Yeah.
The front row all the way back.
Those close we have a quorum
please rise today's indication.
From Representative Mason.
Hold on to that.
Mr speaker the speaker would
pry.
Are their god given us this the
is fear.
The spirit of fear but of power
and love and self control.
Their father please send the
power of your Holy Spirit to
cover us and our decisions
today.
Apple stand fast against the
evil in this world.
The most of all their lord let
us remember your greatest
commandment of all.
Love all those you love us in
son Jesus nine million.
Thank you gentlemen for the
pledge of allegiance
Representative Harlan Vincent.
I pledge allegiance.
Look to the New Mexico flag
Representative Chavis.
Three six branch of the among
United sculptures.
Thank you members good morning.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to the
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business see
no objection it is so ordered
members on take the opportunity
to welcome all of you in our
very special guest here to the
house of representatives today
we are starting the morning by
honoring Bernalillo county fire
department lieutenant Matthew
king and his family.
We'll have a memorial that will
be introduced
debated and voted on we'll have
a special performance backed by
performance from the New Mexico
fire and police pipes and drums.
and we'll have also if the
presentation of the New Mexico
flag flown here at the state
capitol by the honorable
governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
in honor of lieutenant king's
life and service.
With that.
Of the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation in addition it is
so ordered.
House memorial thirty one
introduced by Representative
Borrego a memorial declaring
February six twenty twenty three
Bernalillo county fire
department lieutenant Matthew
king day in the house of
representatives in honoring his
courageous sacrifice House
memorial thirty one introduced
by Representative Borrego.
House memorial thirty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed in place on
the speakers table.
Gently from Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
the point out of the business
announcements and miscellaneous
business to no objection it is
so ordered.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative but.
Thank you Mr speaker and I just
want to mention that I have my
co hard Representative day
Hochman Vigil here for moral
support I want to thank you Mr
speaker for allowing me this
time I want to honor the
governor for being here today
and thank her for being here and
all of our firefighters that are
here as well Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial thirty one be removed
from the speakers table and then
made the next order of business
see no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker would you let me get
to that point the record reflect
that election is a state for
placing House memorial thirty
one on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to debate the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker I will just
tell you that this of memorial
is here today to honor
Bernalillo county fire
department lieutenant Matthew
came day
and when
If you all remember I think it
was this past summer we lost
four of our firefighters in the
the fires up north and Matthew
king was one of those lieutenant
Matthew king was one of those
individuals who we lost and
today we are here to honor his
memory and celebrate his life
I am going to Mr speaker
introduce the individuals who
are here today
we have archery king his is a
widow and I want to welcome her.
Along with Audrey we have eight
teams and hirer king his
children.
Thank you so much Mister speaker
I would like to also introduce
Miguel treatment president of I.
A. F. F. local two forty four of
the executive board.
Greg PETA's fire chief
Bernalillo county fire and
rescue Robert rose deputy chief
Bernalillo county fire and
rescue David Lujan Bernalillo
county fire rescue and I A. F.
F. local two four four member
Isaac sees nettles Bernalillo
county fire rescue I asked local
to for for member.
bear with me Mr speaker we have
Burt can Tana president of the
New Mexico professional fire
fighters association Randy for
LA state fire marshal and
Anthony Labor and along with
these individuals Mr speaker and
members we have
James lamb he is one of the
bagpipers of the New Mexico fire
and police pipes and drums
band and porch one of the
bagpipers of New Mexico fire and
police pipes and drums and Mr
speaker I would also like to
recognize Diego on on call on
who is also a former I. A. F. F.
local two four four and Mr
speaker with that those are my
guests today
and I would like to present the
of memorial two.
Thank you gentlelady and and
before we get to the reading of
the memorial also like to
introduce members of the I. A.
F. F. local two forty four
Bernalillo county fire rescue
and the New Mexico professional
firefighters association
executive officers and members
who are joining us in the
gallery today thank you for your
service.
Click to read.
House memorial thirty one Morial
declaring February six twenty
twenty three Bernalillo county
fire department lieutenant
Matthew king day in the house of
representatives in honoring his
courageous sacrifice.
Whereas Bernalillo county fire
department lieutenant Matthew
king embodied everything that
firefighters buyers to be an
example of courage dedication
and sacrifice and whereas as a
rescue specialist with the
Bernalillo county fire
department lieutenant king
accepted the challenges and
dangers of the career he had
embraced and whereas lieutenant
king grew up in Albuquerque and
was a graduate of Eldorado high
school and we're as the ten king
began his firefighting career in
two thousand as a volunteer with
the corral just fire department
followed by employment with
Albuquerque ambulance servants
service.
And also worked at times for the
Los ranchos de Albuquerque fire
department the Sandoval county
fire department and the Rio
Rancho fire and rescue
department and we're as
lieutenant king began his career
with the Bernalillo county fire
department in August two
thousand eleven and he was
promoted to lieutenant in
January twenty twenty and we're
as in addition to his duties as
a rescue specialist Montoya king
was an emergency medical
services educator and served in
the training division and we're
as lieutenant king's life of
public service was cut short on
July sixteenth twenty twenty two
when he was one of four public
safety officers killed in a
helicopter crash south of Las
Vegas New Mexico and we're as
lieutenant king was on board the
Bernalillo county sheriff's
office metro to helicopter with
a crew assisting with efforts to
contain the east mesa fire and
we're as the crew have been
making water drops from the
helicopter prior to the crash
which happened during the flight
back to Albuquerque and we're as
lieutenant king survived the
initial crash call to nine one
one and was on the line for
thirty minutes trying to direct
first responders to the site
before his death and we're as to
honor lieutenant king service
bravery and sacrifice a
community gathering to say final
goodbyes was held on August
first twenty twenty two at
Tingley Coliseum.
And whereas the tenet king's
funeral was filled with heavy
emotions as friends and
colleagues recall the impact
lieutenant king had on their
lives and we're as lieutenant
king was described as a man who
taught others how to laugh
during the good times and the
bad times and served as an
amazing mentor for how to live a
good life and we're as during
the funeral Montoya king was
given the highest award by the
Bernalillo county fire
department the medal of honor
and his own and his home it was
presented to his colleagues and
then to his family and we're as
fellow firefighters line the
streets to honor their fallen
brother and we're as lieutenant
king was also given a fitting
final dispatch and the final
bill till was wrong and the
recorded final dispatch was
played at the conclusion of the
funeral.
And we're as lieutenant king is
survived by his wife Audrey his
son Aiden and his daughter Kyra
and we're as lieutenant king
leaves a legacy as a courageous
public servant who is always
guided by his moral compass now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February sixth twenty twenty
three be declared Bernalillo
county fire department
lieutenant Matthew king day in
the house of representatives and
that lieutenant can be honored
for his courageous sacrifice and
be it further resolved that a
copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the family of
lieutenant Matthew king.
Pipes please.
The honorable governor please
present.
Families with the flag flown
here on the grounds of the State
Capitol in honor.
Of his life.
The debate on house memorial
thirty one.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative chase.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
Google.
Yes.
Neil to the.
I yield to the lady from
Bernalillo county.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
lady from Bernalillo I want to
thank you so much for the
privilege of
Sharing in the celebration of
Matthew cable's life and his
sacrifice.
And I extend my condolences to
his family and.
I'm sorry that you have to be
here today under the
circumstances.
I hope that
His courage and bravery will
serve to inspire us always thank
you madam Mr speaker is thank
you for Bernalillo.
Thank you ladies are for the
debate on house memorial thirty
one.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola making these acquittals
on one of Ireland's and
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady do you.
Yes I yield to my friend from
all the counties and I cannot
read.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
To leave them for bringing this
memorial of.
The.
It's very important that we
remember our fallen heroes.
You know I'm of shooting.
Some of you know better myself
and I know what it is to lose
Senator John Davey up there she
took of the biggest loss ever
possible and it's very important
that we remember people that
have fallen before us thank you
very much for bringing that
thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lincoln in a
dental representative Vincent.
The gentle lady yield.
Yes I yield to the gentleman
from Lincoln in Montana County.
Thank you Mr speaker as a
retired fire chief.
I just like to thank you.
For sure Matt with us.
I know it's hard expenses of
fire to to lose.
The per person specially that
important.
And
I always get choked up when I'm
talking about stuff like this
because I know how important it
is so thank you to the family.
The gentleman.
The gentleman from San Miguel in
Torrance Representative
Castellano thank you Mr speaker
will the gentlelady yields.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
representative from
The counties that I didn't hear.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to thank you guys and my
condolences you know.
Was out there fighting for my
community and this is a hard
loss and something for for me to
describe but I just want to give
you guys my condolences and
thank you for his courageous nis
and it's it's unfortunate but it
was like eighty five miles as
the crow flies from my house so
in may he rest in peace and my
condolences once again Mister
speaker thank you.
Thank you gentlemen the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper thank you
Mr speaker does the gentlelady
from Bernalillo Mr.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Santa Fe County.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I just want to share my sincere
appreciation to this amazing
family.
My my one of my sons is best
friends with Daniel appears
for a very long time.
And the and to see what that
family is going through I can
only imagine what you're going
through I just want to share
with you what I've shared with
them which is that we are so
grateful.
For a credible man like this
given the ultimate sacrifice for
our state for our communities.
And we want you to know that we
your people's house.
Are you and are so grateful for
you are with you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Is your further debate until
tomorrow thirty one the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative collectors thank
you Mr chairman the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield to the gentleman from
Bernalillo county.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My condolences condolences from
all of our little county to the
family.
Mr chairman and it is in these
times of tragedy that at the
same time while we grieve it
also unites us and to the
gentleman that are all but the
Russian today I know that you
are all heroes and we all
appreciation to specially to the
family know that you are logged
know that we care about you know
that he will always be in our
hearts.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you gentlemen the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield yes I
will yield to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo county thank you
and gentle lady on.
Family Madam governor and all of
our firefighters brave
firefighters on the stage and in
the field and the rostrum and in
the field
I just want to say which is good
us yes thank you.
Of four.
As has been said sharing your
family member yourselves your
father.
brothers family member.
With us.
This was a devastating loss.
It is in our hearts forever.
But he was
I have a I I will tell you this
gentle lady Mr speaker I have a
several family members the R.
firefighters the the gentleman
up on the rostrum and others
have heard this story
I come from firefighter family
and I had one family member
severely injured I'm not sure if
you all recall the horrible
massive fire in a warehouse in
the seventies here in Albany in
Albuquerque.
He was.
Severely injured permanently
injured for life.
And
And it was something where all
of the family members had to
step up.
And throughout the many years
that he was given to live there
after supported him on his
injuries were such that he was a
mobile of for the rest of his
life he was
Paralyzed.
And
So we and I come from a military
family.
Many of you on the gentle lady
Mr speaker have heard the story
of my father's three war
veteran.
We understand that they go in.
And they understand what they're
going in to do.
And they have to be admired and
respected and honored.
In their lives and when they
give their lives in their
living.
And in their passing because it
is without they their sacrifices
some without their service.
Are communities would not be
safe.
So again I.
Gentlelady Mr speaker I just
stand in support and great thank
you from the bottom of my
family's heart to you all thank
you thank you ladies are for the
debate on house world thirty one
Jan lady from Bernalillo
Representative little.
The gentle lady yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker.
Thank you.
I want to express my thanks to
you and your family for
supporting your has been father.
As he
And his and his colleagues as
these are the people of the
state of New Mexico.
Maybe our creator.
Bring you peace and surround you
with love.
In time it will be easier to
think about and to talk about
but there will be time.
I am grateful for all of you who
serve the people of our state.
And I thank you very much.
Thank you ladies are for the
debate on house memorial thirty
one.
Eladio teachers provocative and
I do want to extend our most
sincere condolences to the king
family to Audrey eight into
Kyra.
To all of the takings friends
and colleagues.
Public service is sacrifice as
we all know.
But there's a big difference
when you're public service puts
you in harm's way every single
day.
and I just want to express to
you all appear on the rostrum
those in the gallery.
That your sacrifices do not go
unnoticed into the king family
will remain in our prayers.
For ever.
And.
This house of representatives
will stand with you every step
of the way to support you and to
embrace you as you cream I and
as you move on with your lives
thank you for being here.
It is truly an honor for us to
be amongst you.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house
to the family of the lieutenant
Matthew king I offer my
condolences I also celebrate his
life and I would also like to
mention to you that I come from
a family of firefighters as well
my father was a thirty year
retired firefighter from Los
Alamos so I'm more than honored
to peace standing here before
you today as he is been deceased
for the last twenty eight years
I never understood Mr speaker
what my father did when I was a
kid but as I've learned to
become friends with many of
these firefighters I have come
to understand the professional
level that more Mr speaker I now
move that house memorial thirty
one do now pass and I now ask
unanimous consent of the house
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
members present voted in the
affirmative.
Is the motion show all members
of the house present and voting
in the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered we
are on final passage of house
memorial thirty one the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seventy in the affirmative
zero in the negative house
memorial thirty one has duly
passed this house.
Mr speaker I will go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business Asian
lady we are announcements thank
you
We apologies let's go to the
gentle lady from by Nancy a
Representative made eleven
million for announcements.
Thank you Mr speaker I ask by a
unanimous consent that house
memorial twenty six be removed
from the speakers table and made
the next order of business I see
no objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker would you get me to
that point.
The record reflect election
necessary for placing House
memorial twenty six on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution the generated to
explain the memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker this
memorial is to celebrate
Valencia County today Valencia
County day as you should see on
all of your desks you have some
wonderful gifts from Valencia
County all of this stuff is
drugs from our wonderful county
and that in order to celebrate
we are also doing a right
outside as we speak a Madonsela
so we will be bringing food into
the chambers said to feed you
today but I wanted to explain
a little bit about what I'm
about to is for those that
aren't familiar with it
Valencia County has a rich
Hispanic heritage and we have a
lot of history in the policy
County
what I'm against is in my in
this is explained by my father
who is with he calls himself one
of the original month on centos
he's eighty eight years old and
my family just actually had our
fiftieth Madonsela in December
as we celebrated fifty years of
of doing that what it was a long
time ago when a community then
when they did not have
refrigeration the whole
community would come together
and butcher a pig and then they
would all take it and share it
of amongst themselves and so
then the next week then the next
family did it and then the next
family and it's now become a
tradition now we just get to
enjoy it because we get to put
it in our freezers and now and
enjoy it but it's still a
heritage that we have carried on
so so if you get a chance go on
by and see the doctor so
happening outside I do want to
acknowledge a couple of our
guests from eight to county we
do have up in the rostrum we
have a share of the need to be
here from eight to County.
We have a Valencia County
manager Danny mon it.
And then we have our county
treasurer of runs by.
and if you can I also have in a
little bit we are we also have
some other Valencia County
members up in our gallery is
welcome all of your guests from
Melissa County visiting us today
please rise you can be
recognized in the gallery.
I asked if the court could
please read the memorial to
read.
House memorial twenty six
introduced by representatives
more about Maria Armstrong Baca
and Representative Harry Garcia.
Oil commemorating February six
twenty twenty three as Valencia
County very and the house of
representatives whereas Valencia
County is part of the Rio abajo
and whereas Valencia County is
home of the largest my times in
the United States and then the
times is a symbol of the rich
Spanish heritage of the Rio
Grande Valley.
Where as want to county is the
home of the famous Thome land
grant which the king of Spain
granted to thirty families in
seventeen thirty nine.
And we're as a bridge of Los
Lunas was founded by Spaniards
in the seventeenth century and
we're as the land is officially
known as you Mr similar on the
payment for our lady of billing
and more as a billion means
Bethlehem and Spanish and where
is the land was a strategic
point along the Camino Riel also
known as also known as the royal
road which caused a trade route
south into Mexico and were as of
the land has Dominican hub city
because of a man cut off of the
Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe
railway.
Now known as the BNSF railway
company and we're as opposed K.
farms was a destination for Lee
located yes for refugees and
were as opposed K. farms strives
to be sparsely populated
agricultural community.
And we're as was the site of the
minor engagements during the
American Civil War and were as
real communities is home to
Valencia counties only golf
course tear it down so and more
as Valencia County is home to
the Decalogue stone which
contains an inscription is
attempted to be an abridged
version of the ten commandments
in the form of the paleo Hebrew
alphabet.
And residents to county houses
two museums are the House museum
and the Los Lunas museum of
heritage and arts and more as a
volunteer county is home to
reports of a Cibola National
Forest and the ones on a
wilderness and we're just going
to counties we now known for its
agriculture and we're just going
to county hosts the United
States largest Matanza family
fun event that raises funds to
provide scholarships to students
for preserving Valencia County
traditions by promoting and
enhancing local business
development through civic social
cultural and employment training
programs now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico February sixth twenty
twenty three commemorated as
proventia county day in the
house of representatives and be
it further resolved the copies
of this memorial transmitted to
the mayors have been in Los
Lunas skip farms it out to in
real communities.
Is a debate on house memorial
twenty six the gentleman from
Valencia Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from yesterday was a
county will.
I yield to the gentleman from
western Valencia County thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady I to rise and support of
this I was told that the last
time the Valencia County was
able to do so I'm very
consistent thousand nineteen and
if you haven't already had a
chance to go out there and see
and smell all the good for that
there it kind of reminds us of
home so you know I want to thank
those people that are prepared I
want to thank all those people
that are visiting from one to
county and also our our vendors
who wanted to do this a little
bit taste of Lynsey County and
as we spend our time and you
know come away from our
communities up there all these
things are a good reminder and
the members of the home so
gentle lady I thank you for the
work I think all of the both of
the workers the cokes the month
of settles out there for all the
hard work thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady thank you
German there's further debate
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola McKinley support us on
one and Balenciaga
representative Garcia.
we.
Would you be ready to leave the
deal.
I yield to the gentleman from
all those counties including
Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady of thanks for bringing this
memorial up at the board that we
recognize all districts in our
in our state all counties in our
state you know and we need to
really think the people are
outside cooking the children in
the chilly.
It's good stuff anyway thank you
remove oral I Mr speaker thank
you very much thank you John and
I notice no one wore a white
shirt today I wonder why.
To refer listening away sure
courageous the gentle lady from.
Katrin said US of coral and also
volunteer.
Thank you Mr speaker of the lady
from Balenciaga yield.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Katrin Sierra's of coro and
Bolivia thank you kind lady I to
stand in favor of this memorial
and appreciate all of the leads
to County brings to the state of
New Mexico I do represent the
largest house district in the
nation and part of that is
Valencia and I'm really proud of
that I'm proud of all my
counties but Valencia has a
special meaning in our hearts
and and our minds and when we
see the familiar faces here at
the roundhouse Mister speaker
and makes us remember why we're
up here so thank you Mr speaker
thank you kind lady thank you
Joe ladies are for the debate on
house memorial twenty six I see
none the gentle lady to close.
So I now move that house
memorial twenty six do now pass
and I now ask unanimous consent
of the house that the record
show that the rule has been
called in all members present
voted in the affirmative it's
been motion to show all members
of the house present and voting
in the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered
final passage of house memorial
twenty six the vote is now open.
Loser close level of seven in
the affirmative zero negative
house memorial twenty six has
duly passed this house.
We have someone else Mentzer and
we are going to do a little bit
of turning this morning we've
had a conversation with both
major and we know minority
leadership
to do two bills today house bill
forty eight and house bill forty
three.
So we'll do that after
announcements that generated
from tiles Representative Ortez
thank you Mr speaker at today I
have two young men from UNM
house here in the chamber with
us Mr speaker may I introduce
them.
Please do I have manual.
Many Baca.
And look at Martinez and they're
shadowing me today and that
they're going to extol the
virtues of UNM's house to every
member in this body thank you
very much Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady welcome to the house.
The deleted from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker there's a rumor going
around that somebody has a
birthday today.
And it is the lady from the
Gallup and I see she's hiding
behind a beautiful bouquet of
flowers in there and and I've
got to cut connection with name
on it so I'm wondering if that's
what I do have a cupcake.
Thank you so much would you like
to sing Happy Birthday
absolutely gentle lady happy
birthday Representative
Lundstrom and the gentle lady
from Bernalillo to saying it.
I've had a cold but I'm only
going to get you started Happy
birthday to you Happy Birthday
to you have bureau the the.
To use happy birthday
Representative.
The lady from McKinley thank you
Mr speaker thank you madam
leader for the great singing
today some of you may not know
that I've spent the last two
decades on my on the floor with
all of you for my birthday so
it's a wonderful opportunity
love the singing and sometimes
we even recorded from home but
thank you again and I hope you
enjoy the chocolate maven
cupcakes today.
Thank you gentle lady.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
civil McKinley support of
and one ambulance Representative
Garcia thank you Mr I just want
a reach out to Representative
Armstrong and wish you a happy
thirty ninth birthday.
It's just not nice to be talking
ages but I think Miss Suazo
thirty eight but will so for
thirty minutes thank you Mr
speaker HM to table number Sir.
The.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker first let
me add my birthday wishes to the
gentle lady from McKinley County
and then Mr speaker I wanted to
highlight for members that to
date we have been provided with
a
tactile actually in braille the
pledge of allegiance and a
tactile graphic of the Z. as
symbol from the flag of New
Mexico and these copies were
transcribed and printed buyer
instructional resources center
who provides this service and
supports braille production
throughout the state of New
Mexico these are from the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired and so I'd
also like to recognize my
colleague from Otero county who
also has the New Mexico school
for the blind and visually
impaired in his district.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady you.
Yes
do we do that and announcements.
Well but the chair recognizes
the gentleman from of that or
present law thank you Mr speaker
I appreciate it I'm I'm brand
new to the chambers so thanks
for bearing with me yeah I just
want to shout out to the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired which is in my
district we are so blessed to
have them here and we appreciate
them for bringing us these great
tactile.
Pages here we have the pledge of
allegiance to the United States
of America which we all love and
we also have a tactile of our
great Z. a symbol which we are
so blessed and proud to present
everywhere across this great
state and nation and world so we
appreciate the great people who
are from the New Mexico School
of a school for the blind and
visually impaired and I really
appreciate my colleague from
Bernalillo county for also
joining me in this.
Thank you.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the body I bring your
attention to the bowling
calendar that's on your desk and
I think the balloon fiesta for
setting at the also I'd like for
you to look at the information
card.
It has eight hundred and twenty
eight thousand eight hundred
guests at the balloon fiesta
last year in the economic impact
was two hundred and three point
one nine million dollars to the
state and I want to emphasize
the state because individuals
travel all around outside the
Albuquerque area during balloon
fiesta.
I also want to bring your
attention to capital outlay
request from the balloon fiesta
and ask for your support on that
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Sandoval
Representative Kate's thank you
Mr speaker I have some guests in
the gallery I believe you have
the their names to be able to
count on we do gentle lady at
like two in college in the
gallery joining us here today at
the foot of some of those
caucus.
Which is translated into United
strengths we have Vicky
is that I will send you the
caucus chair and from his Garcia
the treasurer welcome to the
state house representatives
please write to be recognized.
Thank you very much Mr speaker I
just like to say that this
caucuses of of literally their
mission is about working
together to empower Hispanos
across New Mexico supporting is
been is to participate in
advocate in their government.
Thank you thank you gentlelady
the gentle lady from countries
had a supporter but as a
representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker I wanted to talk
a little bit about the great
bags that you all received here
the state of one to county on on
and just ignore all age all the
sponsors and the local
businesses that that worked so
hard to get us these especially
the Valencia County chamber all
grown Espinoza and Kersting ammo
of the economic development
person there and Valencia County
and really acknowledge the lady
from the Lynsey and the
gentleman from the Lancia on how
hard they worked to get all
these bags delivered to you
there's also something that's
being delivered to your office
and so just wanted to let you
know where those back for from
also a little bag of candy happy
Valentine's day soon Valentine's
day Mr speaker and everyone
those bags are provided to you
by city councilor purpose on and
looking for a fun dip with the
north to Domingo Baca aquatic
center and she appreciates all
that you can do for them thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady provided by the use of all
of the committee supporters and
one of our land senator Senator
CM.
Thank you Mr speaker
the speakers permission to be
appropriate.
I talked to the gentleman from
the data back by today and it
would be an agreed to play the
marine corps ham and from this
week Committee and from this
chamber it would be appropriate
Mr speaker of be honored that
would be appropriate gentlemen
while we wait for food to be
delivered in third reading to
begin I think we can.
We can definitely take up that
that request.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you thank you for that and
gentleman here with all the
veterans issue in this chamber
and the other chamber and anyone
else here working in this
building and supporting the
functions of the state
legislatures thank you for your
selfless service.
Thank you Mr speaker I really
appreciate that.
Thank you.
Other announcements.
The gentle lady from.
Tauran's Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker
so that was a couple tragic
events that happened this
weekend.
We had three teenagers and
Edward which is now center
Representative McQueen is
district which was my district
in Edgewood is very dear to my
heart that just passed away from
carbon monoxide poisoning.
And if you guys please I'm
begging you to put carbon
monoxide detectors in your house
and in your shop.
Also my nephew is now a
statistic he's part of the
twenty two that killed himself
every day.
He killed himself this weekend
and I'm horribly broken hearted
and is here to remind you that
our veterans are not getting the
help that they need and please
make sure that we prioritize
that in our legislation thank
you.
Thank you Gillian are closed is
very sorry to hear that.
The gentle lady from.
Leo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business third reading
of legislation see no objection
it is so ordered.
Meeting from Bernalillo
Representative Matthews ready
and item number three.
Yes Mr speaker I am ready
Representative election is
assumed for placing House of
forty eight final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to amendment.
Substitution.
Point eight.
The gentle lady to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker
members of the house
HB forty eight is a really
really simple bill it passed
unanimously in the thirty to
sixty day session two years ago
and unfortunately got caught up
in the meltdown in the the
Senate that occurred that year
it relates to see are in a
certified registered nurse
unnecessary and with me today is
my experts the.
Austin who is a C. R. N. A. and
his practice independently for
thirteen years.
Since two thousand one and
better with roughly two thousand
one to two thousand two federal
law changed and because of the
change C. and ours have been
practicing independently
successfully and safely without
supervision.
Throughout New Mexico and H. B.
forty eight simply updates or
statute to reflect that twenty
year reality of independent
practice and with that we stand
for questions in order to delay
to close.
that.
The we are on final passage of
AB forty eight.
Could try that's my point.
I now move is reporting a pass.
Final passage of house bill
forty eight the vote is now
open.
The votes about to close.
A little.
Eleven of sixty five in the
affirmative doing the negative
house bill forty eight has in
the past this house.
Is really the formerly overs of
Thompson ready and item number
two.
Yes I am Mr speaker.
The record reflect the election
isn't for placing House Bill
forty.
Three hello I just is taken and
it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker so those of
you who've been around who are
freshmen have seen this bill
before it passed the floor the
last time with seven no votes
and that's what this bill could
be called is only yes means yes
so it is a bill that will put
into the sex education courses
in high school or middle school
depending on where they were
they're taught that you have the
right to say no at any point and
that if someone is passed out
that is not permission for
sexual activity if someone is
asleep that is not for
permission if you bought them
dinner that is not permission so
this what teachers are high
school kids
At an early age that I'm sure a
lot of us in here which we would
have known that it's okay to say
no any time during you don't owe
anybody anything and it will
also make universities and
postsecondary institutions have
to use trauma informed Care
essentially for for both the the
accuser and the accused so with
that Mr should I introduce my
witnesses.
Okay thank you Mr speaker I have
Lee love K. Adha.
Jeff Clark and Alexandria
Taylor.
There is a the gentleman from
San Juan Representative one
billion.
Thank you Mr speaker does a
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I yield.
thank you
Gentle lady just I I was just
reading through the title and I
notice that this is not just
the.
Blic schools in.
Senator schools but it is for is
also says private institutions
so that would be private schools
that are high school for.
Mr speaker No it says requiring
public schools and public and
private postsecondary so would
be private colleges not private
high schools.
Thank you for that
it do we even have a private.
Post secondary school here that
this maybe bigger yes we we have
quite a few a lot of them are
online or for for profit Burrell
medical college comes to mind in
Pima Institute and some of those
kind of things are private thank
you
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady what would we be able to
enforce this on online
Private institutions Mr speaker
probably not I mean I can
imagine that perhaps if I you
know what let me check in with
my witnesses but I I can't see
that happening.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
they still have to follow title
nine and it's public and private
second post secondary education
if they have if they are
receiving government money
essentially and I mean I suppose
anything is possible that a
group how you know that some of
the online things do some things
in person or or if if someone in
the class is harassing someone
via the internet sexually
harassing or threatening then in
that case yes they would have to
Take take steps.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so
So a private high school a
private Christian high school
with this would there be
curriculum that they would be
required to use Mr speaker in
the title requiring public
schools and public and private
post secondary so so the answer
is no.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr speaker
and that first time on the house
floor debating a bill so I'm I
think I'm gonna be saying
chairman for for the foreseeable
future
okay
The last year.
The bill that passed the house
how similar to this bill is is
the exact.
Bill from last year.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Bill we had a task force and we
remove that that's the only
thing.
Thank you so Mister speaker and
gentle lady I I I believe the
last time that this came through
there was a provision for that
wasn't just for high school
which is public schools is that.
Is that correct I don't I don't
remember that it was just for
high schools.
that I'm not sure exactly what
you're referring to Mr speaker
but that is the only change that
we made so if what and it wasn't
last well we introduced it last
year but it wasn't determined
germane so it was two years ago
that it was heard on the floor
and it is the exact same bill
with the removal of
the task force.
Thank you Mr speaker and
generating less question just so
this only applies to high
schools and middle schools are
exempt elementary schools are
exempt Mr speaker and gentleman
I'm if if the district I know I
I don't know the laws but if the
district has their sex ed in
eighth grade it would apply to
them but it's up to the district
where they do that and I guess
that's it.
Thank you Mr Gramm one more
question and then to to to to
see their us but you before you
mentioned we have some other
bills are working their way
through the legislature
if one of those bills were to
pass and there were a sex
education or discussion of
sexual
issues with
in earlier grades would this be
required as well in earlier
grades.
Mr speaker No but I will say
that we want everyone to be
teaching toddlers about
affirmative consent not in that
not in the arena of sex but in
the arena of you don't have to
kiss someone if you don't want
to kids should ask other kids if
they can hug they should ask if
you want to hold your hand so
hopefully it will be a an age
appropriate lesson in how to
treat other people.
Thank you Mr speaker no further
questions there is for the
debate the gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield.
Miss.
In a situation where there are
only two people.
All directly involved in the
incident is there a presumption
on the other side of the
innocence or.
Mr speaker this has nothing to
do with criminal or and there's
a this is this is about teaching
people what boundaries are what
what goes after that is not
addressed at all in this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady but in
the teaching of that process.
Perception.
No allocation.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
bill is about making sure that
both parties consent so there's
nothing about the perpetrator I
mean it that that's that's what
if we're trying to prevent there
from being a perpetrator that's
what this bill is about but
there's nothing about who's
guilty who's innocent or
whatever we're making the
standard affirmative consent if
you didn't say yes then nothing
should happen.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
there's nothing.
Associated with this consent is
that correct.
Mr speaker are you asking if you
have to sign a document before
you have sex.
Gentlelady let's let's the house
is being depicted on just a
little bit please.
Speaker gentle lady when there's
two people involved.
No he just mention this and yes
I can.
Conceive of circumstances when
he just might turn into the.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
the point that you have control
bodily sovereignty if you're
doing something and you decide
well I don't want to do this
consent can be withdrawn at any
time by either party.
Mr speaker I guess my question
would be.
Is not consent withdrawn after
the fact.
Speaker I'm gentleman could you
please I I'm not after the fact
I'm I'm a little confused.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
After the fact manning.
For example the next day or two
or three days later.
Mr speaker No.
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
protection related in your
legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
bill is about teaching
affirmative consent it's not
going into legal stuff about you
know he said she said this is
about teaching our youth about
affirmative consent to steer
away from those kind of
situations.
Thank you Mr thank you gentle
lady for your responses there's
further debate gentle lady from
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady from Bernalillo you'll
place Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
assuming that these classes that
you want to have all throughout
our school system here in New
Mexico that would be applicable
to our educators as well right
with the route involves an
educator and a student were
numerous students I'm assuming
that would be the case is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
are you saying
are you saying that sexual
contact between those people is
okay if it's combined I'm not
clarify please Mr speaker gentle
lady no that is not what I'm
saying I am saying that they
would fall under the realms of
what this bill is trying to do
the prevention of and they would
be held accountable is that
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady there there's nothing about
being held accountable the if
the school district can find
there are many organizations
around that to teach this so the
school district could contract
with someone or they could have
their health teacher do it but
there that this is not about
anybody being responsible for
preventing anything it's just
giving are you with the
information they need to protect
their own body bodily
sovereignty.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have
Richard bill and one of the
other questions I have here.
When does the judicial.
Impact to come into play on this
Mr speaker it does not it is
totally up to the victim or
survivor if they want to go to
one in if there's an incident
and they want to report it to
law enforcement that the only
thing that's in here I I believe
it's for college is that when
they come forward to you know
what dean or whatever that
they're just reminded that
Preserving evidence is important
if you decide somewhere further
down the road that you would
want to prosecute.
Mr speaker gentle lady okay
thank you for that explanation
but what happens if the alleged
perpetrator wants to appeal
what's the process there Mr
speaker gentle lady this has
nothing to do with that bill
that this bill is about teaching
the children it has nothing to
do with criminal or punishment
or any of those kind of things
this is teaching young people
that they can say no at any
time.
But Mr speaker gentle lady on
page two lines four through
five.
I
think that's right.
Right here there might be a
change here I'm not sure I've
written it down and now I can't
remember
If you were to you're talking
about the importance of
preserving the evidence I
understand where you're going
with that because if something
does happen that is unwanted I
understand that part of it but
if there is somebody is saying
Hey wait just a minute now that
never happened is there the
opportunity if there is an
allegation made what happens to
the person that's been accused
maybe they have any rights and
gentle lady this bill in no way
affects that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady one
of the other questions I have
Lucy any of our colleges the
board of regents decide to.
Implement this policy that you
are presenting for us today.
Will this be applicable to
anything that happens off
campus.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
US title nine it already is
there.
So it's already in place if.
But it's outside the
institutions control but it's
already in place through title
nine in my understanding that
correctly madam madam and Mr
speaker and all all this is
doing around higher ed is to
make sure that they use trauma
informed care rather than having
you know that the custodian come
in and ask questions about what
happened that it be someone with
knowledge of how to do it but at
the end there's nothing about
what's legal or what's not legal
except that you have to teach
you about affirmative consent.
Mr speaker gentle lady if the.
Whenever we're talking about.
Excuse me.
Due process and that that is
part of this.
Due process Mr speaker because
it's one person's word against
another person support Mr
speaker and gentle lady this
does not touch on that this is
only about teaching you.
Only yes means yes and no can be
given at any time.
Mr speaker.
Whenever there is an alleged
incident that does happen.
Is the alleged perpetrator.
Is the same it didn't happen to
me said that person though be
notified of any sort of hearing.
Mr speaker Mr speaker gentle
lady I do understand this is
about teaching yes and no but
you have to follow it on out to
see what the ramifications can
be Mr speaker and gentle lady
that is in title nine in federal
law.
Mr speaker you're saying.
This is only applicable to our
high schools and what are the
classes refresh my memory Mister
speaker if if the district we
have heard that some districts
do their sex ed in eighth grade
and and so if the if that's the
case in the I think a great is
the lowest that the blue young
guys that we can do and that's
based on the school districts
individual decisions.
Mr speaker teaching this class
with the also entail hiring more
professionals to teach this
class will be a class or will it
be part of another class Mr
speaker and gentle lady it's
intended to be part of the
health education class and as I
said before if there's a teacher
there who perhaps doesn't feel
qualified that person can get
more training for their
organizations throughout the
state that will do that kind of
training for a school district
and actually we have one of my
expert witnesses is one of those
parameters.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady this would be applicable to
private schools would it would
be applicable to charter schools
every room of our educational
system administer Baker and
gentle lady as was stated before
if you receive public dollars it
will apply to you.
Okay
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Whenever we're talking about
confidential reporting and
evaluation of complaints who is
going to do the evaluation Mr
speaker and gentle lady that's
at the post secondary level and
that's outlined in title nine.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady I'm assuming that somewhere
in here there is going to be
procedures put in place for the
state of New Mexico if this bill
is passed re regarding that
clarification of what the comp
what the title nine law does say
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'd I
don't believe it's our place to
clarify what federal law is the
school districts know what that
is and if they don't it's not
part of this bill so that's not
something we would address.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
see that there might be a
problem with the resources not
being.
Availability of resources not
been able to be made especially
as some of our more rural school
districts.
No Mr speaker and gentle lady no
as I said one of my experts is
that a traveling trainer
essentially.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I will
do for with the one of my best
friends was one of those certain
instructors and she covered the
whole eastern side of the state
of New Mexico she was the one
and only she took in everything
from the northern border all the
way down to our southern border
probably the division line would
have been.
Parts of Lincoln County and she
was the only person that was
available so I beg to differ Mr
speaker that's all I have thank
you very much speaker gentle
lady there's further debate the
gentle lady from the nana
Representative Lara Cadena.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
due to yield Mister speaker
gentle lady I yield.
The lady.
Do you know and maybe loves
people that have.
Navigated sexual harassment
sexual assault sexual violence
Mr speaker gentle lady yes as a
matter of fact I was on a call
with three of my five sisters
and I brought up my right and
and they all said we have
stories too so of the of the six
girls in my family at least four
of us small five of us that I
know of have have been sexually
assaulted.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank
you.
My heart is racing and I can't
help but my emotions from coming
forward so obviously right now.
And I thought about whether or
not I'd stand today to speak on
this bill.
Certainly we all want to move
through the day.
We want to move through
legislation with efficiency.
But I think it's important to
say out loud as we ourselves are
committed to a practice of
changing the culture of our
roundhouse of our capital of our
democracy so that all folks feel
safe when they show up here to
participate and in the job we
have in front of us that I stand
today Mister speaker gentle
lady.
Might you have an idea of how
old I was before I realized that
yes means yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
not sure but we have heard from
people in their fifties who said
if I would have known this in
high school my life would be
different.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciate and have so much
resonance with that I'm forty I
turned forty this fall I grew up
in south central New Mexico a
product of our public schools
from a family where there was so
much care and love and
commitment specifically to
raising girls that knew that
they had value and worth that
we're trusted to speak out loud
and speak for themselves but Mr
speaker and gentle lady I would
say that it was only in the last
couple of years in my late
thirties.
But I realize the overwhelming.
Number of sexual encounters and
moments and experiences I had as
a young person and through
college or non consensual.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as
many in the body no I've spent
most of my adult life working
and reproductive justice.
I navigated relationships that
were violent and sexual and
emotional and physical ways.
And even with so much
affirmation surrounding and
holding me so much prayer.
Fifty me every day.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I did
not realize until I was raising
a teenager myself.
That most of the sex that came
into my life.
Was not consensual.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I heard you speak a lot to how
we are teaching young people.
I would actually offer that
we're doing something different.
I'd say the heart of this bill.
Is that we are respecting young
people enough.
To make sure they have space for
honest and accurate
conversations about their bodies
about their lives about their
dignity.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Raising kids is the most immense
an intimidating thing I've ever
done.
And it scares me to no end.
To think of the things my little
ones and little ones all of our
state might walk into any given
day.
And Mr speaker gentle lady I say
we're not in this business are
passing laws to teach young
people like I said but what I
see in the young people that I
get to be part of raising and
their friends and and the the
people they pass through in
their extracurricular activities
and music and sports.
Is that these young people have
a courageous way of showing up.
They're ready to be different.
They're ready to act different
and what they are expecting and
demanding.
Is a system in place that gives
them room to live to their
potential and thrive.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
all know that I'm not in the
business of telling local
governments are local schools
what to do or not to do and I
made debate other bills on other
issues.
But this for me Mr speaker
gentle lady is pretty basic.
Can we make sure young people in
our state have room to have
honest and accurate
conversations about their bodies
their lives and their futures
say thank you gentle lady your
co sponsors this is a bill I've
supported for years it's been
frustrating to see that you all
continue to show up with such
diligence.
Such care such consistency and
I'm glad that in short order we
get to pass this bill through
the house floor thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
gentle lady I hope the Senate is
listening.
Thank you gentlelady there is
further debate the generated
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
mail hi you Mr speaker I yield
to our Majority Leader thank you
Mr speaker thank you ladies
thanks for allowing me to co
sponsor this bill would.
I
I could tell you how much I
appreciate the comments of the
lady from Dona Ana and
I know some of us have heard a
longer story of hers and and we
certainly have all been touched
by that those of us who've heard
that and I know that something
like this is a fairly simple and
common sense approach just at
the front end right Mr speaker
and lady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker and gentle lady that's
exactly right Mr speaker
animated this does not create a
new crime Mr speaker and gentle
lady this has nothing to do with
crime Mr speaker and many and
there's no no penalty.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
there's no new penalty Mr
speaker and related.
Not requiring a new course be
taught in our public schools
either hi you Mr speaker gentle
lady no.
Mr speaker and finally on what
this simply does is required
that the existing health course
include.
At the very minimum a
conversation about affirmative
consent and perhaps some of the
children will be young enough
that those words like
affirmative won't really matter
it's and matter of understanding
that one must agree to is there
a Todd sure wondered before it's
acceptable is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady yes.
Thank you Mr speaker and leading
from.
Bernalillo I was one if there is
one more point that I thought.
Mr but I'm sure if I did you'll
get it in your closing
thank you Mr speaker I do stand
in support is a very simple and
common and very simple approach
to begin solving a problem
without creating a penalty and
to address.
Under way of on
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker lady from
Bernalillo thank you there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo in Torrance
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county please yield Mister
speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker delayed it
so I didn't have this come to my
committee so I do have some
questions for you I need to
explain to me is this mandatory
for graduation or is a selective
that they can choose to take Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
mandatory but there is an option
for parents to opt out Mr
speaker gentle lady wears out in
here and how with the opt out.
Is Mr speaker gentle lady it's
already existing statute that's
not addressed in this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker delay hence
my question because I am always
concerned about the parents
being able to opt out and how Mr
speaker gentle lady do you alert
the parents of this for the past
how would you alert people in
our community to say Hey we have
this thing here's how you opt
out Mr speaker and gentle lady
that would be up to the local
school district.
Okay Mister speaker delay that's
concerning for me because I want
to make sure in writing that
that would go out to the parents
it's Brenda class it should that
should be definitely mandatory
Mr speaker and and.
A gentle lady because.
It's like when you send
everything there's opt out
option you never know right and
I would like for all the parents
know this right off the bat okay
so this to if this were to go
through this is going to be
taught can you there was a
question I had on here what.
Mr speaker and delayed in sexual
activity on page two.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
already defined in law.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
what I'm trying to get at is if
we have two kids and you're
saying that they have to have
consent and that should be every
time because maybe one time he
was in the mood and next time he
wasn't in the mood the next time
so if there has been consent
every time what is the consent
for that's what I'm trying to
get it is it they want to hold
hands that day does it have to
is at the level of secretary to
the consent that they need to
get Mr speaker and only Mr
speaker and gentle gentle lady
that's not exactly but I see
there's nothing wrong with
teaching kindergartners you
can't make someone hold your
hand you have to ask them if you
want to hold if you want to hold
their hand and they have the
right to say no and you have the
responsibility to respect that
Mr speaker delay until innocent
or talk about older children so
I'm trying to figure out if I
got two kids in school and
things can happen to have a
fight to get mad at each other
I'm trying to figure out where
is this consent and how did they
consent do they have I'm adept
of witnesses this part because
I'm trying to look at the next
step there's a couple they get
into an argument and he raises
his voice and that one
persistent to ground or
whatever.
Then what happens next after
that it gets reported to who is
that what's and I'm I'm I'm
almost finished figures reported
who and what's the next step I
mean if there's no penalty do
they have to go back to the
class to inform the parents what
happens next Mr speaker and
gentle lady that is not we are
not prescribing anything in this
bill about what comes next the
school district the school
principal can have a practice of
of whatever but we're not we're
not saying in here oh my gosh
you know if he yells at her that
sexual harassment or whatever
we're saying that we want people
to know that they have a right
to not have anyone they don't
want to to touch their body or
to stop them or to threaten
them.
Mr speaker delayed until agree
with you on that the problem
that I'm seen is whenever
there's vagueness and something
I'm like okay they set this in
motion.
We're supposed to teach them
what happens if they don't
listen let's say we have a
female that is I know some women
that are very abusive.
What's the next step and if
there's no next step.
The what's the point I mean
we're trying we're teaching them
but there should be some sort of
consequences but when you get
consequences there lies a
problem so I see the next step
in this bill we need to develop
consequences we can't have kids
holding hands we can have them
kissing because and they got
into a fight and then a week
later another mad at each other
and that's not consent so I see
we're going but also see where
this bill is going to I also see
going down a path of.
But we need to be a bigger
government to have some sort of
something that says you can't do
this you have to go back to this
class we have informed parents
you're going to get penalized in
some way because I know that's
how bills happened work when
they come through here so I
guess what I'm asking is.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
so if that person consents yes
you can kiss me.
And they get to provide says no
you can't kiss me.
What what is that what how did
they fix that between that
couple what is the school then
step in to do Mr speaker and
gentle lady the bill has nothing
to do with that the bill is to
teach you that they have a right
to say no what happens if
someone doesn't respect it or if
someone wasn't listening in
class there's nothing we can do
to control that we are trying to
prevent those kind of issues by
letting everyone know what the
rules are the rules are no
sexual activity without consent
now somebody doesn't get that
lesson they don't believe it we
can't help that this is nothing
about consequences this is about
teaching about violate the
sovereignty.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
again.
And I was in charge of a school
and I had a child that was
perpetually.
Abusing other people in a sexual
manner or harassing them or
whatever it seems to me that at
some point we would be this
isn't working we need to add
something to it for consequences
and that's where saying going
so.
Mr chair Mr speaker and gentle
lady what happens if let's say
someone comes in or some of
teaching the class what does the
school board get to do of
somebody's being too graphic and
they're talking about things
extremely explicitly what we're
going to be the boundaries for
what we're teaching our children
in class Mr speaker and gentle
lady that is up to the board of
education at that school
district they decide what
they're going to fire who
they're going to hire this bill
has nothing to do with any of
that this bill is only about
educating our youth.
Thank you Mr speaker deleted
their lives are problem how are
we educating them what are they
doing it be like if I went to a
business and I said Hey we're
gonna do this thing what are the
details of it now this gonna be
whatever so we called I'm not
done yet please so Mister
speaker gentle lady my problem
is is that when bills come to me
that are rather vague like this
and there isn't something very
explicit in here we leave it up
to school for which is fine I
believe the problem the schools
I think is that they should have
a lot more time to be able to do
what they want.
However what are going to be the
repercussions of parents coming
state I don't want you talking
about and I'm not gonna say it
but this one topic this is way
too graphic this teachers will
waive way over the line then
what does the school do at that
point they just allow them to
keep continuing teaching that
class like that Mr speaker
gentle lady as I said the school
district hi our the
superintendent hires and fires
and makes the rules about what
is acceptable so there's nothing
in this bill affirmative consent
is a well studied well known
educators if they should if they
want to and I hope they will
want can go online and find
materials to use to teach this
effective for teacher goes rogue
that has nothing to do with this
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so again it's so goes back to my
problem of a one time there's a
consent and the next time
there's not I I I see this going
into a next step of what we
gonna do we know mandate further
in our schools but it was at
that's all the questions have
thank you.
There's a gentleman from
violence here Representative
Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll please Mr speaker I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
and I think I've actually
brought this of the committee my
and my my questions is not
regarding the if the teaching of
this okay Mr speaker my question
is really about the process in
the event that something has
happened and and Mr Spiegel
gentle lady as a as a license
educator I have the duty to
report the first person that I
should be reported to gentle
lady is the police and they then
take over the investigation.
So my question is really about
it's in section the as far as
the process once a complaint is
is been taken on students are
struggling to get there.
Gentleman what Cajun number I'm
I need to page ten.
section II starting on line
thirteen.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
only for post secondary.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady of.
And again just for my from my
perspective supporting the bill
end of supporting with the
intent of the bill is something
that I believe that we're here
Mr speaker gentle lady it's just
the the clarity about who was
responsible for the collection
of the evidence and also the
follow because once if this is
been it the principal secretary
even more so gentlelady that if
its report to the school the
schools to be notified the
police officers or who whether
the probing authorities
Commission then take over the
the of.
The investigation gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentle gentleman
it's all in title nine and when
generally when people are in
college they are over the age of
eighteen and it is against title
nine for someone to report again
if if I came in to close to
disclose to someone higher ed
and I said but I don't want to
go to the police in title nine
you are not allowed to it's that
big the victim that gets to make
the decision whether it goes to
to a criminal phase.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
general and again can you the
judge in the General to point me
to the park before that word
says that that section is only
for post secondary because
inject it is I read the bill and
as a K. twelve educator my my
concern is that.
It doesn't say that in a the
gentle lady eighties principle
or eighty percent of school
district who does not interpret
that could potentially lose our
license if in fact they take
that under of the take the lead
on that investigation.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
first part of the bill is all
about post secondary though the
public education does not start
until page fourteen so so why
where it's placed it that will
be very clear of what of what
students that applies to.
Thank you generally I'm I'm kind
of looking through just to in
differences are on page fourteen
I do see about this talk about
credits when we're talking about
process we're talking about this
I don't know it the gentle lady
and Mr speaker at one point one
is we're saying this is for
applicable for secondary
of our higher institutions only
and it doesn't fall into the K.
twelve so Mr speaker generally
can you show me that were
ordered basically where that
line cuts off so that we know
which our political to a higher
rate in which our political two
K. twelve.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you clarify.
Yes Mr speaker just gentle lady
When we talk about when section
one more page fourteen talks
about the credits and will be
taught my question Mr speaker
and gentle lady is how do we
know that this is only
applicable if everything after a
page fourteen that is applicable
to K. twelve and Mr speaker
gentle lady I just want to make
sure that.
People understand though that we
say that this section is only
for higher education I think
that clarifies it but when we're
not sure what section is
applicable.
That's where Mr speaker and
gentle lady I believe that
there's a little confusion and
may lead to miss Helen of
information and Mr speaker
gentle lady as a parent and as
an advocate I very much support
what you're trying the intent of
this Mr speaker and gentle lady
my only question is how do we
clarify that this is a K. twelve
because we also have a a
required reporting Asian which I
may have if if anyone to twelve
this is reported they should
make the report and see what the
employees in the sky so Mr
speaker gentle lady LA two of
respond Mr speaker and gentleman
the administration of
postsecondary or K. twelve knows
what the rules are title nine
does not apply to K. twelve.
I'm sorry it does but but it's
and and a mandatory reporter of
of kids being abused that's
exactly right that doesn't
change this at all.
Is Mr speaker generally of
that's I'm not I'm not saying
that because I'm I'm a deputy
superintendent so I I do
understand about the court my my
question ma'am interim in gentle
lady is just about that I know
that this part is available
because as we read this.
The gentle lady is has said that
only the only pages thirteen or
fourteen before apply to.
Secondary schools for post
secondary schools.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
all I was baby clarification or
some kind of that our disclaimer
otherwise that this is this is
K. twelve in this is higher rate
because Mr speaker gentle lady
right now I don't think it's a
quite as clear as to where one
begins and where women's.
Mr speaker there why there
wasn't a question did Mr Mr
speaker and gentle lady
incentives are some point can
you point me to somewhere before
that word says that all all
pages the preceding pages on
pages thirteen and fourteen our
secondary and everything out
that is K. twelve.
Mr speaker and gentleman
we in general when we do laws we
don't say okay A. B. and C.
apply to DCNF and when it's
already in state and federal
law.
Mr speaker gentle lady but when
we're talking about this law
here they were talking about
this.
Guess I understand very much
about as far as reporting on and
again I I just want to know just
all because for me to read
through this.
Mr speaker gentle lady from is
an educator.
I was dropped when I read this
through the fifth time I was not
sure if the section the on page
ten was applicable to me and
that's all Mr speaker gentle
lady that I'm asking or that I
have a question is where in this
bill or in any part before that
does it say that this is part
applicable K. twelve.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
gonna sit down so I can read
this computer so because I have
no short term memory so on page
eight line thirteen.
A new section of chapter twenty
seven article two.
NMSA nineteen seventy eight so
that's where it says.
thank you gentlelady.
But hi I am looking at the
section right now but it does
not I cannot from there to.
To make the distinction that
that is in fact only for second
education with the reading from
the state
Under section two and section
and chapter two article to MSAs
nineteen said not to to run and.
With the department sold out the
detail trauma informed policies
controlling for respondents for
the investigation disciplinary
procedures addressing
allegations of sexual assault.
Mr speaker gentle lady my mic
again had this committee
clarified with amendment or
something just so they said that
this I just want Mr speaker
generally please understand my I
understand all this I sympathize
my only concern is that they can
do the way that it could build
its current stand it's not clear
of what is a K. twelve
responsibility and what is a of
the higher ed responsibility
and.
Is there question Mr speaker.
Yes ma'am pointed Mr speaker
gentle lady you said that that
section of clarified and so that
was the that was a higher ed
but that's it was only for
higher rate so you've talked
about this if you can generally
if there's a section in there or
online that shows in states
that.
But this is a popular portable
higher at Mr speaker and
gentleman it is where it is
placed in the law that
determines whether so there's
that K. twelve section I not in
this bill but in the already
stout standing law that will
clarify whether who it applies
to.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I thank
you for your responses I do want
to state that I do support the
intent but I do Mr speaker
gentle lady I feel that that's
it's somewhat not clear as far
as the responsibilities and
Of K. twelve so thank you Mr
speaker there is further debate
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Julie from Bernalillo December
about you know.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I yield thank you and
gentle lady I I.
I am
I'm standing in support and I'm
sorry you've had to go through
some deep dives on this when we
said over and over again that
this bill.
Is.
Only.
And I shouldn't say only because
it has so many significant
amount of cations
Resenting affirmative consent
policy in schools.
So you ask the question early on
gentle lady Mr speaker or you
raise the point that how many of
us had we known this.
Have an Representative because
in a.
And others had we known this.
In my case fifty plus years ago.
It would have changed.
What I personally had to go
through.
and I'm speaking as a victim.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
In all the years that I've been
here and you've been with me for
most of those years.
You've known me to be a very
reserved person.
And gentle lady you've known me
Mr speaker.
To not be able to speak on these
types of on.
Situations and concerns because
of being reserved having been
raised reserve fund in Catholic
of settings Catholic family.
However as I progressed Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
In my public service in this
role as a state representative
and having heard from my
constituents it becomes more and
more important to stand up.
Be brave.
Have the courage.
To speak on behalf of everyone
if that is either subject a
victim or potentially in those
situations so Mister speaker and
gentle lady.
Are you you are aware that the
state of California has passed
and and a consent law is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
yes.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I want to let the.
My colleagues know that I am a
grandparent and my two oldest
grandsons ages eight and six are
is going to school in the Los
Angeles Independent School
District.
And I sat in Mr speaker and
gentle lady and some other
classes I had the opportunity to
be there before they went out on
a summer break and then again
when they came back in for fall
break.
And the a Los Angeles school
districts take a restorative
justice approach.
And that's what you're promoting
gentle lady and Mr speaker we're
promoting a restorative justice
approach which recognizes
victims potential victims of.
Sexual assault sexual harassment
institutional racism and you
name it.
All of those protections that we
have under the US constitution.
And we're bringing to the state.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady.
We also talked about body
sovereignty.
And how very important that is
so I I bring this up because I'm
the mother of two sons and the
grandmother of four grandsons
those eight Eral grant that
eight year old grandson and that
six year old grandson Mr speaker
gentle lady or already in their
first second and third grade
learning.
What consent was.
And they were the teachers were
demonstrating Mr speaker and
gentle lady demonstrating
physically what that meant.
And they it was it was so
admirable to see so now my
little grandson's especially the
one that the role there in that
pre teen stage pre preteen stage
where they're teasing each other
now in classrooms and there Mr
speaker and gentle lady teasing
each other about you liking this
girl and you know and so on.
And they are very aware he is
very aware.
Of what is acceptable.
To that young lady that's
sitting in front of him that he
happens to like.
Or think is she's cute.
And he will respectfully ask.
If he can even say.
That he likes to other students.
I thought that was Mr speaker
gentle lady the cutest thing.
Was that wasn't exactly what
we're talking about step one Mr
speaker and gentle lady and for
all those questions that came to
you about how this would play
out this is how it plays out so
that when he reaches.
Middle school high school and
college and his adulthood he
would have already have
ingrained in them.
What is acceptable what is not
acceptable what he can do what
he cannot do and and and not on
the other side as well.
Those young ladies are learning
that too so Mister speaker and
gentle lady I just wanted to
stand up and let the body known.
That this is how it plays out in
a state that has already passed
affirmative consent and they
have embraced restorative
justice as their approach in
education and I would hope Mr
speaker and gentle lady that we
all stand up and pass this bill
but more importantly I hope that
our department of it education
and our higher institutions and
everyone embrace the restorative
justice approach because it
works admirably thank.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm.
We wanted to prevent issues and
when when I I don't remember
what year was I've been carrying
this bill for a lot of years I
had a man who is about forty
coming to my office and say when
I was in high school and we
talked about dating the thing
was where can we get alcohol to
get her drunk so we can get sex
we don't want that to be the
common thinking this is to
prevent that kind of stuff that
was so damaging to both the boys
and the girls for years.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from a total
Representative block.
Thank you Mr speaker is a
generally it lady from
Bernalillo county yield Mister
speaker I yield thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
just a few questions I won't
keep here all day a promise.
So my first question is is
affirmative consent is that
already in the federal statute
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
not.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady and so I we got
California they they've passed
that already are there any other
states Mr speaker gentle lady
that do have this law.
Speaker there are.
Thank you Mr speaker than thank
you gentle lady so I've been
trying to find the other bills
in the past I know that it was a
house bill forty four last year
and I believe on this one pager
we have here it says seven votes
to twenty twenty one I couldn't
find the twenty twenty one bill
but a.
Mr speaker gentle lady does this
bill pretty much more that last
bill from twenty twenty one
Mister speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman we took
out the task force.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady so I'm reading
this bill here and I don't see
any kinds of penalties for
localities that do not implement
this is there a certain date
when they're supposed to
implement this affirmative
consent policy Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
what when it comes law it will
be implemented by the PED.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I've I believe
PED would probably promulgate
regulations Mr speaker gentleman
and Mr speaker that yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I had one
concerning question about the
the content of what we're
teaching you know we all agree
yes means yes no means no and
that's you know it's pretty
black and white I hear I really
hope that we are teaching this
to minors Mr speaker gentle lady
and I just want to stress that
we're not teaching under age
children that it's okay to have
sexual activity.
With people over eighteen Mr
speaker gentle lady that would
be statutory rape Mr speaker and
gentleman that is not at all.
That has nothing to do with this
bill okay thank you Mr speaker
thank you generated just want to
clarify that because we
certainly don't want to teach
our youngsters anything that
would lead them astray Mister
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
intent is to give people
students the knowledge that they
have to keep themselves safe and
healthy.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I think this is
so important to to teach this to
young kids I think it's very
critical at a early age of
development that we make sure
that they know that yes means
yes no means no so I appreciate
you for bringing this forward
gentle lady and those are all
the questions I have for you
thank you.
There's a gentleman from San
Juan McKinley Representative
Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I yield thank.
I'm convinced yes I was sent
here and I wasn't going to get
involved in the debate because I
just thought that everything
really looks food I didn't see
any problems of this legislation
but I asked this question.
What does this legislation that
we're sending anybody to jail Mr
speaker and gentleman no
okay added
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
the debate I was hearing the.
I think.
I don't know why I could tell
you that there's courts and
jails and this and the other.
I think obviously isn't.
That all this is the piece of
legislation the.
Is children of the children that
we have William waters Cruz no
means no is that all this is Mr
speaker and gentleman
essentially there's a little bit
in there about trauma informed
treatment in post secondary
education okay thanks and that's
my concern was because I just
look at the legislation I'm
looking for a where it goes to
court and we're just a job to
come in and what is the officer
coming with a hat and gloves I
can find it.
And I was just concerned because
after the debate I thought maybe
we were going to start locking
up our high school kids
huh because of everything I
heard okay sorry I was confused
about the finished but isn't the
debate thank you the gentle lady
thank you the gentleman Mr
speaker although I do sometimes
wish I had the ability to lock
people up.
There's further debate the
gentleman for many in the
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please yield hi you.
Mr speaker gentle lady so I
think you summed up the bill
with the phrase yes means yes
and no means no
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
correct actually Mr speaker
gentle lady I like better only
yes means yes so silence doesn't
mean yes thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady so I agree with
much of this bill
The a little uncomfortable with
the idea of consent being given
by all parties to sexual
activity I don't think that's a
good situation Mr speaker gentle
lady bill skip over that
it says here that consent can
never affirmative consent can
never be given by a person who
is asleep unconscious
incapacitated due to perhaps the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
Mr speaker gentle lady I agree
with that one as well Mr speaker
gentle lady
the it says here that someone
whose stated in the past and
perhaps engaged and activity
that's not of an instance of
consent again Mr speaker
generally so I agree without.
SO had Mr speaker gentle lady
what I understood you I believe
you said earlier is that this is
all about education.
Is that correct generally Mr
speaker Mr speaker gentle lady
it is all about education with
the addition of using trauma
informed care post secondary.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
so I'm a little bit confuse them
about it's not just policy but
the bill title also references
procedures and those procedures
are I believe starting about on
page three point twenty two and
this is procedures so include
missile response by the
institution to this report and
then it goes on to talk about
more procedures including an
investigation.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think one of the concerns I've
heard expressed on the floor
today is that is not just
education but there's some kind
of.
Process that's being said here
and I look at the beginning of
the bill this is all new
material Mr speaker gentle lady
so is that correct for
instituting a procedure for set
of procedures Mr speaker Mr
speaker and gentle lady this is
part postsecondary and it's
already in title nine.
Thank you gentle lady so what
this also does and this is on
page five of the bill starting
it page for our line I it says
that the post secondary
educational institution shall.
Enter into memoranda of
understanding agreements are
collaborative partnerships with
existing organizations.
to I guess operate somehow in
the this space of informed
consent procedures so Mister
speaker gentle lady it says
shall.
The does that mean the
institution itself doesn't have
people on hand to deal with the
subject Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentle lady again
this is college and it's to make
sure that the university or
college House somewhere that
they can refer either the victim
or the
perpetrator for lack of a better
word to so they don't have to
have it but they have to have a
relationship perhaps with the
rape crisis center in in the
county or
They contribute.
Arms get tired they need to have
a place where they can it could
be a perhaps a private
counseling if there is something
like that but just some
relationships or but if I
college sophomore comes to
someone and says this happened
they can say here's a number you
can call we have a relationship
with them because if you don't
have that then it may be months
and months before they can get
any services and we don't want
that to happen.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I so
my concern is that we not tie
the hands of post secondary
institutions that have this
subject matter already covered
in their policies and procedures
this so shall basically contract
out and so I I do not like that
portion of the bill and I'll be
up front about that but when we
move on to.
Section two of the bill talks
about management as part gentle
lady what page I'm I'm not
keeping up with the sections I'm
sorry Mr speaker gentle with him
on page eight of the bill.
This is section two of the bill
and it's nanomaterial once
again.
It says that Department show
dogs certain policies and
responses for the investigation
so here again it's calling for
an investigation which is more
than just education.
But let me skip over now I know
I.
I've got a little bit more to
say and Mr speaker would like
now to go to page fourteen of
the bill and I think
this answers a question that
came up just a few minutes ago
so this is section three.
it's dealing with The New Mexico
code section twenty two dash
thirteen dash one point one the
title of that is graduation
requirements.
So it seems that this idea of
having policies and some kind of
educational program is being
added to the graduation
graduation requirements of state
law.
So Mister speaker gentle lady it
looks like it's been tucked in
there this health information
health information response
information that that you have
an issue here.
So what I find rather
interesting and I don't think
it's a good thing Mr speaker
gentle lady is that I read the
graduation requirements statute
a number of times it's kind of
telling us you don't have to so
many units in this subject and
that requirement perhaps starts
at this class coming in and so
for dates and all that.
But on page twenty when it comes
to the health education course
and that's since existing
statute all of a sudden we have
the all this language that isn't
typical to this section of law
this goes into a great deal of
detail them and you can read it
for yourself Mr speaker gentle
lady it's four pages
It's on page twenty one adding a
whole new paragraphs mentioning
things and basically subject
matter and points to be made
that doesn't really belong in
the statute if it's health
education course so many units
that should suffice but this
seems to want to put in this.
Policy of the bill we're doesn't
really belong in for that reason
I I have trouble with the bill
as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's in
there so that we do we.
Determined that affirmative
consent is the standard that
must be taught it's not a new
different class it's within the
health class that districts can
decide if it's one day or one
week or whatever but it's it's
still outlined what it is that
this bill wants to do without
that paragraph the bill will not
make affirmative consent the
baseline.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so if
we apply that approach this
section and graduation
requirements would probably get
to be about two hundred pages
because everybody want to put in
details of what they want taught
I think we have what are called
standards and benchmarks that
kind of flesh out what the
general framework is supposed to
look like so I think that's an
inappropriate place to put this
information and then finally I
do have one other question for
the gentle lady Mr speaker and
that is
at what age would this be taught
in in public schools Mr speaker
gentle lady and gentle lady it
says in the bill eight through
eleventh grade.
So it's up to the school
district when they teach it but
it will not be taught per se in
in third grade.
Mr speaker gentle lady so is it
possible for did I hear you say
eighth graders on up.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's as
middle school to high school
although I did just see
something that was eighth to
eleventh grade but.
Thank you is it possible Mr
speaker gentle lady if you know
the answer to this for middle
school student to give consent
for sexual activity.
Mr speaker gentle lady if
they're of age by based on state
statutes.
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
elaborate please.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's
it's kind of complicated because
it depends on the age of the.
The fourteen year I mean if if
if you're fourteen and if you
can have consent with an
eighteen year old is that right
no you cannot with seventeen and
as you get it's it's it's kind
of like the table I'd say for
lack of a better word that how
old the person the people that
partners are.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
I think that really are
convoluted everything there such
a thing as statutory rape
I would hope people would
understand that that's a crime
some of this is almost implying
that the young people can give
consent when in fact they cannot
legally do so.
So Mr speaker gentle lady I I do
understand the concept of
consent of
There's just a whole lot here
that our society has let us down
on we've kind of wrote it are
pillars of morality and now we
end up with a legislation that
tries to try to fix things when
I think if we abandon the
supports for good and civil
society this protective of
children it's about teaching
them the message that premarital
sex is not a good idea can lead
to all kinds of problems and
that causes a lot of pain and
suffering so Mister speaker
gentle lady thank you for the
time
I appreciate being able to ask a
few questions thank you see you
know for the Beijing lady to
close Mr speaker I now move that
house bill forty three do now
pass we are on final passage of
house bill forty three the vote
is now open.
The votes about to close.
What is important in the
affirmative twelve in the
negative house bill forty three
has duly passed this house.
Generated millions of Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that business
committee reports in addition
disordered.
Click to read.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill one sixty one has had
it under consideration point I
was recommendation that a do
pass and that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption option
available committee report on
house bill one sixty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Post date the eyes have it could
reproductive.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house bill one eighty has had it
under consideration point in
with recommendation that a do
pass as amended and it's
referred to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption
adoption of federal committee
board on house bill one eighty
eight all those in favor signify
by saying aye opposed eight the
eyes have it committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill one fifty
five has had it under
consideration point some of the
provision added to pass and for
the remaining recommends that it
not be referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
The.
Mr speaker move adoption were on
adoption federal community
portal house bill one fifty five
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Opposing the S. Senate committee
report up to.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
thirty one has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that I do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption
adoption of fable committee
report on house bill thirty one
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Post makes the as of a committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
one thirty has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation added to pass and
that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption rented optional a
favorable committee report on
house bill one thirty all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Calls may be a Senate committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
terms been referred house bill
forty four has had it under
consideration point a with
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption granted optional
Federal Committee Porter house
bill forty for all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose new ideas have a
committee report up.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too it's been referred house
bill sixty two has had it under
consideration point seven
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption or that option or
federal community Porter house
will sixty to all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Does make the a Senate committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
to miss the referred house bill
one zero three has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation auditing pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption or that option or
federal committee report on
house bill one oh three all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Opposing the S. have a commuter
for about the.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to miss been referred house bill
ninety five has had it under
consideration point of
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair move adoption for
the doctor of federal committee
report on house bill ninety five
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
His name is on a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
team has been referred house
bill one forty two has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendation but it did
not pass that House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee substitute for house
bill one forty two to pass an
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee Representative
Matthew McQueen chair that's a
different document of federal
committee report on house bill
forty two but a favorable
committee report on house energy
natural resources and
environment committee substitute
outdoor forty two of those and
everything about this and I.
Clothes make the as having
committed for adopted Mr speaker
taxation and revenue committee
team is been referred house bill
seventy eight as amended has had
it under consideration point of
recommendation of do pass
respectfully submitted
tournament the chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
adoption of federal Canadian
port on house bill seventy eight
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Was me yes have a good product.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that order
business introduction of
legislation to no objection it
is so ordered.
Click to read.
House Bill three hundred
introduced by Representative
scared and Chandler and act
relating to public employees
requiring policy enabling public
employees to telework amending
and enacting sections of the
NMSA in nineteen seventy eight
House Bill three hundred
introduced by representatives
scared and Chandler House Bill
three hundred having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
it's the house government
election Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill three oh one
introduced by Representative
Castellano and act relating to
the gaming tax providing a right
to differential for certain
gaming operator licensees
located in a class AA County
House Bill three oh one
introduced by Representative
Castellano House Bill three one
I've been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
vents the house taxation and
revenue committee
House Bill three oh two
introduced by Representative
Castellano and act relating to
school activities prohibiting
imposition of limitations
against all school age persons
from the use of their names
images likenesses or reputations
allowing for their professional
representation of all school age
persons by an agent for matters
arising from the use of the
school age persons names images
likenesses or reputations House
Bill three oh two introduced by
Representative Castellano House
Bill thrill to have been read
twice by title is are printed
and referred to the house
Education Committee then to the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three oh three
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil and act making
appropriation of ten million
five hundred thousand dollars to
the rural air service
enhancement fund House Bill
three oh three introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil
House Bill three oh three having
been read twice by title twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee thence
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill three oh four
introduced by representatives
Chasey and Thompson and act
relating to public pensions
allowing a supplemental needs
trusts to be named as a survival
for survivor or refund
benefit should confectionery
pursuant to the public employees
retirement act the judicial
retirement act the magistrate
chairman act and the educational
retirement act clarifying
certain dates a payment in the
event of the death or
termination of a survivor
beneficiary House Bill three oh
four introduced by
representatives Chasey and
Thompson House Bill through for
having been read twice by title
is that are printed and referred
to the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
said house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill three oh five
introduced by representative
Nibert and act relating to
parentage amending repealing and
acting sections of the New
Mexico uniform parentage act to
clarify surrogacy agreements
assisted reproduction in
parentage determination House
Bill three oh five introduced by
Representative night part House
Bill three I have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then to House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three oh six
introduced by representatives
Elaine read and Lara an act
relating to crime prohibiting
the unlawful purchase of a
firearm for another House Bill
three of six introduced by
Representative Lane creep and
Lara House Bill three oh six
amendment twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house consumer public affairs
committee then to House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three of seven
introduced by representatives
Kate's Allison Sariñana Johnson
and Representative Allen
Martinez and act making
appropriation to the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration for the town of
Bernalillo museum to develop
phase one of the better in
heroes of the American southwest
forgotten stories from forgotten
places documentary project House
Bill three oh seven introduced
by Representative Kate Allison
Sariñana Johnson and
Representative Allen Martinez
House Bill three you'll seven
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee then the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three oh eight
introduced Representative
Hernandez Allison Jones Kate's
and Serato and act relating to
taxation expanding in income tax
credit for the adoption of a
special needs child to the
adoption of any child increasing
the amount of credit House Bill
three oh eight introduced by
Representative Hernandez Allison
Jones Kate answer item House
Bill three oh eight having been
read twice by title is are
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then so house taxation
and revenue committee our house
bill three oh nine introduced by
Representative Hernandez and
Dixon and act relating to gaming
control increasing the maximum
award of a gaming machine on the
premises of a nonprofit
organization gaming operator
licensee House Bill three oh
nine introduced by
Representative Hernandez and
Dixon House Bill three oh nine
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer and public
affairs committee.
Thence the house commerce and
economic development committee.
House Bill three ten introduced
by Representative Sanchez an act
relating to political
subdivisions amending the public
improvement district act
allowing a district four to
impose a special property tax
levy for purposes of that act
authorizing the creation of an
administrative committee
pursuant to that act removing
the option to impose a higher
rate of property tax if approved
by voters in the district
amending the tax increments FOR
Development Act allowing a
district board to impose a
property tax for purposes of
that act authorizing the
delegation of certain powers of
the board to members of an
appointed administrative
committee pursuant to that act
providing that all contracts
entered into by a public
improvement district board why
tax increment development
district four are not subject to
the procurement code providing
that the debt obligations of a
public improvement district
court tax increment development
district are not those of the
local government and are subject
to audit pursuant to the audit
act making conforming and
technical changes House Bill
three ten introduced by
Representative Sanchez.
House Bill three ten have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee this
House excision and Revenue
committee.
House Bill three eleven
introduced by Representative
said at a Dixon brown Trujillo
and Allison and act making
appropriation to the department
of finance and administration
for the council of state
governments to provide a grant
writing and technical assistance
services House Bill three eleven
introduced by Representative
said at a Dixon brown Trujillo
and Allison.
House Bill three eleven have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House.
House Bill three twelve
introduced by Representative
Lord Harper Duncan and
representative Alan Martinez and
act relating to children
requiring a best interest of the
child determination in all abuse
and neglect proceedings
providing the best interests of
the child standard in a piece in
the correct proceedings House
Bill three twelve introduced by
representatives of course Harper
Duncan and Representative Allen
Martinez.
House Bill three twelve
amendments was my titles are
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirteen
introduced by Representative
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
this Martinez and act relating
to cannabis regulation creating
a cannabis nursery license
changing the plant count for
cannabis producer Michael
businesses and integrated
cannabis micro businesses
removing the cannabis control
division of the regulation and
licensing department from the
from the provisions of the
uniform licensing act
restricting restricting the
synthesis of tetra hydro can't
open all the application and
renewal fees for vertically
integrated cannabis
establishments creating the
equity bureau of the cannabis
control division of the
regulation and licensing
department specifying hearing
procedures granting subpoena
powers providing for
distribution of assets of
nonprofit corporations
incorporating as for as for
profit corporations which are
allowed under the cannabis
regulation act House Bill three
thirteen introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero and
representative of your Martinez
house with three thirteen have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
and ended Affairs Committee
dissents the house Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill three fourteen
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
happier Martinez and act
relating to criminal record
expungement applying automatic
expungement to records involving
only cannabis House Bill three
fourteen introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero and
Representative happier Martinez
House Bill three fourteen have
been read twice by title is our
printed referred to the house
consumer and public affairs
committee thence the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three fifteen
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
how the year Martinez and act
relating to distributions of the
cannabis excise tax providing
distributions to the community
reinvestment grant Fund and the
substance use disorder
prevention and treatment fund
providing purposes applications
and wards House Bill three
fifteen introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero and
Representative have here
Martinez House Bill three
fifteen have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
Indian Affairs Committee
elections in in the Affairs
Committee excuse me House
government elections in in the
Affairs Committee thence the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three sixteen
introduced by Representative
Dixon and dealer Cruz and act
relating to forfeiture allowing
certain seizures of property by
a law enforcement agency that
participates in federal
equitable sharing programs House
Bill three sixteen introduced by
Representative Dixon and David
Cruz House Bill three sixteen
having been read twice by title
is a representative for to the
house consumer public affairs
committee there is a house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three seventeen
introduced by representatives
I'm here nor New Chasey
Representative Andrea Romero and
Representative Chandler an act
relating to eight imposing
restrictions of liens imposed by
a service provider amending
sections of chapter forty eight
article eight NMSA nineteen
seventy eight amending a section
of the motor vehicle code
regarding rights of subrogation
House Bill three seventeen
introduced by representatives on
in our new Chasey Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
Chandler.
Comes with three seventeen is
order having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to house consumer
Public Affairs Committee then so
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three eighteen
introduced by Representative
Lujan an act relating to
elections revising compensation
for election board members the
time for processing certain
certificates of registration and
cancellations provisions for
accepting and processing
absentee ballots and retention
of voting records House Bill
three hundred eighteen
introduced by Representative
Lujan.
House Bill three eighteen have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed for the house
government election Indian
Affairs Committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three nineteen
introduced by Representative
Lujan Matthews said at a lane
and Sanchez and act making
appropriation to the office of
the state auditor to conduct
agreed upon procedures for it
for entities delinquent in
reporting pursuant to the audit
act.
Three nineteen introduced by
Representative Lujan Matthews at
a at a lane and Sanchez.
As with three nineteen have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three twenty
introduced by representatives
Castellano and Sanchez and act
relating to off highway motor
motor vehicles amending sections
sixty six dash three dash one
zero zero one point one and MSA
nineteen seventy eight as two
thousand five chapter three
twenty five section one as
amended amending definitions
House Bill three twenty
introduced by Representative
Castellano and Sanchez Bill
three twenty have been read
twice by title is our printer
for to the house consumer Public
Affairs Committee thence the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee.
House Bill three twenty one
introduced by Representative
Harper Hochman Vigil Jones
Representative Harry Garcia and
Representative Lundstrom an act
relating to taxation amending
distributions of the liquor
excise tax and motor vehicle
excise tax House Bill three
twenty one introduced by
Representative Harper Hochman
Vigil Jones Representative Harry
Garcia Representative Lundstrom.
House Bill three twenty one have
been read twice by title is a
representative for to the house
taxation and revenue committee
this house appropriations and
finance committee
House Bill three twenty two
introduced by Representative
Harper and senator Maestas an
act relating to taxation
creating a flat corporate income
tax rate requiring all business
income to be apportioned by the
single sales factor repealing
provisions of the uniform
division of income for tax
purposes act House Bill three
twenty two introduced by
Representative Harper and
senator my Estes House Bill
three twenty two having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee then so
the house taxation and revenue
committee
House Bill three twenty three
introduced by Representative
Harper led to a Cabana
Representative Representative
have here Martinez and senator
Mestis an act relating to
taxation changing the name of
the gross receipts tax to the
sales tax changing the name of
the compensating tax to the use
tax changing the name of the
government of gross receipts tax
to the governmental sales tax
changing the name of the
interstate telecommunications
gross receipts tax to the
interstate telecommunications a
sales tax ranging from the least
vehicle gross receipts tax to
the least vehicle sales tax
changing rooms of reciprocal
option gross receipts taxes to
municipal local options sales
taxes changing the name of the
municipal compensating tax to
the municipal use tax changing
the name of County local option
gross receipts taxes to county
local option sales taxes
changing the name of the county
compensating tax to the county
use tax changing rooms of the
axe and Revenue bonds related to
those taxes to conform to the
new tax names reconciling
conflicting amendments of to the
same sections of law amending
and repealing sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight.
House Bill three twenty three
introduced by Representative
Harper Lente Cabana
Representative here Martinez and
senator Maestas.
House Bill three twenty three
minutes on my title is a
reference to referred to House
excision and Revenue committee.
House Bill three twenty four
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to
government organization
requiring the children youth and
families department to monitor
requests for reimbursement
imposing a rate of interest on
past due payments House Bill
three twenty four introduced by
Representative Lord.
House with three twenty four
have been read twice by title is
are printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee themselves government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill three twenty five
introduced by Representative
Figueroa and lunch from an act
relating to public school
governance creating reporting
requirements allowing the public
education department to suspend
individual local school board
members providing penalty for
violating the nepotism
provisions requiring more
mandatory training for local
school boards and governing
bodies of charter schools.
Adding more public access to
dish to decision making of local
school boards and governing
bodies of charter schools
through webcasting and archiving
meetings House Bill three twenty
five introduced by
Representative Figueroa and
Lundstrom House Bill three
twenty I have been read twice by
title is are printed and
referred to the house government
elections in universe Committee
then the house Education
Committee House Bill three
twenty six introduced by
Representative Lord and act
making appropriation to the
children youth and families
department for child abuse and
neglect prevention and support
services House Bill three twenty
six introduced by Representative
Lord.
As with three twenty six amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three twenty seven
introduced by Representative
Lord an act relating to children
allowing persons to leave
infants with first responders
and safety devices for the
surrender of infants under
certain conditions without
criminal prosecution for
abandonment or abuse of a child
allowing the installation and
operation of safety devices
devices for the surrender of
infants providing requirements
for installation operation and
monitoring and inspection of
those devices providing limited
limited immunity for operators
of those devices requiring the
children youth and families
department to issue rules to
implement the per the provisions
of a safe haven for infants act
making appropriation House Bill
three twenty seven introduced by
Representative Lord House Bill
three twenty seven have been
read twice by title is our
printer defer to the how house
health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three twenty eight
introduced by Representative
Daily Cruz and act relating to
motor vehicles enacting a new
section of chapter sixty seven
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
requiring the development of the
vision zero plan requiring
reports creating the position of
vision zero coordinator
providing duties providing a
definition House Bill three
twenty eight introduced by
Representative Cruz.
House Bill three twenty eight
ten minutes twice by title is
our printer referred to the
house consumer public affairs
committee then to House
restitution public works and
capital improvements committee.
House joint resolution twelve
introduced by representatives
Harper Dixon and Figueroa the
joint resolution proposing to
amend article seven of the
constitution of New Mexico to
allow voters regardless of
political party affiliation or
no political party affiliation
to vote in the primary election
of the political party of their
choice and providing political
parties the option of allowing
only party members to
participate in the political
party's nomination process on
condition that the party pays
the cost of that process H. J.
art poster and resolution twelve
introduced by Representative
Harper Dixon and Figueroa.
House resolution twelve I've
been read twice by title is our
printer for to the house
government elections and indeed
Affairs Committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution thirteen
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew lock and Mason and
joint resolution requesting the
Congress of the United States to
call a convention upon the
application of two thirds of the
state for the limited purpose of
proposing amendments to the
United States constitution to
impose fiscal restraints on the
federal government with the
power and jurisdiction of the
federal government and limit the
terms of office for federal
officials and members of
Congress house joint resolution
thirteen introduced by
representatives Pettigrew block
and Mason house resolution
thirteen have been read twice by
title is are printed and
referred to the house government
elections and indeed Affairs
Committee this the house
Judiciary Committee.
House memorial thirty introduced
by Representative Dixon Szeryng
Jana at a at a and Chandler in
the more you'll declaring
February seventh twenty twenty
three Jim realtor day in the
house of representatives House
memorial thirty introduced by
Representative Dixon Sariñana at
a at a and Chandler House
memorial thirty have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed in place on the speakers
table.
House memorial thirty two
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew consent Dunkin and
representative Alan of Martinez
the memorial declaring February
eighth twenty twenty three
the national debt over in the
state in the house of
representatives House memorial
thirty two introduced by
representatives Pettigrew can
send down can and representative
Alan of Martinez house memorial
thirty two have been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
in place of the speakers table.
Folks I wanted to contingent to
house bill three twenty one I
mis read the committee
assignment three twenty one it
should read House
transportations public works in
capital improvements committee
this the house taxation and
revenue committee.
I'll repeat that House Bill
three twenty one referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee in South taxation and
revenue committee for the.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I got about order
business announcements and
miscellaneous business gentleman
from going on a representative
thank you Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet starting at
two PM today thank you Mr
speaker.
They were sticking up in room
three zero seven or signaled the
gentleman from some divided
Santa Fe Representative McQueen.
Mr speaker
Was on the floor earlier when
Representative Lord.
Announced the deaths of three
teenagers and enjoyed.
The the the the Moriarity high
school.
Which lost two brothers just
three years ago.
Of the so this seems so
familiar.
You wonder if we could just rise
in a moment of silence.
Please rise.
Thank you gentlemen thank you
members thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from us on the
ones on the Fe and tells
Representative editor thank you
Mr speaker your your house
agriculture second St water
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine thank
you members taking note the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative set up the thank
you Mr speaker your house
commerce and economic
development committee thank will
need today fifteen minutes after
the floor ends and just for
clarification will be taking up
H. B. twenty three and two
twenty nine thank you thank you
members signaled the gentle lady
from thousand percent of artists
thank you Mr speaker your house
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee
is meeting tomorrow at ninety
and we have three bills H. B.
thirty three HB two seventy four
and has around nineteen thank
you members signaled provided
from Santa Santa Fe and Rio
Arriba and Los Alamos
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
judiciary committee will meet at
two fifteen today.
Members take note the gentle
lady from Chavis representatives
Ezzell Mr speaker point of
personal privilege stages such a
point Mr speaker I've had quite
a few people that might be
sitting up in the gallery
throughout the days whenever
there listen to announcements
and times of various committees
that are happening they don't
know which rooms areas so if the
chairs of those committees
whenever the announce when
they're meeting if they would
also include the room number it
would be very helpful to those
people that do want to to those
committees thank you very much
understood thank you Jim lady
and the other announcements the
gentleman from the nana
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker your
consumer public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow
afternoon at one thirty
in room three seventeen thank
you thank you delay member
sticking out the generated from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson.
Okay.
All members thank you for
create a productive day today
I enjoy your afternoon
committees thank you for
everyone who joined us here
today in the building to all of
our guests we appreciate senior.
Tomorrow we will reconvene at
ten thirty a little earlier than
usual we've got a we've got
quite a number guest tomorrow on
the floor and tomorrow's also
Asian Asian American Pacific
Islander.
And it alligned day here in the
capital first time ever I
believe very exciting day gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker of the house stand in
recess until ten thirty tomorrow
morning no objections the house
was in recess until ten thirty
tomorrow morning.
