we don't know, uh.
see, I forgot to take.
Our committee members, uh, thank
you.
New Mexicans use over plastic
bags each year, unfortunately.
On the streets, in our trees,
you name it.
an average of 12 minutes can
last through the ever growing
threat of microplastic
pollution.
And plastic bags are not just
polluting our world's oceans
there.
Also our clogging waterways and
roadsides costing millions of
dollars to clean up.
The spill would draft the land
of enchantment by banning
retailers from using single-use
plastic bags with some
exceptions.
Our goal is not to replace
single-use plastic bags with a
single-use paper with single use
paper bags, but their own bags
through a tents
we know this works.
Uh, here in Santa Fe.
Under this ordinance in Santa
Fe, um, our colleagues in 12
other states have already
implemented the litter recycling
And I'll have my guests uh our
expert witnesses, excuse
witnesses, um. Good morning,
Chair, Vice Chair and committee
members, um, I'm Shirlene
Sitton, your Solid Waste bureau
chief at the Environment
Department. I have 22 years of
experience, um, delivering a
municipal solid waste recycling,
and keep it beautiful programs
at the municipal level, and I'm
very excited to talk to you
today about House Bill 392,
which helps our waste in
recycling communities.
and reduces litter.
Now you may have heard the term
recycle right in recent years.
Well plastic bags are not
recycling right, they're not
acceptable in any collection
program in New Mexico.
What they do contribute to 80%
of the contamination in our
recycling streams, and this
costs our recyclers an estimated
$3.8 million a year to handle
them and remove them.
Um, these bags are not only a
nuisance to recyclers, but also
to waste facilities. Our solid
waste bureau regulates
landfills, and they are mandated
to uh clean up litter.
But they have to spend millions
of dollars across the state.
chasing after fugitive plastic
bags blowing in the wind and
cleaning them up, so, um,
they're very much would like to
see those go away.
Um, I want to mention that this
bill, um, supports both rural
and urban communities,
alleviating the impacts of
plastic litter and microplastic
pollution that are harmful to
wildlife but also to livestock.
We know cows and horses are
harmed by ingesting fugitive
plastic bags.
The most recent Keep America
Beautiful national literary
Study.
Found that 325 million
single-use plastic bags are all
along America's roadways and
highways.
Our New Mexico DOT spent over $8
million in FY 24, cleaning up
litter on our highways.
Litter hurts our biggest
economic generators, tourism.
Did you know that there are 74
local clean and beautiful
organizations across our state
trying to fight litter, and each
and every one of your districts.
Our tourism department supports
these efforts because litter
hurts New Mexico's. This bill
works by banning retailers from
using single-use plastic bags
and mandating a fee um for paper
bags, retailers keep 3 cents of
the fee and help pay for the
back to help them pay for the
bags and then remit 7 cents to
the local government for
education, and my role, uh,
previously with the city of
Santa Fe, I was responsible for
the education and enforcement of
the city's bag ban.
And I can attest that most
retailers are compliant.
And the funds created from the
paper bag fee were a great
source for recycling education
and um reusable bags to give to
our residents.
So I want to close by saying in
my experience, there are those
who say that plastic bags, these
kinds of flimsy plastic bags are
reusable, and they're handy for
things such as small trash can
bin liners or pet waste, and,
and I know that's true, but I've
lived in Santa Fe with the same
band for 9 years, and I always
have a few bags from allowable
sources that I can use for these
purposes, but frankly, nobody
has that many bins in their
house or that many cats.
So there are other solutions for
these concerns that don't create
the amount of litter and
nuisance costs that these bags
bring to our beautiful land of
enchantment.
This bill is an easy common
sense solution to keep litter
out of our territory. Thank you.
Miss Jar, um, first I'd like to
thank the sponsors, uh, the
gov's office, and I'd like to
thank all of you this this
session seems to be going really
well on um recycling illegal
dumping.
I just want you to know that we
worked really hard to find
a solution for plastic bags that
respected local communities to
be in charge of that, to run
programs as they see fit so that
the instant bag police of the
state that your community's
desire, um, there is a
backsliding but largely this is
a bill about
local communities and their
waste reduction, their liter
efforts. So thank you for your
consideration.
to be with you guys again.
So this bill, this particular
structure of this plastic bag
band.
Um, having carried this bill
before in the legislature, I can
tell you that.
The research is that this this
bill would save about 500
million plastic bags a year out
of New Mexico's environment.
It is absolutely a nuisance to
your communities, it's costing
Mexico City's millions of
dollars having to deal with them
for the reason Charlene
mentioned, they're not being
recycled up in litter programs
in the city of Albuquerque
alone, it was estimated they're
costing $6 million a year.
To deal with plastic bags.
So, and aside from all of that
um of course growing our outdoor
economy and one of the most
littered items, it's
proliferating the, the, uh,
roadways, um, plastic waste is
truly one of the biggest
pollutants that we're dealing
with today.
And they never really plan it.
We have to deal with plastic
waste and this this is kind of
low hanging fruit from a policy
perspective that fairly easily
and it will have a big impact
and it's just a place to start.
But um, but I think it's a a
great bill for New Mexico and
all of your community.
Thank you very much. Um, we'll
go to the audience, uh, first
just to show of hands who's here
and support him, who's here in
opposition? We'll do opposition
first. We're gonna take 3 on
each side and then we'll go on.
Uh, chairman members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
president and CEO with the New
Mexico Retail Association, uh,
while we do support efforts to
reduce plastic waste and
encourage sustainable practices.
Uh, we do have several concerns
regarding the legislation.
First of the patchwork of local
regularly bill does explicitly
allow local governments the
ability to set requirements that
go above and beyond state law,
allowing municipalities and
counties to enact more stringent
um.
Fans or fees, uh, this will
result in confusing and
burdensome patchwork or
regulations
must navigate increasing
compliance costs and
administrative burdens.
Additionally, the bill does
allow for local governments to
go above the minimum fee that
that the state mandates of 10
cents per carry-out bag.
Again, we do believe that
creates an incentive for
meunicipalities to use these as
fees as a revenue generator. Um,
if the, if lawmakers do decide
to move this bill forward, we
urge you to consider a uniform
statewide approach without
additional local government
mandates or fee structures so
that it provides retailers with
necessary time and.
Anyone else in the room? Is
there anyone online who would
like to speak all guessing.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, plastic bag bans are
a great example of a policy with
unintended consequences.
For starters, the state of New
Jersey passed a law in 2020
banning single-use plastic and
paper bags in all stores and
food service businesses. The law
took effect in May 2022.
A study by Fredonia Research
found that while the number of
plastic bags did go down by more
than 60%.
The alternative bags ended up
having a much larger carbon
footprint.
With the state's consumption of
plastic bags spiking by a factor
of nearly 3.
plastic consumption went from 53
million pounds of plastic before
the band to 151 million pounds
following the ban.
That's not the only place where
this kind of thing has happened,
similar thing happened in
California.
The LA Times editorial board
recently highlighted the failure
of California's plastic bag ban.
Uh, in, in which they ban
single-use plastic grocery bags
back in 2016.
But as the times noted in its
editorial.
In 2014, California tossed about
157,385 tons of plastic bag
waste into the trash. By 2022,
plastic bags accounted for about
231,000 tons of trash, nearly
50% more.
Please oppose this potentially
environmentally harmful plastic
bag ban. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I don't see any
others in the opposition, so
we'll do support. Again, I'd
like.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Sarah Pierrepont. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Recycling Coalition. We
are a statewide nonprofit
organization that is supported
by our members. We have about
220 members throughout New
Mexico working in solid waste
authorities, municipal solid
waste, tribes, pueblos, federal
entities, and we urge you to
support this bill. Single-use
plastic bags are the top
contaminant in New Mexico's
recycling programs. We've done
these really informative but
kind of icky projects.
waste characterization studies
on our pueblos and in our
landfills and in our recycling
centers where we sort through
all the material that's brought
in physically sort through it.
And we found that these
single-use plastic bags are the
top contaminant. They get
tangled in the equipment when
they're tangled in the
equipment, it is unsafe for
workers. You have to completely
stop the facility and clear all
the gears and clear everything
out so that the recycling can
work as we all want it to. It is
for these reasons that I
encourage you to support it, and
I will just comment about the
person that was just um
Opposed to the bill because of
New York, excuse me, New Jersey
and California. The beautiful
thing is that I'd like
OK, thank you, thank you.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members. Um, my name
is Anna Hanson. I am a former
Santa Fe County commissioner,
uh, who supported the plastic
ban bill, um, in
Santa Fe County, we did
extensive research before we did
the ban, we did over a year of
research outreach to businesses
and to the community and we had
unanimous support from the
county, um, businesses, which I
think is really important to
stay. I am also the chair of the
coalition of Sustainable
Communities of New Mexico, which
stands in full support of this.
We represent over or close to.
50% of the population of New
Mexico, the sustainable uh
coalition represents Taos.
County house.
City town.
City of Santa Fe, County of
Santa Fe, Las Cruces, Bernalillo
County and Albuquerque.
We all stand in support of this.
I also am the registered
lobbyist for the Pueblo ofuake,
which also believed very
strongly in environmental
measures to protect the
environment. So please give this
bill a due pass. I am on honored
to stand in front of you. Thank
you for your time and thank you
for uh your support of this
bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Miss. My name is
Melissa Bernard, and I'm here on
behalf of the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter, or 35,000
members and supporters. Um, I
wanted to know if I could speak
briefly and see the rest of my
time to the person behind me. I
just wanted to be on the record
in support of this bill, um,
because today we are hosting our
supporters and participants are
here in the audience. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna take one more in
the room, but we're only gonna
take one Matthew Campon, who has
found plastic for the county
commissioners of Santa Fe last
year to pass the bill that they
passed to begin to carve. Thank
you and if you'd like to speak
online, by phone. Please state
your name for the record.
Mary Garwood with the City of
Carlsbad.
OK, you have 2 minutes.
OK, um, I come to you today, um,
uh, with 9 years of keep curls
by beautiful experience, um, I
could tell you throughout these
years, um, my number one
complaint and number one issue
has been the plastic bag, um,
people come to our community,
um, they residents, visitors
alike and channeling working
with the mayor's office and um
through the city, um, you know,
I, I often would, would handle
the complaints and uh we would
try.
to get them cleaned up as fast
as we can, but next thing you
know, they're right back out
there, you know, a week later,
like we hadn't done anything.
Um, the city of Carlsbad spends
almost $800,000 a year on
cleanup efforts between our
parks, community service, my
position, um, and just with
various contracts, uh, to keep
our medians and highways clean,
which is almost is a million
dollars a year, which is really,
really crazy. Um, I really
support the fee, the um the 10
cent fee because that is proving
to be an incentive for change.
What we're seeing here in
Carlsbad. We just recently
passed our plastic.
Bag ban, um, and it got
implemented on February 1st, so
we're, we're in a learning curve
right now. Um, I, I agree that
it's an easy solution to take
care of these complaints, um,
you know, we're not asking for a
whole lot. We're just asking for
a little bit of behavior change
and sometimes it takes
legislation for that change to
happen. Um, ranchers, um,
they've proven support, um, bags
get caught in the stomachs of,
you know, animals and, and cows,
um, we've had plenty of ranchers
come forth and say that
They've lost their cattle, um,
you know, with the bags being
ingested in their stomachs. Um,
it's good for economic
development. Nobody wants to
come to a trashy town, you know,
we do have the oil and gas
industry here, and I can tell
you, working with families and,
you know, representatives that
aren't able to, you know,
I'm sorry, that's been 2
minutes.
OK.
OK, uh, so that ends our public
comment, um, uh, thank you
everyone for your input. Uh,
we'll go back to, uh,
Representative Lu Juan, uh, if
you have anything to add before
we go to the committee. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I would just add
that with the uh some of the
concerns we heard that.
You know, from 2016 to today, we
have learned a lot and this is
not the same builder you would.
There'd be um
More stringent definitions and
structure to what going to the
committee
for.
Um, what stakeholders were
consulted.
Uh, thank you for the question,
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Cortez, um, it.
Yes, I'm so sorry.
Representative Senate Cortez,
um, we, um, we are relying on
um.
the previous work that's been
done and so at this point, um,
we haven't, uh, consulted the
stakeholders in southern New
Mexico.
Other than that, other, I'm
sorry, other than the um the the
cities that um have passed the
bag bans and their concerns and
the solid waste authorities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, this bill would
authority from the local
governments to have input into.
Um, address their their local
concerns, but I.
I think that's about it.
Experts, this would impose an
essence and then we would get to
enforce and hold people
accountable on something that
we.
With one of the most pressing
environmental
pollution pollution
toxic um German and
representative, I don't think I
introduced myself when I gave
comments earlier,
but I'm
one of the in my comments, the
the piece of allows, you know,
the city of Hobbs or any other
city to um.
There's a statewide law if it
passes in state law would be the
fees that ordinance and that's
the way they wanted to handle
it.
And
so that they were
collecting those fees and then
investing those fees.
Waste issues.
Um, so
I, I, I perceive this to be
recognizing that cities may want
to do something above ability to
adopt ordinances that are even
more expansive.
in
the
Mr.
Chair Secretary Kinney is
we my city would get to set
parameters.
Law in
Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, um, I would also add
we just heard from uh city
councilor Mary Garwood from
Carlsbad.
To the last um.
Testifying a person saying that
this is very much needed in that
part of the state, but.
We don't know that they don't
want it also, so I would say
that they would have parameters
and they'd be considerations to
our local government, but having
heard from uh a local government
official saying.
That this is a dire need and and
a very big concern in that part
of the state, I think, um, helps
the argument today. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you so much,
um.
Chair and Kenny,
I represent District 62 in
Chabad. And my local for this.
So again, my, my question is we
get to set parameters on
something that we don't want. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Uh, so.
I think we're going to quickly
get to a discussion about how
this works and then enforcement,
so let's say the city of Hobbs
did not want to pass that it
defaults to the state to.
that and the
the enforcements are uh more or
less maize and, you know.
In other words.
I think what would happen stores
like Walmart and uh those big
retailers are doing this
statewide, they would inherit an
ordinance, so then we get down
to the mom and pops and if they
felt as though um.
The city and and the business
community there did not want to
stand this up.
Um
One, I think they'd be missing
out on a key source of revenues
for litter and waste, but it.
push that on them, I think we,
we do see that Las Cruces, Santa
Fe have.
it
takes to get, you know, to
decide that they want to do
this, but we'll be there to help
them understand the
Chair.
Would Hobbs be able to opt out?
Mr. Charon and Representative
under the state law, there's not
an opt-out provision.
Um
And and correct me if I'm wrong,
if anyone knows that there is,
but I don't believe there's an
opt out provision, it would be
if enacted, it would be we would
continue to work with
communities like Hobbs to uh
help them understand it better
and listen to their concerns and
maybe they craft an ordinance
that's in recognition of it or
maybe not.
So Mr. Chair, Representative,
and secretary.
In my understanding this
correctly that local control
wouldn't.
I wouldn't say that local
control wouldn't matter. There
would be direct input and
working along as a secretary has
just described the.
Uh, the type of implementation
and and the importance of
working with our local
governments is in fact what we,
the goal that we want to
achieve, and uh I would just say
that they would benefit at least
7 cents of the fee collected uh
by retailers by.
By the sales of
Of um
The, the
Of the, of the, the, I'm sorry,
the paper bag, thank you.
And so I think they need to, I
think there'd be a big
conversation about this and the
benefits and outweighing those
benefits for local government in
these areas, especially in our
rural areas, we would be there
as a state to help I'm, I'm here
to represent the beautiful
people of District 62 and were
often forgotten in the
southeastern part of the state
and these bills are imposed
without insulting our local
local government and so moving
forward, I would just I would
love to encourage everyone to
keep Southeastern New Mexico
specifically.
Hobbs in mind, bring us to the
table. Let us have a
conversation with you.
Um, I do have one more question,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Secretary Kinney. So with this
plastic ban, and plastic bag ban
also be imposed on the
restaurants and the fast food
industry and.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair Representative Senator
Cortez, um, there are exceptions
and there are exceptions for
restaurants, so there's very
reasonable exceptions here that
look a lot like how the city of
Santa Fe Baban um works if
you're spending your time in
Santa Fe, you might notice where
you might get a bag or where you
might not get a a plastic bag,
so, um, there's reasonable
exceptions for food service, um,
it doesn't ban every bag like
the produce bags that you put
your stuff in at the grocery
store.
Dry cleaning bags or things like
that, really just trying to go
after that ubiquitous.
Handled
Flimsy single use kind of
grocery bag that so often
becomes litter.
And
we were talking about, we want
to make this a benefit to your
community. The, the mandate is
on the retailers not to use the
bags. It's not on the city.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Senator
expert Secretary Kinney, there's
so many of you, um, and thank
you for uh letting me be a voice
for my district and just to
remind everyone in the room how
important local control is to
us.
Thank you, Representative. Next
up we.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
and representative, um,
I'm curious.
The, the fee structure.
And if I, I'm going to try and.
Let me
Mm
If you would let me define what
I think I've heard.
I believe what I've heard is,
This will be a mandate.
statewide.
What
Local communities will be able
to opt into is whether or not
they want to profit.
From this.
There is 7 cents of the 10
cents.
That local communities.
Would
be that, that's kind of the
carrot for them.
To
Become the administers.
Um
This is a weird bill because it
has both carrot and a stick.
Um, it's a mandate, but there is
a
Incentive
I'm concerned about the
incentive.
If it's a mandate, I in a
statewide, I have no idea what
need for education there would
be, in particular, so it's we're
just really talking about.
Grocery stores.
Mostly and, and probably
convenience stores.
Other than that,
Um, it seems like the the
exceptions are for everything
else, so.
I, I'm, I'm concerned why.
Does this bill have both a
carrot and a stick if there's
just a
If there's just a mandate, why
not just make it a mandate?
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair, um, Representative
Montoya.
So it
It's a, it's a mixture, right?
the.
The we, we, it's not our intent
to just replace.
Plastic bags with paper bags and
and continue to have.
level of waste. Now the paper
bags aren't likely to become
litter and they're also
recyclable, so they're, they're
preferable in many cases, but um
really we want people uh to to
bring their own bags.
Uh, we, so that reduced waste
overall.
So, um
The fee structure there for the
paper bag is to uh.
Promote the the use of reusable
bags, so if you, you come in
with a reusable bag or you just
don't need a bag oftentimes
people buy one thing and it gets
stuck in a bag, um.
So we're reducing the amount of
waste were not requiring people,
uh, to have to buy paper bags,
um, the.
The fee structure that goes to
the city then can um help them
in the city of Santa Fe, we
bought reusable bags and we made
them available to people, and
you see them everywhere, they're
the blue ones.
to bring one today that say
bring your own bag.
So it's, it's, it's a mixture uh
of alternatives, and you're
right, there's carrots and
there's sticks.
Um, we want this to be a benefit
to communities to counties or
cities, um.
To reduce the litter that they
have to clean up and also
provide them not to give them an
unfunded mandate but to provide
them the tools they need.
In order to carry it out.
So
Mr. Chairman and, and
Uh
Representative
I don't see how it's an unfunded
funded mandate.
It would not be a requirement on
the cities, it would be a
requirement on the retailers.
So there's no unfunded mandate
if it were just a mandate.
My concern is we're, we're
charging 7 cents per bag on the
Citizen.
Or more
So
Is there anything in this
provision that requires
It's a 7 cents to go towards
education.
Or is the city able to just put
this in their general fund.
So what happens?
When they stop advertising or
there's no need to advertise,
it's fully implemented. I don't
see this provision sunsets.
So Mr. Chair Representative,
first of all, it is optional, I
mean, somebody doesn't.
Get paid a bag fee unless they
choose to not bring it back with
them.
And that's really kind of the
mechanism what they have found
those fees just.
to migrate towards
bringing reusable bags with
them, which
Many of us do, and then you
never pay a single fee as far as
what the money is used for the 7
cents that goes to the community
is used for education.
And um and I know in the city of
Las Cruces where they did this.
They say it's really helpful. I
mean, the funds that they do get
really help them support.
that program. So, um, and the
outdoor economy there is growing
like it is in San Juan County,
super important to keep, uh, but
anyway, that's what it goes for,
and I think for the local
retailer, it helps offset the
cost of buying paper bags, and
it just helps them manage their
economics. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and, and
Representative senator.
I do see 3 cents goes to cover
the cost of bags, so that tells
me that's what we think the cost
of bags is.
My concern is the 7th sense.
Plus no limit. It appears, Mr.
Chair and Representative.
Armington could charge $1 a bag.
There's no limit. There's a
lower limit, there's not an
upper limit.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative,
the local governments can do
that now. What we're finding
that is um a health helpful
boundary is that 10 cents.
So Mr. Chair and
and representative. I, I would,
I would.
Disagree with this part of it is
all these communities can do
this now. What we're doing once
again as we're mandating it, and
then we're mandating a fee that
caught that is way more.
Then the 3 cent bag costs.
That just doesn't make sense,
that portion doesn't make sense.
If we're going to make this a
mandate, a stick, I would
imagine the stick would be if a.
Retailer refuses to comply,
somebody can force them to
comply.
I, I don't, in my mind, Mr. uh
Chairman.
cent.
A fee
made this an opt-in.
I think that most cities who
want to do this.
Could do this
And I think most of them would
do it, cause I think there's a
built-in incentive of 7 cents to
then use towards administering
recycle programs or or something
like that. So I
It just seems like it's an,
right now we have so many things
that are that are going through
the legislature right now that
are going to be of a cost.
On consumers in the end.
If you want to just make this a
mandate.
In my mind, Mister Chairman.
I would just have mandated the 3
cents costs recovery for the
retailer.
Seven senses is unnecessary.
There, there is no need.
To
Advertise
I don't see one reason to have
to advertise. It's only retail,
it's only.
A couple of industries that have
to pay for it that so as a
matter of fact, that's 7 cents
that is wasted.
On advertisement.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Thank you, and I would just say
that
having the chair I'm sorry, Mr.
Chair.
Appreciate that, sorry, thank
you, Mr. Chair, um, I would just
say that, Mr. Chair, that
representative, that this is a
huge issue and we're hearing
from.
You know, from across the board
and and those testifying even
today that this is a huge issue
and local governments have had
the opportunity to opt in for
quite a long time. I know here
in Santa Fe we've been doing it
for close to 10 years. I know
that it's been effective in Las
Cruces has been doing it, I'm
not sure when they, they, uh.
It's been a while, and we're
seeing the the benefits of
these, and we'd like to extend
those benefits, but also
understand the dire need, and I,
I defer to secretary to add.
Mr. Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative, thank you again,
I appreciate your questions and
your line of thinking, always
good the way you're thinking
about things, you know, when I
take a step back and think
outside of this bill and think
about recycling and and litter
and waste in New Mexico, you
know, we're spending
and and I just looked and we
actually granted 500
Uh, Hobbs to for educational
programs back in like 2007 or
2017, I'm, I'll get my, so in
one respect, I hear what you're
saying respecting our tails,
right? So if
if these bags are getting into
recycling centers, if they're
becoming operation and
maintenance issues and then
we're having to grant money back
to communities or find ways to
help those communities pay for
those mechanical or educational
mechanical fixes, educational
programs.
I
I unders there might be a
philosophical difference on how
to do something like this, I
understand that.
technical expertise.
To on a on a problem that
doesn't seem to be addressed by
this point.
So that's where we're going with
this bill, it it it it will save
money for communities in the
long term because again they use
that money for litter and waste
reduction.
Um
that they collect beyond the
cost of the paper bag.
So thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, and Representative, I guess
if I'm gonna get to the crux of
my issue with this is we're
mandating education.
Or mandating, they spent 7 cents
on education.
And we're
Putting a 10 cents per bag cost
on the consumer or mandating the
consumer to pay for education.
If we're gonna just, in my mind,
if you're gonna, if you're going
to.
Implement this as a mandate.
It shouldn't cost the consumer
more than 3 cents in his mandate
per bag.
They're gonna go from a free
bag.
On what are already very
expensive cost to go to the
grocery store.
And now we're gonna mandate.
I mean, how many bags do you
have to walk in?
To the grocery store with.
to be able for the average
family of 5.
To then walk out with what is
the equivalent of.
10:15 plastic bags that end up
in their car. How many
So they're gonna be buying these
10 cent bags.
In my mind, for no good reason.
Except for to advertise.
Recycling
We're, we are, this is a tax.
On the consumer to pay for
recycling advertising.
That's egregious in my mind,
calling this.
So there in my mind, a carrot.
Or a stick is appropriate.
But
To them
Mandate, the cost of recycling
advertising.
I just don't believe that's the
consumer's responsibility. So
philosophically, I do believe
philosophically.
This is a problem because in my
community,
What I'm seeing back home is.
Over the last 10 years, I've
seen litter.
Drop dramatically.
Most of those plastic bags that
come from the
Grocery store, then go into a
bigger trash bag that is plastic
also, and then it goes into.
And goes into uh the landfill.
We're not having
What used to be. Farmington has
a lot of wind, uh, Mr. Chair.
And we used to have a lot of
this blowing, and you would see
these bags blowing.
It doesn't happen so much
anymore. People have
Have maybe not bought into
recycling programs, but what
they have, what they have bought
into is the anti-litter. So in
my mind, this goes way beyond,
we don't want to use trash bags
because we're worried about
cows.
This goes way into.
We want to put a tax on the
consumer.
And in a perverse way.
Encourage the
Local communities incentivize
them.
To them
Spend money on advertising to
them about recycling.
That is my problem because that
is not the way the bill is
presented. The bill is not
presented as because in reality,
this is not a.
Mandate
And where we're just asking for
cost of recovery for the
retailer of 3 cents. This is a 7
cents per paper bag tax.
On the consumer.
So that
Advertising for retailers could
be mandated.
On, on by local communities.
I don't see any other way to
describe this. So, um, Mr.
Chair, I, I just
Once again
Somebody has to stand up for the
consumer who was tired of having
to pay for things that other.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Let's see, Senator
Representative.
Expert and secretary.
They're abbreviated thing we
want to say it would be easier
instead of all that.
There we go.
All right
Mr. Chair Representative, I've
got a couple quick questions.
Some of them are gonna be a
little along the lines of what
representative Senator Cortez
said, I'm very curious, y'all
said there's local control built
in here.
Um, as many of you know, I, I've
been at Eddy County commissioner
for quite some time. I'm the
mayor of Artesia, where in here.
Honestly is their local control
because it sounds like if this
passes.
plastic bags will be eliminated.
And if I'm reading page 3, line
2 correct.
I have to charge a feat no less
than 10 cents, so that's not
very much control. I guess I
could charge more. Is that what
we're saying is the local
control, so I guess, Mr. Chair
Representative, what I'm asking
is this is not local control.
Is that a fair statement,
honestly?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, as we're moving
through this discussion, yes,
this would be a state mandate
and we're setting the amount at
10 cents
And if the local government
would choose to increase that
amount, they they'd be, they'd
be able to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. So again, so
really when we say this is local
control, this isn't local and I
would add enforcement would be
under local jurisdiction as
well, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, would
we have option not to enforce
this?
Yes, Mister Terry, you would.
But if we did, Mr. Chair
Representative, if we did not
enforce this.
Would the state enforce it?
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
you turned page 6.
Of the bill
Stars and penalties.
Section
Is the local government.
violation.
And then uh
Then it gives in section B.
Uh, County municipality that
chooses.
To enforce, it gives some
direction there, but again,
chooses to enforce.
Um
And then it says in section C, a
local government may enforce.
And then finally in D, the
department may enforce a
violation if the government
fails to do so. So as I said, as
I started.
My comments we felt good that.
There's a lot more on the
enforcement side that deals
with.
First
Giving the local community the
option and then 2.
Allowing the department to come
in to come in with
enforcement.
OK, Mr. Chair Representative um
and secretary.
If we're mandating it, why would
you?
Why would you may not enforce
it.
Let's say a city decides we're
not going to do this. Why would
this state may not enforce it.
communities that have
implemented a ban like this,
I found that enforcement isn't
really necessary.
That those communities are those
retailers are subscribing the
local government is benefiting.
And that the consumer is
choosing to show up with their
own bags and not paying
anything.
So
Um, we don't necessarily feel
and I, I feel somewhat strong
about this that the state
shouldn't be in the business of
enforcing these bags.
Um
This is one of those.
Maybe there will be later
adopters, but I, I think there
will be.
scale adoption
works and how it benefits them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary Representative. I
guess this is where I, I'm
really gonna have a hard time
with because if you talk to our
communities and you talk to a
lot of the smaller communities.
I think what we're hearing is
they're tired of.
Santa Fe
Of our body
Enforcing rules on them that
they, they may or may not want.
Um, this would be one of those
in my opinion. Now, as we heard,
and I think as you pointed out,
Carlsbad has recently done that.
And I do think that is helpful
to, to many of our areas because
I think a lot of us are sitting.
Kind of looking and going, OK,
let's see how this works.
So rather than allowing it to
continue to grow.
And that and let the locals have
buy-in, which I think at that
point possibly.
would give you better buying.
Right? If, if more folks, Mr.
Chair Representative, come to me
as the mayor and say, hey, it's
really working in Carlsbad. we
love what's happening.
And, and those
In small bits, those
conversations are happening.
I'll let you know that.
Um, so, rather than force it,
And then you have folks going,
we're sick and tired of y'all
telling us what to do. Why would
we not want to now see if this
grows because it seems to be at
the moment.
Very slowly growing. I, uh, so
I'm curious why, why are we not?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you,
I I really appreciate where
you're coming from from your
perspective, um, however, I'm
gonna focus on the small
progression.
That you mentioned.
This is, this is such a growing
exponentially growing problem.
That we have had enough, I
believe, local governments
should have, um.
Opted in and were seen the
benefits there that we need to
move faster on this when we're
looking at the savings that we
can have, and when we're talking
about the public health and
safety issues that we are seeing
because of these microplastics
in our environment and our
bodies, I think that we need to
move, I don't think I know we
need to move faster on this
issue, so that's, that's what I
would meet your your question
with Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative.
I guess I, I'm gonna land right
there on the local, right? I'm
gonna kind of shift a little bit
because the other piece I'm
interested in, and y'all have
said that.
The bags you put your fruit in,
I think in here I read that if
you get like chicken or beef and
be wrapped in plastic to keep it
from contaminating.
I think dry cleaning you've
used.
Uh, I've been in Santa Fe now
for.
More days than I've ever been in
Santa Fe in my life,
representative, uh, and that's
not a shot at that I just, I've
never been here this long, um.
So I have been out doing, doing
a little more shopping than I
typically would.
I've noticed a lot of the things
that I've purchased, not at
grocery stores, have been in
plastic bags.
As well. So I think
Representative Montoya kind of
hit on this a little bit.
Are we only eliminating and so
are these other bags that that
we're leaving in place, not a
problem.
Oh, thank you so much for that
question, Mr. Chair
Representative Henry.
I'm
For 9 years, I was the
enforcement for the plastic bag
band in Santa Fe, the, the
ordinance is really specific,
um, but written about, I think
about 12 years ago, it predated
me by just a bit, um, it's
really specific about what.
thickness and barrel width and
and things like that on plastic
bags that are allowable. So
there are quite a few bags that
are allowable.
Um, but we've largely eliminated
those flimsy single-use plastic
bags. It's not perfect. This
will never be perfect.
Um, but there's a lot of good
when I moved here, the first
thing I noticed was the lack of
plastic bag litter and that had
only been in placed about a year
and a half.
But I didn't even have one
person fully dedicated to
enforcing this. Our, our
citizens are alert citizens
would just call up and say, hey,
I got a plastic bag here, um,
and I would call up the manager
is very.
Once it's in place, it's, it's
very little time or effort to
enforce and the benefit of
having the funds because about
recycling and waste reduction,
um, not just on plastic bags,
um, is, is very beneficial to
the community because that need
never ends.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative and expert, uh,
the other question I have as
well is.
You know, we've talked about Las
Cruces, Santa Fe.
Albuquerque implemented it.
Then went away.
Mr. Mr. Chair, um,
representative, I believe the
city council just revised and
and revert and changed that
ordinance
because I think at the beginning
you said it's forgot who I think
it was secretary said it's $6
million or it might have been
the senator, um.
It cost Albuquerque $6 million a
year to deal with their plastic
now, is that what I heard?
Mr. Chair Representative Henry,
I'm not sure, but that sounds
about right.
I believe that's what
the senator had mentioned. OK.
Mr. Chair Representative, why
would they go away from it if,
if it was a cost saving. I like
I'm interested in, did the
locals decide this wasn't
working for them, or,
or how did that come about
to the the year had a weight on
their decisions, Jack.
OK, Mr. Chair Representative,
and
When I say COVID ended. I'm not
ignorant. I know COVID still
exists. But when, when all of
the, the major
COVID
Peace, whatever we want to call
it, kind of has we've moved on
from how come that is there
efforts right now for them to
reinstate it?
Mr. Chair, I don't know that
answer, um, I think we can, we
can research that for you and
get back to you on that, I do
know some of our city councilors
there and our commissioners, and
I'd be happy to to talk to them
and get that information for
you.
I
And I think that's
Again, one of the most important
pieces to me, and one of the
things I've talked about the
most since I've been up here.
is the more we take away from
local control and move it away
from that local voter.
That one
Allows them to make their
decisions on what is affecting
their cities and their counties,
and we put it in Santa Fe,
that's so far away, uh, that's
where I really get a disconnect,
and I think that's where we're
getting a disies, right? Um, I
think the 1111.
Discussion that we had earlier
was it is working in Santa Fe,
Las Cruces.
Apparently, maybe not right now,
Albuquerque, but in those, those
little areas, but no one else
has taken interest in it at the
moment. So I want to make sure
that that we are not pulling
away from, from those local
folks who are actually listening
to those local voters, um, and,
and
Forcing an implementation.
Thank you, Monsieur, I again, I
do hear your, your concerns
there and I rather than seeing a
disconnect, I see that more
communities in these regions are
are starting to lead in these
efforts and when we see those
sorts of things happen, we want
to give the supports and and
give the benefits of what these
programs do from the local
perspective and as you
mentioned, it is growing.
And I think we need to focus on
that, but it's growing too
slowly. We need to really that's
when the state should and should
take action when we see that our
local governments are taking the
measures, but they don't have
enough support. This gives them
the support to grow and to move
faster. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, and I hear what
you're saying we needed to go
faster, I think this this this
body, this legislation has also
tried to implement things to
move.
Items faster that we are not
seeing uh from the the the
customers, right?
I don't, I, I guess I can just
go there, right? Why not? So, so
we're seeing these EV mandates,
whereas in rural communities, we
are not seeing as many folks
wanting to purchase them as we
had hoped, so we're trying to
enforce that change on them.
To me, I, I think.
What I love to see is when folks
start to change because they see
the benefit of the chain.
Because then you have better
buy-in rather than a force on um
and, and I guess that's where I
stand on government, I would
rather have government help me
get to where I need to be rather
than force me to where I need to
be.
On something. There are things
that obviously.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate your comments again,
I would just say that there are
there is leader uh leadership
out there and they, they need
the support and I think when we
start seeing those things,
that's when we as.
As a state, as legislators can
take the initiative to um to
move towards these types of
mandates, especially when we're
hearing the concerns of our
locals, and I know I'm here in
Santa Fe, but I am very attuned
to our rural areas and rural
districts, and as I travel
across the state as you will now
as the new legislator, you'll
see how we actually really come
together on a lot of these
issues. Thank you. Thank you Mr.
Chair, that's all.
Thank you representative for
Representative Murphy.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, thank you all very much.
I'm, I don't want to replow a
bunch of old ground, um, I did.
I do, uh, I do want to say, I
think you've heard from me that,
um, Mr. Chair and Representative
that I spent a lot of time in
the outdoors, hiking and camping
and fishing, and I really
appreciate all of New Mexico and
um and believe that we need to
clean it up in all the areas,
not just the oil field, not just
our urban areas, but, but all
the areas and so I support the
effort. I don't support this
bill, um, and the reason being
for many of the reasons here,
the local control tax on
consumer, um, I do.
Think that uh in terms of Mr.
Chair and Representative, when
we talk about the pace.
Of um acceptance of this, we
have seen some pretty dramatic
movement. It's, it's not
Um, I don't know, it's not
exactly clear to me what what
the status of Albuquerque is,
but running some quick numbers,
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
have just over 2 million people
in the state and due to local
control and implementations of
these types of bands.
More than half of those are
covered and it's and and it's
appropriate because those local
areas have decided to do it.
Um, with respect to the
education effort and this is a
recommendation, um, if you had
in here an opt-in or opt out
that that would take care of
that issue. We, we don't have
that here.
Um
But in terms of the education
effort, I would like to suggest,
um.
That that happened before the
fact and not after the fact.
And what I would, I would
suggest because, you know, I
don't know enough about this
issue to
Who, um
Completely.
Understand all of its
ramifications, uh, to the
counties and the cities and, and
so forth.
But I think that if you would
put together an education
package and begin going in front
of the city council County
commissions, and I will pledge
to help you get those meetings
in Roswell and Chavis County.
Then, um
Then the local people can can
decide for themselves and so
with that I'll conclude my
remarks.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy, Representative gorilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. um I want to follow up some
of the questions that I have
here, Mr. Chair.
And I don't know if you have
these answers, um.
Somebody I think was Senator who
mentioned the cost of recycling.
Yes, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative.
What we have estimated that this
could save at least $3.8 million
per year in recycling. Thank
you.
um,
I represent Albuquerque of and
we have.
The structure and the structure
to recycle.
Um, and somehow we benefit much
because we still see bugs
everywhere.
But from the recycling and the
health and the clots and pipes
and everything that small
communities, do they have the
same infrastructure that we have
in Santa Fe, in Albuquerque to
recycle those bags, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Mr. Chair for the
question. I'd say right now we
don't have across the state
we're having a problem with
recycling these plastics, so
it's it's, it's really across
the state, so I'd say
infrastructure across the state
is, is um not in place for this.
Complete.
So we uh we actually I'm trying
to help everyone in the state,
Mr. Sherpa, um.
Supporting something that they
don't have to do because they
don't have, we don't have this
infrastructure everywhere. So,
um, I know plastic bags affect
our health, um, affect our, our
systems, water systems,
especially.
Um, the, the wild wildlife to um
so we are trying to support the
stating at every level, that's
Mr. Chair and panels,
that's what I'm understanding
representative exactly it's so
many different levels that these
these microplastics affect us
and this is why we need to do
something uh this this big for
the entire state. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Chair, and panel, um, I think
sometimes we who live
In, in larger cities take
advantage of having those access
to things, so I'm really glad to
see that bills like this, we
are uh are approaching um our
state at every level, so thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Abeta.
it.
I do not have a recycling belt.
Um, I do come from a rural, a
mother of 4, and I want to say
that cost because they don't
provide bags. I have to take my
own bags most of the time.
Um, my question is, as the
consumer.
If I take my own bag too.
Let's say Hobbs or Carlsbad or
left in my vehicle, how much
would I have to, Mr. Chair, if
you're bringing your own bags to
shop is if this is if this goes
through, we, we, um, we get the
suit at the governor's desk and
she signs it, yes. OK, great,
thank you. We do not have a gas
station, we do not have, and I,
I do see the plastic bags.
Throughout
My area hanging on trees,
hanging on barbed wire.
Keep cattle out of the road. I
see that um my children and I
participate in all the local
trash board.
So, um, I'm also coming from a
place of work.
I'm sad to see the plastic bags
go because in my home they're
reused quite a bit.
Um, but I am thankful for the
operative that helps shift and
make.
The microbe behavior change. I
appreciate this. I know it's
going to take a little bit of
change, um, but shopping up here
last weekend and we forgot about
the the that change.
We left our bags in the vehicle,
things out, um, we didn't, but
um, I just want to say thank you
for bringing this up and.
For all. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and thank you
for for being a parent that
cares about the environment and
teaching her kids the right
thing to do. Thank you.
Uh, any further questions to the
committee before I ask some
questions of my own?
OK, um,
uh, I, I appreciate this, this
bill. I support this concept.
Um, I, I think sometimes we, we
need a little push to change
behavior, and I think this is
that push.
Um, I know, uh,
Uh, barbed wire fences, um, and
another plastic bag magnet or
the Choya.
Um, like, you know, the again
the Choya and.
They may stay on the show and
they're not going anywhere else
but can came him off the hoya is
a is a challenge.
Um, I know I've done cleanup
days in the Santa Fe River and
The, the trash that flows into
the river.
It doesn't
crumple up and get smaller. It
actually fills with material and
gets bigger.
As it, as it tumbles and fills
with sediment and things like
that.
And I know the uh the bags,
they, they work their way into
the recycling.
process, even though they're not
recyclable, and the recycling
process works uh through this,
this tumbling kinetic function
of sorting the materials, and
they get caught in the gears.
And they have to shut down the
whole system and pull the bags
out periodically. I think it
happens a couple times a day, so
that's a
That's another expense.
Um, I do have some questions on
the bill itself.
Um
But I'm just gonna go through
the bill.
That marked
Uh, I know you had some
Uh potential cleanup edits that
uh.
Uh, we weren't going to tackle.
Um
On
H 5
Uh, line 18, section D.
Um, I didn't really understand
how this section worked.
Is it start off saying that 7
cents of the fee.
Elected by the retail
establishment will be
transmitted to the municipality.
And then it says, accept that.
If the municipality or county um
has a higher fee.
The amount retained by the
retail establishment shall not
exceed 3 cents.
So it's 10 cents. I see 7 cents,
I see 3 cents. I don't see the
disposition of the higher fee.
So the local community has a 15
cents fee.
What happens to the extra 5
cents.
Mr. Chair, from the way that
this, the language is here, then
they would the local government
would.
would keep the additional fee
that the uh retail establishment
shall not their portion of that
shall not exceed 30 cents.
If it goes above 10.
Retail establishment still gets
3 of that.
But the the extra goes to the um
city.
OK, but, but it is 1010 is the
minimum, it is. So they get 3
cents regardless, regardless the
retail, OK, but it doesn't say
what to do with the extra money.
And for clarity, I think it
should.
I mean, the way it's written,
it's like, you get 7 cents
unless it's higher, in which
case the retailer keeps 3 cents
and it just, it just doesn't
follow logically.
You need some drafting work,
I believe, so you would
recommend that we amend.
section to address the
additional fees that could be
incurred.
Um
if a local government uh
increased uh.
The defeat above 10%, is that
correct? clarify that section
because I think it's unclear.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, my next question is on the
enforcement.
Uh, on page 7.
Um
There are the penalties and
There, there's no penalty for
the first violation, 500 for a
2nd, $1000 for the third.
But then below in section E it
says Eretail transaction is a
separate violation.
And in my sense is,
If you have a retailer who's not
complying.
You, you go to them and you say
you're in violation. And that's,
that's their first.
And that they're still not
complaining, you go back and you
say you're in violation and I'll
be $500 and that's their second.
And so forth. 3 1000. What this
says is,
You could have someone in the
store and you could watch them
do.
And transactions.
And that's potentially $8500.
And I, I think
That's a bit heavy-handed. I, I
suspect a court wouldn't allow
that.
But, um,
I think you need to work on
that.
To chair to your point.
We're making note of that and
we'd like to work with you on on
that language so. OK.
Um
Erbzenev on page 7, line 25, it
says beginning January 1st,
2026, the local government.
Uh, main enact an ordinance, um.
I would, I would take out the
date.
Um, I, I, I'm concerned that
You're saying they can't do this
until that date, and I think
they can't do that currently.
I don't want to suggest that
existing ordinances are invalid
until that date.
Mr. Mr.
Chair.
Um, two other points, um,
One, I, I heard concern that
there, there was no upper end to
the, the, the bag fee.
I, I don't think, uh,
municipality would.
We charge $1 a bag. I, I just
don't see that happening. Um,
that being said,
You know, you could put in an
upper end of 20 cents or 2.
And then I also um
You know, you might like I, I
think banning the plastic bags,
uh.
I, I think that's absolutely the
right thing to do, and I think
the vast majority of them come
from big retailers.
And you know, we heard from, you
know, industry that they want a
uniform standard and like, you
know, no disposable plastic bags
is uniform standard. That's a
good thing.
Um
I, I wonder if on the, the paper
bag fee.
Um, if that's something a local
community could opt into.
You know, so have a statewide
bag ban on plastic bags, and in
terms of charging a fee for
paper bags.
Like maybe that's a program they
want to participate in and maybe
it's not.
But at least we've, we've
accomplished.
You know, 90% of what I think is
the intent of this bill by
banning plastic bags.
And I wonder if that's something
you might think about.
Mr. Chair, I'd have to.
I'd have to check on on that
that exception.
Yeah, I think we would be open
to it. OK, so, so given the
suggested changes and that I
know you had some of your own
cleanups which we have not
addressed. I wonder if you'd be
willing to roll this bill and
come back with the committee
sub.
chair we would
I, I think that would be a good
idea and we, we probably can't
get you on the agenda for
Saturday.
Uh, but we can get you on next
week, hopefully have a shorter
discussion since we've already
addressed some of the big
issues, uh, and I do have a
couple of other cleanup edits
after the uh
After the meeting.
Mr. Chair, we'd be looking very
much forward to having that
conversation with you. OK. Thank
you very much. I appreciate
that.
Mr. Chair, I think someone took
my phone accidentally.
OK, so ribs and Blu Hon is in
search of her phone. Uh, we're
gonna give her just a minute to
come back because she's on the
next bill there. Got it. OK. Uh,
our next bill is House Bill 394
Clean energy and Natural
Resources Board.
Um, if we could just get back
right back into it, uh,
Representative Lujan, this is
your bill as well.
Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you for
um.
Listening to my this bill.
Today
It's relating to um energy and
creating the clean energy and
natural resource advisory board
and appropriation. Mr. Chair,
this concept
Uh.
Something that I've been.
Working towards uh many of my
efforts, I, I hosted an energy
policy symposium last year and
it will do so again this year.
Uh, much to your knowledge, and
from that symposium.
wanted to really uh address and
understand how we can
Uh, consolidate efforts towards
the renewable renewable energy
industry in all other aspects of
uh our state being an energy
state. And so this is one of
the.
The ways in which I'm addressing
some of those conversations and
those efforts, uh, to for our
state to really.
Focus on how we can benefit from
the opportunities.
That are before our state in the
regard of our renewable in
industries, but our energy um.
Efforts for our state, Mister
Chair.
I've uh I've discussed this with
with uh several different um.
Experts and.
As uh Ener is our.
And uh agency of resource.
I've directed this towards that
agency and with that, Mr. Chair,
I'm happy to engage with the
full conversation and.
And efforts from the expertise
on your committee and from you,
Mr. Chair, and have this
discussion in a more fuller way,
thank you.
Thank you. And you do have an
amendment on this bill, is that
correct?
Mr. Chair
Someone on the move for
discussion.
Amendment for uh.
9 for for discussion. Thank you.
Um.
in Lujan, do you want to explain
the amendment?
Mr. Char, these are some minor,
um.
Changes that came about as we
were working.
And 11 being, I think the the
the biggest one for me and where
I caught was on page 2 between
lines 10 and 11 inserting one
excerpt from uh Indonesian tribe
of Pueblo, which is extremely
important.
And
The others are.
The, the, the last point on the
amendments of um number 10 would
be the others too.
To generate an annual report to
the Secretary of Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
and the legislative Finance
Committee, which I felt were um
essential to doing the work of
of this sport, Mr. Chair.
OK. Um,
Before we go to the audience,
uh, is there, is there any
objection to the amendment, so
not, not the bill, but
Is there any objection to the
amendment?
So kind of a motion to adopt the
amendment.
I
Uh, and seeing no objection, uh,
you haven't amended bill.
Um, and now we'll go to the
audience, uh, by a show of
hands.
Um, who's here in support of
this bill?
Uh, who is here in in
opposition?
Uh, is there anyone online who
would like
Uh, Athena Christa Chair
committee members, my name's
Athena Christodoulou. I live in
Albuquerque. I'm an energy and
environmental engineer. I think
it is a very good and laudable
um deal to try and get people
together before a legislative
session to discuss moving
towards clean energy, I would
recommend, and this just coming
from experience the oil and gas
industry is, in my opinion,
overrepresented because they are
involved in most areas.
I would suggest that academia
include environmental engineer
rather than just academia in
general, and that environmental
group be included as well in
this conversation. Otherwise, I
fully support this bill. I think
it's a good step in trying to
transition to clean energy.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, is there anyone
online who would like to speak
in opposition.
OK. Uh, anything further
represent Lu Han, before we go
to the committee, Mr. Chair, I
would just, I would just say
what, what is, what are, um.
that
this is important to bring us
together as we do have a
mandates to uh transition but
also includes all.
All of our energy um.
Infrastructure to participate.
OK.
Um
Members of the committee
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Representative, um.
I'm, I'm
Actually concerned here just
about duplication.
Um
This
appears to me as, you know, Ener
is already.
Tasked
With doing this
Uh, setting up boards,
commissions.
Doesn't even seem to be there
like Ener even has a limit on
how many boards.
That they can
Convene
So I'm, I'm not exactly sure.
What great need this bill fills.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that question and in part, I
was thinking of uh some of the
issue that you, you're asking in
your question because we do have
uh multiple boards. What this
would do would consolidate a lot
of those efforts of those boards
and really get us into um.
What, what needs to be focused
in um in regards to the Eners um
responsibilities and duties, Mr.
Chair.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, but I don't see
that this bill excludes Mner,
so.
Once again, I, the question of
duplication.
Mr. Chair,
representative, exactly, I hear
you. I think what this does is.
It, it puts the efforts towards
this consolidation of what this
board would do, and yes, I can't
uh uh I can't tell this agency
that they this actually.
Could
And implementation of this
afford that those boards.
Um,
Consolidate their efforts
towards
this one board here that would
be created.
Chair and representative,
couldn't they do this now? Just
consolidate one board.
Mr. Chair, um, it would.
I believe they could.
And that's why having this
conversation and putting this
together could really move their
efforts to do this and maybe if
you will or in a in a way that
that directs them to to focus
more um.
Concisely on what the the
efforts of what the constructs
of this this board would do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Say this is the eliminate the
other boards.
That Ener has in place. I mean,
if we're trying, if this is if
the
Mr. Chair and Representative, if
the.
If the intent
is to consolidate.
adding that language into this
bill to say this is the board.
And eliminate the other nerd has
the ability to put in place, Mr.
Chair, I think that would be a
bigger discussion and we would
need to have the secretary
involved in that decision.
Uh, myself, um, but I'd be happy
to bring a a conversation
together with the secretary, Mr.
Chair.
So Mr. Chair and put this in
place.
We could, even if not this year.
In future years, potentially,
say this is the board mandated
by the.
So I'm
I'm not sure. I'm also looking
at since Mr. Chair and and uh
representative because there's
already
These other boards and
commissions in place that had
been doing work.
This
Just adds another expense. I'm
seeing the cost to this.
It, it's just the duplication
I'm not getting unless.
It's not duplication, and it's
meant to consolidate and let's
make the bill a consolidation
bill, but
I'm,
I'm concerned with anyhow, I, I,
I could go down this road back
and forth with you. I just, I I
don't see if it's just
duplication of what's currently
going on, just not necessarily.
This configuration.
Um, I would, I would suggest you
do what.
The Chairman McQueen has stood
in trying to consolidate
missions that are in place or
different boards are in place.
I would suggest more of a.
Otherwise, this is just another,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
beyond that.
My, my big complaint with all.
Energy-related boards and
stakeholder groups that get
together.
is what I see all of these all
of these.
Uh
Stakeholder groups.
I never see a purposeful effort
to bring consumer advocates into
the group.
We can come up with a lot of
ideas as long as other people
are paying for it without
having.
I just see a um
taxpayer or a ratepayer
whoever's gonna be on the other
end of whatever we come up with.
That has been my biggest gripe.
Uh, is
I never see consumer advocates
brought in.
People on fixed incomes, people
who
Whenever we make decisions, they
have to live with them, so
that's just a critique, um, but,
um, unless this bill
Is a an actual consolidation.
And eliminates duplication. I, I
can't support it as it is, just
seems like it's just one more
board doing the same thing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Murphy.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
thank you very much, um.
Does the secretary, uh, Mr.
Chairman Representative, this is
secretary has support this bill.
Mr. Chair, I have, I've had, um,
conversation that I was doing
this and I let out neither in
opposition.
Um, she's fully aware that this
is something that I'm doing.
Thank you Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, um.
I think these
These types of boards, uh, serve
a very useful purpose.
Um, I am of the same mind as my,
as my colleagueistic polyistic
approach and consolidation.
Um, I have some experience with
this and during the President
Clinton's administration, I
served on Secretary of Energy
Advisory Board, Hazel O'Leary.
And then later her successor.
And and one of the things I I
will, I will tell this group and
is that.
It gives a wonderful opportunity
for people with very diverse.
Experience much like this
committee, sit down and talk
about big issues and how they
affect each other in the
industry.
Um, during the George HW Bush
administration, I served on a
similar board on the a great uh
Secretary Manuel Lujan.
And and what I found there was
is that it does put people of
different.
Um, persuasion, perceptions,
opinions, uh, in a situation
where they those can be
explored.
And um have minimal adverse
impacts to you know, particular
industries or, or, or whatever
the goals are. So I support that
very much and also acts, I
think, somewhat.
A sort of a pressure relief
valve.
And um sort of a a buffer, so I
certainly support the the idea.
I think that.
Um, there ought to be a
consolidation, um, I think that,
uh, just as I currently serve on
the National Petroleum Council,
the secretary in many cases.
Um, is required early on in the
term outline major goals to
their specific task that that
board needs to look at and
there's deliverables for that.
So I'd also ask that you
consider that, not taking away
from the flexibility of the she
may need to talk about, but
those would be a couple chairman
representative representative,
you're speaking to my heart, I
think that and quite honestly
modeling this.
I was looking at the the uh US
energy um.
Uh, with the secretary's board
that from what you were
describing and trying to model
that and what was done there on
the federal level, and you said
exactly what what my intentions
and why I wanted to create this
in the.
The word that I will um hold on
to Mr. uh.
The Chair is holistic, and that
was the entire approach that I
took for the energy policy
symposium that I hosted was to
really focus in on that holistic
um.
Apparatus of bringing everybody
together and when you said
pressure, uh.
Release valve, that's exactly
was one of the experiences I
have seen this type of event
because it was a full spectrum
of everybody, um, included in
the conversation and it was, it
was needed, it is, it continues
to be needed and where we are as
an energy state trying to solve
these bigger problems, and the
only way we're going to do that
is to bring everybody together.
I.
I would
Love to work with you on some of
the and also with representative
Mooya and maybe uh formatting
this um.
A bit better and taking in your.
Having your input and what it's
trying, what I'm trying to
accomplish with this, Mr.
Chair, thank you one final
comment if you really want to
look at, get into some energy
policy nerd stuff. Look at the
Bob Galvin report, which is on
the future of the national
laboratories that report, which
I was a member of that committee
is credited with largely saving
uh Los Alamos and Sandilia from
being shut down after the Cold
War.
Um, and then there's another
one, that, that is of some
interest with uh Dan Yergin on
the future of energy R&D in labs
and uh I'm way off the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think we
could all nerd out on the
subject matter and I'm happy to
know that there's yet another
energy nerd in the room. Thank
you, Mr. Chen.
So, uh, sorry, um, we have a lot
of members presenting other
bills, including, uh, so we're
just trying to juggle uh
personnel. Uh, are there any
further questions to the
committee before I ask a couple
of questions?
OK, um
Representative Lujan, uh.
Uh, you know, I, I appreciate
the effort here, um, I, you
know, to represent Montoya's
point.
Uh, if you look in uh for the
community's sake or the public,
you look in the FIR, there's a
list of the other boards.
Uh there inner.
And, you know, honestly, looking
at this list, I, I don't see a
lot of duplication.
Uh, I'm familiar with some of
these.
Um, the National Lands
Protection Act Committee is
actually national Protection
Committee, uh, they administer,
uh, an important uh land
conservation tax incentive.
Um, there's a tree planting task
force. I, I don't don't know
what they do.
Uh, Obviously the oil
conservation commission is
pretty important. Uh, there's a
Urban Forest Council state
parks.
I mean
In terms of consolidation, I
don't see a lot of opportunity
for consolidation there. Um, I,
I would say that the
Um, your proposed, uh,
committee.
My concerns with it are it says
clean energy and natural
resources.
I might focus on clean energy. I
think that's what you're
thinking about, but natural
resources is obviously pretty
broad.
Um
Uh, 19, you know, keep that in
mind.
Uh, if you're going to produce a
report, uh, you're gonna have to
meet more than twice per year.
Uh, and, um, meeting prior to
the legislative session, um,
like in 19 people together in
the first two weeks of January,
uh, it's gonna be a challenge.
Um, and I, I would note, uh, in
some of the committee members
might know this, some might not
as part of the
Uh, constitutional amendment
I've been working on 45, 45.
We moved the start date up a
week.
Uh, because in the 2nd session
in the 45 days takes you right
before filing deadline for
people who are running for, you
know, do all the paperwork for
that like signatures. Um, so
that then potentially you're
basically in the first week of
January.
Um
So I, I think that's an issue.
Um, so, given that feedback and
given the, the comments from
our, our members is, is this
something you want to keep
working on or
yes,
I would like to keep on on
working on this, I think it's it
has um a lot of value to it and
um with the expertise from your
committee and your. OK. And
would you be willing to roll the
bill in order to do that. OK, so
we'll roll this bill as well.
Mr. Chair, if I could, I might
be able to fix a problem for now
and I see the next presenter is
in the room.
I'd rather stick to the order of
the agenda. I wondered if maybe
representing Dixon can present
um.
House Bill 403.
It's being that she's a
correspondent, well, you're all
co-sponsors, right?
It seems like we have no
shortage of of people who
present the bill in this
committee.
OK, that, that's fine.
Oh
well you did it
you did a fine job. Yeah
in itself was enough.
OK, uh, Representative Murphy,
you're up then.
Given my recent success, Mr.
Chairman, given my recent
success in getting bills passed
quickly. I'm wondering if I
leave the room.
This might be
Best way to get this done.
Um, so our next bill, uh, thank
you, Roan Murphy. Our next bill
is House Bill 403 oil and gas
fund distribution and uses, uh,
whenever you're ready.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, uh, members of the
committee, um.
This is the first time I've ever
presented a bill, so.
Be kind, please, um.
Mr. Chairman, uh, what my bill
does, um.
I
me
Mr. Chairman, redirects directs
back to um the source that that.
Um, certain taxes that are
collected from the oil and gas
industry.
Um, they were redirected in
years past, mainly due to budget
constraints.
And um
The most important
Aspect, I think, are one of the
most important aspects of this
bill.
Is that I believe it will once
again sort of realign industry.
And the division on many areas
that have become contentious
over the years.
Um, it
I think we'll create more of the
partnership.
Uh, that we had in decades past
that seems to have been lost.
Um, for example, with this bill
in place, I really doubt that
the division would be as
concerned about well transfers
as they are.
Nor would they be um as
concerned about um so let me go
into.
Built the history of the bill
and and oil and oil and gas
companies collective right or or
pay a variety of taxes, the
severance tax, conservation tax,
emergency school tax.
A variety of these taxes.
The conservation tax was
actually uh began levied in the
1950s.
And then in the 1970s, the
reclamation fund was um to
ensure the proper plugging and
abandonment and reclamation
efforts.
On a retired oil and gas wells
were responsible reclamation
fund can be thought of as sort
of an insurance policy.
Um, that
Um, if, um, the division finds
that um there are no responsible
parties for and and well.
And they'll have the results.
Currently only about in the it
it varies depending upon prices,
but only about 10%.
oil and gas conservation tax
goes into the into the
reclamation fund when in years
past it was essentially all of
it.
Um
The current FY 24.
fiscal estimate on the
conservation fund estimates it
would collect about um.
Excuse me, uh, means that tax
revenue, excuse me, conservation
tax would be Mr. Chairman, about
143 million and of that only 28
would go into the reclamation
upon the funding percentage.
Now, we know that the oil and
gas industry like a lot of
commodities is cyclic.
And we go through times of high
prices.
Over the last several years.
Prices and production have been
good and those are forecast to
be good for some time.
And I believe it's really
incumbent upon the legislature
to build that fund so that when
we do when the industry uh and
perhaps there are more.
Well.
The state will have the
resources to plug and abandon uh
those.
Now
It's currently estimated.
At least based upon the last
couple of years and given an
estimate for next year.
Uh, which, by the way for FY 25
is slightly smaller than this
year, but they still estimate
that we'll collect.
Approximately $112 million.
With about 22 million.
Now if all of that money instead
of being swept into the general
fund, the excess funds were to
go into the reclamation fund, it
would build that fund at a rate
of about 80 to $100 million a
year.
So it's not hard to project
that.
Within a decade or so.
There could be a fun balance.
of
billion dollars.
Um, currently, um, and I'm just
gonna accept these numbers. I, I
haven't looked at them in in
detail, but I believe the
division estimates there's about
1700 wells.
That are orphaned
Or need some level of intention.
That's out of 66,000.
And so that's about 2.5%.
Now
In order to plug all of those
wells.
Uh, division currently is using
a number of roughly 125. Um.
For a variety of reasons.
Uh, that number is way too high.
And the and and uh I can tell
you this because.
My company oil wells have become
an economic we plug and so our
experience is more in the 600 to
80,000 range.
And there are some reasons to do
the procurement and distances
traveled with some of these um
contractors why the division
they use 125,000.
So in order, in order to plug
$17 million.
The fund currently has a
balance, I think of.
66 million
0.
Now
If you allow this.
Fun to build up.
And I'm just, I just took a
number of.
$3 billion because it's gonna be
building at roughly.
Um
100 million a year.
Um, over a 15 to 20 year period.
Not all that money is gonna be
spent right away obviously could
be earning interest.
And um it's pretty easy to see
where.
Decade of roughly 1 billion in
principle.
So what would that do at 100,
how many wells could we plug
with 10 that'd be 24,000 wells.
That would be about 1/3.
A little more than 1/3 of all
the wells and that would take
that would mean that.
The lack of a better term.
We have gone from 2.5% orphan
rate.
To a 35% orphan rate which.
Um
And let me, I just want to
close, um.
By reminding everybody that.
Um, this is gas industry for a
very specific purpose.
was redirected.
During various budget crunches
and has never been directed back
to the reclamation fund for
which it was which is.
I'm supposed to be.
I think that from the industry
standpoint.
When we
hear about
Increased bonding and some of
the many bills that have come
through here and members of the
committee you've heard some of
the concerns.
About some of those.
Um
Is the industry perspective is,
is look.
Yes, there, there may be some
problems in our industry.
We're not perfect.
Um, I refer back to, I think
back to the governor's remark.
And the thing that she did say
though is that Mexico's oil and
gas industry is the cleanest in
the world.
Oil and gas that we produce.
is by far the cleanest in the
world.
It's been my experience of um
just like your neighbors, my
neighbors are well intentioned
and good people.
And they try to do the right all
the time.
But we do have problems in our
industry.
And there are wells that need to
be plugged there are sites that
need to be reclaimed.
And industry has been paying for
this.
And I don't know of any other
industry there may be there may
be some Mr. Chairman.
Where the good players.
In the industry actually pay.
the actors
And that's what um.
responsible oil and gas
operators have done.
Generating
Um, not only uh this committee
has heard time and time again
the the impact of jobs and
revenue to the state.
But in this specific case.
We are taking a portion.
Of the revenue that we generate.
to
A very specific problem where
that problem occurs.
Mo, next month.
10 years from now, 20 years.
And I think that's the
responsible thing to do.
I also think it's the
responsible thing for this
legislature to do.
Is to put those monies.
And the fun that they said they
were that's an obligation that
the state has.
The oil and gas industry just as
the oil and gas industry has the
obligation to pay these funds to
address those issues in the
future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, um,
Thank you. Uh, we'll go to the
audience, uh, just by a show of
hands is here.
Um, who's here in the
opposition, so we'll do support
I saw more than 3 hints.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
Nimoa supports House Bill 403, a
bipartisan bill allowing the
highest level of environmental
stewardship by rightfully
refunding New Mexico's
reclamation fund.
Since the introduction of the
reclamation fund in the 1970s,
New Mexico's oil and gas
industry has paid a conservation
tax on every barrel of oil
drilled to fund efforts to plug
and remediate abandoned wells.
Stewardship that ensures sites
are returned to their native
state. While consistently funded
by industry since the 1970s,
money from the reclamation fund
has been redirected to other
state budgetary needs during
lean years. House Bill 403 will
return that funding.
For every well plugged through
the reclamation fund and federal
dollars, New Mexico's oil and
gas industry independently plugs
10.
Oil and gas should carry the
responsibility of ensuring wells
are appropriately plugged and
remediated.
In 2022, the reclamation fund
balance was approximately $22
million. As of November 2024,
the balance and the reclamation
fund was approximately $66
million thanks to increased
federal funding and continued
healthy conservation tax
funding.
However, the balance of the fund
fluctuates based on the price
per barrel of oil, the
continuous funding proposed in
this bill would ensure that the
OCD always has the necessary
funding to plug and remediate
sites. We urge you to please
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, Mike Miller, Premium
Basin Petroleum Association.
We're in strong support of House
Bill 403 when in which enhances
the oil and gas reclamation fund
and ensures greater
accountability in the
restoration of abandoned well
sites and associated production
facilities here in the state.
By increasing the tax revenue
that industry is and has been
paying allocated to the oil and
gas reclamation Fund in prior,
prioritizing proper plugging of
the abandoned wells. This bill
directly addresses environmental
and public health concerns by
ensuring adequate funding and
clear guidelines for well
reclamation HB 403 reinforces
our commitment to the
environmental stewardship while
supporting responsible economic
development in the oil and gas
industry.
This legislation also also
streaks accountability,
strengthens accountability by
allowing the state to seek
indemnification from operators
who failed to meet the
reclamation responsibilities.
This provision ensures that the
burden of cleanup does not fall
on taxpayers but is
appropriately shared by the
industry.
Excuse me, we urge the committee
to support HB excuse me,
support HB 403 and take this
important step towards
protecting New Mexico's
environment, public health, and
economy. Thank you for your time
and consideration.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, Public Policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. We're here in strong
support of HB 403 because it
provides necessary funding to
safely plug and remediate
abandoned oil and gas sites. The
bill enhances environmental
protection and ensures
transparency by mandating annual
reports on fund usage. So for
those reasons and reasons stated
from the previous two speakers,
the chamber stands in proud.
OK, so I don't see people.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Jim Winchester,
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, um,
for all the reasons stated, we
do support this bill. This was
something that was sort of
worked out between industry and
the administration 20 years ago.
It's been diverted away, let's
get it diverted back and use it
for the intended funds, so for
that reason, thank you, we stand
in sport.
Um, is there anyone online who
would like to speak and support,
please raise your hand.
OK, coming back to the room, is
there anyone who would like to
speak in anyone online who would
like to speak in opposite.
Sorry,
forgot to unmute. Chair,
committee members, my name's
Athena Christodoulou in energy
and environmental engineer, and
while the purpose of this bill
seems to be very good. I'm glad
to see that we're going to um
that there's an effort to um add
to the deadbeat dads bill as I
would, uh, fund, as I would call
this,
um, for many years I would ask
you not.
To I would ask you to be
courteous in your comments. OK,
sorry, excuse me. I that it, um,
um, it's good that the industry
is coming forward to um seek the
plugging and and reclamation, I
would say. I would have to state
that I am not observing the
industry to be the cleanest in
the world, I think they should
look at methane sat and see what
the results are coming out for
that before they continue to
claim that.
Um, I do see that there is a
taking away from the um energy,
um, I think they're taking away
education, and I'm just kind of
curious as to what kind of
energy education, whether that
was tax dollars going to
advertise for the energy, I mean
for the industry or whether they
were actually were starting to
work on clean energy. Um,
otherwise, that's all I have to
say. Thank you.
OK. Thank you very much, uh,
representative Murphy, anything
to add before we go to the
committee?
Um
No.
OK.
Uh, first step, we'll have
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um
Mr. Murphy, um.
I, I actually really like this
provision.
Um, this is something that I
about even our fees.
Uh, that we charge 5 vehicles.
In New Mexico had
Um, that, that's been a harder
issue to deal with a bigger.
Act
And then just writing a bill to
say all those dollars. The good
thing about this is this is
something we can do.
it would allow us, I think,
every year I sit in here.
All of the the abandoned way and
the reality is we would not have
any.
Abandoned wells or orphan wells
had the Mrs. Chairman and
representative. I, I kind of see
this like the uninsured
motorists. This is
Something that industry has paid
for.
Knowing
That there will be abandoned.
Wells due things, some of that
just being of a company.
Passes away
And it is no longer there's no
longer responsible party alive.
Um, so I, I really do appreciate
this, I think.
Once again
Looking at the numbers that you
presented.
That this year.
Yet
fund
To I know it's going for good
purposes. I know we're using.
When I look at $112 million
going for this in in for this
purpose.
And $22 million.
Is all
That is going into the
It just seems like we're
If we have, if we have a.
Orphaned I mean that's if I'm
looking at these dollars and we
have record surplus right now. I
would have to say.
The reason we have this problem
to whatever degree it's a
problem, I think this is an
opportunity to rectify that.
So, um, and then Mr. Chairman
and thing.
Uh, and that is
I, I can see if all of these
time.
To its original purpose, it
won't be very long, 2 years,
potentially if we could, we
could take the number of orphan
wells we have.
Um minus necessarily what is on
BLM land.
Um, but
Or anything in the state, state
land, um, I, I could see.
Within 2 years, potentially
Wells at that time, but the
reality is I, I see within 3
years.
Being plugged, I could quickly
see.
That this
Uh, fund could increase in the
next billions of dollars
potentially.
Again
And so I, I, I, I see the
Uh, as far as legislators go.
I could see us.
Going back in
Maybe stopping the amount fund,
especially if there's a downturn
in the economy but I think while
we have the money.
I think it's prudent for us to
do this.
And then we can react in the
future. So, um, I, I, I see
today.
Uh, that this
This
answers the midway point in the
session, so I really, I really
like this bill or ask you this.
I'm, I'm not sure if you're
aware.
year.
Last year or the previous year,
made it to the Senate floor.
Uh, opposition up to that point.
So I think if we can get over to
the Senate, um, I think.
Uh, I think this could answer.
The problem that that at least
I've heard at least in 3
different bills so far this
session, comment as to support
on the Senate side.
I, I do understand there's a
last session, I think, um.
Perhaps yes and so and and it
and it differs a little bit um
but it, um, is, is very, very
similar.
The
Let me comment a little bit on
the numbers because
um the 1700 well numbers um I've
heard others in in the um
Um, I'm currently looking at,
um, the fact sheet that says we
have 68,516 active wells.
34,000 of those are on state and
fee.
So basically.
This fund would be.
Because the OCD is primarily
located lands.
You know, of those 34,000
there's about 349 of them that
are orphans.
So that would put somewhere
around 130 or 1400 other wells
in order to get to the 1700 as
being on federal lands.
which
Um
The
Coming to the state for that
purpose, but for purposes of my
calculations, I just wanted to
convey to the committee that
even at 1700 if that's the real
we could easily plug those out.
from a stand
a few years.
I mean, I mean collectively the
abandoned orphaned.
That'd be my only comment. Thank
you.
Yeah.
Um.
So,
125, maybe, but that's not.
That's an average, Mr. Chair,
um.
Sorry, Madam Vice chair, um, I'm
sure there are wells, uh, the,
that, that could be encountered
because of the, you know, lots
of casing problems.
Uh, that could run up that, but
you could also have wells that
cost 5 or 10 depending upon
their depth, their location, and
so the number I'm using is
actually from the OCD.
A well plugging stats it lists
the number of wells that they
plug for the last 4 years, the
amount of money that they spent.
well
2020 and 2021 was 35,000.
They're averaging 22 with 70.
They're averaging 23 was 10 they
showed 349.
They're responsible.
These are numbers that
Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Sheriff, I
understand the question, um.
Types of whales that would
require that level.
would have to be a very deep and
B have some very, very difficult
conditions.
Um, in our experience, my
company's experience, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, um, we've,
we've encountered wells that are
more difficult to plug than
others more expensive than
others and so we, I kind of
think about this in terms of
averages and so
I actually think
To be brought down pretty
significantly if.
You did things like uh.
have a more robust most many
times.
Um, and you have, and you have
staffing issues identifying it.
I think that price could
actually come down if you did it
in as what has been described as
a very robust way.
You know
Targeting hundreds of whales at
a time in a in a setting up the
proposal so we're not just
moving we the industry.
The state not necessarily and
that's just not that's just not
very efficient.
Thank you. Maybe close to
schools or is there, is there a
priority?
You know, um, I, I think
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, um.
I believe they have that those
processes in place now for the
for the for the plugging that
they're doing and um I don't
know, I cannot give you the
details, but, um, my
understanding is, is they go by
risk.
You know, Isabel, um, what sort
of risk does it propose?
citizens in the area or you know
whatever it may be.
So.
Um,
I did and the reason behind that
is is that when.
This was done, uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, when this was
done, um, or kind of revisited
back in the 70s and it was
actually revisited.
Um, back after the 1986 and
1987.
price collapse.
And for those of us that are old
enough to remember those times.
Um, the price of oil went from
just under $40 a barrel.
To about single digits 6 to $9 a
barrel.
And so uh there was a concern
then about um.
about what might happen to and
so um.
The uh
Um
Thought was is that um the money
needed to go into the
reclamation fund that was a
discussion between the
administration um at the time.
And um
The education piece.
was one the industry because
I think industry felt like that.
Um, maybe.
The citizens of of the state
didn't know enough about about
the issues regarding the oil and
gas industry and much of that
money actually went into.
What I would call oil and gas
education.
Education.
And so
My feeling is, is that.
By leaving that money in there,
it goes against what I'm trying
to do and that is to make things
less contentious.
s
And that is because I could
envision a situation where the
division would be getting a lot
of pressure from the oil and gas
industry to the public how great
we are.
And the renewable sector would
be doing the same thing.
And so why have
That
Uh, I think both industries are
doing a pretty good job so that
was my simplistic way of of
schools, the amount of water in
the drought stricken state that
is now produced water that it
cannot go into the um water
cycle that's unusable, just in
the water committee talking
about it, um, industry, so I, I.
I just had.
A little bit that that's in
there.
All right, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, how the
allocation affect other programs
or.
Well, I'm sure it will impact
it, um, you know, the, the good
thing is is that we met him uh
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
The good thing is, is we're
running record surpluses.
Right now.
And um while we're doing that
that we direct the funding to
where it was intended and I
guess in my simplistic way, uh,
Mr. Chair, Madam vice chair, you
know, it's the old saying of
making hay when the sun shines.
And we have.
Um, we're gonna have
Based upon reasonable estimate
somewhere between 80 and $100
million going into
that it really needs to go into
the purpose that was intended
and that is to address uh.
PNA and reclamation issues.
that we talked about so much.
Um, madam
Mr. Chairman, last year, if they
don't, they should because uh
with the backlog of so if if
that continues to grow, we'll
never address this problem and
and to me we need a more robust,
larger effort.
So that we don't all continue to
sort of pick up the sides of
these issues through penalty.
Disagreements over what the
right financial assurance ought
to be.
And this fund was dedicated for
the purpose of plugging and
abandoning and reclaiming wells
and uh.
For me that's why it should be
used for and I'll be used in a
very robust way, um,
they should have it. Well, they
should have it every department
have what they need to do their
job, but it doesn't quite
happen, but thank you for your
answer.
OK, um,
How might the increased tax
effect? Um
doesn't change the tax rate at
all, but only redirects the
funds.
What about
So not even Mr. Chair.
Um
man
Um, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman,
it's gonna be the amount that
that is no longer swept to the
general fund.
Which historically in the last
few years has been about $100
million.
Either side of that and that's
about what it's projected and at
least for the near term years
that would be recurring.
That would be assuming that the
the price of oil stays at, you
know, at a level.
comparable to where it is now
the the key depending upon the
distribution now is $70 a barrel
and um.
You know, most of the
Oil and gas plays and.
The larger, especially in the
Permian.
Um
are going to be very economic,
probably $40 or $50 a barrel.
Yes, and what this bill does is
gives the so currently there's
sort of um Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, they're sort of two
activities that the division
undertakes and the first is.
Analyzing and surveying.
And then the second part of it
is actually contracting for the
plugging of those wells.
So what this bill does is say
and that typically has been
somewhere around $20 million in
the internal staffing.
2025, I think last year was 27
million.
So this bill cuts off the top 40
million and sends it to the
division to continue those sorts
of efforts. In other words, what
we anticipate is.
Um, if they're only doing 10
number of wells at 27 million a
year, what could they do with
40?
Right, so we're
trying to build those resources
in the division so they can they
can identify those wells.
And then the second part of it
then it's going in and this is
the really expensive part is the
actual plugging and abandon and
reclamation and so that 80 to
$100 million has to.
And it, it, it actually
requires, it shall be spent.
Plugging abandonment and
reclamation.
And the thinking behind it if if
I uh.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam, the, the
thinking behind it is.
This ensures that that fund will
continue to do what it's
intended to.
And that's, that's why it was
directed.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madamy, it,
it is not it, it is going to tax
and
I understand you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Senator Cortez.
Mr. Chair, if please.
Uh representative, I'll come
back to you. We actually have
several people on the list.
Uh, but you don't have, uh,
represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, uh,
for bringing this bill, um, I am
a.
While on appropriations, you
know, we certainly discuss
earmarking funds and and some of
the challenges. But I really
appreciate the fact that these
funds have been collected from
the industry and I think that
we're all awaited uh this
effort, um.
Uh, representative
You know what the check it every
day. I didn't check it this
morning. It's somewhere around
$73 I believe.
Uh, Mr. Chair
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. And so that
would mean that 19%.
Uh, would flow to the
reclamation fund, is that right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um.
The, I, I'm glad that uh we
discussed the about that. I
noticed uh Mr. Chair
Representative, and actually in
the analysis, um.
It did, uh, I believe from M
nerd, um, they did not have a an
issue with that per se, they
said striking, uh, that is not a
significant change as the
current demand for plugging and
remediation generally outstrips
available funding, leaving
nothing for that requirement.
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
do you know how much um has uh
from the federal government.
Um, Mr. Chair,
I have that number somewhere in
here and.
It's either 35 or 65 million.
That's one of the numbers that
pop in my head.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, it is 35 million
and I, uh, I wanna highlight
that because, um, given the
figures that we're discussing,
that's a substantial amount of
money that could go, uh, of
abandoned wells and should that
money no longer be available or
taken back by the current
administration. Um, it would
leave New Mexico, um.
Madam Chair, representative, is
that one of the things that um.
You're concerned about as well.
Um
Madam Madam Chair and
Representative, I am concerned
about that and and then I think
you could tell as I was going
through my math.
That I sort of want to make the
point that even if that was to
go away, there would be there
would be adequate funding to
address the federal issue as
well even though.
The chances of that are highly
unlikely, but, but there
certainly would be adequate
funding.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I think
that's wonderful to hear, um, I,
one of the issues that was
brought up um in the FIR and one
of the analyses um.
That I, I believe is of concern
to some folks is the question of
changing the word, and I was
wondering if you could if you
could talk a little bit about
that.
I certainly am, Madam Chair
Representative, my concern there
is, is that is that.
Future administrations could
have different priorities and
could once again just take the
funding that's really being
collected and and being uh it's
supposed to be directed lugging
abandonment and and use it for
other purposes. I don't know
what those might be sitting here
today, but they but they could
be well I think of as redirected
again.
Not to the front but into uh
whatever internal.
Um, priorities that the division
may have at that time and so
what I'm seeking, uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative is is
continuity and certainty change.
They, um, are you concerned that
uh the other item brought up um
in uh the analysis from Mner is
the concern that potentially
other operators would see that
uh that change, um, as a reason
to not.
Um
Plug and remediate their own uh
wealth.
Um, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, I'm not
particularly concerned about it
and the reason being is is that
is that the reclamation fund.
And it's all geared towards
abandoned and and really the key
word is orphan wells.
the the main part of that is is
that.
By being an orphan, it means
that you don't have a
responsible party, right? And so
the funds have to be used for
orphan wells, I mean for a
company.
Um
You know, to do that, I mean
none of this has.
And so to collect bonds.
file civil cases or whatever.
It's just simply acknowledgment
of resources here that should
alleviate some of the division's
concerns that we've that we've
heard so much about.
So, and the short answer is no,
I don't think so.
Chair, thank you,
Representative, for going into
that, um, one of the um.
I just, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I just want to
state for the record that um in
the FIR there is a reference to
a legal case, um, that is used
in as an example, and I just
want to state for the record
that that's a, a
mischaracterization of the case,
um, having seen some of the, uh,
documents pertaining to that.
Um
Mr. Chair Representative, I.
Really appreciate this effort, I
think, you know, as members of
our committee have noted, um,
this is an important
Uh, endeavor, I, you know,
appreciate the fact that the
industry, um, is providing the
funds to do this, um, and so,
you know, I'm, I'm pleased to to
be a co-sponsor in this effort
and thank you for your answers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. She, um, and thank you Mr.
uh, that.
I,
yes, um,
I've had some informal
conversations with them, um, I
wasn't, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, I wasn't out.
Uh, opposition from them.
Given that I haven't seen a.
to help with the lugging not
help to cover.
The total cost of
I'm in this situation, correct?
Mr. Chair, representative the
bill covers both lugging in and
abandonment and reclamation.
And so if I could plugging and
abandonment um is really
primarily a downhole operation.
If you just think about where
their industry does it, whether
the division does, you go down
and you set a series of cement
plugs.
So there can be no migration
into the surface.
You can
You then remove the cliche or
whatever topping material
contaminated soil, be it water,
that's removed and taken.
Um, and then the ground is
recontoured, and it's reseeded,
and that's really the.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
much more money will take to its
replying and taking to share.
Well, um, looking at the
numbers, you know, there's
somewhere between 1% of the
active wealth so.
Um
You know, it's never envisioned
that every well.
Would have to be destroyed.
And so
Um
My example basically said that
if this fund built up.
Somewhere between 2 and $3
billion which is very clearly
could.
Then at the current rate, we
could place in the state even
though we, I don't think anybody
and you are the expert in this
area, so allow me to ask you
these questions.
Well, this fund will be enough.
I think it's, it's many times
more than enough, and I think
that from a practical standpoint
what will happen.
Is this probably 5 years we'll
be sitting here now that we
have.
a billion dollars in this fund,
we now know we have a more
robust plugging program.
We now know that the division,
maybe it's time.
That
that we changed the funding
formula.
Some are now goes into me and
that perhaps this money ought to
go for another use. That's
certainly at the at so.
My anticipation is is that.
This fund will build up very,
very quickly and they'll have to
be a discussion.
So if we need to continue to add
it.
But, but my, Mr. Chairman and
represented my, my, um, main
focus is, is that while we have
this this amount of funding,
let's set aside to do
prevention,
the incentives of the companies
like after thought and um, Mr.
Chairs representative, uh, I
think we're in the industry uh
working on that every day.
Be to be better.
more efficient
Um, I think are the numbers.
On our water reuse rate and so.
In terms of unfortunately.
It's very difficult, Mr. Chair
and Representative, these things
normally happen list because the
company has gone bankrupt.
And that's usually.
And just as you know, COVID cost
the state mini businesses, those
low price times also.
And so
It would be very nice to be in
business.
It's almost impossible and so.
The situation that's left by
that has to be addressed in some
way and what industry is saying.
The state needs to do is to um
and then going forward we'll
have funding in there hopefully
the 1700 wells, if that's the
right number, I don't know what
it is, but whatever it is,
another 1700 wells of prevention
and making companies.
You know, there are many other
ways to address this situation,
hopefully will be not an
afterthought but a.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, uh.
Um
And I kind of wanna um.
Compliment you for that.
Because um.
One of your colleagues, past
colleagues.
Uh, then,
Um
He was 8 years into his death.
And he introduced his first
bill.
On, on 3rd reading on his 1st
bill.
And actually
You know, we, we gave him the
3rd degree right on his first
bill. We all voted no, the very
beginning, but it was a good
deal.
And, and you know, uh, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah, when he was closing on the
bill.
And he said,
You know, this is my first bill.
But I, and, and I realized just
how hard it is.
In
See running at the.
And answering
Viable questions from the
committee members.
And I, I never realized how
difficult it was legislation and
to get it passed.
Because Mr. Chair, he said.
I came up
And the
Focus
Just killing democratic bills.
And that's what I've been
playing for the last 8 years,
and he was good, he was a good
debater in terms of trying to
kind of be to our, our
legislation.
But that's why I want to
compliment you.
You know, in terms of kind of
really not going the route of
one of our past colleagues, you
know, that, uh,
Uh
But I did want to share that
story with you, um, you know,
uh, Mr. Chair.
I want to suggest that you sign
on to as a deal with energy
renewables and oil and gas, and
have them
Uh, kind of yield to you to kind
of do the presentation on their
bills, but uh
You know, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Is there anything in your
legislation that.
For the reclamation.
Mr. Chair, that kind of
Um, Mister.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um.
First, I'll say that that one of
the experience and wisdom.
And so I, I am thinking about
um.
Mister Chairman is in shifting
of responsibility.
s.
And all this does is to.
that
In the position of of uh
Having to address that well.
It simply gives the state the
resources financial resoil.
Thank you for that, Mr. You
know, Mr. Chair, uh, we've done
uh funds.
Um
And I've been through uh
periods.
Where we
S
Every source trees.
Uh, whatever
So this is correct.
And uh
And move it forward in a real.
Uh, one last thing is uh
Yeah
I gas industry is imposed the.
What's called the emergency
school fund tax.
And
And you might be aware that was
the first grocery tax.
it
The emergency emergencies.
There's
but let's say you back then
said, you know, we kind of
sugarcoat this because this is
our first, our first kind of
grocery seats tax that we were
imposing, I think it happened,
Mr. Chair, in the 30s.
And uh
Naturally, we know how that all
those taxes to li on gas.
go down, they kind of.
Like the emergency school on tax
and probably even the oil and
gas, they go into the suspense
fund.
And from that suspense funnel
fun.
So I was trying to do it for the
longest time for about 10 years.
And
Uh
But
do it.
In times of high energy cost.
That's when
We take it, run it into uh uh.
programs
in times of high energy costs.
And in times of low energy costs
when we have warm winters.
We hardly put anything into
that.
So I've been trying to kind of
do that, but I gave up after 10
years, Mr. Cha.
In his very professional and I
think this bill is worthy of
passage, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative,
that's high praise. Thank you
very much. Any further questions
from the committee?
Uh, Representative Murphy.
Uh, I am close to, I have a
couple of questions.
First off, um.
The basic idea that we
collective we should use it for
the purpose we collect it for.
I
I want to know that.
In terms of it being an
insurance policy.
It's an insurance policy for the
state.
It's not an insurance policy for
the industry.
And it
You know, this fund
You know if it's
It's not a, you know, people
should be respond messages. I
mean, to the extent it's an
insurance policy, I think you
even mentioned uninsured
motorist insurance.
Like we all have to pay that
because of bad actors.
There weren't bad actors, we
wouldn't have to pay that, and
we'd all save money. And so I
always feel that
The state has an obvious
interest in policing the
industry.
But the industry hasn't interest
in policing itself.
I think it's sometime and I will
take issue with one thing,
Senator, that the orphan whale
problem is.
So, uh, I
I have a uh so one question.
The, um, I hope it's smaller.
Um
The
Uh, the Senate version.
Last year, Senator Neibert, you
know, I think it was fairly
substantially different. It
amended the same section of law.
And it increased the payments to
the fund.
But it also capped it out at 80
million.
And everything over 80 that
wasn't expended over 80 million
flowed back into the general
fund.
And so
Because of that, much smaller
general fund.
I
It's a difference it's worth
nothing and I'll get back to
that in a minute.
The first thing I want to bring
up, I think uh uh the mealing,
um, you're changing that
language.
And I think that language needs
to be restored to discretionary
spending.
I think mandating the spending.
And taking away the agency
discretion on this uh is a
mistake.
Um
And they're certainly
circumstances when they give an
instance or a given year, you
would not want to make these
expenditures.
Uh, and I think if we take the
money.
into the fund and say it can
only be then you're covered.
I don't think so with that in
mind, I would, uh, on page 2.
Line 17.
Uh, restore the main and start
on page 2 line 18, uh, strike
only.
Yeah
And that would be my.
There're a second, so there's an
amendment in the second, um.
Ian Murphy, would you?
Um, Mr. Chairman, if I could ask
a couple of questions, um.
Let me tell you what my concern
is, and I think you answered my
question is my concern is that
by leaving May in there.
those funds could be diverted
from whatever the the.
the department which is no
different in my mind than
diverting the funds to the
general funds.
And that's, that's my unease
with with leaving Mahe.
Then you said something.
If
Clear that it goes into the fund
and that the money can only be
used for that purpose.
That would cover me
That what you said. Did you
understand how how that works,
Mr. Chair.
Resent Murphy, uh, it's my
belief that.
Uh, if we, if we adopt this
amendment.
We still have a statute that
puts money into a fund and
specifies its uses. In order to
use that money for anything else
wouldn't be the discretion of
the agency.
We take an act of the
legislature.
And, you know, frankly,
Yeah.
We can do that with or without
the show, right? I mean, we, we
could do it your way and then in
the next budget crunch, we just
change it and raise the fund,
which is, which is, I think how
we got here in the first place,
right?
So, so what my point is, I, I
don't want to.
Uh, require, and I think that's
what child does, Mr. Chair, I
understand your point and I
Is there a discussion?
Is objection to the amendment?
OK, you have an amended bill.
Um, second question, uh,
potentially a bigger question.
But thank you for accepting
that.
Um
On page 2 in section B.
Why are we capping the payout
from the
I mean, if, if, if we have the
money available and we have the
need, and we have the capacity
and I, I, I fully recognize
that.
capacity at the agency could be
An issue.
But the way this is structured,
it, it looks like you're trying
to grow the corpus.
And since
We're paying for this and with
this tax.
I mean, if we had a need of
greater than 40 million a year.
Why should we, you know, sort of
hoard that money in the corpus.
Why not?
Allow greater payout as the
need, needs arose.
I, I believe Mr. Chair, I
believe that the ID incorrectly,
but the idea here was.
That
Roughly under B1.
For example, the survey
abandoned 2 for preparing plans
for administrating.
And so the thought here was is
that if they're spending 20 to
$27 million a year, we'd
actually want to give them 40.
Because they're now we're
growing the corpus of the in
order for them to handle the
administrative load.
And then anything after that.
So, uh, my reading is you can
use 40 million from the fund in
in any year.
And then 1 and 2 are what you
can use it for, yes.
So, but if, if they had capacity
to do 80 million worth of
plugging.
Or 50 million or whatever,
shouldn't we encourage them to
get this done because the, you
know, these wells are emitting
pollutants.
It seems to me like it's a, a
bigger interest of the state to
get the work done.
Rather than to grow the corpus
of the fund.
I agree with that, um.
The
I guess what I would say is is
that.
Um, and make sure that they
would have all the necessary
funding they do for
administration be able to spend
as much money of the reclamation
into principle.
Now, if they're able to spend
$100 million a year plugging
wells, then great, but I'd hate
for them to spend $100 million
on administration and not plug
any wells. That's the issue I'm
trying to get to.
And
There's a Murphy, um.
You know, my understanding is
they use our two FTEs.
There's not that much money, um,
obviously the vast majority of
the funds would be expended in
in the well.
Wellfield
The, the current structure of
the bill doesn't have a cap on
administration.
So, I mean, as it's currently
written, they could spend.
Good
Just as a structure issue.
Yes. So,
My, my basic question is,
Why are we trying to grow a
fund?
Instead of getting the work
done.
I think Mr. Chair, I think my
goal is is to do both, and that
is to.
Do as much of the work as
quickly as possible and then
make sure that any remaining
funds.
Are saved for.
issues in the future.
And for example, let's say they
could spend $50 million this
year.
And then
Because they're gearing up
internally and externally next
year they might be able to
spend.
150.
And so hopefully if 100 goes in.
And they've spent 50 this year
they'll be 50 for next year
because I don't think we can,
Mr. Chair, I don't think any
organization's capable of
ramping this up overnight.
Over time they are.
And Murphy, I think you
accomplished that by having so
the money goes in and it stays.
Um
Murphy, then we're on the same
page. How do we fix that?
Um, I think we probably, uh, I
don't have it, I don't have off
the top of my head in a minute,
Mr. Chair, that, uh.
relatively soon.
Um, and Murphy, I believe I can,
uh, and I, I, I believe, on page
2 paragraphs A and B could be
combined into one.
And then 1 and 2 become uh
basically A and B at the
permitted usage,
so like if
Once we make changes to
paragraph B, it becomes kind of
and it can be
wordsmith in a, so you, you
would have
You would say the fund can be
used for the following purposes
and then you list.
Yeah, I'd be happy to work with
you. And then we, and by the
way, I think I made a mistake in
my prior amendment. I struck
shall on page.
Two line 23, I think I actually
if you're gonna wordsmith it, I
think that will all get worked
out.
Yes.
OK, and you know with that.
Um, you know, I, I.
Can't speak for the whole
committee, but OK, hold on one
sec, ribs and Sonia, did you
have a, a follow-up question?
I, um, yesterday, mass appeared
on the on the on the general
concern.
So would you
Even fathom.
I still, you know, I I I love
the the bill we need to be.
That's an interesting, Mr.
Chair, Vice Chair, that's an
interesting concept, and I'd
have to think about it a little
bit because one thing I, I did
consider as going through this
was.
You know, should we cap it as to
amount?
Should we cap it? Should we
sunset it as to time.
I concluded at that point was
and it sort of goes back and.
to the chair's point and that
is.
Sort of
or shall at the end of the day
the legislature can just
override it with 50 with with
with whatever and so that's kind
of I guess that would be my
answer is I sort of leave it to
that realm and my hope is is
that.
Is that that will not happen
very soon and build this up my
guess is that.
At some point, if we start we
have a fund with $500 million
and it's pretty clear.
a billion dollars it's pretty
clear from division analysis.
that that's not needed.
Then
I
I cuz I like the bill.
OK, and with that, I think we're
gonna roll the bell.
Yes, sir. OK, thank you,
representative Murphy. Thank
you.
OK, so I, I love to, uh,
Get things out of this committee
and so far we're a perfect 3. So
let's see if we can uh vote the
next bill up or down.
Represent Zamora, you've been
very patient. I've seen you in
and out all morning, so.
Uh, thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee for having me time of
the session where we're so busy
and.
All their stuff done. So it
represents more, if I may, I'd
just like to say this is House
Bill 390, Curry County Water
lines.
Yes, sir, Mister Chair, uh,
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee, uh, House Bill
390 makes an appropriation of
the department of environment to
plan design, construct, replace,
and improve water lines.
In Curry County
And uh Mr. Sharon and members of
the committee.
I'd like to begin by kind of
giving you.
Uh, a story about what's going
on in Curry County with Zamora.
I greatly appreciate that. I
just ask you to keep it short.
Thank you.
will
So
There's an area that's affected
by the PFOS contamination.
And
The values of the homes of the
people in this area have
dropped.
To 0 in some cases.
The way to fix it.
Is
To put him a water line with
finished water where they don't
have to worry about contaminated
water getting into their homes.
That will help the well-being of
the people.
Not only with their health.
The mental
The state because they're losing
uh.
value of their homes that they.
And it'll
It'll, uh, secure the tax base
because the county's gonna lose
tax base when these the values
of these homes go down.
And it'll help prevent.
The movement of POS towards
Clovis because we won't be
sucking that water towards the
town by pumping these wells.
And this, this problem, Mister
Chair.
The members of the committee
was.
A problem that was cause a fan.
On the base
And it, it, it wasn't in at any
fault of the people, so.
The state, as everybody, a lot
of you probably know already has
a lawsuit against DOD.
When that lawsuit settles.
The money will come back to this
and we're we're very sure that
this lawsuit will settle at some
point in time.
The issue right now is.
These people need
Good, clean drinking water
that's not contaminated in their
homes.
So we're trying to fix that.
In the appropriation will let us
allow to put those lines in and,
and, and make everybody.
Uh, put them in a better place.
Mr. Chair, and I won't go. I, I
have a lot more stuff to all
that. I, I hope we can support
this bill.
And and clean up.
Not, not clean up, but.
Make the people
Uh
Get the people into a good
position there in Clovis and
then later, later these monies
can come back, we're kind of
banking on the state
youmora. Is there anyone in the
public who would like
Anyone in the opposition?
And you went online going back
to the committee representative
Abeta.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative Zamora. I was
reading
it.
This issue has Mr. Chair and,
and Representative, this issue
has come on really strong in the
past 4 years.
Uh, if, if we, if we look at
back at the history.
Of how it happened and when it
happened and all that.
I believe we've known for 9
years that there was an issue
that needed to be addressed.
But it, it took uh at the
national level, uh, EPA and
everybody to decide what levels
of POs were dangerous to humans
and, and, and when those levels
were set is when all this
started taking place and really,
really moving along.
I'd hate to make a statement on
that because I don't have like
medical records or anything like
that, but I can tell you, Mr.
Chair and Representative is that
the EPA.
Uh, has set a standard.
And
Some of those standards.
And I can't think of the number
right now, but like in the
closer where the main
contamination is is.
It might be 1000 times. I, I
better not quote that number.
It's, I know it's way
commendable
s
Mr. Chair and, and
representative, if I understand
your question right, you want to
know what's been done.
Already to to prevent this uh or
or help this issue.
And Mr. Chair and Representative
Department of Defense and Cannon
Air Force Base.
Have drilled
Wells
to
Pump water out of the aquifer.
And then they're treating that
water and pumping it right back
in.
And it, it, they have just
recently started that.
It has taken him a long time
before the remediation started.
And those are the concerns.
With the people is, is how what
what we have to.
take into concern is how fast
will this plume move?
In, in, in the.
In the aquifer
And then how fast and they're
not really remediating.
Everywhere the plume is moving,
they're remediating where they
where the plume started.
So there's a lot of issues that
are going on.
And what this is gonna do is, is
it's gonna.
we don't ever get.
Yeah, Mr. Chair,
thank you, Chair. Thank you
Mr. Chair, if I may make then I
might have missed and with
representative Abeta is.
Secretary NED uh Kenny.
Is, is very.
Strong in support getting this
money to those people so that.
Help solve this problem that we
have.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Dixon.
Second
India
Thank you.
Chairman, I just have one
question.
Uh, and, you know, I've got.
family, extended family and
dozens of friends there and.
Roosevelt County as well.
And my question is, Mr. Chair.
Uh, these residents
Where the PFOS is showing.
Sure.
Are they on?
Private Wells or are they on the
water system?
Who's well
That services these residents.
Mr. Chairman and they are on
private wells.
just about everybody has their
own interior.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you
And
Thank you, Representative
Representative Montoya.
Uh, Mr. Chair, not really a
question, just I just
disappointed Representative
Small is gonna be for missing
this POs.
Well, so thank you so Montoya on
Representative Small's behalf, I
would, I would note that this.
This PASS contamination is not
from the oil and gas industry.
Fair enough, um,
so more, I, I appreciate this.
Uh, we had Mr. Scott.
Come in and talk to the interim
Maordo.
And the devastation in this area
is just
Um
It's hard to take.
Um
His his land is contaminated by
his wells are contaminated.
Um
You know, he's
Just before
Certainly he, he and his family
were consuming this water. These
cows were contaminated. They
destroyed his cows and then.
These cows were considered.
I mean, it's just abs, we
believe, of course, coming from
the firefighting foam at the Air
Force Base and they were in
drills and they use the foam and
then they
Just hose it down, you know, and
it.
blows off the base. So, um, I'm
happy to support this bill. Uh,
we do have a motion in the
second, um, uh.
Let's take the vote.
Yes
Representative Dixon.
Representing Garcia Rola.
Represented Murphy, yes.
Cortez? Yes.
First year Sonyana.
McQueen. Yes.
So you you pass 9 to 0.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Thank you and uh
unless there's anything from the
committee, we're adjourned.
Thank you
