Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya
Representative Nibert there.
Representative Rubio.
Representative Scott.
Representative small
Representative Townsend Here.
By your Sarinana.
Your.
Directly in.
Okay so first announcements
we're rolling possible for
twenty two
of Bill they're gonna work and.
So my compact the session
dates and details babies I have.
also we're meeting for the
Saturday this this trend of yes.
Story line.
Saturday will be our last date
on house bill's
These house bills that are in
their first committee
I don't know of any hospitals
that it's it to another
committee and Mike come our way
so I guess some of the that the
words are but generally we don't
have those on Saturday in the
start hearing sessions.
So we have four bills on the
agenda I received a request to
raise thousands bill backed
would that on the agenda at
that.
not.
Honestly not sure we'll get to
it but I can put on the agenda.
But we don't get that they would
the other day what to do next
year.
I would expect no less from the
terms of the you know it's
interesting there there was a.
Organization proposal one the
proposals is that
The session session at least in
a given legislature so for two
very bills carried over so it
would start in this committee
processor anyway.
Some of the.
any
any questions from the
committee.
Okay so we are one of the one
build this morning yes before
twenty six clean fuel standards
Representative Ortez your thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee I really do miss you
guys most of you
this bill H. B. for twenty six
puts New Mexico on the path to
create a clean transportation
fuel standards that will create
jobs grow our economy and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions the
bill gives the environmental
review board the authority to
design a clean fuel standard
with some key components like
deep stakeholder involvement and
focus on equity justice in four
ability of these fuels for New
Mexicans.
The benefits are clear we
estimate that sixteen hundred
permanent jobs and twenty three
hundred construction jobs will
be created by twenty thirty
which translates into fourteen
seventy million in workforce
benefits and to R. forty million
or more in private
infrastructure investment.
Mr chairman that is not all.
We estimated New Mexico clean
fuels program will reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by
sixteen million tons by twenty
thirty and eighty million times
twenty forty.
This is so important as the
biggest source of greenhouse gas
emissions comes from the
transportation sector at twenty
seven percent.
Clean yield or something that
New Mexico's New Mexicans want
across the board there was a
survey done in this last October
two thirds of New Mexicans
pulled across the diverse
geographic racial socioeconomic
population support a technology
neutral playing field approach
for New Mexico as this bill
provides so today you're gonna
hear from businesses and NGOs
from around New Mexico and
nationally they believe in this
potential in in fact compact
Consumer Reports a nonprofit
consumer testing an advocacy
organization supports this
program because it will provide
more fuel options for consumers
which are not tied directly to
the fluctuating oil prices.
I'd like to choose my experts
show me on director of the
environmental protection
division at the Environment
Department and Claudia Borchert.
Chief of the climate chief of
the kind of change bureau at the
environment department and
they'll briefly walking through
this bill.
Thank you Representative Ortez
good morning chairman members of
the committee I'll now turn over
a walk through to my colleague
here misfortune.
Good morning.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you for having me before
you today it's a pleasure to be
here to support House Bill four
to six House forty six percent
and economic or economic
opportunity all New Mexico.
The environment import rules
clean fuel standard to New
Mexico this ensuring New Mexico
remains healthy place to live
and work one creating jobs
between advisory stakeholder
Committee and the rule making
process HB four to six things
diverse stakeholders from across
New Mexico together to
participate in designing the
clean fuel rules that best fit
New Mexico.
This includes the process will
see participation from gas
agriculture transportation.
Justice organizations public
health experts electric
utilities environmentalists
chambers of commerce state and
local governments water managers
the public and others to include
the voices of all New Mexicans
so thinking fuel program work in
New Mexico.
I think your program addresses
businesses that produce or
import and then resell high
carbon fuels the transportation
and other uses it's important to
note that the cream tools would
not apply to the many small New
Mexico fuel retailers like gas
stations.
I do think you'll program clean
fuel providers have to option of
fuel providers at two options
thank you reduce the carbon
content did fuels to beat the
clean fuel standard for the
continue with business as usual.
If if you providers choose the
first option they would generate
credits that they can sell New
Mexico's new clean fuel market
issues the second option and
decide to continue with
businesses.
They will have to go to the
claim to the market to buy
credits from those that have
that.
Because many providers are
already turning to and providing
clean fuel options this will be
new income stream get those
businesses.
All market rewards existing
projects producers and
incentivized to devices new
economic opportunities without
picking winners and losers.
If you are already available gas
stations today and the
electrification of vehicles is
underway.
Examples of low carbon fuels
including renewable diesel
diesel ethanol.
The chill gas and electricity.
New Mexico is already home to
refineries that make by the
school and the.
For example New Mexico made
biodiesel is blended with
traditional fuel diesel pumps
throughout southern New Mexico
it's also exported to other
states.
No gasoline mixes thank you
fifteen are cost competitive
today and produce less harmful
conditions.
The new economic opportunities
to participate in the dental
market our men's and statewide
for example
consider properties drugs to
make biofuels produced in some
part.
Jerry methane waste curry county
transportation for dairy
products.
And the renewable diesel
refinery in a teacher can
deliver the diesel to drivers
cheer New Mexico.
A well designed into programs
provides consumers more choices.
The choice on what type of fuel
they want to purchase the choice
to pay less the choice to reduce
their own carbon footprint and
if an electric car or truck is
involved the choice to fuel up
at home.
New Mexicans and say this is
what they want to.
The energy transition is already
here and accelerating rapidly HB
four to six will position New
Mexico is super power in this
clean energy weeks.
Thank you chairman between
members of the committee.
Mr chair we stand for questions.
Okay for we go to the committee.
Public
special.
Let me know if she speaking on
the screen.
So renew no more than fifteen
minutes each side
to ninety seconds per person of
us to come up and use the word
like a phone.
Help us.
Opposition first of here in
opposition if you just.
Yes get the speakers will speak.
come on that.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Winchester second director of
the independent petroleum
association of New Mexico just
want to start by saying that we
wholeheartedly agree that
reduced emissions is definitely
a shared goal by all parties
including the oil and gas
industry and we certainly gone a
long way in the past decade or
so within the industry itself to
reduce those emissions while
increasing production
however the question that this
bill asks is at what cost would
be mandated clean fuel standards
have on New Mexicans and I think
there is really no argument even
from supporters of this bill
that it will reach consumers who
use automobiles hitting them
hard at the gas pump now based
on studies that we see from
other states specifically
California upwards of sixty
cents per gallon has been tacked
on as a result of their clean
fuel standards act and that's on
top of higher gas prices that
we're seeing uh in these recent
days.
In New Mexico estimates for as a
result of this bill are looking
at thirty to fifty cents
increase per gallon and that
really is a regressive tax that
will be foremost on those in
poverty in New Mexico as well as
those in rural areas
finally there will be costs
associated with fuel conversion
and that will affect the entire
supply chain in those costs will
be passed on to other oil and
gas sectors and other industries
so for those reasons we do stand
and respectful opposition thank
you.
Thank you chair representatives
for the opportunity to speak my
name is Tony grant I'm a
campaigner with the climate
lines to to the center for
biological diversity we have
over eleven thousand supporters
and fifteen hundred members in
New Mexico and we oppose this
bill because it won't result in
meaningful emissions reductions
that New Mexico needs to see
clean fuels and it's only a
small part of the emissions
reduction piece but this bill
much worse creates carbon market
that will allow polluters to
trade in carbon credits mass
these include into the future
putting frontline communities in
the climate at risk so for that
reason we oppose this bill and
we urge you to instead consider
legislation that invests in
public transportation active
transportation and
electrification infrastructure
thank you.
Anyone else opposition in the
audience.
It will go online.
But if you would like to speak
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand if you're
here in support.
Senator and the.
First up we have Travis state.
You Mr chairman yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee try to stay
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Chile Association we sent
opposition to house bill four
twenty six the passage of this
bill will provide new
regulations that would
drastically increase increase
impact our membership we're
already facing high
transportation cost regulations
such as the proposed clean fuel
standards will make it more
expensive to grow distribute
chilly here in New Mexico and as
price takers are members have
limited access to recoup
additional transportation costs
created by the clean fuel
standards we just committee
oppose house bill four twenty
six thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Caitlin's Bradley.
I think we lost.
With this case.
Good morning Mr chair can you
hear me yes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee wants
probably I registered lobbyists
in New Mexico Fuhrman by our
bureau thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning we stand a respectful
opposition as our membership
opposes environmental mandates
and instead believes that policy
transitions should be voluntary
incentive based and provide for
market driven innovation.
This proposal has the potential
to directly affect our rural
communities the most as they
have to travel further distances
for their basic needs such as
groceries medical visits and
work with the current rate of
inflation now it is not the time
to implement best costly policy
thank you.
Thank you that's up with.
Excuse me Sagura Smith.
Mr chair I'm in support please.
Okay will come back to you next
up with Paul guessing.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Paul
guessing a president Rio Grande
foundation policy research
institute based in Albuquerque
dealing with New Mexico public
policy issues.
We have serious concerns about.
This legislation that including
from the environmental
perspective if the full cycle
carbon emissions and
environmental impacts of a
public policy are not considered
you could wind up doing more
harm than good and I would look
no further than just at all one
of the key fuel components that
is being considered as a
replacement for.
traditional gasoline according
to agricultural sciences doctor
Serra Tabor the U. S. ethanol a
program waste five billion tons
of fertilizer sixty eight
trillion be to use of natural
gas utilizes fifty seven
thousand square miles of prime
farmland would otherwise be
follow if we do not have dental
program all fuels resources put
into transportation have impacts
this only ships it doesn't
resolve the environmental issues
inherent in gasoline I urge you
to oppose this legislation thank
you.
Thank you next up we have Larry.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is Leri
Sonntag here I'm a member of the
better together New Mexico
grassroots coalition and I along
with thousands of New Mexicans
and encouraging you to oppose
house bill four twenty six New
Mexico is by far one of the
poorest US states and this bill
would create additional
hardships on those who
financially suffered the most
with requirements that would be
among the most stringent in the
country our people can ill
afford the costs of a result
from this type of legislation
it's quite different to
institute this type of cap and
trade policy in a state like
California that has abundant
wealth should be noted however
is that policies like this are
driving up poverty and
homelessness in California as
well.
For these reasons and those
articulated well by to
Manchester and others we are
encouraging you to oppose house
bill four twenty six thank you.
Thank you next up we have Erika
Brunson sh.
Good morning my name is Erika
Brunson and I am from the
American fuel and petrochemical
manufacturers we are the leading
trade association representing
the makers of fuel in the United
States as a leading trade
association it is concerning
that this bill has been
introduced without the input of
stakeholders we have been
invited to the table to discuss
the ramifications to the state
of New Mexico and a thousand
jobs they can be affected we
respectfully exceeds the pope HB
four to six thank you.
Okay seeing though other hands
up okay good to support if
you're not into let's be support
these are the line will use of
my.
the rules apply to no more than
fifteen minutes the second
person.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee it's going to be here
secretary Kenny New Mexico
Environment Department I
appreciate the sponsor working
with us to bring this bill
forward
and just quickly I I wanted to
say just a couple things one I
appreciate the comments that
were in opposition actually and
to any of those groups that want
to work with us that's exactly
what we're doing with this bill
is a setting up the
environmental improvement board
to adopt rules in a public
process so this route this bill
is very different than what
you've seen in previous years it
engage it it lousy environmental
improvement board to engage in a
public process to adopt rules so
there's ample opportunity for
those here are interested to
come forward and work with us in
that public process Mr chair
members of the committee I saw
behind me who is lining up some
not gonna talk about the
industry who are supporting it
but we also have extractive
industries we also have
utilities we have many people
who have written letters in
support that we are have shared
with you I believe today who are
in support of this bill so we're
not catering to the lowest
common denominator we're racing
to the top of those industries
who want to work in New Mexico
bring those jobs here and work
on our climate solutions at the
same time in both rural and
urban New Mexico thank you.
Thank you very thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Romero on behalf of to
question the trickle up to
Carson currently has forty DB
charging stations in their
service area with ten fast
charging stations can be
deployed of this year.
Because it's also working on a
we hydrogen power plant project
this power could be used for
long haul trucking these the low
carbon transportation credits
will help to conserve to
continue to invest in renewable
energy we support this bill
thank you.
A good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee my name is
Marco Gonzales and the research
this for Tesla yes was mission
is to accelerate the world's
transition to a sustainable
energy future we've invested
four million in charging
solutions vehicle sales and
service capacity on tribal lands
here in New Mexico and just need
to charging stations the yes
those charging network in New
Mexico currently includes
publications with seventy six
charging ports and additionally
we've invested in a twenty three
level two chase stations with
reporters thirty eight point we
support the adoption of the
clean fuel standards bill and
applaud the administration and
other state leaders on this
committee
for recognizing the need for
carbon based standards to
accelerate our transition to a
sustainable energy future
HB four twenty six has been
proven elsewhere and in can
result in reducing emissions
would in New Mexico and X. are
in the use of electricity as a
transportation fuel so we
appreciate the Sanchez efforts
and this committees about
consideration we ask you to
support the bill thank you very
much Mr chairman members the
committee.
Good morning members of the
committee and chair of Bill
Jordan with the Mexico Boyce's
for Children I want to thank the
sponsors for this legislation
which we believe offers the
right incentives to reduce
carbon emissions in the
transportation sector which is a
necessary and effective step
protecting our environment and
improving community health in
the air we breathe in addition
to the climate and health
benefits this legislation would
also bring about economic
benefits through job creation
and new investments we hope
you'll support this legislation
thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Laura Sanchez
I'm the executive director of
government public affairs for
PNM and we stand in support of
this bill of just a couple of
comments that we want to thank
the sponsor for all of her work
on this effort as well as the
expert of course in the
department we feel this is this
is a that improvement over last
year's bill there are some
differences that I can
definitely appreciate the
stakeholder input I think is a
huge improvement to make sure
that there are representatives
from a variety of areas industry
as well to be able to
participate in the rulemaking we
have a couple of differences
that we will be working out with
the speaker just clarifying the
definition of disadvantaged
community and we anticipate that
PNM because of our programs will
end up being
a partner that will have credits
to sell
within the structure and so as
part of that we also want to
have conversations about the
investment of those credits of
the net revenue so with that I
ask that you support this bill
thank you.
Good morning members the
committee
its chairman a Mike d'antoni
with Xcel energy we are neutral
on the bill right now but wanted
to say that we submitted
comments yesterday late and I
haven't had a chance to talk to
the sponsor yet about and we
hope we're hoping to move to a
support position we want to make
sure that utilities are involved
in the of policy making
rulemaking process we are very
much our company is involved in
electric vehicle
advancements throughout our
regions and so for that reason
mainly we we are supporting this
bill in order to support it he
actually supported with but what
happened to the Sanchez thank
you.
Thank you chairman and members
the committee I see any County
climate energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico we
are also support this bill we do
believe that the future of
transportation is electric but
this bill would offer a solid
intermediary strategy for
decarbonisation and we will also
help advocate for stronger
policies within the bill as it
moves forward that will look out
for disproportionately impacted
communities yes that is what
thank you.
You Mr chairman members I'm
Kevin Moran of the regional
associate vice president.
For government affairs for
environmental defense fund
environment transaction Fund and
I'm here in support of
legislation we're very pleased
to see this this bill and
appreciate the work it's already
gone to develop it has more work
is done on it we hope to be a
positive contributor thank you.
Okay go online
Percent Ryan Kitty.
Hello good morning Mr chair
members the committee my name is
Ryan Kenney with clean energy
really relations largest
provider of renewable natural
gas transportation fuel we
apologize sixty filling stations
in forty three states include a
substantial eight alone in New
Mexico we provide service to
refuse transit heavy truck
customers we are a business
success story because of the
California clean fuel standard
we take the credits for the
California
fuel standard standard and use
it and combine them with federal
requirements to bring down the
cost of the higher costs are
already need to be happy parity
with diesel fuel.
This bill will increase jobs
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
as a positive externality
decrease font from the Knox in
diesel particulate matter our
renewable after gas for
transportation that stress is
our economy of lower fuel cost
increases energy security
significantly significantly
benefits our environment by
reducing carbon emissions up to
three hundred percent and smog
forming oxidations by ninety
percent this bill is also a
mechanism that fosters
technological innovation
innovation supporter of US
market for alternative fuels
provides long term investment
certainty again we are a
business success story because
the California clean fuel
standard we urge and I thank
you.
Thank you next up we have Louise
Guerrero.
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee and was gonna with
the circle program that chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members throughout New
Mexico the stances support of
each before twenty six we are
glad to see a one hundred
percent investment of utility
credits electrification with a
focus of budget for
transportation impacted
communities this bill supports
transition away from fossil
fuels for two electric vehicles
which will cut down on carbon
pollution fight climate change
we encourage even deeper
decarbonization goals and focus
on electrification in the future
for those reasons we stand and
support thank you.
Thank you that's that we have
Amy brown.
Good morning committee members
I'm Amy brown I'm the chief
operating officer of our lead to
consulting I'd like to a
consulting has been advocating
for adoption of a clean fuel
standard in New Mexico for
several years because we believe
it would be a triple win for New
Mexico fighting climate change
reducing pollution and
benefiting the economy by
creating clean energy
investments in New Mexico and
good jobs.
Adelante consulting's economic
analysis which you've heard.
I did already that was completed
for last year's legislative
session found that a clean fuel
standard would provide clear
economic benefits for our state
we now would also benefit from
federal clean fuel incentives in
the inflation reduction act and
bipartisan infrastructure law
that will add even more value
and catalyse investments in New
Mexico a clean fuel standard
provides a real opportunity for
New Mexico today three states
have passed a standard and have
a thriving clean fuel secretary
as a result now is the time to
act started tracking clean fuel
producers to our state.
We would be the first state in
the southwest and could lead
regional development if a clean
fuel standard is adopted here.
Please don't let New Mexico miss
out on great jobs new
investments more consumer choice
and fewer emissions I urge you
to authorize adoption of the
clean fuel standard active
session and vote yes on house
bill four twenty six thank you.
Thank you except with Charlie
mark as.
Yes the Mr Chairman can you hear
me yes.
thank you members of the
committee of house bill four
twenty six clean fuel standards
comes at a time when this effort
is at a pivotal point in the
development of the electric
vehicle market by the way I am a
registered lobbyist for the
alliance for automotive
innovation.
Today there are sixty D. B.
models that are offered in every
major of by every major
automaker and they've announced
plans to substantially increased
this production in the next four
years automakers intend to offer
a hundred and thirty different
electric vehicle models in a
variety of different segments
however the automotive industry
investments alone will not be
enough to increase market
penetration for electric
vehicles which in the second
quarter of twenty twenty one
accounted for only one point
nine six percent of all vehicles
sold in New Mexico.
Customer demand is necessary at
a and time and time again
studies show that purchase
purchase incentives and
available charging and
refuelling infrastructure are
key to doing so a clean fuel
standard could promote both New
Mexico has set an ambitious
electrification goal with the
adoption of clean cars
regulations starting in model
year twenty twenty six we ask
that you support this measure
thank you.
Thank you next step with Graham
Dorrans.
Grammar you with us.
We have sherry Miro.
Share your needed on your end.
Sure you need to meet yourself.
Yeah that's good Allison Smith.
Yes good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith registered
lobbyist for tallgrass energy
program is developing clean
energy products sorry projects
in New Mexico and is supportive
of this legislation we look
forward to being part of the
conversation moving forward
thank you so much have a
wonderful day.
Okay we have time for two or
three more let's the same way.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm Sam way with the
New Mexico acylation here in
strong support but it's the
field standard Mr you collision
is the national trade
association for the arms
industry we feel policies like
this have been strong drivers of
RG development across the
country the transportation
sector is one of the largest GHG
in New Mexico and decarbonizing
transportation were required
drop in fuels like oil natural
gas to support near mid term
decarbonisation and hard to
electrify applications no longer
argue projects often captured
destroy a greater amount of
greenhouse gases that are
emitted during the fuel's
combustion making aren't you
want a few fuel is capable of
achieving a carbon negative for
better than carbon neutral
impact today consenting RG
production will prove air
quality in waste management
practices in New Mexico by
reducing organic waste methane
emissions while simultaneously
displacing fossil diesel fuel
investing in clean low carbon
fuel such as renewable natural
gas generates jobs you know it's
a green economy reveals reduce
transportation related emissions
that affect the health of
communities and contribute to as
not long cancer and other
respiratory and cardiovascular
conditions a study by UC Davis
concluded that work in CFS will
reduce air pollution deaths
related particularly emissions
and avoid up to eighty seven
billion dollars in health care
costs I see if S. program would
promote the development of
robust alternative fuels market
in New Mexico create new I
economic activity including the
production of hydrogen from our
energy and one of the prominent
agency you've heard today about
a CFS is an significantly raise
prices for consumers of
conventional fuels that's simply
untrue divest all season not
been statistically shown to
increase retail conventional
fuel prices for consumers in a
prior role within California
resources board thank you.
It really one more ring it do
the Richard Cory.
Yes thank you chairman and
members of the board I'm up in
the committee I am speaking on
behalf of the Mexico clean fuels
Association and and the former
California air resources board
Stafford the last line of years
of which I was director of the
agency.
And want to speak to experiences
so the low carbon fuel standard
in California was implemented in
twenty chances twelve years
experience and I was responsible
for its development and
implementation over that period
of time and recall the concern
at the time prior to
implementation about the
concerns about gas lines price
spikes lack of availability of
fuel leakage businesses leaving
the state and a lack of
associate investment but if you
fast forward to what played out
what we saw were significant
investments in clean feels for
in depth a program that was
different to it did not pick
winners we see investments in
cleaner ethanol renewable diesel
biodiesel sustainable aviation
fuel electrification dimethyl
ether renewable hydrogen.
That are driving down emissions
unequivocally substantial
reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions as well as pollutants
that contribute to formation
motion as well as diesel
economic impacting communities
and in terms the claim some
price run ups the evidence
simply isn't there into the
court.
Thank you.
Okay so we they're still.
This doesn't people there is a
so I.
Thank you for growth
participated sorry we can't get
their.
Representative Ortez would you
like to respond to any of the
comments before we get to the.
Mr chair I don't need to respond
I think we'll get to that
through the questions but I have
to let you guys know about I'm
so sorry yes this.
I should cut that we do and then
it should be on your dresses are
going to be with her.
The public this point point in
your binder there were two is
the the need to.
Is here two two five four three
six point.
Two two five four three six one.
The.
That.
There's a communities.
In the event thank you Mr chair
we and transportation fuel into
the definition section means
electricity or liquid or gaseous
that is blended sold supplied
user offered for sale to power
vehicles or equipment for on
road or off road purposes.
A discussion on.
Bills to be in front of bills in
the I heard.
And the caption.
Research for this is adding an
additional information session
on the.
Actually in.
Citing this committee.
Syrian opposition to.
Okay so and then you have in the
bill.
Members of the committee on the
bill as amended.
There's got.
Representative.
One one twenty two start.
Issue alright.
As expressed.
Right
to.
Representative.
For each
page.
Which is.
What happens.
Right to hold this discussion.
Units of measurement that
to to once.
I.
Instead of.
Thank you to.
I'm going to units
of metal which.
And that's our.
Yes.
Read the.
Mr chair representative I I
don't believe that we can agree
to do that at this moment but
I'm gonna defer to my to my
experts to.
The conversation.
Mr chair.
Representative Scott and pounds
per gallon is not pulling two
grams for major.
and so
you conversion perspective I
don't think that will work.
Chairman.
Representative networks grams
what.
Right yeah.
Yes on twenty eight so.
Mathematical to questions can't
stop grams to pounds.
We.
To.
That state.
Mr chair Representative so
I the gallons has internet
service to however I think that
more importantly the bill also
talks about being compatible.
With what is happening in other
jurisdictions and this is what
the previous two other
jurisdiction are set up so I
think it's
is important to consider.
Sexes we Chairman representative
if I may add on also the need to
account for electricity and the
carbon infants being on
Hound pregabalin regular
unleaded gasoline equivalent and
so madam jewel is the chosen
option to achieve not purposes.
So Mr Chairman representative.
This legislation.
Is what.
Impact.
Transportation if you.
Concept which.
You too at.
All right.
The cost.
The cost.
This.
What appears.
To discuss.
Mr Chairman representative.
Transportation.
Issues are.
Mexico.
Mr chair representative we can
get pretty close.
And asked to.
Mr chair representative I didn't
hear the question could you
repeat that please.
Total total CO two emissions.
Transportation motor fuels that.
Representative chair I'm sorry
Mr chair representative is not
we have greenhouse gas emissions
inventory that we did in twenty
eighteen.
Twenty eighteen the con the
contribution from transportation
was sixteen point five million
metric tons of CO two
equivalent.
Thank you for.
So.
Thirty percent.
Reduction.
In those emissions rate.
Yes.
Million tonnes.
Mr chair representative that
that map scenes correct.
So the.
Mr Chairman representative if
this.
Legislation passes district six.
What will be the impact.
Planets.
Mr chair representative this is
one way that we can reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and.
It's it will be effective so
it'll be will have thirty
percent fewer greenhouse gas
emissions from this sector.
By twenty forty.
Mr chair and representative
trying to get this.
Director calls this piece of
legislation.
Do we know how much you prove we
will if that.
Chairman representative we
calculate that we're going to
have sixteen point two million
and decrease of emissions by
twenty thirty and then I believe
it's eighty million metric tons
of decrease emissions by twenty
forty and so that would be the
effect.
Mr Chairman representative and
text or.
The.
Predicts.
The total and will.
It's.
See you to.
Here.
Forty.
Thank you.
So.
If you'll allow me to do a
rounding.
The program.
Cheers consequence this
legislation this point.
Cero cero cero what.
Mr Chairman representative.
Watch.
This is point zero one percent
we were looking Mr Chairman
representative what I would call
the last.
He needs so which.
Mr Chairman representative.
Hi part of that sketch.
So
again we're talking and pounds.
Yes.
Generate approximately twenty
pounds of CO two.
Also total life cycle emissions.
It is.
Chairman.
More.
Which.
Yes.
What we the total loss short
pool costs one.
Just to see to.
So.
Yes the.
In the state.
Twenty two title which.
CO two.
Approaching the.
Net loans.
To.
So.
Mr chair.
Forty percent she.
Questions.
Three million that.
Are
for jurisdictions.
For the.
Been trying.
I.
This last one that was supposed
to dollars.
Hundred twenty dollars I
couldn't find one Washington.
G. through.
Program.
Fund.
British would.
For the longest what.
So.
We have which.
The.
That time should
be accommodated.
For a family business.
Can you tell me.
What will be the cost.
That.
To.
Mr chair representative I cannot
tell you the cost of that credit
and the reason why is because
the rulemaking hasn't started
the the conversation that brings
and all the stakeholders
including producers including
utilities and and folks from all
around the state that that
conversation hasn't started I
think it's really important to
address the the the market the
credit approach market approach
to this you know we know that
the markets haven't been.
As inclusive as they need to be
in other states so we have the
opportunity now through the rule
making process to ensure that
the market credits reflect the
needs of New Mexicans and the
businesses that are coming here
so I I mean that's.
That's how all stream using the
answer to your question first
and I am happy to ask the
experts to to weigh in thank you
Representative Mr Chairman
representative
A couple of additional points
one
For the emissions reductions
that will occur that we're
predicting under each before
twenty six and the rulemaking
and ultimately program that will
be designed as a result of it
It is only as you say
Representative Scott
just a fractional share that
fractional air will bring jobs
to New Mexico that factual here
will bring investment into New
Mexico oil and gas is all ready
moving in this direction in
order to meet consumers where
they want to be which is the
demand for clean fuels and we're
gonna be able to find that and
be a leader here in New Mexico
for those demands
one other point I would add is
that one of our supporters as
Missy of value transportation
they are trucking business in
southern New Mexico they're in
full support of this bill are
already using clean fuels and we
were excited to hear from them
for their support on this bill
because state New Mexico
businesses providing job in
southern New Mexico can be a
leader for the country on this
thank you.
Mr Chairman representative what
to two one is that.
Com usage which.
With the school.
Carton French the widespread
twenty.
Two
point seven dollars to four
hundred forty.
How long you expectation that
carbon credit program we could
develop.
It's.
So.
For use.
She
was orange.
Market to to health.
Mr Chairman location do we have
to buy.
Some.
It was the disposition to spark
addition when.
Or with.
And jobs that has to be recruit
yes.
So what.
Thank you so one the New Mexico
consumer.
So Mister chairman
Representative seventy dollars
to the card.
Will cost.
New Mexico consumed by yes
which.
Mr Chairman representative of
the world is riding a question
the state.
Each.
This.
This was.
The New Mexico thrive and gas
powered vehicle two hundred two.
Mr Chairman representative
option.
Gentleman will need to.
Thank you for your.
The representative
Representative Townsend thank
you share.
Thank you
Well my colleague.
Very.
It is late.
Articulately.
The math.
Of.
Actual impact.
Local.
I'd like to take a little
different approach and talk
about the actual impact.
To the families of the New
Mexico.
While.
On the of the people that stood
here today.
At.
The opportunity to benefit from
the proposal.
There will be.
Thousands of New Mexicans.
In rural parts of New Mexico.
Not be able to participate.
In this process.
So.
Chairman and.
Representative.
Do you agree.
This proposed legislation.
What very likely.
Resulting in increased costs.
Gasoline at the pumps for New
Mexicans all across New Mexico.
Mr chair representative I I do
not agree with that statement.
So.
Mr chairman and gentle lady.
We need to be willing to take to
the amendment that says if it
does it will negate the
rule making process.
Mr Chairman representative
Part of the.
considerations chairman.
Representative I ask a question
it will not you are standing
here just by day this proposed
rule nine making will not cause
an increase in you.
What you'd be willing to take on
the amendment says it does
difficult to get the process
reserves are down fifty thousand
back in the
in Representative you asked the
question idea.
The order the representative
defer to her expertise into the
question often.
We give them the opportunity to
answer the question I did give
them an opportunity I'm asking
president she started to speak
you cut her off not to change
the subject.
So
there is yes.
Mr chair representative we
already have language in this
bill that limits cost to
customers that is that is one of
the guidelines as the rulemaking
begins that is.
Already a part of it we don't
need an amendment to.
Guarantee that it is already in
here.
Mr chairman and gentle lady.
No where in America.
Yes this process resulted in
need for fuel.
Mr chair representative it.
It has.
There are few options in
California and in other states
that are.
The clean fuel options are are
less expensive.
That is what's happening and I
want to I also wanted Mr chair
representative may if I may.
It is a miss that clean fuel
standards have increased prices
at the pump the research shows
that it has not it provides more
options there are other factors
that that inform fuel prices
including what is happening
right now in Ukraine.
That affects feel prices
profits of companies also
affects fuel prices.
Chair.
I spent a career.
The Business.
The.
At.
As much more experiences
anybody.
On the effects of part
regulations.
Today.
The United States.
Some highest priced fuel in
America.
She is in California.
Right.
Mr chair representative I agree
that California has higher fuel
prices than New Mexico but what
this bill looks at is providing
options that are not gasoline
right we've got.
Electric hydrogen biodiesel
these are all the types of fuels
that
that we can have here that will
help us reduce emissions and I'm
happy to let me expert
responsible but more.
Chairman representative I would
also say that there are
different kinds of fuel now as
Representative Cortez alluded to
not just hybrid hydrocarbon
fuels
there are five diesel hydrogen
so many different kinds of fuel
as these energy companies these
advance energy companies new
energy companies including our
traditional oil and gas major
players they're spending so much
money developing different ways
that we can solve our problem
and all this bill does is allow
New Mexico an opportunity to be
a leader in that effort.
Your process.
Is a trap.
And let me tell let me explain.
Your process although eloquently
described.
Allows people.
To engage in a process that will
form.
Eight eight process.
It is not to allow them again
the process.
It is to.
Force them into a process that
will cost the change.
Mr chairman and gentle lady.
I don't believe in the use.
Can and I certainly means
dollars back.
All of these.
And if the.
We'll raise fuel prices in New
Mexico and will charm and reduce
the standard of living for many
New Mexico's that are living on
fixed income.
There's absolutely no question.
For example.
Mr chairman.
The I think it's.
There is a provision that.
Fifty percent of the proceeds go
to the underprivileged
communities is that correct.
Mr chair representative they are
disproportionately impacted
communities questions.
Really good players.
Mr chair and representative that
that is in statute already.
That language that definition.
The.
Shares lady.
That even that initiative.
Does not protect those people's
standards of living.
Although it may be a small the.
The people in New Mexico.
Just like the people in
California.
In Arizona under azar Bob rules
if you know what those are.
All increased.
The cost of fuel.
It just.
It has in every instance and and
and although I can agree with
you that.
You could have some yes.
From this proposed rulemaking
from an environmental
standpoint.
You are for our standard of
living of many New Mexicans the
mid and the people living in.
Navajo reservation that are a
hundred miles away from grocery
store in the after the impact
every time we go to the cast.
The.
Thirty or sixty or ninety cents
a gallon they're gonna feel it.
And I don't the those people
when they get up in the morning.
For the most part whether there
is our illustrious southeast or
wherever in rural New Mexico
state.
At.
Many impacts of the warranty.
In their life.
They don't see that when they go
to the gas.
They see the impacts of of
what's happening today.
Mr chair and gentle lady.
What type of infrastructure
changes do you believe industry
will have to increase our
in order to handle the fuels.
Mr chair representative I think
I think there are lots of
different kinds of
infrastructure changes that are
that are already coming that
they're already here with the
new the Act electrification
fuel on charging stations around
the state and and that is that
is happening already
I'm happy from expert to Mr
chairman members of also to
Representative Ortez comment
that
tall grass energy who you who we
all heard we're sitting in
support of this bill has
invested six hundred million
dollars into converting the.
Assisting infrastructure
Escalante in northwest New
Mexico into eight with plans to
produce hydrogen and make that
conversion there so these are
the kinds of when we say
investments and jobs and
economic growth these are the
kinds of
investments are already being
made and that we would like to
you know ensure that New Mexico
gets and that new jobs and
investment are brought here.
Yeah it's just in Mr chairman
that's exactly what I'm talking
about I'm on the paving.
Progresses
Mexico at all I understand
coming from the M. L. P. world
exactly how.
They benefit coming their
taking.
Transportation cares bringing
out of state natural gas in the
New Mexico to make conversions
of hydrogen.
just wanted I've met with them
and I understand the process.
It doesn't take any New Mexico
gas and in and out there
severance tax revenue that it
brings.
Midwest gas and the New Mexico.
But let me tell you what I'm
concerned about and I'm very
concerned about.
We're taking a giant leap.
And we're leaving Mexicans in a
large.
We're having.
Big utility companies that can
capture the value of the tax
credit Martin credits they're
going to reap big benefits I get
I thank us later on our couch.
I've been involved in the
company that has as it has done
that the staff.
But I'm telling you.
The average New Mexico whether
they be in downtown Albuquerque.
Will will be.
Our standard of living will be
quiet because they will be
spending more on fuels.
Than they ever have and they
will not see any benefit because
what happens was two million
people in New Mexico does not
affect the world.
I think my my.
Kali.
Four five decimal places to get
to a point one the calculation.
That's the.
That's really troubling to me
I'm not saying that the process
can work in.
And the credit world doesn't I
mean I understand that but it's
not our work for the average.
So I ask you this one question.
How are four or under privileged
people.
In New Mexico.
Budget by higher fuel prices
which will result in a lower
standard of living.
Mr chair representative I
disagree completely with the way
your framing this this issue I'm
just so I think we should we
need to start from there.
Low income and New Mexicans will
benefit deeply from having
different fuel options they're
not going to see increased
prices at the pump there they
are going to see other options
for for fuel period
in addition we've got
investments in in E. V.'s in
charging stations and they will
see they will see decreases in
their monthly output to teach to
transportation fuels there is
well
The way the rulemaking is going
to go.
That investment will be monies
will be re invested into
disproportionately impacted
communities that is another way
in which low income New Mexicans
we'll see we'll see budget and
there are other benefits as well
not only not only on the
monthly.
Gas bill.
For transportation fuels let's
be really clear here but but in
the jobs that will be created
that has three benefit for New
Mexico as well and I will argue
that every day New Mexicans
especially rural New Mexicans
feel the impacts of climate
change every single day we are
feeling it so I you know I am.
I'm concerned that we're
that we're focusing on the hi
I'm and I need to Mr chair and
Representative Townsend as I I
do believe in Representative
Scott Smith I think he's very
very skilled at it but I think
that it's it's missing some some
points in in the the formulation
of that number we we have an
impact on climate change.
And as a leader because we bring
this here in New Mexico we're
going to influence you know
other states as well that's what
I believe Mr chair
representative and my experts
can add to this event and
Mr chair representative
on the I we complete disagree
respectfully on your assessment
of the tall grass project
Escalante
and as a second point I would
say that we have a letter of
support by the leading
nonpartisan consumer testing and
advocacy agency Consumer Reports
exactly on this bill this is
something that they have studied
for a long time they have an
entire team and that is analyzed
the effects of clean fuel
standards like this one and H.
B. for twenty six Consumer
Reports
nonpartisan independent.
Advocacy organization for
consumers supports this bill
thank you Mr chairman gentle
lady and let's just cut to the
chase.
If you honestly believe.
That's at the moment to the bill
that says.
The cost of fuel.
To New Mexico residents cannot
be higher taxes than the average
of Texas Oklahoma and Louisiana
or neighboring energy producing
states.
Mr chair representative I'm not
gonna do that.
And.
Mr Chairman.
Gentle lady with all due
respect.
If you want to do that.
It causes me to believe that you
believe that your you cannot
compete with those energy
producing states that our
standard of living for New
Mexicans
will be harmed.
And that their fuel prices are
going to rise.
Because this legislation and
that's why I will not support it
and not fight it tooth and
toenail every step of the way is
because it is going to raise.
Active fuel to New Mexico it is
going to harm their standard of
living and by your not being
able to accept that it just
verifies to meet it did you
leave Iraq thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair.
I have a couple of random
questions.
The first
Is relating to the impact that
this legislation would have on
the global effort to reduce.
The house gas emissions
is this Mr chair and
Representative Ortez and experts
is this the only effort that New
Mexico's taking to reduce CO two
levels Mr chair representative
it is not.
Mr chair Representative Ortez is
this the.
Only effort in the United
States.
dealing with.
Transportation.
Greenhouse gas reductions.
Mr chair representative it is
not the only.
Mr chair Representative Ortez
when we talk about the global
climate change
The international agencies.
Talk about five different
sectors that are involved in the
effort to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and transportation is
one of them but Mr Chairman
representative would you not
agree that.
There's general consensus that
in order to reach our goals we
need to staff many different
types of greenhouse gas emission
reductions measures.
Mr chair and representative I
really wanted to make sure my
colleagues this these questions
can I could I come back to okay
sorry.
I'll be fine because of this and
we have others on the list for
thanks okay.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
I don't have very many questions
but I do have a couple of things
that I want to follow up with
some of the prior questions
When I.
Listen to the introductory
remarks your experts to serve Mr
chairman and Representative.
But the effort was to allow
Mexico to remain a healthy place
to live.
Am I take that statement as.
The status quo.
Is satisfactory that New Mexico
is a healthy place to live.
And so if that's the case.
What are we trying to
accomplish.
Mr chair representative hi.
What this bill focuses on is
offering options it will
increase investment and jobs.
Money coming to the state you
will reduce greenhouse gases
which that greenhouse gas
emissions which will have an
impact on the health and well
being of New Mexicans.
Chair representative on I would
also add to Representative Ortez
is comments that.
The projections of climate
change and the impacts of
climate change to New Mexico
quite dire things we've already
seen mega droughts wildfires we
do want New Mexico to remain a
place to live into the future
even though we have these
projections we want to make sure
that we have a healthy state job
wise economy wise environmental
lies
not only now but going forward
thank you so so Mister chair
representative are you saying
that if we pass this legislation
we're not going to have those
wildfires we're not going to
have those throughout this.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
not we're not saying that but we
are saying that this bill will
is one tool in the toolbox where
we can decrease our carbon
emissions over time and the cost
of what those carbon emissions
are projected to cost us as a
state if we start addressing
these kinds of problems now and
pass each before twenty six so
that we can develop a well
designed clean fuels program
will be able to save New
Mexicans.
I think billions of dollars I
think it's twelve point two
billion dollars into the future
of
of climate change related
damages.
Mr Chairman representative.
You talked about
The fact that if we if the fuel
supplier.
Meets our standards they will be
able to sell these credits.
If they maintain their status
quo.
They will have to buy credits
M. so let's talk a little bit
about those credits.
For those that maintain the
status quo.
Don't have to buy credits who
ultimately.
There's a cost of those credit.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative that would be a
cost that the fuel importer that
continues to
use and sell high carbon fuels
will.
In creating based on the
purchase of credits from low
carbon fuel providers
and then that so that cost to be
incurred by the fuel the fuel
providers I would say Mr chair
and representative and that is
part of the rulemaking so we
can't say what that looks like
completely here that's one
possibility but in the
rulemaking is when we're getting
into that the details of that
with the way the part that the
way the market is created how it
works.
Well it won't matter.
What the rules are.
The.
Person that decides to maintain
the status quo and.
Continue to sell.
The status quo drugs which was
just put in the page gasoline
and diesel.
Continue to sell those products.
They're going to have a higher
cost for their products.
And ultimately that positional
cost will get passed on to the
consumer will let.
Mr Chairman representative which
has we don't know that
I mean sorry Representative
Nibert my apologies
There's a lot to be considered
in the rulemaking and what I
think is one of the most
exciting things is a lot of
these fuel companies and these
businesses are already making
the changes we see we already
see ethanol blends we already
see diesel blends this is just
meeting the fuel providers where
they are and providing certainty
in the market for them all add
that
this issue and clean fuels was
actually recently heard in the
United States Senate and
Certainty was a huge deal for a
lot of the feel providers there
and a lot of the conversation
centered around that and so I
think it's meeting with U.
makers where they are.
Yeah to maintain the status quo.
You you do one of two things.
Either you mandate that those
cost can't be passed on which
may limit your.
Representative fuels this people
may decide not to sell or.
The reaction is going to be to
pass on those costs to the
consumer which is.
Generally what occurs in a
competitive market so it seems
to me that that those that
maintain the status quo.
So openly the consumers in New
Mexico and the reason why I'm
concerned about this is.
I look at my community.
And.
Our ability to.
A choir.
Electric vehicles for instance
at least this has been a lot of
a local lot lower level.
Them we see in more urban areas.
For a variety of reasons one of
which is the distance that we
have to travel.
To.
Other market centers.
Two hundred miles Albuquerque
two hundred miles to Las to
enter my house bill passes to
enter more Los crucis two
hundred miles there were a lot
in my case
Yeah and so people people are
making choices.
Based upon their own situations
and so why are you this
legislation is.
It's I have a lofty ideals with
the impact of this legislation
is going to be at Mike is.
Are going to end up paying more
for their fuel because the fuels
that are.
Currently available.
But elector carpet people in my
community can't reliably.
Use of vehicles to to do a round
trip to Albuquerque.
Orders for and so
by the.
Part of this legislation is.
Wishing some of those costs down
on on my constituents in rural
New Mexico
and I'm concerned about that so
let's look at the other side.
Who ultimately will receive the
can come from the sale of those
credits.
Mr chair.
Representative.
To the queen Representative
Nibert.
Can you mean okay.
so the the the recipients of
those of the that dollars are
set out in the credit markets
are those that produce low
carbon fuels so for example in
New Mexico real valley bio fuels
locating someone park it did
produces biofuels would be
simple the recipient some of our
local utilities like Carson if
with the so low carbon
electricity that is another
example also you know we have a.
You know Jesus is
HollyFrontier's Sinclair's H. of
Sinclair's renewable diesel
refinery if they choose to
participate in the New Mexico
market the to the recipient of
the clean fuel credits in the
the funding from from the
market.
Mr Chairman representative would
you agree with me that the
average New Mexico and will not
be the recipient of that income.
Mr chair representative I think
I don't agree
investments are being made
across the state in things like
TV's and Evey charging stations
that's only one that's only one
aspect of this clean fuel
standard biodiesel
Renewable diesel is also
something that can that will
reduce prices at the pump for
for the average New Mexicans.
So Mr Chairman representative.
The person lying.
These other fuels up a pop
receive the income from the sale
of credits.
Mr chair representative Nibert
no hi and I'm I apologize if I
framed it in that way the
benefits of a legal standard are
are significant to to New Mexico
you know we're we're not only in
see more options which is what
New Mexicans want want more
options for for their fuels that
they used for transportation
we're gonna see benefits in in
more jobs across the state as
well and investment in
infrastructure those those are
those are the investments that
will that's the benefit that
we'll see we have a wide range
of options.
For transportation fuels.
Thank understand the benefits.
Talk about income.
From the south credits and who.
Receive staff and and so I asked
if the average New Mexicans
would receive the echo from the
sale of credit.
This the income from the sale of
the credits with the average New
Mexico being given to get to be
a participant in the income
generated from the press.
In order I think she answered
that it I think it's pretty
clear from the structure of the
bill that they would not.
I believe that they would not
but that's not.
At.
I I.
Representative Ortez Mr chair
individuals not going to receive
a check from the company.
Representative Nibert but they
but the companies that are
producing these low carbon
intensity fuels
will be providing jobs and they
will also be providing less
expensive transportation fuel
that's that's the benefit.
Chair Mr chair and
representative
I would you know maybe and
analogies you know we benefit
from
the oil and gas industry
investing because we don't
necessarily receive a check from
that.
Companies that are doing
transactions between each other
but we all benefit the community
from the drugs.
Mr chair representative.
Has anybody looked at the price
of transportation fuels from the
status quo.
Sources being diesel gasoline.
In the states that have enacted
this type of legislation I
believe you said earlier that
the you didn't to necessarily
agree that the cost went up I'm
wondering if anybody is looked
at at that specific issue.
And has green mini information
from what has occurred in other
states.
chair representative Nibert
indeed yes the the there are
many economic analyses that
looked at that one that I would
refer to is states in white just
last year and that economic
analysis did look at the cost at
the pump impact from the clean
fuel standard programs that are
existing in states that have
them and found that there were
no
correlated full price impacts
from the policy.
Mr chair representative
Did Washington just enact their
clean fuel standards last year
that would affect January first.
chair representative yes that is
the case.
Do you know what happened
between the price of gasoline in
Washington between December of
twenty twenty two and January of
twenty twenty three.
Mr chair representative member I
I do not
If my experts to happen if they
do go ahead and.
there are lots of factors
related in in gas prices at the.
Russian they didn't you cream
that had a huge impact on gas
prices other externalities I
have had no effect on prices.
We could debate whether Russian
invasion of Ukraine resulted in
the gasoline prices going up for
the other political factors that
were involved in that the issue.
Would it surprise you to learn
that in Washington the price of
gas we went up substantially
between the month of December
and the month of January.
Mr chair representative Nibert I
I not surprised by anything
these days so.
That's that's my answer.
Mr Chairman representative I
believe there have been studies
done in California with respect
to the price of gasoline down to
where.
They're very is.
Stance.
California's dollars actually we
are attributed whether it be a
tax or or cost of refining cost
of the base product Senator.
Your and the studies I've seen
have indicated that the twenty
two cents per gallon is
attributed to their clean fuel
standard.
And so it yeah.
Maybe contrary to so some of the
testimony here it seems that
there is some increase in price
attributed to their standard to
California at least from some
people who have research that to
that issue.
Mr chair and representative
I think the fact of the matter
is.
Well these goals may be
laudable.
And moving in in that direction
I think.
Electrification of
transportation news is here it's
going to stay
Maybe at some point it will even
He accepted in and remote parts
of our state because the
technology has increased I think
we're headed in that direction.
But I'm also concerned that
legislation like this at this
time.
Is going to be borne by.
People in my community they're
going to pay the cost of higher
fuels their standard of living
will be reduced.
Yeah and and it concerns me
because I think that state with
a population of two million
people.
Is.
The prepare to to have.
Significant impacts on on many
of the things that we're trying
to to impact with with this and
and other legislation and it's
going to be.
Cost of this are going to be
born and the impact is going to
be borne by the people who can
least afford it yeah and I just
the Hey tickets ten you to see
us go down these roads
and.
I'm sure that market conditions
being what they are.
They're they're moving us in
those directions.
We're going to impose costs now
All people can't afford it and
and shouldn't have to bear those
costs.
So for that I I can't support
the bill thank you.
Here Representative average that
we're going to go back to
Representative Dixon.
Use.
Also numbers rather because.
She has good information that
you collect.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Ortez so just to
go back to where I left off
which was discussing the fact Mr
chair and representative that
New Mexico is not the only state
implementing
carbon for the take greenhouse
gas reductions efforts to
correct Mr chair representative
so that is correct and and Mr
chair and representative and
international experts.
Recognize that in order to meet
our goals for greenhouse gas
reductions we need to staff many
different policies
to achieve some of these results
Mr chair representative to.
Mr chair and representative and
these efforts are
typically broken into hi at
twenty thirty eight twenty forty
twenty fifty time frames is that
correct.
Representative Dixon that yes.
Mr chair and representative
Would you agree that when we
talk about any effort to
mitigate climate change
There are trade offs.
Mr chair Representative sin yes
there are.
Thank you Representative and Mr
chair I think that is a very
important
component to the discussion it's
frequently left out there are
trade offs with any decision
that we're making and all of our
efforts to
mitigate climate change have
trade offs
Mr chair representative clean
fuels
it certainly is a policy that is
going to have trade offs I don't
think that any of us disagree
with that.
Mr chair representative one of
the things that has been brought
up is
The cost and I think it's a very
legitimate and valuable point to
discuss is the costs to some of
our disproportionately impacted
communities and constituents
with lower incomes
Mr chair Representative is one
of the.
Effects of clean fuels
legislation.
Going to be an improvement in
air quality.
Mr chair representative and that
is absolutely benefit.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative
and that seems to me not to be.
I think that's a consensus
understanding is that correct Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair representative I sure
hope so.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
this proposed one of the areas
of research that I think
is also.
A point of consensus is that
disproportionately impacted
communities frequently suffer
from worse air quality in their
communities Mr chair
representative would you agree.
Mr chair representative yes I
do.
Mr chair representative is one
result I have worse air quality
us.
Mr chair representative sin
absolutely Mr chair
representative do you happen to
know the annual cost of treating
as much Mr chair representative
I I do not but I imagine that
you do.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative as it happens I
did check that information
during this debate.
And
the annual cost in the United
States to treat asthma is over
three thousand dollars.
Mr chair representative what.
The worst case
Let's look at some of the.
price increases of.
gasoline in California for
instance Mr chair representative
what's that what is the annual
impact on
New Mexico on a family or a
citizen if that you know worst
cases twenty five cents.
Per gallon increase for clean
fuels.
Where.
Maybe it was hired at colleges
Mr chair representative and I
think that's going to take us a
moment to to calculate
but I would argue that we don't
need we don't know what that
looks like
you know as we go through the
rule making you know that the
rulemaking is centered on equity
and affordability and ensuring
that disproportionately impacted
communities do not bear the
brunt of what the rulemaking
goes through and and just Mr
chair representative just so so
you know that the EIB has you
know has rules that they must
have they must abide by that
ensures that you were looking
at.
You know whole cost of public
health issues we're looking at
the technical ability of the
rules that are being created the
and I think really importantly
here the Economic reasonableness
of reducing eliminating or
otherwise taking action with
respect to environmental
degradation and that that is you
the that's the grounding with
which the eighty will be making
this these rules so I will get
back to you were.
After that we.
Like us to do which I mean it Mr
Mr chair representative Dicks
and I I think it's a bit
speculative
If you'd like us to take our
calculators we can Mr chair
representative I think the point
that I'm driving at is that once
again there are trade offs in
that New Mexico families.
Will benefit in some ways and to
potentially
have increased costs in other
ways and and we don't
necessarily know
but Mr chair Representative you
mentioned the E. ID and this is
you know something that has
concerned me in the past sort of
the.
Delegation of.
Authority but.
One of the things that if you
could address Mr chair
representative is the make up of
the EIB.
And who sits on that board and
what the political composition
is and.
Level of experience.
Representative Dixon quality of.
For.
Committee chair Representative
Dixon thank you for that
I the the environment proven
board is made up of seven
members they're appointed by the
governor and no more than four
if anyone anytime anyone party
can be construed that border any
moment.
Thank you Mr chair and expert
Claudia Representative is meant
manta that Mr chair
representative sent it is
also important to note that that
the New Mexico environment
department is developing a task
force that will connect will
take us into this product
process that task force is maybe
it's not called the task force.
It was a committee.
Advisory committee will be made
up of all kinds of different
people including producers and
utilities and folks from
disproportionally affected
communities I think that's also
important and and they will
start to hash out the the issues
which include price that's
really really important so we'll
go that that will take that that
data that information the input
from a wide range of
stakeholders including
producers.
Inset into that rulemaking
process.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
and as a point of reference at I
do appreciate the conversation
about the price of gasoline and
Mr Chairman representative
during the discussion I was able
to locate the price of gas per
gallon in Washington state and
for reference mid November
November fourteenth to be
specific the prices at was five
dollars and one cent per gallon
at the end of December on
December twenty six the price
had reduced to four dollars and
three cents and then this week
February the price was back up
to four dollars and twenty cents
so Mr chair representative it
clearly is volatile and I
suspect that since clean tools
was not in effect between
November and December
there may be other factors at
play in the price of gasoline
but Mr chair representative I'm
not expert in that so I should
other people have specific
factors and open to that Mr
chair representative.
I don't think that I have
anymore questions I have made
some notes through the
discussion of things that I was
interested in following up on I
appreciate the presentations I
think
it's been very thorough and by
and we're really pleased to see
a proposal that moves New Mexico
to the front of innovation
in this area as you know I am
very deeply concerned about
climate change and economic
diversification and how all of
our energy sectors can work
together and so I am very much
in support of this legislation
thank you very much.
Thank you Representative accept
Representative small thank you
very much Mr chair thank you
Representative we're testing to
the experts Mr chair
representative were to as first
I want to.
Commend you and the legislation
that you're bringing page eight
there are a number of provisions
that is you sort of talked to us
about there's explicit guidance
to limit the cost to consumers
as you work through all aspects
of this rulemaking is they're
not
Representative there is.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Representative it's
great that thank you for
including that also on page
eight Mr chair representative
It's the it appears that a
hundred percent of any of the
credit receipts that go to our
investor owned utilities are
going to be put back into
electrification.
Is that right.
Mr chair representative small
that is.
Have a great.
And so Mister chair
representative I know that that
do you envision that sort of
vastly building out charging
infrastructure really across New
Mexico cross service territories
that stretch from the most rule
to the most urban parts of the
state Mr chair representative
small yes and that is that one
of the intentions in the hopes
and goals behind this.
And Mr chair representative I
think it seems fair that is the
one of the outcomes further I
know you've and I just want this
is sort of the first of all
thank yous the fifty percent
that'll be dedicated
specifically to
disproportionately impacted
communities chair representative
could you give us just a couple
quick examples of those
communities what they might be
and for your experts.
Mr chair representative of small
thank you for that question so
disproportionately affects
communities
are scattered throughout New
Mexico the department of
transportation recently dues
the national electric vehicle
infrastructure plan which is the
dresses exactly question about
where will
charging interest we're charging
infrastructure needed and
examples of communities that
were on that map include you
know the the the include a lot
of tribal areas they include a
lot they include parts of the
northeast and northwest and
state you know really it's like
with a forty percent of the
state are classified as
disproportionately impacted
communities largely because of
the income great thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
Eli expr Act create that because
it really shows sort of the
statewide budget the legislation
proposes here today so I can
certainly see communities in the
county that I represent Dona Ana
County but as you talked about
really every county across the
state there seem like there will
be those benefits towards
specifically in this section for
the charging infrastructure
Briefly Mr chair representative
thank you touched on this
Representative which has but it
seems to me that often times the
impacts of of climate change in
the climate crisis are felt
acutely by rural
New Mexicans just as much as
urban New Mexicans few examples
I'm familiar of Mr chair
representative
is drought impacts folks at your
with less sort of.
That reliability and water
systems those are tend to be are
more rural communities which you
agree Mr chair representative
that those impacts.
Seems like the folks across New
Mexico feel the impacts of
drought the impacts of extreme
heat those the impacts of
extreme weather perhaps even
more harshly than Mexicans
living in urban areas Mr chair
representative small hi I do
agree I Representative a rural
district.
Thirty six thousand people in my
County and we.
We absolutely feel those impacts
you know we can't in every way.
But most of New Mexico is rural
and we I know I know that my
role my my colleagues in rural
districts also have constituents
that feel that impact thank you
Mr thank you Representative I I
think that comports with what I
see you know and
It seems to me Mr chair
representative that both
reducing the inputs that is
reducing of the emissions as
well as adding extra choices and
extra opportunities reliability
for transportation in this case
is an important goal that your
legislation will the out
positive outcomes will help
there Here Representative the
final thing
it seems like jobs associated
with this legislation hi they
focused in any one area of the
state.
Or are they more the
opportunities sort of widespread
Mr chair representative small
Those opportunities are all over
the state you we're all we
already have companies that have
that have been doing this kind
of work in your part of the
state you know I I know that we
had some conversations with Kit
Carson and in my district you
they see this as a benefit as
well and they can imagine more
jobs coming from coming to to
trials and the opportunities for
job all around the state office
which will increase the money
that we use it some of the
almost five hundred million
dollars of our budget so that
those those opportunities are
are statewide.
Thank you Mr the representative
and I appreciate this sort of
the point of and we've got sort
of a picture of of what's to
come the Mr chair representative
as you point out we've heard
that both testimony and sort of
noting where those jobs and
whether those jobs are in
Artesia whether those jobs are
in Milan as we look at sort of
things up and Escalante whether
those jobs are down into Indiana
county with real value bio fuels
and other transportation options
I appreciate whether those jobs
are connected to
our agricultural industry and
some of the waste to energy
opportunities that exist there
this will create jobs all across
New Mexico in a way that makes
New Mexico stronger appreciate
very much also the points
regarding just the pure health
and safety benefits that this
legislation proposes thank you
very much Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative smaller
to the monthly.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative yes.
So.
What kind of a broad discussion.
Not just what this bill does
fuel standards.
And in the
The options that would be
created we've had a pretty wide
discussion about things are not
this bill.
concerning EV's and.
And at different types of
electricity hydrogen at this
point we're talking about is for
electricity not for vehicles.
so
I I would try to the point of
this bill is the purpose.
Of this bill bill to try and.
Encourage New Mexicans.
To purchase if they are going to
be purchasing fuel.
A less a more environmentally
friendly.
If you.
If we is that correct is that
incorrect Mr chair
representative with the the the
the purpose is to.
Offer.
Fuels in this state that have a
lower carbon intensity but
that's that's one aspect and
purpose of this bill another is
to bring businesses to this to
this state and to enhance the
businesses that already exist in
the state that produce these
different types of low carbon
intensity fuels so thank you Mr
Representative that Mr chair
representative monthly and also
like for my from my experts to
weigh in fact Representative I
also had to Representative
comments that measurable these
weird I.
The this technology hello
energy and
Yeah that we are excited that
based on what we hearing from
the consumer research have you
done this is what thank.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and Representative I do agree
Representative consumers would
like this a lot of consumers
would like.
To have any building.
I think maybe we need to pass a
bill that car dealers should
give the navy to every poor
person that can't afford them
also yeah Mr chair R. Evey Bill
appropriates.
Mr chair not only the the I was
just mentioned Mr chair that
this is an easy bill it was
just.
It's not we're not giving we
parse dollars that comfortably
anywhere you to respect that's
exactly the point you just made
my point Mr chair in the
launching.
So Mr Chairman and Mr chairman
I'd this this conversation has
been very broad I would
appreciate a little bit of birth
to discuss all of the topics.
Today.
Will be on.
So Mister chair.
If the purpose.
Is to encourage different type
of fuel usage which is the
reason these are being brought
up Mr chair.
Currently.
Do you know how many refineries.
Mr chair and representative.
That blend fuels are in New
Mexico current.
Mr chair representative Andrea I
I do not know but I know that
they exist in New Mexico
To my experts knew how many
refineries.
blending fuels that fuels.
Chair Representative Montoya
I yeah I guess I would need
clarification which made by
blending fuel cell aware one
refinery she's the Navajo
refinery north teacher and then
there's a bio fuel refinery in
Stanley Park
I don't know what you mean by
blending.
So Mister chair for feels to be
end up at a gas pump.
It has to be bonded at a
refinery.
Mr chair and and the
representative
those are the two those are the
two in New Mexico.
Currently.
Blending fuels in New Mexico for
retail so.
So Mister chair and
Representative do you know where
the majority of New Mexicans get
their fuel from.
Are the sources of the
refinance.
Mr chair representative and Mr
chair representative Montoya my
expertise meets taxes so Mister
chair and Representative that's
correct the majority of the
fuels.
are coming from elsewhere.
Their transportation in mass.
Duction.
Is economic.
all right I don't get in San
Juan County and where you live.
Representative.
Those fuels do not come state
and they're not coming from
Texas come from Colorado.
People on the the the the west
side of the state or getting
fuel parameters all.
So Mister chair and.
Representative what I'm wanting
to get to today is.
Why the cost will go up in New
Mexico.
Besides the the cap and trade.
Model.
Which we've been in this cap and
trade.
It is.
There will be credits that that
are traded some some by and so
that's that's really if if if
that's if that's the model that
we're following up some people
will be getting credits and some
of them and some people can
purchase them from those who
have that that's the name cap
trade at it's not really a major
that's just what it is.
Mr Mr chair.
The reason the price would go up
if this is mandated across New
Mexico.
Is because communities that are
currently getting their fuel out
of state.
If this is mandated all of those
communities.
There's one of two choices.
Either.
So those feeling stations who
are getting their fuel elsewhere
if they continue to get that
same fuel from out of state.
We'll have to pay.
The tax they will have to pay.
To bring that in.
For Mr chair the other option is
that has to be transported from
a further distance likely not
through pipelines because they
would have to or they have to
build new pipelines because cat
it's not like you can next the
two of the same type doesn't
work there's and and there are a
number of pipelines but.
For that to happen Mr chair and
and Representative.
It will drive the cost up in
most of rural New Mexico.
And it there would be if Navajo
refining were to take this on
and decide to in order to
Start blending different fuels
folks in the area nearest.
That we're finding.
We get the benefit of being
close the refinery.
But if you're getting it out of
the provide readouts Colorado.
There's really only one option
because the cost of
transportation.
Because all products to go up
including if you'll just
transport by truck which would
likely be what what happened to
most of the communities across
New Mexico is being transported
by truck if it were coming from
one of the one of the New Mexico
with plans.
So there is no doubt no argue
that the cost at the pump will
go up in rural New Mexico and
it's not it's it's a and quite
frankly back home I I that's an
option my folks.
For for for go.
The.
If that happens.
That's not the only price that
goes up Mr chair and
representative.
Everything in rural communities
if you don't have a real.
It's coming in on trucks.
So if the cost goes up.
Even if it's as low as twenty
five cents a gallon.
Every item that comes in to a
rural area.
Comes in full and leave sept.
So you're not paying for
transportation for drugs into a
real community one way.
The prices coming in the the the
cost of that complete round
trip.
You can't put corn in a.
Or or if we or any other product
in the case in a tanker truck
that was hauling fuel it's going
to help you.
So that entire round trip is
added to the price of all of the
commodities that go to our rural
communities.
So it's not just the increase Mr
chair to the cost of fuel to the
individual who's just trying to
fuel their vehicle it is the
cost of every other consumer
item that is trucked transported
into a community where there's
not a right.
So Mister chair.
Representative.
This.
It's just an increase.
The local communities.
I'm Lester and Lester able to
opt out of this this will this
is they're not they will likely
not be purchasing.
Even if even if the Navajo.
Refinery in Artesia.
To begin blending fuels.
Even if they were to start doing
it there these these different
type fuels.
It would still be cheaper to pay
the fifty cent per gallon likely
increase.
And San Juan county inTaos
county it would be still less
expensive.
To purchase from out of state.
Then to have that product
trumped up.
So if the effort is to try and
take people.
To a.
A lower carbon fuel.
My suggestion is that in many
many rural communities in New
Mexico.
They still won't switch to the
to the to that fuel because it's
still be more expensive I've Mr
chair and Representative
I have a a newer vehicles and I
like to put a little bit more
expensive fuel and air just
because it can save me from
other costs down the road other
account issues.
the average person pulls up and
make the punch.
the the fuel that is the least
cost and it's not because they
wouldn't they don't prefer lost
premium for that vehicle they
would love to be able to do that
that's just not an option when
you're on a fixed income.
So Mr chair and representative
it does appear as if
This.
Effort
has.
Thanks.
And I'm I'm glad that the that
secretary from.
Environment Department is here
because these are concerns.
In rulemaking.
That have to be taken in place
of the folks in my community.
Average all right.
Search.
To fifty cents.
Difference.
Then the Albuquerque market.
And the reason is the product is
trapped in.
We did have refineries in the
area there was a refinery
western finding in Gallup which
is shut down for economic
reasons.
That means we are now getting
our fuel out of state in my
community in your community.
So so Mr chair.
The price will go up that is not
a yes and it's not market
conditions.
This is transportation costs
that are built into every call
every dollar.
That every gallon of gas.
Mr chair I I do appreciate
Representative Scott doing the
math but math is a lot simpler
than.
New Mexico.
Is responsible every year for
proximally forty million dollars
carbon emissions.
World missions are approximately
once again I'm rounding in both
instances about forty billion.
In carbon emissions.
Annually that's the world in New
Mexico if.
Every New Mexico the two million
plus that we have where to stop
the meeting alright.
Just completely stop at fifty if
we were just.
Two million people.
Out of the world at a New Mexico
not place them somewhere else
that there are missions were to
to be completely done away with.
That would be point zero zero
one percent.
Of the world's of tire carbon
emissions.
So what we're asking New
Mexicans to do.
As we go down this road and it
was mentioned that these are
states that that that this is
stand alone doesn't mean we just
backed every single item that we
are pursuing.
To the point that out that New
Mexicans and it it's zero Corp.
Two point one million New
Mexicans and that its zero
carbon.
That is point zero zero one
percent of the entire emissions
of the world.
For up for us to ask our people
to lead as the cost goes up Mr
chairman that is not what
they're asking for when they say
they want options they would
love to have.
Inexpensive options.
Even if this is zero Mr chair
and representative even if this
course at zero cost.
per gallon.
At the point of production.
The transportation costs are
real.
This just causes has been out of
control inflation.
Across America this last year in
our rural communities this just
adds insult to injury.
At the local level.
So it's.
The question really needs to be
asked when people are are are.
Our.
Encouraged.
To to do something different to
curb emissions.
They need to be asked at what
cost.
What dollar figure specially Mr
Chairman representative.
the the people want to extension
incomes the poor.
and by the way is the we we talk
about the
People who are affected the
most.
We were told Mr chair that that
when we went down the road ETA
and closures of of power plants
in my community that cost would
go down.
That was a that was a cheaper it
was it was more for.
Mr chair the same the same
request that Representative
Townsend asked of you that was
something that I asked of the
sponsors of the TA was.
That if it were to because of it
the costs go up with limited
costs to a certain amount
annually for a person on our.
And same thing happened there
was no agreement for that
because we knew the cost was
going to go up and it has
dramatically.
And I would say folks and and my
community.
Who lost their jobs and are now
also paying higher electric
rates.
Our our W. secretary.
And
the fuel source that that many
reservation the structure I'm
not sure if you're aware of this
are having to use to heat their
homes this call.
In a fireplace.
that's what's causing as.
That's what's causing unfiltered
coal being burnt.
Mr chair and representative I
would just ask.
For those folks.
Any increase in cost you think
that there.
That that that they really are
wanting to go down this road
costumes up Mr chair and it will
communities do you believe they
want to do this.
With that increase costs Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair representative you've
made a lot of really important
points that I I want to I want
to acknowledge I want to to let
you know that I that we're
hearing.
And that's why it's so important
as we go through this will
making process that this bill
allows that we're insuring that
the impacts in disproportionally
affected communities are not
what you believe they will be
that we're working to ensure
that that's not the case I want
to introduce before I get to the
answer to if I answer your
question which is probably gonna
have to remind me to do
There couple other really
important points I want to make
you know for in has this clean
fuel standards and they and they
import one hundred percent of of
their fuels there has been no
impact.
On the price at the pumps so I
think that's important to
address
We
Refineries like marathon before
they left New Mexico start a
long black bio fuels like it you
know I think that we're gonna
see how refineries making some
of these making some of these
tools that that we're talking
about
I just we I want to reiterate
that you know I I I don't
believe we don't share the same
view on the price of the product
we're not seeing that the data
doesn't support that that the.
Fuels the fuel prices are
increasing we do we just what a
great but we need to work that
that is not the case for New
Mexico and that is where it's
really important for for you
members of your community to be
participating in you know in the
the oil making process as well
so that we can sure that doesn't
happen.
In order to show.
Thank approach acting.
So Mister chair representative.
The goal is to eventually not
have available.
ETA officially this project for.
No carbon based fuels.
That is the reason I mentioned
early on
the idea of having to go to
electric vehicles.
They're not free that was
established I think pretty.
Clearly at the beginning of my
questioning.
They're not going to be made
free.
Singapore and fuels go away.
Eventually.
And the only answer is for
electric.
That is something that we're not
gonna make free to them hi
providers on billing of the.
Satcher's are knocking the
making those freedoms that what
that's an expense that is not.
I just think that they're
contemplating today.
Not a budget for that not of
their personal budgets so Mister
chair and Representative.
These decisions we make are not
made in a vacuum.
And.
The budget.
It's clearly not their worldwide
to make a difference our
difference if we stopped
emitting one hundred percent
today.
We do this one Senator and I'm
gonna make it one more time Mr
chairman you one minute Mr
Chairman
you know what the authority to
implement today.
Not recognize you.
Mr chair I still have the floor.
Montoya Mr Chairman wrap it up.
Four and I was wrapping it up if
you heard if you were listening
I was wrapping it up.
So Mr Chairman representative.
I do believe New Mexicans what.
To have a state lesser carbon
footprint that is of value the
house.
Taking away options and reducing
their quality of quality of
life.
For.
Impact worldwide on the issues
that were mentioned.
For the the the the the the
forest that was mentioned this
bill will not to fix that even
if we did all the things stacked
on top of each other they will
not do that.
In New Mexico.
Two small population.
The cost is too high especially
for the poor.
And for that reason Mr chair I
can not support something that
the budget is too low.
Just to punitive on poor people
and people on fixed incomes
thank you Mr chair.
Separado.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
Very interesting debate
lot of perspectives
Representative for chair.
Would you not agree that.
The United States is a
capitalist system.
Mr Mr chair representative.
I agree that capitalism is what
drives this country yes.
And Mr chair representative
So the markets
a change which we do not agree.
Mr chair representative but yes
and I'm just going to give you
an example Mr Chairman
representative and I do have a
point Mr chair
so the other day I saw someone
we care technician I thought
that I saw some weird Karia ten
issues that I really liked and I
thought those was the cost a bit
of money and I sure what those
instead of the one type up so I
I thought maybe I'll go out to
get a new pair technicians
correct has that ever happened
to you Representative
Representative route it happens
to be literally every day right
she would envy.
So Mr chair representative
is there any legislation right
now that's eliminating.
gas powered vehicles.
That we don't Mr chair
representative Representative
Rader I don't know the that
which is vital to the Senate
side the.
So Representative.
And Mr chair this particular
legislation is not eliminating
the use of gas powered vehicles
Representative and she's Mr
chair representative Recco that
is correct not.
Thank so Representative and Mr
chair and.
Through the market there are in
fact gas powered vehicles there
hybrid vehicles are clean our
vehicles your EVP vehicle so
there's a variety vehicles in
our market that not correct Mr
chair representative yes that is
correct.
and Representative and Mr chair
so I would have Bernalillo and
working as a city planner and
remember a time when our federal
environmental standards were
being violated on our freeways
and we have to make some
corrections
and thank I guess my question
would be Representative Mr chair
I think that the movement to
approve this
legislation.
Might help us to improve our
environmental standards and meet
part of our environmental
standards and in fact improve
for big city like Albuquerque.
Those standards.
Mr chair representative Abrego I
I I do believe that and there
are other environmental benefits
to having at the clean fuel
standard which including the
impact groundwater
Rules can be highly polluting so
having a wider range of lower
carbon intensity feels less
polluting fuels is is really
important for you to be all
kinds of of climate goals we
have an environmental goals that
we have.
So back to my earlier point Mr
chair representative
the market really is moving and
probably a direction of more
clean fuel and more
environmentally friendly
standards and it seems to me
like this legislation would do
that and Mr chair representative
when the market dictates
typically producers are going to
try to move in a direction to be
able to produce those ten issues
that people want to do not agree
with.
Mr chair representative right
Recco I want those ten issues
that that you want as well the
market conditions are you know
they're the reason why is that
yeah companies are not only
creating cleaner fuels and
different types of tools that
fuels but automakers are also
creating different types of cars
hybrid Evey
hydrogen lots of examples of the
market does you dictate these
I'm sorry new ways of doing
things so Mister chair
representative so we're not
precluding the use of gas
powered automobiles my they're
still available and they're
still on the market Mr chair
representative yes they are.
And
and finally.
Mr chair representative which
you comment on the.
And it says in the FY are also
and yes page three.
Concerns with regards to.
This.
Fortunately impacted
communities.
You comment on that please.
Why are.
HM.
It's set in Alice's from the
Office of the Attorney General.
I can give this to you.
Perhaps you're looking at the
wrong sort Mr chair thank you.
Politics.
Mr Chairman representative Greg
I don't I guess I don't really
understand the issues with this
but I want to let you know the
definition of disproportionately
impacted communities comes from
the sustainable economies task
force legislation
which.
I can give you the citation
issued like.
Nine dash fifteen dash fifty
eight
So it's it's it's been defined
in statute it's chapter that's
what we're getting that that
definition would you that that.
So Representative Strickler I Mr
chairman and representative some
of my colleagues have mentioned
that we would be negatively
impacting
just some of these communities
that are either lower economic
status or communities of color
and and so that is really the
crux of my question if this
legislation was approved.
How do you see that I guess
that's really the question.
Mr chair representative Borrego
I see.
Opportunities for supporting low
income communities communities
of color reducing health impacts
from
you know from the pollution from
dirty or fuels I see the
opportunities for job creation I
see the opportunities for New at
decreased cost of righty of
transportation fuels that that
they may be that they may be
using so that's it and budget Mr
chair also state review County
with some transportation
corridors I think that with the
transition to cleaner fuels that
companies are moving towards and
that will be encouraged by this
bill that those transportation
corridors by twenty five by
forty the communities living
next to roadways highways we're
gonna have the state's health
wise
in addition to.
We're really looking at
public health Mr chair and and
Representative the shaft the
feds would probably be providing
grants and loans to encourage
some of these cleaner fuels and
clean your vehicles in the
future if this were passed.
Mr chair representative Borrego
there there is a lot of money
available right now through the
Iranian other various federal
programs for programs like that
could support a clean fuel
standard in the form of tax
credits and and other requests
and I think it's important that
we put our state on the right
path to be able to bring those
funds those funds into the
state.
Thank you and Mister chair thank
you for bearing with me and in
fact I think and I it was
brought up that the refineries
in New Mexico are not there's
only two of them that have
blended fuels and we would have
to be quite possibly to other
states but in fact the market
when the market dictates
Refined Mexico may have to step
up and try to compete because we
are the nation's capitalises
side so Mr chair I think
I think it's important that we
talk about competition to get
those ten issues
Act producers are going to try
to step it up and I think that
these are important issues that
you know
while maybe in the short term
and you know we talk about the
short term and long term the
long term is that we eventually
transition to these these fuel
markets but the short term is
there maybe you may not be able
to get those ten issues
immediately so Mr chair thank
you and Representative thank you
I think I've made my point.
Thank you radio so we've been on
this bill going on two hours.
We're going back to
Representative Scott for a
brief.
Question or comment thank you
Mr.
Public health two simple.
Way to look into this.
According to credit.
Mr considerate.
Thank creating come out.
They can create one.
Must be purchased.
One of the conditions in New
Mexico.
You have to purchase he left
which which will have to
purchase the infrastructure to
create the legal.
Create jobs we.
They will have to change.
Mr Chairman representative what
will we say all.
Corporate credit cost.
Which
to me and it will be reflected.
The cost can look to the New
Mexico construe.
Mr Chairman.
This.
The loft the increased cost of
fuel.
New Mexico consumers slides in
the face of all the experience
on the west coast states British
the British Columbia we're these
policies.
It's simply yes Representative
the fact.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
Six.
Well All.
The disproportion checked
communities because.
They will all.
It was initially and that's.
Ninety eight percent.
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Going back to Representative
Townsend for second time.
Thank you Mr chair.
I I those on.
Our.
Right.
Office.
Their operations.
Prices.
Yeah higher.
The.
And.
And I think that is important in
the.
Yes.
We'll.
The harmful to many New Mexico
there are benefits I I I'm not
going to negate the fact that
there are
of the one hand you have the
benefit that almost.
fillable.
On the other in you're going to
see standards of living people
that live in New Mexico
deteriorate rapidly that is my
concern I am not one bit
concerned about refinery stepped
them up.
We'll tell you I just got a note
that the refinery and the.
At the refinery association has
never been contacted in in to
work on this bill.
So this is a collaborative
effort of all of the people.
This is an activist be all.
And and it is something that I
it hi the.
And Representative don't take
that as as I shut it to we're
all activists for some.
That's why we're representatives
if you have a you have a soft.
If you believe will make this
world a better place.
Money is very different I'm an
activist in the different areas.
And so I want you to understand
that.
I hope you look at it I hope.
You if you if you really believe
on increased costs yes I hope
you put our people on a level
level playing field with our
surrounding people and say we're
not gonna charge New Mexicans a
more fuel than any other
producing states and you pick up
as long as they're not
California and Arizona were
tardy fifty cent higher thank
you.
Is to questions all.
This is a tax.
Mr chair it is not a tax.
That.
It's a tax Representative those
taxes passed
They.
Yeah yes this tax.
Catalytic converters cars Tax.
Representative Ortez it's been
suggested the your bill would
increase faster down a thirty
sixty at their highest ever was
ninety cents a gallon.
Is there any evidence for that.
Mr chair the there is not
evidence of that.
Thank you is before taking
motion to the presuppose and
comments.
Mr chair up I will keep them
brief I I have heard your
concerns and I.
I knew that in the rulemaking
process we will yes this
concerns.
That is making works and
And we'll we'll get to the place
that that I think will make you
feel comfortable but this is
this is what we need to do right
now in addition to all the other
ways in which were reducing
climate emissions and also
taking care of our people at the
same time I think that's really
really important here and that
this bill paves the way for that
to happen in reducing costs and
providing more options for
transportation fuels reducing
carbon emissions and taking care
the communities that are most
affected.
Thank you thank you
Representative Ortez a
presenters Jane motions share
with.
The the the best the second.
But.
Representative Griego.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
Really no.
Wasters are the ana.
Yes.
Terry queen yes seven to for
the past seven for.
