Good morning, everyone.
Good morning.
If we could stop the
conversation, the audience,
please. Thank you.
Um, welcome to the House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources.
Uh, a couple, well, first, let's
take a roll.
Representative Abeda here.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, here.
Representative Henry, here.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
He
Representative Senator Cortez
here.
Represented small.
Vice and McQueen.
Here.
We have quorum. Thank you.
OK, um, uh, first off.
Uh, if you're here for House
Bill 222.
Which is fracturing fluid
disclosure and use that bill's
been rolled at the request of
the sponsor, uh, it will
probably be heard on Saturday?
Um
Which means we will probably
meet on Saturday.
Um, the.
Uh, the thing I don't know yet
about Saturday is
Uh, the speaker is threatening
to have a a floor session
Saturday morning.
Which is normally when we would
meet.
Um, I think the first session is
to do uh a public safety
package.
Um, and only a public safety
package, so don't know how long
that takes.
Um, and so we might end up
meeting after the
For session.
Um
Any questions about Saturday?
OK. Uh, we also, I just want to
say thank you to our sponsors
for our uh committee dinner last
night and also um I missed the
second half of our last
Saturday, uh, meeting uh when I
was presenting a bill. Uh, thank
you to uh Marco Gonzalez for uh
providing lunch.
Uh, last Saturday, so we had a
we had a nice dinner last night
with um.
Uh, the committee and uh many of
the people we work with.
Uh, and we appreciate that. Uh,
anything else, um,
From the committee before I
change my seat.
Fire.
He's in my toy.
I for one, am against meeting on
Saturday.
OK.
Yeah, and I, I don't even need
to take a motion on that, yeah.
Thank, thank you for your input,
Montoya.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
the bill we have for you this
morning is House Bill 257.
It is oil and gas will transfer
rulemaking.
This bill would allow the oil
conservation division to make
rules to uh put conditions on
the transfer of oil and gas
wells.
Um, the, the concern here is
there is
A general pattern of large oil
companies.
Uh, developing wells, pumping
them for a while, maybe the the
yield decreases.
They transfer them to
And mid-level company.
Maybe they refurbished so well,
maybe they pump a little longer,
eventually the yield decreases,
uh, they transfer it to a
smaller company.
Uh, the yield continues to
decrease and maybe there's even
an additional transfer to an
even smaller company.
And the concern is that as these
wells get sort of passed down
the chain, the financial ability
to
Um, cap and plug them at the end
of the useful life.
Diminishes
And so what this bill would do
would allow the oil conservation
district division to.
uh, adopt rules around transfer.
Um, this was part of House Bill.
Microphones are awful.
This is part of House Bill 133,
uh, last year.
Um
Uh, we broke up some of those
elements into standalone bills,
so uh I have 32 today and 1 will
be on Thursday.
Uh, and this is the first part
of that.
I'm joined today by Ben Shelton,
who's general counsel of the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Division, and if I
may, I'd like to turn over to
him to make a few more detailed
comments.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Madam
Chairman is the.
members of the committee.
big thing I want to clarify
about.
This legislation is all that
although this is a new authority
for the division.
This is, this does not represent
a particularly
Sweeping change in the way that
we are going to
Uh, conduct business in the
state with regards to the to the
oil and gas field. We do not
have at the moment the capacity
to impose a
Um
Significant limitation on most
of the wealth transfers that
happen because most of the world
transfers that happen don't
really require additional
scrutiny. Parties on both sides
are doing everything they're
supposed to be doing.
This is, um, designed to give us
the tools to go after go after
some of the what you call low
hanging fruit from an
enforcement perspective, which
is to say operators that
Probably shouldn't have the
wells they have now that we
would love to head off the
possibility of increasing the
number of orphan walls in the
state by.
I'm standing in some of these
interactions we
again, just do not see this out
of the gate as a um authority of
general application.
Um,
We'd welcome any questions.
Man, I would note there's a
committee of the 22 number on
the committee said is.
230604.1.
Um,
ma'am, chair of the committee
said just um.
Uh, I think just.
Tweet some of the language.
Um
It's substantially similar to
The uh the original bill, but
the
Um, because we were tweaking the
language and language that was
already being amended.
It's just cleaner to do a
committee.
Right.
We're going to go ahead and go
to the audience. Um, we're gonna
have 5 people from both sides,
so we're gonna start with
opposition. So within the
audience, um, if you have
opposition, raise your hand.
OK, and we'll have 3 of you come
up to the microphone.
You have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 member
companies.
Nimoga opposes House Bill 257
because it's a dangerous
precedent to allow the state to
dictate to who and what private
property can be sold and how
transfers can be made.
For example, if it transfer is
denied, does it mean that a
transferee lacks sufficient
financial capacity based on
known or project production. Who
does the due diligence at OCD.
Does the transferee have to
prove up its financial
stability.
Financial assurance is already
required. Is it only based on
production? If so, where is the
production? New Mexico, United
States, globally, what if the
company is new to oil and gas
but has other operations and
assets that give it financial
stability.
The language in this bill will
be especially harmful to small
operators who buy wells from
large operators when average
production volume is lower,
which keeps the wells producing
and earning revenue for the
state.
Preventing transfers from large
operators to small operators,
runs contrary to the OCD's
mission to protect correlative
rights and reduced resource
waste.
This bill assumes a small
operator is a bad operator, and
that is simply not true. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jim Winchester
with the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, and I
echo the concerns of uh Ashley
with Namoga, so I won't
duplicate those, but I do want
to stay just a couple quick
points, um, this bill does set a
very bad precedent and does
represent a sweeping change to
allow a state commission or
regulator to be involved in the
ability of an oil and gas
company to freely buy and sell
their leases and assets.
Um, for a regulatory body to
become involved in the financial
evaluation of a private company
is an alienation of real
property interests of private
parties and ads IPA concerns on
the part of private entities
financials, which are
confidential. It would further
cause significant delays in
mergers and acquisitions since
it involves a transfer and a
transferee and the very
uncertainty of not knowing.
When regulators can overrule a
deal will actually kill deals
before they begin, especially
for independence.
Finally, this will continue to
push operators to do business on
federal leases instead of state
lands, and that is a current
trend in industry in New Mexico,
specifically because New
Mexico's regulatory scheme is
already burdensome, costly, and
massively inefficient.
We do stand strongly opposed.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We respectfully oppose this
legislation.
You know, we don't try to
regulate other businesses being
sold in the state, and I think
that um
This is over burdensome. Our
biggest focus with the business
coalition is
Jobs
Business development and the
good of the people in the state,
and when we do something that
can deter from that, that's
problematic, not just for oil
and gas, but for every member of
our state.
We need to be cautious when we
implement policies like this.
I think it's unclear about the
requirements for the financial
assurance.
And it could disproportionately
impact smaller operators. We
value all operators, all
businesses, and all job
creators, and I urge you to say
no to this legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, member
of the committee, Mike Miller,
Premium Basin Petroleum
Association, um, most of my
points have been covered. I
would like to bring out another
point that has not been covered
by my colleagues, um, one is the
broad discretion granted to the
OCD raises concerns about
regulatory overreach and
inconsistent enforcement. The
bill lacks clear objective
standards for determining
whether a company has the
financial capacity to manage
well liabilities, such
uncertainty creates an
unpredictable regulatory
environment that will deter
investment in New Mexico's
energy industry and drive
business elsewhere. So for the
reasons already stated and those
I just stated, we stand in
opposition. Thank you.
We're going next to online. Do
we have any, if you raise your
hand if you're in opposition of
this bill.
All right. We have no none
online. All right, we'll go back
to the audience if you're in
favor of this bill and would
like to speak, we're only gonna
have 5.
A chair, members of the
committee. My name is Tanis Fox,
and I'm a lawyer with Western
Environmental Law Center.
We stand in support of HB 257.
HP 257 was part.
Of a larger reform to the Oil
and Gas Act that was brought
forward by the Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources Department
during the last legislative
session, as you heard from
Representative McQueen.
Welk was an active participant
in the stakeholder process that
led up to that reform bill
introduced last session, HB 133.
HP 257 clarrifies the plenary
authority, the oil conservation
commission and oil conservation
division have over oil and gas
operations in the state. The
bill will help protect the state
of New Mexico and its taxpayers
from the financial, human
health, and environmental risks
that can occur as a result of
transfer of marginal wells to
marginal operators.
It's well understood as
Representative McLean explained
that oil and gas wells have a
life cycle, and that at some
point during that life cycle,
production of the resource
begins to decline, and a well
becomes less productive and less
profitable.
It's well understood that these
less productive marginal wells
are sometimes sold off by
larger, more financially sound
operators to some marginal
operators, operators who may not
have the financial resources to
properly plug, abandon, and
clean up a well when it comes to
its end of life.
These are operators who may go
out of business, go bankrupt, or
who are otherwise not available
to properly close a well. In New
Mexico, it cannot be seriously
disputed that the financial
assurance requirements in the
Oil and Gas Act are not
sufficient to properly plug,
abandon, and close wells. HB 257
gives you a conservation
commission and the division the
tools to better scrutinize well
transfers.
All right, that is 2 minutes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Marion Lanai. I'm with New
Energy Economy and on behalf of
our 5000 members. I want to
strongly support HB 257.
Without this need, needed extra
grant of authority to the OCD,
we will continue to see the
shedding of rapidly declining
wells to insolvent operators who
do not have adequate financial
assurances in place.
And what does that mean for our
state? Not only do we have 1600
abandoned wells that are spewing
methane into the air and leaking
radioactive and toxic fluids
into our ground and surface
water, but an enormous inherited
price tag, currently estimated
at $8 billion and that doesn't
account for what has been come
to be known to be known as
Orphan wells in waiting. These
are thousands of more idle
wells.
The other huge area of concern
is that wells are currently
being transferred even when
operators are repeat
environmental offenders,
operators who willfully violate
the law and then transfer their
mess to ready to be bankrupt
shell companies. Please vote yes
on this bill and give our
agencies the needed tools to
hold corporate polluters
accountable for their mess.
Thank you.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Michaella Trujillo Hanniel, and
I'm here on behalf of Earthcare,
and environmental justice
organization
that supports community-led
campaigns to better our
environment and our communities.
We strongly support House Bill
257 because our community should
not have to suffer the
consequences and of industry
neglect and evasion of
responsibility. Children and
families, seniors, and other
frontline community members have
already been impacted by air and
water pollution from a abandon.
and poorly maintained oil and
gas wells.
These wells leak methane, polo,
groundwater and create long-term
health risks.
Yeah, industry continues to
dodge responsibility,
transferring wells between
companies to avoid
accountability. This is a matter
of fairness and environmental
responsibility. Our community
should not have to be left to
deal with abandoned wells,
leaking methane, and
contaminated water because
companies want to pass their
liabilities onto others. We urge
lawmakers to pass House Bill 257
and ensure that the oil and gas
industry is held accountable for
the damage it causes.
Thank you. Please try not to
repeat also when you, when you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Deborah Condit. I'm the
registered lobbyist for
environmental Defense Fund. EDF
supports this articulation of
OCD's existing powers to
regulate the transfer of oil and
gas wells. Too often, wells are
transferred down the value chain
to increasingly insolvent
operators who disappear and
leave the taxpayers with the
burden of well closure and
cleanup costs which can uh total
up to $150,000 per well. The
legislation provides examples of
circumstances where the OCD can
impose higher scrutiny on
transfers to protect the public
and the environment from
improper abandonment of the end
of life wells. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
Representatives. My name is
Lavin Johnson. I represent the
Center for Biological Diversity.
I think all the commenters in
front of me have spoken
compellingly to the reasons for
this bill. I just want to add
some numbers, um, as of
yesterday, there are more than
73,600 wells in the state of New
Mexico, and nearly 3200 of those
are inactive. All of those more
than 73,000 wells will at some
point during their life cycle
become marginal wells that have
the potential to.
It unplugged for years leaking
methane and other pollutants
into the environment and around
communities. This legislation is
necessary to ensure that those
wells are plugged promptly.
And that the state is not left
on the line for millions of
dollars. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we'll go online,
Zoe.
Zoe, did you want to speak on
this bill?
Uh
We'll go back to the presenter.
Anything else? sponsor?
Man, sure, um.
Just in response to some of the
comments I want to point out
that.
You know, this isn't a typical
industry.
So, you know, we say this is
such a bad president.
If the corner grocery store.
Change his hands and ends up
shutting down.
The state doesn't get left hold
in the bag.
And this is a known.
pattern of these these wealth
transfers to smaller and smaller
operators.
And you know, were not talking
about a single well talking
about multiple wells and so the
resulting liability to the state
can be substantial not only to
cap and plug the well, but
Also potentially for
environmental mediation if need
be.
Um, you know, this is just uh a
prudent measure.
To make sure that we hold oil
and gas operators accountable,
you know, and make them play by
the rules, which everyone
understands what those rules
are.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Thank you. Um
And do we have any questions
from the committee?
Representative Murphy, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee.
Um, reputative chairman, uh.
Queen and the
Sorry, Ben Sheldon.
An expert. Thank you.
Um, it won't surprise anybody in
this room that I have really
serious concerns about this
bill.
Um, I'm concerned about the
impact of the industry. I'm
concerned about the impact to
the smaller producers.
And I'm also very, very
concerned about the impact.
Uh, to state revenues and
production.
Um, I have maybe 6 general
questions and I'll move into the
bill itself.
And
Um, maybe the easiest way to
move this along is to let you
all know how, what I see this
bill doing and seeing if if
we're on the same page. Um, I'm
paraphrasing the, the short act,
but it basically says that you
want to collect private data,
both production and financial.
You want to regulate the
transfer of real property. You
want to limit the transfer of
real property.
All in an effort to minimize
state financial exposure to
potential PNA wells and
reclamation Act.
Is that a fair summation, uh,
Madam Chair Representative.
Expert.
Madam Chair, Mr. Murphy, I
would.
a little more uh real property
means it's pretty specific thing
I think they're not always
necessarily.
Um, madam, I'm sure if I could
uh push back on that a little
bit, representative and expert,
uh, mineral interests are
considered real property in the
state of New Mexico, correct?
Madam Chair, representative,
would you then agree with my
summation or uh summary that it
is, it does.
Madam Chair representative, the
minimum interest doesn't always
get transferred, sometimes it's
just a matter of um operatorship
which can be.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, um, Mr. Sheldon,
actually, uh, under the standard
joint operating agreements that
are entered into in these types
of properties operator cannot
assume operation without owning
an interest in the property.
That's by contract.
Pretty standard in the industry,
I believe you agree with that?
Madam Chair, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, rep representative, um.
Why take this approach to
providing far-reaching authority
to um the division.
I believe your testimony is that
it's not transformative.
That, um, it'll have little
impact on the way the uh
conservation division.
Implements its policies.
My question is why did
Um,
Manch represent Murphy to.
Protect the state and the
public.
Madam Chair Representative, I
understand that, but is it's not
a solution in search of a
problem.
Me and Murphy now.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
Um, I note that.
In the FIR it lists very little
fiscal impact uh to the agency.
Yet there are far reaching
authorities and responsibilities
that are being created here.
You believe that the uh fiscal
impact to the agency will be
minimal.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
we do.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Mr. Sheldon, thank you, um.
I note that a few years ago that
this committee heard hearings on
bonding limits.
Um, the amounts went up
substantially.
Uh, why is this not enough? And
it because it seems to me to be
one of your your many tools, the
toolbox.
Why, why are the why are the
bonding limits not currently
adequate when they were advised
just a short time ago.
Madam Chair Representative, are
you, are you referring maybe to
the penalties, the bonding
limits have not been raised in
adequate for even.
Basic remediation where we are
capped at a blanket bond of
$250,000 for virtually any
number.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
and expert, uh, but those were
increased uh by rule within the
last 6 years or so, correct?
Madam Chair and Representative,
those bonding limits are set in
statute.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Mr. Sheldon, thank you.
Um, I also know one other tool
in the toolbox, um, and I'm
wondering how your agency is, is
taking advantage of that.
Uh, through a variety of acts
that were passed may have been
IPRA, or excuse me, IRA or it
may have been one of the others
that was passed during this last
administration.
There are millions, hundreds of
millions of dollars allocated to
plugging and banning and
reclamation activities. It's my
understanding that the state of
New Mexico has received some of
those monies continuing to
receive them.
This, together with the bonding,
doesn't appear to be adequate.
Why not?
Man,
Murphy first, uh, you know, I
would just like my extra to
answer that question, but
It's unclear to me why we should
expect the public to pay for
that so when you're talking
about public funds to uh
abandoned wells.
You know, I think that should be
borne by the operator. I think
that should be born by the
industry.
I'm sorry,
did I cut you off?
Madam Chair and Representative,
the
Ones that we received from both
the New Mexico and the United
States or federal tax dollars
are um insufficient to the task
at hand but based on the number
of potential orphan wells that
need to be plugged and that is
without getting into the um
environmental
needs as well, which all come
out of the rec fund and and
associated funds. Madam Chair,
Mr. Resent representative
McQueen, excuse me, um, Mr.
Sheldon.
Um, back to, uh, person
McQueen's Point about the public
paying for this doesn't the
industry already pay for this
through the oral conservation
fund.
I note that
Last year some $137 million was
collected through the OC through
the oil conservation fund paid
by industry.
fund is dedicated to plugging
and abandoning orphan wells and
reclamation activity.
Yet, your agency only utilized
about 27 million, about 20
million of them.
Um, lots of that was for staff
work. Some of it actually went
to plug wells.
There was over $110 million that
was left unspent.
So if you have 80% of one source
of.
Uh, of revenue.
That you're not spending.
On a problem that many have
testified as a severe problem.
And why are additional resources
needed.
And they are not taxpayer
resources.
They are industry uh payments
made to the OCD and.
Say in New Mexico to solve this
very problem.
could you
Enlighten me a little bit, uh,
Madam Chair Representative
Sheldon.
Me, cherubs and Murphy, um.
First of, I think we're mixing
concepts here, OK, this bill
doesn't provide additional
resources. This bill, uh,
attempts to
Um
Assigned responsibility to those
who should be responsible, and
that those are the owners and
operators of these wells,
pardon me.
The uh uh I'm aware of the the
conservation fee and that
significant portion of that fee
has been historically diverted
to the general fund. Uh, there
was an effort last year in the
Senate to change that. I expect
to see similar effort uh this
year there have been discussions
about that.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that answer. I, I
guess my point is is that it
seems the industry is providing
an awful lot of.
Um, but I'll move on to my
specific issues.
Um, so let's see here.
Going and I'm reading from
230604.1, and I'll go to this
2nd page, a.
3
It looks like the
addition from the
Original bill was the inclusion
of
Right at the top, including
digital records maintained in
automated data system.
And my question is,
Um, why do you believe the
division needs access to that,
um, and what, what is, what is
the purpose of that addiction?
Madam Chair Representative right
now, the division collects data
from the operators directly on a
monthly basis for a variety of
things.
Um
The vision in the.
Medium and long term someday is
to both relieve operators of
that burden of doing that
self-reporting. It also provides
the division with better, more
accurate, and real-time data
feeds. Right now there's a trend
in the industry to move towards
um.
Remote monitoring and control of
wells so that you can.
actively monitor and manage an
oil field from a control room
rather than.
Um
just more efficiently from a
control room. This is creating a
fairly large data feeds that it
would be more efficient from a
regulatory perspective and from
an operator's perspective for
OCD to have access to. This is
not, uh, this is something we
would require a fairly
significant capacity shift for
OCD, but this is effectively
table setting for that for that
change.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr.
Representative Mr. Sheldon with
a fairly large capacity shift
that would, would, would, uh,
impact the fiscal impact to the.
Is correct?
Madam Chair Representative, this
was a uh shell of the division
was required to operate this way
and required to collect data
this way, then yes, it
absolutely would. This is um.
Like most of the other elements
in the in the enumeration of
powers of permissive authority
for the division.
I didn't share representative
Mr. Sheldon, thank you. Um, I
take it that what you're really
talking about are skatta
systems, is that correct, Madam
Chair Representative moment,
yes.
Um
Madam Chair, uh,
and, uh, Mr. Sheldon, are you
aware that there are numerous
different types of skat systems
across all sorts of different
platforms are utilized by
different companies, but the the
the system that accompany my
like mine might use could be
very different than a large
company, how would you integrate
all of this sat system platform.
Madam Chair Representative with
some difficulty, I imagine, um,
which is why we anticipate that
moving in holes to that kind of
a monitoring, monitoring system
would be a capacity change for
the division, Madam Chair, Mr.
representative Mr. Sheldon, um,
the way it works now, the way I
understand it is is that what
you want to do is get to a
common platform, which we
achieved by recording our
production to the OCD in a
format that you've required
allowing commonality across the
industry.
Therefore, anybody uh with uh
access to public data can
actually access that data right
now.
Where what you're suggesting is
you would completely up in that
process.
I understanding that correctly?
Madam chair,
Representative
Yes, the idea would be to
transform our our reporting, our
reporting and data management
process.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
Mr. Sheldon, thank you. I'd like
to move into some specific
questions.
With respect to the bill, I'm
gonna be jumping to page. It
looks like uh there may be some
minor changes between page 2.
And 5, but it looks like they're
mainly clean up. And so if I
could, I'd like to go to page 6.
Um, item 2.
The item 23 just simply uh
repeats what we talked about
previously, uh, regarding the
different platforms.
There's nothing new intended I I
take it, Madam Chair
representative.
Sheldon, just a repeat of what
we.
Madam Chair Representative,
23 I'm sorry, number 23 be page
18.
Yes, Madam Chair Representative,
that's a conforming, page 6, 18.
Thank you.
Um, OK, so now I'll go to line
21, number 24 to regulate the
transfer of oil and gas wells,
including limitations.
Um, A, the transfer or.
And then it goes on.
Later to talk about how it could
be limited if there was some
sort of enforcement action or
transfer or or transferee was
out of compliance. And my
understanding that provision
correctly, Mr.
Um
Madam Chair Madam Chair
Representative, yes.
So, um, Madam Chair
Representative Mr. Sheldon.
If a transfer or meaning the the
the seller of the property or
the transfer of the property is
out of compliance.
With a provision
But the transferee is not.
That
That, uh
Arrangement could be denied by
the by the.
Right
Madam Chair Representative
conceivably, yes.
Madam Chair, Mr. Representative,
uh, representative and, and Mr.
Sheldon, I find that
counterintuitive.
Perhaps you can explain to me
why I'm wrong on this, but if
you have, let's just say,
An operator that may be out for
even administrative reason but
for whatever reason they're out
of compliance.
Wouldn't you want
That property transferred from
that operator to an operator
that is not out of compliance.
If this provisional.
Essentially says you deny that.
I don't understand why you
explain that to me.
Madam Chair, Representative, um.
The question fundamentally is,
is less about who is in or out
of compliance, and it's about,
it's more about resources.
That's what we look at.
Uh, if the party if the
transferee, for instance, was
um.
Taking on liability for
remediation and cleanup.
That the resource that they
didn't appear to have resources
to be able to manage. That's a
situation where we would look at
that interaction a little more
closely in the scenario where
the transfer or had open NOVs or
had open compliance issues in
the transferee didn't.
Uh, and we were confident that
the transferee had resources to
actually manage some of the
responsibilities that come with
well operating in the state.
I can't imagine why the division
and under that scenario what
Madam Chair, Mr. Representatives
representative and Mr. Sheldon.
I understand that that may be
your intent, but that's not what
this legislation says.
I would direct you to a one,
subject to one or more notices
of violation.
2 enforcement action or 3 out of
compliance.
So the goal may be what you
state the legislation doesn't
really do that unless I'm
missing something, Madam Chair.
Representative Mr. Sheldon.
What am I missing?
Madam Chair, Representative.
That the OCD has discretion in
these matters.
has an understanding of how
industries operate in the oil
field. We would not limit
transfers where we thought that
the transfer had the potential
to
Put the wells in the hands of a
better resourced operator.
I guess I'm madam Chair,
representative and, and Mr.
Sheldon, I think the key word is
is is, right? It's a and it is
right before number one, so.
Um, we're getting into what is
the definition of is?
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, I think the more
important word is on page 2 line
18. OK, and that word is may.
Thank you, madam chair, uh, Mr.
Sheldon, I appreciate that.
Um
I'll just make this as a
statement. It just seems that
you could prevent transfers from
the buyer has done nothing.
Um, I'll move on to my next
question.
And
Oh, yes, this is the other thing
under under a.
Or an entity that owns more than
25% interest in the transfer or
transferee.
How do you determine that when
there are
When these are in many cases
private companies.
Madam Chair and representative,
I think we would like to compel
that disclosure as part of the
Uh, financial investigation
transfers.
Madam Chair, Mr. Representative
Mr. Sheldon, so let's talk about
that a little bit.
We talked about production
records.
Financial records.
Ownership records.
If you compelled that.
have the authority to compel
that.
Does that now make those private
company records, public and
subject to IPRA.
Madam Chair, not necessarily.
There are a number of exceptions
to the IPA and reasons that we
can withhold the information.
Madam Chairman Representative
Mr. Sheldon, uh, perhaps she
could go through those
exceptions to assure.
Uh, owners of private companies
that that those guardrails and
protections actually exist.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
sorry I'm not prepared to
perform that analysis for me
today. We didn't.
have that.
Madam Chairman, uh,
Representative Mr. Sheldon, uh,
if you're able to compile that
or you have something please
provide it to my office.
Most Chris.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative McLean, um.
Mr. Sheldon, I wanna, uh, go
back to
Uh, the ownership and the
properties and the entities and
as my experience and
understanding.
That in almost all
circumstances, when you look at
a well, a lease, or what we may
sometimes call properties which
are accumulation of leases.
There are multiple working
interest owners.
And there are operated, there's
the operated work, uh, the
operator who, as we discussed
earlier, it has to have like
contract and industry practice,
a ownership in the well, so
there's real property associated
with him together with the
operatorship.
And then there's also
non-operated working donors, and
these are people that will own
anywhere from a small fraction
to essentially really large
interest.
properties.
So if a well, I'll try to get to
my question. Um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Rep
Representative and, and Mr.
Sheldon.
If
If you, if the division denies
operatorship.
And
That impacts the financial.
Viability of that well.
And those non-operated working
interest owners are injured is
the division liable for that?
Madam Chair.
Representative, I think that.
All of this falls within the
sort of the police power
generally.
Of the division, I think that uh
the same.
Question could be
you,
you can ask the same question of
when the division, for instance,
or even say the land office is a
um
leaseholder for a lot of these
compels plugging of a well that
uh.
For, for any reason, so I think
the dynamic there is, is, is
fundamentally the same. I think
that.
Um
That question of liability goes.
Much more broad than just this
bill, Madam Chair
Representative, and Mr. Sheldon,
I would, I would think that the
police powers could.
And once again I'm not an
attorney and you are, but could
be extended to the operator, but
how would you extend them to a
non-party that owns an interest
in the world that has just been
damaged.
By by
by a decision by not a decision
of the division.
Madam Chair, I just, I think
the, the utility, the use of the
regulatory authority of the
division is not something that
generates.
Liabilities to the state. This
is fundamentally minerals that
are um
that are owned by owned by the
state and occasionally.
Um, occasionally other parties,
but that just is not a, that's
that type of liability just does
not.
Exists now for actions that OCD
takes in the, in its regulatory
capacity.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Mr. Sheldon, with all due
respect, the reason they don't
occur now is because the
authority of the OCD is limited
primarily to technical matters.
And uh financial contractual
suggestion.
You not agree with that?
Uh
Madam Chair representative, I
think that's, that's certainly
correct, uh, you know, you're,
you're talking about a level of
financial analysis that
The OCD currently doesn't do, I.
I would say that that is
probably something that would
Um, that lack of capacity is
something that would preclude
the scenario that you're
imagining from happening. I
don't think the OCD is in a
position to engage in FTC like
investigation of uh.
of finances and financials. I
think fundamentally what we are
looking to do here is
Ensure that um the actual sort
of property, the actual owners
of, of some of these properties
and the um parent companies of
some of these operators are.
Uh, we're talking about here
that we're not opening ourselves
up to a shell game with
subsidiaries.
Um, and I'm sure, uh,
Representative McQueen, Mr.
Sheldon, um,
I've got about 6 more questions
here and I want to move on, but
I would suggest to you.
That, um,
That's exactly what this bill
does is it creates the OCD FTC
department or the OCD credit
analysis department, not a role
that
Your division has has has
typically played.
Quite frankly, I said, I believe
it sets a dangerous precedent,
but I'll, I'll end my monologue
and move on with my next
question.
Um, B.
Um, this would be on line 5,
last page, the transferee fails
to provide adequate financial
assurance.
As required.
Can you explain, is that
typically adequate financial
assurance is typically meant a
bond.
Are you talking about something
beyond that?
Madam Chair, representing, my
apologies.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Financial Assurance can take a
lot of different forms.
Sometimes it's a bond, sometimes
it's a letter of credit, so a
lot of our larger operators just
have insurance policies for
these kinds of things.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
Mr. Sheldon, but
Adequate financial assurance
could then mean any number of
things you say bond, credit
facility, could it be just a
sense of assurance of financial
capability.
It'd be that broadly construed.
Madam Chair Representative, no,
no. So Madam Chair
Representative, you're talking
about typical financial
assurance instruments, letters
of credit.
Insurance something like that
something that that that a
A financial institution or
bonding institution might issue.
Mountain chair, yes, cash.
I'm sure.
Representative, uh, it could
also include that.
Madam chair, I.
I'm not sure if we would accept
cash in an envelope.
But I mean perhaps is a, is a
certified check or some other.
In other words, you're not
talking what I'm trying to get
to, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, Mr. Sheldon.
is you're not talking about
some, anything beyond the credit
facility. You're not talking
about uh individual inside the
division having uh feeling like
there's adequate financial
insurance. Some nebulous
concept.
Madam Chair, no, this is a
fairly common practice in the
industry.
Madam Chair Representative Mr.
Sheldon, thank you on the sea.
The transferee lacks sufficient
financial capacity.
Based upon known or projected
production.
Could you define please for me
financial capacity known
production and projected
production. I how the division
would define that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, the
ins and outs of exactly how
those definitions would get
applied is probably best left in
the rulemaking. I can tell you
how we look at it now.
Um, and right now the tools that
we have to look at.
Financial um capacity of a
transferee are fairly blunt
instruments with fundamentally
what are you producing now?
Are you currently managing?
Um
say 20 wells that produce less
than 50 days a year. Those are
examples of things are the
volumes that your wells are
producing low enough that is
reasonable to believe that you
don't really have the cash flow
to manage the assets that you're
looking at. This is, this is
what we do now.
Uh, we heard a concern about um.
You build the divisions.
Ability to look at, say, wells
in Texas or get a more complete
snapshot of the financial health
of a given operator.
That is what we would like to
get here. We would like to be
able to solicit more information
than what we simply have on our
reports if there are.
Um
With the portfolio for an
operator is a lot more
diversified and a lot larger
than we can see, I think that we
would like to see that
information and evaluated as
part of as part of a transfer
request, we would hate, of
course, to slam the door on
somebody.
Um
We shouldn't based on their
financial capacity.
Madam Chair, uh Representative
McQueen, Mr. Sheldon, um.
So it's an overall view if I
understand the process, the
division looks at it based upon
an average.
Barrels per day per well.
Or or some other methodology
determined that these wells
might be approaching economic.
Therefore, a certain amount of
financial risk, my understanding
that, Madam Chair,
Representative Mr. Sheldon,
correctly.
Madam Chair Representative, we
look at a lot of factors that's
certainly a big one.
Madam Chair, Representative Mr.
Sheldon, what is projected?
Madam Chair, I think, and
representative, that's a piece
of information that we would.
Love to be able to compel, I
think that, uh, again, what we
have right now is fundamentally
backward looking based on uh
production reports that we get
from operators if projected
production, if the operator, uh.
On the, you know, this is, this
is restricted to the transferee
if the transferee has
information that is relevant to
their financial ability going
forward, I think that'd be a
great thing to share with the
with the division, I think that.
Um, fundamentally what we are
concerned about here is, can you
operate your asset I think
projected production going
forward based on whatever
information that operator is,
uh.
Is able to share with us is
certainly a salient point to
that.
So Madam Chair, Mr.
Representative and Mr. Sheldon.
What you're really talking about
here, probably uh reserve and
economic.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, I.
I, I don't want to get too far
out in front of what we might
ask for, Madam Chair,
Representative Mr. Sheldon, but
once again this might be private
corporate information that once
again would be turned over to
the division would be subject to
to IPRA, correct?
Again, Madam Chair and
Representative, that is, um.
An open question if analysis can
get complicated.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, Mr. Sheldon.
It projected production include.
Untapped zones within a field or
Madam Chair Representative, uh.
Potentially, I think he was
getting the rulemaking, that's
the area where we would start to
figure out the contours of what
sort of information we can
compel from an operator in order
to uh determine their sort of
future financial health well.
Not putting the OCD in the
position of having to handle
information that it shouldn't
have.
So Madam Chair, uh
Representative Mr. Sheldon, if
An explorer had an idea about a
new, a new idea about expanding
production in an old field, the
submission of that data would
actually telegraph.
Uh, to the world with his idea
is, is that correct? And
couldn't that have a chilling
effect on exploration,
development and new resources
and the revenues that are needed
by the state going forward,
Madam Chair Representative, I
just don't see the rulemaking
process coming out that way.
Um
A few more questions, Madam
Chair, I representative Mr.
Sheldon, um.
Be here. Let me see how I can.
Let's go on to D, the division
issues a written finding.
Um, and it seems to me that
that's pretty subjective.
Of for the purposes of
mitigating risks to the state.
Um
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Mr. Sheldon once again, isn't
that really uh
Opening up the division to
litigation by multiple parties
on multiple levels.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
any multiple parties on multiple
levels are free to sue the
division today. Um, I, but I
think the openness of the
division to litigation is a
product of what the division
does and
Who's out there and how much
money they have for attorneys,
Madam Chair, I'll, I'll, uh,
I'll finish my question. um I'm
Chair Representative Mr.
Sheldon, uh, free to, to get
this right, free to so the
division today. uh uh immense
cost to the taxpayer.
Madam Chair, Mr. Representative
McQueen.
Uh
Sheldon, thank you.
Thank you, Representative is
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and Mr. Sheldon.
Representative Murphy is truly
the only expert on this panel
and so my questions will be a
little bit more simple and, and
clarifying. So my first
question, Madam Chair,
Representative, and Mr. Sheldon
is beginning with page one
starting on line 19.
And I'll give you just a second
to get there.
I noticed that oil conservation
and of the energy, minerals, and
natural resources department is
crossed out and that seems a
little bit more generalized just
to have division there. So could
it indicate a possible shift in
power.
Ma'amir and Cortez, that's just
clean up language. The division
is defined in the statute.
So there's the that's just the
legislative council service
striking excess verbiage. OK, so
Madam Chair Representative and
Mr. Sheldon, we are still just
talking about OCD, right?
Ma'am Che represents correct.
OK, wonderful. Moving on to my
next question. So the next
question I have, Madam Chair
Representative is compliance
with natural gas capture rules,
they could be a moving target as
the regulations evolve. So does
it make it more difficult for
companies to predict transfer
eligibility.
Are are you referring to a
section of the bill or is this a
more general question?
Could you repeat the question
please?
Madam Chair Representative.
Compliance with the natural gas
capture rules could be a moving
target as the regulations
evolve, so could that make it
more difficult for companies to
predict transfer eligibility.
Um, men chairs and secrets, you
know, of course, as regulations
evolve companies, you know.
I have to evolve with them and
comply with them, um.
To the extent they're connected,
I, I suppose so, but.
Um, I, I don't think um it, it
injects additional uncertainty.
OK.
So Madame Chair representative,
just to clarify, this is
rulemaking.
On top of all of the rules that
we already have.
Ma'am chair representative
Cortez. This is specific rule
making dealing with the transfer
of these wells. OK.
Um, my concern is always the
economic and the fiscal impact
and this disincentivizes the
whole oil and gas industry, not
just the smalls, but also the
bigs and just a reminder to
everyone in here, the locals own
these small companies and they
live employee feed and educate
in our cities and not just my
city and Lake County, but 49% of
the state's budget. I just
wanted to say that before I go
into my next question.
Um, the OCD.
I'm realizing would need to
track violations, financial
standings and compliance records
for every potential well
transfer. So, Madam Chair
Representative.
This would require more
resources and staff, does OCD
have that?
Madam Chair Representative, are
Enforcement of this provision
will scale with the staff that
we have.
Um
We, we don't think this requires
more staff now because with this
tool, we will again, as I
mentioned in the opening
statements, sort of low hanging
fruit operators, uh, this will
allow us to.
Um
Keep wells out of the hands of
operators that are most
problematic based on information
that we have in front of us
today. OK, and those that
information or the rules won't
change mid-game, Madam Chair
Representative Mr. Sheldon.
It just seems so vague.
Madam chair, the process for us
setting our rules is.
Um, fairly exhaustive. We
noticed rules, uh.
It goes all in our in the Chino
building is flooded with
attorneys and there is evidence
presented cross-examined, it
takes months, uh, so.
It is a moving target to the
extent that year over year you
may find yourself in slightly
different requirements, but
these are, uh.
These are requirements and
processes that the industries in
the practice of complying with
not just in New Mexico but
nationwide.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative and Mr. Sheldon
that moving target also concerns
me, but I'll go ahead and move
on to my next question. Madam
Chair Representative, and Mr.
Sheldon will current contracts
and agreements be disrupted if
transfers that were previously
allowed are now restricted.
Madam chair
No, this is a forward looking
bill.
Oh, OK. And it will not impact
existing contracts, Madam Chair
Representative and Mr. Sheldon.
Madam chair, no, that's just not
how the division is.
this.
Thank you so much for
clarifying, Madam Chair,
Representative, and Mr. Shelby.
have some more questions. How
much do marginal wealth in New
Mexico account for the total
state production.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's gonna depend on how you
define marginal wells, um.
That number is very small
compared to overall state
production. I will tell you most
of the production that we have
is coming from uh major
producers I didn't know if there
was something defined in the
rulemaking.
Ongoing rulemaking about the
marginal walls, no.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
not sure what ongoing.
you're referring to
the new bills being proposed.
The new rules, but I'll move on
to my next question. Madam Chair
Representative Mr. Sheldon, how
would the OCD determine if the
transferee lacks sufficient
financial capacity based on
known or projected production to
manage some of these liabilities
associated with the oil and gas
wells.
Madam Chair representative that
would be a uh
Process of investigating what
information is publicly
available, as well as lising
additional information from the
operator.
OK.
And I think I have one more
question for you, Madam Chair,
Representative, and Mr. Sheldon,
how would the OCD be able to
collect transferee financial
information.
And this might have been
something that Representative
Murphy covered without
subjecting such information to
the inspection of the Public
Records Act.
Madam Chairs representative,
those are safeguards that we
would look to the rulemaking
process to install.
Oh, OK.
And then I do have one more
question, and Madam Chair
Representative and Mr. Sheldon,
wouldn't there be serious
Privacy concerns, so if the OCD
were to try to perform an
accurate financial capacity
analysis.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think the answer is the same for
that question. That is uh uh
this visits that are an issue
that we would address that we
frequently address our
rulemakings. OK.
Alright. Well, thank you so
much, Madam Chair Representative
and Mr. Sheldon. That concludes
my questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and the expert.
Uh, I've got a couple of quick
questions that that I kind of
want to understand.
Uh, what specific criteria will
oil the OCD used to determine
when a transfer should be
restricted or denied. Can you
help me understand that?
Uh
Madam Chair, represented the the
criteria are listed in the bill.
Um.
Subject of open enforcement or
notices of violation of the Oil
and Gas Act or open enforcements
under spills and releases, which
is a water.
Uh, out of compliance with
natural gas capture reporting
requirements, which is our
methane waste rules.
Um, as well as the, the criteria
in uh B, C, and D on on page.
Those will get refined as we get
into the rulemaking process to
implement this.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. I
guess what I'm really asking is
on the financial piece, you, you
keep saying, are they
financially stable, I guess is
where we're headed for this.
How do we determine whether
they're financial.
Financially stable.
We have the expertise in OCD
right now to determine if
company's financially.
Madam Sheridan representative to
an extent, yes, we, um, as we've
covered there are levels of
financial analysis for the
solvency and health of these
companies that we don't have the
capacity to get to and probably
wouldn't pursue, but it is a
type of information or category
of information that we would
like to be able to solicit um
the legal team does enforcement
for OCD with uh would solicit
information and uh.
and utilize it to the extent of
their understanding, so this
again would not be.
Too deep of an analysis, um, but
it is a category that is
relevant to develop to
developing and ascertaining
whether or not an operator is
going to be able to operate
those wells.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative and expert.
I guess what the other, I'm
gonna add on to that question
then.
Most of these folks that are
going to be buying these wells
from companies are most likely
going through a financial
institution in order to get a
loan to do that. So are we
saying the OCD will be able to
look at their financial
documents closer than the
financial institution that
thinks that they're worth the.
Well, I guess anytime we give a
loan, it's worth the risk that
this company to actually be able
to perform what they say they
are.
Madam Sharon representative,
we're interested in more than
the entity's ability to repay a
loan.
We're interested in their
ability to remediate, reclaim,
plug and abandon properly, um,
these are things that go past
the creditworthiness of an
individual borrower for whatever
sum they're borrowing.
Thank you, Madam Chair, but you
say you're interested in more
than a loan, but it sounded like
quite a few times that you've
said as they're financially
stable or we don't want these
marginal companies, um, which to
me marginal when you're saying
that, uh.
You're referring to the fact
that they might not be able to
once, once, and I think you've
sort of said that.
Once that they have completed,
they're not gonna have the money
to actually do, do the cleanup,
that's what you're saying, is
that correct? Adam chair, an
operator is looking to buy a
bunch of wells that it doesn't
have the money and won't have
the money to clean up, then yes,
we'd be very interested in that.
Wouldn't the I Madam Chair,
wouldn't the financial
institution that's giving the
loan, take that into
consideration.
Madam Chair and Representative.
I don't know that it will.
That's I think part of the
disclosure that we are that we'd
be looking for.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
from there, is there going to
Madam Chair Representative, is
there going to be an appeal
process, um, obviously,
If, if y'all are going to
determine, and, and, and I think
where I'm headed with this, I'll
just toss it out there right
now, um.
You've stated a couple of times,
the companies that probably
should not have the wells.
Uh, the low hanging fruit type
companies. How are those low
hanging fruit companies
determined? You, I'm, I'm sure
financial disclosures, which is
going to be an important one
according to what you've said so
far, Madam Chair.
Um
If they have any violations, no
matter what types of violations
they have, even if they're just
clerical error type of
violations.
So, how do we determine those
marginal companies,
Madam Chair and um.
We are not looking to kind of
create a brand new category of
marginal companies or whatever
of companies that we are going
to deny transfers to, we know
right now.
You should not be taking on
additional wealth.
joke I make is you can look at
our press releases over the last
3 years and get a pretty good
idea of the list that we're
holding in our head, but.
Companies that are the subject
of administrative compliance
orders where they are.
In the process of abandoning or
uh we are sort of limping them
along trying to prevent them
from going completely bankrupt
there is not the practice of the
OCD, for instance, to um use the
penalty process to try to put
anyone out of business. We would
always rather operators continue
to operate their wells.
Or plug them and abandon them.
That is the, that is our ideal
scenario, and so we work very
hard with operators, even
operators who are operating
really at the margins, uh, to
keep them.
Uh, operating and moving along
but those companies that you can
think of as being on sort of
life support with the division,
um.
We don't think should be adding
more liability in the form of uh
potentially complicated uh
plugging in abandonment and
environmental remediation
liability.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, have we ever
seen in the oil and gas
industry, what, what you might
consider a marginal well become
a very productive well in the
future.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So with,
with that answer, when we're
determining these companies, how
do we know?
I feel like we're targeting an
industry.
That could be on the cusp of new
technology, um, new
possibilities to where that well
that you're worried about today,
but actually become very
productive tomorrow, but because
we have not allowed them to
continue to move on because of
some criteria we've created.
We've now taken that well out of
production, um, and possibly
plugged it.
Madam Chair and Representative
kind of appreciate the support.
That's a very good argument for
why we should be expanding the
categories of information that
are submittable to OCD and that
we might consider when
evaluating transfer requests.
Madam Chair Representative,
well, thank you for thinking I'm
headed towards support cause
that's definitely not the
direction I'm headed. Um,
because my, I think where I'm
drilling in on that is I, I
really have an issue with when
we say that an industry, uh,
could possibly you've got low
hanging fruit of marginal wells,
those marginal wells probably
could be sold we've seen it a
number of times where
The Majors might sell it to uh
as, as my.
friend from Lee County
Representative Senator Cortez
said to a a local small company
a New Mexico company, but then
they've also gone back to the
majors once those become
producing again.
So I, I'm afraid that we've kind
of messed up.
How the oil and gas industry
kind of has functioned for many
years.
On going from very productive
and maybe a little more
marginal, very productive to and
I have a hard time with us
determining what marginal means.
I guess that's where I'm zeroing
in on.
Madam Chap representative, I
think that the um
The bill that we are considering
right now doesn't preclude the
scenario you just articulated.
Uh,
The
Again, the authority here is
permissive, so the OCD has
Staffed with men and women who
fundamentally generally come
from this industry and are under
a mandate to continue producing
for the state, so we're not.
Trying to necessarily shut in uh
a lot of wells that have the
potential to continue to
produce. Again, we're um looking
at
Things that we can do that are
Fairly obvious to the division
right now to keep
Um
many millions of dollars of
liability off the state books.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. The other
question that I'm going to sort
of, sort of move to is, has
there been, uh,
Consultation with the industry
and stakeholders, anyone else to
try to see how this bill would
affect him and or how we could
make this bill better.
We started the process of
consultation with stakeholders
and industry groups in August of
2023.
Uh, on basically this concept of
found its way into House Bill
133.
last year in the 2024 session.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. Can
you help me understand what some
of the discussion was.
I'm sure, I'm hoping that the
stakeholders were, were both
sides of this, of this argument.
Can you help me understand some
of the arguments in that
stakeholder meeting.
Madam Chair, most of the
arguments in that stakeholder
meeting did not involve this
provision of the bill. Um, most
of the arguments against this
particular authority for the
division I heard about 30
minutes ago.
This uh the the negotiation or
the the discussion around a lot
of the components in House Bill
133 from last year, um.
Centered primarily on other
components in the bill this uh
along with the bill that we may
here next is we're considered
relatively noncontroversial
components.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, so in your
stakeholder meetings were
Small, small industry or small
operators, large operators, were
they in your stakeholder
meetings?
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
Madam chair. So in those
stakeholder meetings, large
operating, small operators,
nobody objected to this bill.
Or had comment
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I'd have to go back and consult
some of the notes from some of
those meetings. I'm sure it came
up, but uh.
The
Most of the conversation was
about other issues.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
be very interested in what came
up in those meetings. Um, I've
heard from, from quite a few
industry folks that.
Obviously have, and as you heard
today, have serious concerns
with this bill, so I would be
interested in those stakeholder
meetings. What came up if you
would. Thank you.
Um
A couple other quick questions.
You've kind of already discussed
this to a tiny bit, but could
this bill open the state up to
legal challenges from companies
claiming overreach.
Or inconsistent applications of
this.
Bill
Madam Chair, not to sound like
my school professor again, but
anyone can sue anyone on
anything at any time. Um, I
don't see this view, this bill
as opening up particularly new
avenue of liability the division
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert, and I
understand anybody can sue at
any time. I guess where my
question is, is if a company
feels like this is being applied
in fairly or impartially either
way.
Could that open us up to more
litigation to say why.
Was this company allowed and why
is this company not allowed?
Madam Chair Representative that
would be uh I think open to
appeal primarily to the Oil
Conservation mission before uh
going to court.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
I think why, why that it's a big
concern for me is it feels like
there's a moving target in here.
Um, and we're not sure exactly
what, what, where this is gonna
land, what, you know, I always
hear.
Again being the new guy
sometimes legislative intent,
um, sometimes I'm a little
afraid of what we think is
legislative intent and then what
actually happens in rulemaking.
So, um, I.
That is one of the big fears I
have is, how is this applied,
um, and could there be winners
and losers chosen through this,
this particular.
Madam, I'll wrap up right there.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative is
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, representative, um, McQueen.
Mr. Chairman, um,
I
I'm concerned with a lot of
subjective language.
That's in here.
Um, on, on page.
Uh, 7.
Um
We use the term uh provide
adequate.
Financial assurance.
Um, I also see here sufficient
financial capacity.
And then, uh, we have, we have
another term there which is
rejected production.
That, um, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman is, is, that is my
biggest concern with this.
Is there really are no targets.
There really is nothing
prescriptive.
It is very, very subjective.
Um
In particular,
On page 7
Where we're, we're adding a word
here that doesn't exist.
On page 2
On page 2, the division shall
require financial.
Assurance condition for the
performance of the rules.
But on page 7, we add the word
adequate.
Which
Changes changes, uh,
dramatically, I believe the
application becomes very
subjective, and I, I believe
that is why.
Uh, many, many folks are, are
talking about how
That would open us up to much
more legal action just because
Of what appears to be
subjective, if it's more
prescriptive.
I think that that is.
Uh
Essentially keeps us from
litigation. I, I think the
subjective nature of this. So
could you please, uh,
Uh,
If you could, um, Mr. Chairman.
You could
Explain
These terms and and why, why
we're using those terms
adequate, sufficient.
Rejected
Maner Risa Montoya, um.
I think those kind of terms are
Uh, common in the law.
And there they used commonly
when you're describing a
situation where it's not um one
size fits all.
Um, so it's kind of like the
word reasonable.
You see reasonable everywhere,
um, adequate reasonable.
Um
Sufficient
These companies come in
different shapes and sizes, you
know, so we can't say, you know,
in language here, we don't want
to say financial assurance of at
least $500,000.
That might be too much for some
and too, too little for others.
So it's, so they use words like
adequate. I mean that that'd be
my take I like Mr. Shelton to
answer the question as well.
Madam Chair, Representative
Montoya, I think in this context
act which just means financial
assurance that is compliant with
the rule.
Sorry, and Madam chair to
clarify the rule governing
financial assurance.
So Mr. Mr. Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Chairman, um, Mr. Shelton.
Currently the rule.
Pertains to what's
In statute now, which just says
financial assurance. Does this
adding adequate?
For determining, doesn't that
change?
It dramatically.
Madame Chair Representative No,
the division determination of
the adequacy of financial
assurance is bound by the
statute and the rule.
So then, um, Madam Chair, um,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Shelton, then
why add this language?
Why, why a
What appears to be completely
redundant.
Except for adding the word
adequate.
It seems if, if, if, if the
point, Madam Chair, that you're
making uh Mr. Shelton is that
It goes to the rule concerning
Financial assurance now.
I have that line if it's not to
then make it subjective.
For future rulemaking that we
have no idea what that would
look like.
Ma'am shares and so yeah, I, I
think what we're looking at here
are uh
Criteria for rules, specifically
relating to transfer.
So it's a separate analysis when
one of these roles is
transferred.
Um, there are existing rules, as
you know.
Uh, for operation, this is a
different uh point of inquiry. I
agree with that, Madam Chair,
and, and Mr. Chairman.
But because we are adding this
in, it makes it a moving target,
whereas if we just use the same
language.
And placed it in here for
transfer.
We would have used the exact
same language rather than adding
in something that is very
subjective.
So I, I, I, I think that is why
Um
Uh, there's such a concern
because it does appear with a
moving target like that that uh.
It it really the, the level of
subjectivity goes up
dramatically.
Um, as it is now.
Uh
Financial assurance is defined.
Um, there's a, there's a dollar
amount and if you can reach that
dollar amount.
Um
There would be nothing and if
and and Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, if that same language
was in here that you just had to
Either get a policy.
Uh, whether, whether it's
bonding capacity or whether you
get an insurance policy, um, to
be able to provide it, um,
financial assurance, adding
adequate.
Changes it dramatically, that,
that, that does make it
subjective, whereas currently it
is prescriptive.
Um, so, um,
I, I'll, I'll move on.
Um, but
I would like to
This goes to
kind of the discussion that
we've had other, other members
have brought up.
Uh, the.
Uh, question of whether or not
OCD has the expertise.
To determine
If a if a company
is financially viable.
If they have the ability to
perform.
And
I believe this is another area
that opens us up to litigation
because if they can prove that
they were able to have financial
assurance.
Under the original definition,
And if
Uh, a company is
Uh, if a business is able to
say,
Under, under every
non-subjective.
Concern
We're able to
Uh, comply.
We're able to perform under
those rules.
And then
The division comes and says, we
disagree.
I, I don't know how that would
not increase litigation.
In particular, my argument would
be
What expertise does OCD bring to
the table.
Concerning
Uh, financial.
Professionals, uh without
That without
OCD
Going out and hiring financial
professionals who could then
Um
Make a determination of
viability, I have no idea what
grounds OCD would stand on.
In a court proceeding.
When, when a.
Business could
prove that they had
The, the, the money lined up for
this, separate from
Other
Holdings they may have other
production they may have. Let me
see want to respond.
Man I I tell you a couple of
things first, um,
It strikes me that a lot of the
The opposition to this bill is,
is coming from.
Concerned that OCD would abuse
its authority.
And I don't think, I think they
have a track record of not doing
that.
That's certainly not the intent.
So I
If OCD was acting arbitrarily.
You could see them, but that's a
good reason for them not to act
arbitrarily.
They don't have a history of
acting arbitrarily.
don't have the intent to act
arbitrarily in the future.
So in terms of, you know, fairly
applying.
regulatory authority. I, I don't
see that as opening them up to a
bunch of lawsuits.
Um, because I don't expect them
to abuse that authority.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
Um
Yeah
3
I think there is a concern about
OCD being able to uh
Uh, abuse authority when you
give.
Authority without any
guardrails, there is always a
chance for increased abuse.
So, uh, and Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, um,
I believe that just goes hand in
hand with government. Um, we,
you give too much freedom
without guardrails.
Uh, we've seen all over the
world that abuse takes place. It
all depends on who the
individual is sitting in that
seat, whether or not.
Abuse takes place.
So
Uh, projecting
Past history onto future
performance.
Um, I, I don't believe we can do
that. I think that is exactly
why we come in and we make laws
with guardrails. I, I, laws
without guardrails.
Definitely put us in a position
for future abuse. So to your
point,
Yes
I am concerned with OCD future
abuse, based on
Um
Let's just say maybe even some
predetermined thought processes.
Um, you look like you want to
respond and, and, and I will go
into my next line of questioning
based on what I just stated.
So ma'am and Montoya, the
guardrails are in place and it's
the legal system.
So, so OCD decisions I I believe
can be appealed to the Oral
Conservation Commission, those
administrs in the administrative
decision can be appealed to
district court. There's the
arbitrary and capricious
standard.
There's
Um, but that mechanism.
And that exists here and
Um, you know, so because we have
judicial review.
We have this guardrails in
place. So, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, so you, you don't have
the similar concerns that we
have, that there's no expertise,
there's no
Financial expertise.
OCD currently.
To to be able to administer this
and, and I'm gonna refer to some
of the statements that were made
earlier.
But it doesn't appear as if
you're concerned.
That that expertise doesn't
currently exist there.
Ma'am Cherus and Montoya, I, I
believe that uh OCD has the
expertise to evaluate the
financial health of the company.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and that is why I think
Statements that were made.
Uh, during this deliberation.
Were
The intent
is not to go after the healthy.
But
Uh, I heard that, uh, we're
gonna go after low hanging
fruit, the worst performing
companies.
Companies that are on life
support.
Companies that obviously
Uh, or don't have.
Uh, the, the financial means.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, that
sounds
Somewhat subjective, it sounds
somewhat as if there are
Already uh businesses that exist
that maybe are on some sort of a
uh
And pardon the term, because
this is not meant to be
specifically this term, but kind
of on a, on a, on a list or a
target list.
Of
Of
Companies that OCD.
Already believes.
Should be
Limited
That's what concerns me.
Because if that's the case, just
from the discussion we've had
today and if I were one of these
companies,
I would feel like I would take
Conversation that was had today
and I would litigate the moment
that I was denied.
Because it sounded as if
There's a predetermined list.
Of folks that are businesses.
That
Uh
Are, are out of favor with OCD.
Would you like to respond?
Men cherish him onto you, I
would be surprised if there was
a list.
That being said, I'm sure the
oil conservation division is
well aware of companies that
have a history of noncompliance.
So
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
And that's why I'm, I'm
concerned that this is really
not
About their financial ability to
perform or to be able to provide
financial assurance.
Um
Madam Chair
I, I believe this is why.
We're not hearing from OCD.
We need this many FTEs so that
we can have people who can
Then go out there and evaluate
these deals.
Cause I don't, I don't, I'm not
sure it's about the deals. I'm
not sure it's about.
Ability to perform financially.
Um
I, I, I would assume taking on
something like this.
There would be a whole division
under OCD that would be uh able
to then
Do a
FTC type of investigation.
Into whether or not
The company is, is viable.
I, I don't believe.
Uh, the information that is
provided here is enough to deny.
The word, the, the language
here.
is
Uh
Provide adequate financial
assurance.
Uh sufficient financial capacity
and
Based on known or projected
production, which is, which that
alone is a big moving target.
I am very concerned.
About granting this type of
subjective.
Authority to any.
Division of government.
Um, and, and, and Madam Chair,
Mr. Chairman,
You stated earlier that
The reason that
This is important is because
The state is on the hook, and I,
and I'd like to point out.
Besides financial assurance that
we require.
Through bonding, through uh
insurance policies.
But
You, you stated that it
shouldn't be on the back of the
public.
To
To ensure abandoned wells, but
the reality is,
Oil conservation fund has been
in place for years.
Just because we took that money
and then put it into the
General fund
doesn't limit the fact that
those dollars went to this fund
for this purpose.
Um, I, I'd be very, very
interested to see.
For the amount of time that this
fund was in place, the dollars
that were collected here that
were then diverted to the
To the uh
A general fund, I, I would not
see those as public dollars. I
would see those as dollars that
were contributed by the industry
for this very purpose.
So madam chair. I, I cannot
support this legislation in part
because we have mechanisms in
place.
guarantee financial assurance.
We have a fund that's been in
place that we have misused as
the legislature to pay for
everything else other than this.
We do this as well, uh with uh
dollars that should go to the
road fund. There's several
things that, that, that I think
you and I agree on, uh,
elsewhere where those dollars
need to be directed for the
purposes that they were taken.
And until we uh uh
Exhaust
All avenues to make sure that
financial assurances are
correct, is correct that the,
the oil conservation fund is
going to the purpose that we
have taken that money from.
Uh,
Until we exhaust that, I am very
reluctant for us to be put, to
put government in place in any
industry.
To say
You know what? I know you can
get a loan for this, but we're
going to deny it anyway.
I think that is very, very
precarious, and I'm, and I'm not
sure that that would stand up to
to.
To legal scrutiny. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you Representative Nexis
Representative Small.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair and Mr. Chair, um,
First, Mr. Chair, in terms of
sort of the, the problem in, in
the
sense of
Uh, violations we're seeking to
address. Is this more forward
looking, or are there some
examples that uh really help
guide this legislation.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, the application
of this would be forward
looking, obviously the um.
These examples that have, have
guided this, um.
Yeah, there are.
There are multiple, there are
companies that.
Uh, as a, as I mentioned
earlier, are under
administrative compliance
orders.
Um, to try to avoid them from
going bankrupt right now, uh,
that are the type of companies
that we, um.
We try to apply this, apply this
towards just sort of um.
Where we can
Where the division feels like
they can confidently project
that we are growing the risk to
the state significantly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Chair and, and Mr.
Shelton. Um,
OK. And obviously, we're at a
time of sort of rapidly
increasing production or or I
guess.
Were through a time of rapidly
increasing production,
continuing to increase, although
at a slower rate.
Um,
Is, is it sort of that a lot of
the new wells and sort of their
Future state that are that we're
most focused or just
Overall, yeah, is it a certain
class of well,
Uh
Mr. Madam Chair, Mr.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, I
think that wells that are
getting drilled today are
getting drilled to the
specifications of um.
Things like the methane waste
rule to say nothing of current
technology. Those are not
generally the ones that we are
most concerned about, I think
older wells with um.
You know, uncertain casing
integrity, older equipment, uh,
those are the sorts of wells
that we um.
And to identify as, as higher
risk.
Uh
Which is not to say that those
would necessarily sort of
restriction, it's sort of a
combination of is it a risky
well and is it a risky
transferee or um is it a risky
sort of transaction?
OK.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Mr. Shelton. That's
helpful, um.
The
Going through sort of the new
material, obviously a great deal
of this as chair, you said.
A great deal of this is not new.
The new, uh, really starts on
page 6 of the substitute.
Um
Going through their uh
23.
Seems the new edition there
seems like it's focused on
Is, uh, let me ask this, is oil
conservation division,
automating, and is this meant to
sort of meet the automation that
the industry is doing and also
the oil conservation division
is.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think is doing is a, it's a
little generous. I think that we
would like to have.
The authority to do this, and I
think that this language in
there, um, on page 6, line 18,
that's sort of subsection 23 is
designed to provide a signal to
everybody that um this is a
direction that the division
would like to move in, um, this
is, there's a certainly a
capacity concern Representative
Murphy able to identified a lot
of the challenges with going out
and collecting this sort of data
today, uh.
But you know, this is, again, as
a regulatory body, OCD is by its
nature, extremely conservative
in its application. The plenary
authority into the Oil and Gas
Act is.
Very, very, very broad. It is to
regulate all things, all
mannerisms, uh, with 3 with
regards to this to this industry
and so when the division is
going to do something different.
Uh, the preference is always to
have statutory authorization
that is clear to have gone
through collaborative process
with stakeholders and
For the legislature to, to
identify that. So I think that's
part of why this language is in
there, there's a question of,
well, could no CD do this
tomorrow? the answer is.
Maybe, but again, as a very sort
of conservative minded regulator
there is always a preference to
have very, very ironclad we.
statutory authority.
Got it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton, um, and then going
through the, the, the next
pieces really quickly, um,
first, it seems like the focus
is on uh uh
Uh, companies who are, who are,
um,
who have violated the Oil and
Gas Act or sort of are subject
to enforcement actions. Do you
have a sense of sort of what
percentage of, of companies that
is, or maybe you could you
provide that to us? Madam Chair
Representative, I can certainly
get that to you. I don't want to
provide you with a misleading
number as some folks in the
industry are have noted, you
know, we issue notices of
violation from everything to
major spills, major releases and
significant environmental impact
down to um kind of what you
think of is more like your
speeding ticket, so.
Um
I think the the.
The question is of those sort of
actions, which one would sort of
hit the threshold of of risk
versus which ones are more
speeding tickets you signage is
deficient on a reporting
requirement things of those
nature, Madam Chair, Mr.
Shelton, Mr. Chair, I, um, thank
you. I think that's helpful. I
think additional clarity around
that. I can well understand the
in the intent and perhaps the
need, but sort of that
differentiation because there
may be
Like you said, sort of the
speeding ticket versus the
egregious violation. There's a
broad difference there. And to
put things in statute, um,
The um
I guess
Moving quickly ahead, um,
to me seems sort of like a Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton,
it seems quite broad and at
potentially open to more
interpretation in future
administration.
Um
Madam Chair, to the extent of
the entirety of the Oil and Gas
Act is open to.
Different interpretation again,
the plenary authority in the act
is extremely broad, so this is a
narrowing and clarification. So
with, with that caveat, sure,
yeah, absolutely, future
administration can apply this,
um.
As they as they would see that.
OK. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Shelton. Um.
Then sort of that understanding
more and perhaps looking if
there are ways to clarify more
on 24A.
So that it's um
You know, it's in this case,
sort of the example of the
speeding ticket doesn't inhibit.
The ability because Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton.
Uh, operators taking over wells,
perhaps in the future
repurposing wells that are sort
of maybe a combination of
traditional production, uh,
maybe take, maybe Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, and Mr. Shelton
taking over wells to start doing
things like carbon capture use
and sequestration.
Those would be areas that it
seems like we want to have the
ability.
And
Testing how those would fit
within this new, within this
sort of enhanced authority, get
some feedback from uh OCD on.
Uh, how we could work there.
Is that something, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton, we could
For to get a little bit more
information about.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
of course, um be happy to engage
in that process. I, I think the
only thing I would flag is that
the alternative is a transfer
hypothetically is denied all the
uses that you, uh, allude to as
well as the potential use of uh
company coming in and and doing
a work over project on wells and
buying in an active oil field
that applies just as easily just
as easily if the site is simply
plugged versus transferred to a
risky operator that's going to
abandon that dynamic is not
precluded.
Even if a transfer is denied.
Um, what is, uh, it's actually
potentially enhanced if you're,
if you're thinking that you
would like a well work over
project or or carbon
sequestration or geothermal or
any of those things, that is
less likely to be able to happen
on a well with, for instance,
gigantic environmental liability
and a huge amount of remediation
that needs to happen
environmentally, so if we can
prevent that, we actually
enhance our ability to go back
into an active or plugged well,
uh, and, and apply.
I work over project or or any
other use, so we are.
We're we're growing the, the
potential tail lifespan for for
alternative uses for wells in
this way.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton, thank you. That, that's
helpful understanding it and,
and
And it, maybe it'll take me a
little bit more time to
understand that maybe there are
opportunities to sort of clarify
or
drive towards that. It's
helpful. I think the
That life and prolonging,
extending.
That life
And um while mitigating against
the risk is sort of the balance
where
And you and
And, and private, the private
ways that we can enhance that
are great, Madam Chair, and ways
that we really fundamentally
inhibit that.
Um, I think our, I'm very, I'm,
I'm more cautious now about like
that.
Um, so look forward to hearing
more. And then, again, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Shelton.
The, um,
Again seems broader and perhaps
less.
I, I struggle to understand the,
uh, you know, maybe could use
refinement.
Uh, or at least I'm asking that
question. D seems, I struggle a
bit more with. Thank you,
Representative is Representative
Abea.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and Mr.
Sheldon. I appreciate you
bringing this issue to our
attention and providing a
potential solution through
financial assurances, um, as you
know, my district is fairly
large and if anyone understands
an industry coming in extracting
and leaving, it would be me and
the things that are left in our
backyard, literally.
Um, and how that impacts us. Um,
I specifically appreciate your
willingness to take on the task
of more regulation and ensuring
that taxpayers are not footing
the bill for clean up, um, and
with that said, how much is the
state currently paying for the
clean up?
Uh
Madam, chair, and Representative
of Eden that that is a moving
target.
Um, we pay millions of dollars
out of the direct fund. Right
now, the average cost is just to
plug it in in a well under the
contractors that are available
to us in the statewide price
agreement is about $125,000.
Um
That is not including
environmental so if there are
groundwater concerns or if there
are concerns around
Any other environmental issue
that tends to spiral the cost. I
just, we just had a uh
environmental project yesterday
uh that I was looking at that
just passed the $10 million mark
in terms of the estimates.
For its remediation.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and Mr. Sheldon,
and that's 10 million for 1
site.
Madam Chair, that's correct for
one pet and then a couple
100,000 for another site.
Couple of 100,000 just for the
down hole, um.
Just for the downhole plugging
in abandonment, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, and Mr. Sheldon,
I appreciate, um, my committee,
they're very knowledgeable in
different areas and I, I
certainly enjoy their
perspectives, um, and earlier we
had heard from Representative
Senator Cortez where she
highlighted the amount that this
industry is bringing to the
state and then we heard from uh
Representative Montoya about the
general funds and I, I hope I
understood this correctly, but.
he had said,
There's taxpayers that are
paying into the general fund and
that's their purpose, and I
respectfully disagree that we.
Oh, OK. Then I will retract
that.
So what I'm, what I'm asking for
is best practices then best
practices in the industry, um,
and where I'm coming from is
that
Where in this is the industry
saying we want to do our part.
You know, Madam Chair and
Representative, I would say that
most of the operators and most
of the production in the state,
so the dollars that are flowing
into the general fund, the
conservation tax and other.
Your other means are from larger
operators that.
Uh, drill.
Operate and plug wells that
never.
Across our desk, uh, I would say
that's the majority.
What we're talking about here.
Um,
So I don't want to.
Create the impression that the.
Overall operation of this
industry is intrinsically part
of this problem. I think that we
are able to isolate the
liability to the state and to a
very few actors and those are
the actors that.
Um, we would like to apply some
additional scrutiny too. I mean,
I think you'll hear as much
frustration from OCD as you
will, I think the industry would
would echo it that the operators
that are not doing the things
that they know and everybody
knows they're supposed to be
doing or dragging the name of.
Uh, the producers who are
driving revenues to the state
kind of dragging it through the
mud, and I think um we would
like to get a handle on that and
start curtailing some of, some
of that activity in particular,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative and Mr.
Sheldon, and that's my concern.
I, I want to have some buy-in
from the industry. We have all
agreed here that it is highly
profitable industry that has
been a significant help to fund
so many issues across the state.
However, I'm concerned that I
don't hear.
The the buy in from the industry
to say yes, we understand that
this is also um a problem, and
this is how we want to address
it and when reading this, I, I
do share some of some concerns
that Representative Murphy, my
good friend to the left of me
has brought up and I understand
that he feels that it is a far
reach, yes, my, my suggestion is
why not make it a contractual
obligation between the parties
that's reviewable by.
OCD
Why not put the burden back on
the two parties initiating in
the transfer to say, you sort
out who's gonna clean it.
You litigate it among yourselves
as long as it's in your contract
when we and that could be uh.
point that is reviewed when
you're approving the transfer.
That way the state is not
burdened with enforcing it, and
it goes back to the parties to
litigate who will clean up.
Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative, I
That is a creative
interpretation. I, I would point
back to the very conservative
nature of the interpretation of
their enabling statute by the,
by the OCD as a regulatory body.
They do not, um,
To in shorthand, they do not
color outside the lines of what
the rules authorize with the
statute authorizes, so uh that's
certainly a creative solution.
I'm, I'm not even sure that.
This
Um
Legislation
As we have it now would
necessarily require OCD to put
that into contractual terms
because those are private
parties fundamentally.
Um, so that, that's an open
question, but um
That is certainly the type of
activity that we would love to
see uh the industry take, take,
uh.
A onto itself.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and Mr. Sheldon,
I agree, yes, they are private,
however, the provision of at
least identifying cleanup
initiatives and the respect for
the environment of how you first
came to it or how you plan to um
extract from it and then leave
it, I think needs to be a
necessary part of.
The review of transfer because
it does have, there's
responsibility there, there's a
responsibility that.
That and a duty that we owe to
the citizens of the state, and I
think that it should be
included. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative McQueen and Mr.
Sheldon. Representative
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
I, um,
I have a number of questions.
I've certainly benefited from uh
the questions that, uh, folks
have asked.
Before me, so I will certainly
try not to repeat questions.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
um,
And uh
Mr. Shelton, um, can you let me
know uh which operators, um, you
discussed this bill with prior
to its introduction.
Madam Chair, I would.
Say that the contents of this
bill go back to August of 2023
when the discussions around
House Bill 133 from 2024.
Began and that included a fairly
broad spectrum, including the
various trade associations and a
number of operators who
about leaving somebody out but
certainly you can.
Imagine kind of the majors.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Shelton. I appreciate
that. I think last year when we
were discussing house bill 133,
1 of my major concerns at that
point in time was that I felt
there was, um, a lack of
engagement, uh, particularly
from smaller operators at the
table.
Um, and, um, in my questioning
with um.
Anyway, um, I expressed my
concern at that point in time.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative and Mr. Shelton,
um, despite the fact that there
were discussions.
Beginning in August of that, um,
year, this is a bill that has
been introduced this year.
Um, and so specifically my.
concern is whether or not
In the drafting or review of
this.
If
Um, smaller independent
operators that um.
Where their primary focus is to
take some of the to purchase
wells from larger operators, if
they were incorporated in the
discussions because I think that
their business practices, um,
that.
Smaller operators go through
that are not necessarily
reflected in.
how this bill would work in
practice.
Uh, so I just wanna confirm,
Madam Chair.
Mr. Shelton, that for this
specific bill.
There were no discussions with
our smaller independent
operators. Is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, no,
we did not go through the same
process in the development of
this bill that we did through
Hospital 133 last year.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Mr. Shelton. Part of
the reason, um.
That I
I have concerns about how this
bill may be um.
How it may
Sort of it's practical
implications.
Um, that I don't.
feel are
I think how it will
Work and practice does not
necessarily match.
What happens in industry
currently.
Um, and I think my, um.
Colleague, uh, who is a, you
know, practitioner in this
field, asked a lot of questions
that certainly allude to that.
Um,
So Madam Chair, um,
Representative and Mr. Shelton.
I think
One
Issue specifically, you know, I,
I think that there are a number
of ways that we could perhaps,
um, narrow and refine some of
the language to really
Focus in on the intent.
Of
The bill, which I think is an
important.
piece of
Both ensuring that.
Our state continues to produce
oil and gas in a very
responsible manner. Um,
Sorry, Madam Chair, um, and
representative.
I guess I, I don't need to
provide. I'm happy to provide
specifics offline. Um, but I
think
My concern, and I'll leave it at
this, is that
Mm
We can have a
Bill that works to do what.
The agency.
wants to do to remedy certain
situations and make sure that
there is a responsible
mechanism.
Um, I think we can do that in a
way that also fits with the
practical realities of
The oil and gas.
Uh, operation and transfer
process.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
just have 11 question. Um, so
over the past 9 years, the topic
of inadequate bonding has been a
topic in many committees that
I've attended.
We've heard that large companies
sell to their wells to smaller
companies, eventually go
bankrupt and leave the state to
pay. So does the state have the
funding to clean up and deal
with the potential liability.
Of tens of thousands of orphaned
wells.
Madam Chair, no.
Mm
All right, thank you. I think
I'll the rest of my questions
were asked. What is the will of
the committee, Representative
Madam Chair, um, I move to not
pass on House Bill 257 and I do
pass house energy, environment
and natural house Bill 257.
Thank you.
Madam chair, substitute motion
to table.
All right, the substitute motion
of a rule, so when, um, take the
roll on the table.
A yes would be tabled and it
would be not to continue on.
Representative Obeda.
Pass.
Representative Dixon.
Pa
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gorola? No.
Representative Henry, yes, the
table.
Rivers represented Montoya.
Representative Murphy? Yes, to
table.
Representative Senator Cortez,
yes, to table.
Representative Small
I can go back around.
And
Representative of Beta.
No.
And Representative Dixon, no.
Viana?
No.
McQueen.
No table
Right, the table motion has
failed, um.
Miner,
um, there's a motion on the
floor that we can go back to,
uh, we've heard concerns
expressed about the bill, we
would be willing to roll it and
address some of those concerns
and bring it back.
Right?
I don't know what to do next.
So we roll the roll the roll the
bill.
OK.
Next your next bill.
Um, Ma'am chair members of the
committee, um.
Thank you for the discussion on
the last bill.
Uh, the next bill is House Bill.
258 natural gas capture
requirements.
This bill effectively puts in
the statute existing rules.
Regarding natural gas capture.
And with that I'll turn over to
Mr. Shelton.
Uh, Madam Chair, members to
clarify what we're talking about
here is not a new.
Uh
Animal, the states, the methane
waste rules have been on the
books, um, for OCD since 2022,
It's
very long process of developing
those rules. We are not looking
in this legislation to reopen
the waste rules, um, what we're
trying to do is provide them
with a little bit more
durability by enshrining them in
statute versus having them, uh,
live just in the rule the
requirement for 98% capture, I'd
say the rules have been
effective.
To this, uh, to this point we're
seeing um you've seen in the
last few years a tremendous
degree of um change in the
In the operating community.
To limit uh waste.
Um, this is a sort of a
companion rules to the
environment department's ozone
precursor rules, which are
dealing more with, uh,
Leaking and kind of approaching
this issue for more of a um
emissions perspective, these
really are uh just using the
authority of the OCD to limit
waste, uh, generally, so this uh
codifies those targets that we
developed at the division
developed.
Um
Back in
Uh
Uh, I think it was final in
2022, before I was with state
government. I'm sorry, my dates
are a little bit off there.
Uh, but effectively we are, uh,
the, the headline is capturing
the 98% capture requirement. Um,
there are a few exceptions that
exist in the rule that we are
looking at, um.
Uh, codifying through the um
through the world, you can see
the sort of A1 through 5 and I
think there's an amendment.
As well, I don't know if that's
been introduced yet.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Right, can we pass out the
amendment? Can you tell me the
202 number?
Ma'am share the number on the
amendment is 230605.1.
Um
We get a motion for discussion?
OK.
Amen, the amendment takes out
the uh pneumatic controllers
language on the bill and then uh
reorders the paragraphs.
Um, right, we'll go ahead and go
to the audience first.
OK. All right, we're going to
take a total of 5. So do we have
any online?
We have 3 people in line. So
we're gonna take 3 in the
audience and 2 online. So, raise
your hand if you want to, if you
are in opposition to the bill,
we'll just take 3.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 members.
Nimoga opposes House Bill 258
because the bill is unnecessary.
During the water and natural
resources Committee in October,
New Mexico Environment
Department and the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department gave a presentation
on the waste rule progress.
88% of the operators who
reported in July 2024, had
reached the 98% gas capture rate
even prior to the 2026
requirement.
They found that there have been
significant reductions in
venting and flaring in
comparison to production
increases, especially in the
routine venting and flaring
areas which has decreased by at
least 77% since 2018, at which
time at least 2.4% of the
state's gas was vented and
flaring wasn't reported.
Year to date gas capture
percentages have increased
slightly, even though production
increased 8%, showing operators
are paying more attention to
infrastructure and takeaway.
Apply substantial work has been
done in reporting areas where
operators were not properly
reporting their gas losses. This
bill will create the need for
additional rulemaking, costing
taxpayers resources and staff
time.
Regulation coupled with
innovation is working, but over
regulation creates a loss of
production, potential for New
Mexico. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Winchester
representing the Independent
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico, um, just for starters,
the requirement obviously of 98%
gas capture already exists as a
state regulation and you just
heard about that, but the added
step here of codifying includes
new language that is not in the
state rule.
that negates an entire
protracted stakeholder process
on the rule itself. For example,
no mention about acquisitions or
sale of one or more wells from
an operator and how that changes
gas capture requirements. The
state rule does account for
that. No mention that advanced
leak or repair monitoring
credits can be used to deduct
from the volume of lost gas. The
state rule does account for
that. And finally, most
egregiously, this new sub sneaks
in language that exempts.
pneumatics. This represents
moving the goalpost
substantially different from the
state rule itself. I would
estimate that half the operators
in New Mexico would immediately
be out of compliance with this
change. We stand respectfully
opposed. I'm also speaking on
behalf of PBPA. They also stand
opposed.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Carlos Santagres
and CEO of the New Mexico
Business Coalition, and we
respectfully oppose this
legislation.
We've already got this in rule,
and if you want to codify it,
then you're gonna have to go
through another very expensive
and lengthy rulemaking process.
We just did this, and a lot of
the operators are already in
compliance.
This confusion just creates
problems within the industry,
and again, it can lead to job
loss.
I encourage you to oppose this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we'll go online
if you're opposed to this bill,
please raise your hand.
Right, there's no one online
that is a post. Um, next we'll
go to the audience. If you're in
favor of this bill, and we will
take 3 people from the audience.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
here representing the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter. My name
is Melissa Bernardin. We are in
support of HB 258. The Sierra
Club and other colleagues and
stakeholders helped to craft
nation leading methane rules
that are resulting in urgent
reductions of this potent
greenhouse gas, putting
these rules goals into law is
important and something we
support. Thank you. Good
morning, Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Felicia
Guillen, and I'm here on behalf
of Yucca, a statewide youth-led
climate justice organization
with thousands of members and
supporters. We strongly support
House Bill 258 because it takes
the necessary step towards
reducing methane pollution and
holding the oil and gas industry
accountable for harmful
omissions.
Methane is a potent greenhouse
gas over 80 times more powerful
than carbon dioxide in the short
term, and New Mexico is home to
one of the worst methane
hotspots in the world. For too
long, oil and gas operators have
been allowed to vent and flare
methane at will, wasting
valuable resources while
polluting the air our
communities breathe. HB 258 sets
a clear standard requiring
operators to capture at least.
98% of the natural gas they
produce or
By 2027. This
a long overdue policy to curb
emissions, reduce waste, and
protect public health. It
ensures that the oil and gas
industry is held to a higher
standard of pollution control.
Inventing are limited and that
we see a real reduction in New
Mexico's methane emissions. We
must take meaningful action to
slow climate change and improve
air quality for frontline
communities. For too long our
state has allowed industry to
dictate the term terms for
environmental protection. Your
time is up. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Travis
Kellerman. I'm the senior
climate policy advisor for the
governor. I stand in support of
HB 258. It's
Extending and codifying the
methane waste rule, the
extensions are very minimal and
there's actually more
flexibility in this bill and the
existing methane waste rule on
the data provision, this allows
for automation of reporting
which saves operators money. It
saves the OCD expense.
And it ensures accuracy of
reporting and production.
This return on investment by
operators has been seen already
with the methane waste rule, and
we hope to codify this.
Rule and extend it with, with
this bill. I urge your support.
This is an important priority
for the governor and the state.
Thank you.
We have, we, we.
This is the 4th 1. OK, yeah,
we're only doing 3 and we're
doing 22 online. Thank you. If
we don't get the ones online
maybe, well, no, we'll have one
online Athena.
Has been seen already with the
methane.
Hello, Chair.
Committee members, I'm sorry,
I've only been able to listen to
the last little bit, um, my
name's Athena Christodoulou. I'm
an energy and environmental
engineer, and I want to stress
to you this is a very good
opportunity to put into statute
what we need. This, um, the
methane, and I will, again, I
can't emphasize it enough,
methane emissions, uh, which are
underreported and undercounted
as to their impact, are driving,
driving.
The climate crisis we are in.
They are underreported, and I am
so glad to hear that we're going
to be putting into statute and
using data collection that isn't
going to rely on the industry.
Thank you.
Mm
All right, that's all we have
online. We'll go back to the
sponsor. Um,
uh, I want to let my expert Mr.
Shelton uh respond to some of
the comments about the
differences between the existing
rule which uh.
We acknowledge the existing
rule.
search it.
Madam Chair, the statute is
meant to describe.
Not significantly extend or
modify.
Existing rule that industry is
complying with in the field
today.
To the extent that the statute
compels amendments as far as we
can read them, the amendments
would be technical to add the
new statutory section to the
authority part.
Of the rule, um.
Specifically, the pneumatics,
taking pneumatics out of the
statute does not remove that
exception in the rule, the
pneumatic exception exists still
in the rule that was intended, I
think, as I understand it and
again before my time, but uh to
be a temporary provision to
allow industry to have some
leeway to update pneumatics, uh,
to more modern equipment, so it
was never intended to be a
permanent exception is, is my
understanding of that, so that
that is why it doesn't, that's
why the amendment proposes to
pull it out of the codification.
piece, but for the foreseeable
future, the pneumatic exception
and all of this is the rule,
which is 191527.
Um
Uh
we'll we'll still be there,
we'll still be available with
the industry.
Right. Do you have any questions
from the committee?
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm gonna
Change my
Uh
Uh
What has become my practice of
going last, um, based on what
was just stated. Um, Madam Chair
and Representative and Mr.
Shelton.
Uh, you just made a statement
that it was your understanding
that this was a temporary
provision.
Um
That pneumatics could be used
out in the in
The field to capture methane,
which
Was during the rulemaking, which
I did.
Uh, attend, uh, some of the
meetings that took place with
stakeholders.
Um
Not the rulemaking itself, but
the, but.
Stakeholder meetings.
That was never discussed, that
that was a temporary.
Uh
Action.
Um, it was a mandatory action.
To capture methane and in part
because electricity does not
exist.
At many of the well locations,
it's the only
Option. The other option.
That exists actually is more
harmful.
With emissions.
I'm not sure if if that's.
If if that's understood, and I
know, I know, uh,
Representative Murphy will be
talking about this, uh, in more
in depth.
But
Uh, the, the folks who had to
comply with this.
Never in their mind thought that
this was a temporary action or
they would not have complied.
In such dramatic fashion, if
they knew something else was
coming.
So I, um, Madam Chair and.
And Chairman McQueen, um,
That is
That is what we hear from so
many industries in
Uh, New Mexico, not just oil and
gas, but that the goalposts get
moved constantly.
Regulatory certainty.
Which every business needs to
have.
I just continues to be.
Uh, removed.
And
Um
Madam Chair, to, to the point.
Uh, of, of pneumatics being
used.
Uh, we know this, we know that
88% of operators.
are in compliance
And that compliance is capturing
98%.
Of methane
The rules that are in place are
working.
The rule as is in place is
working.
And
To be honest, Madam Chair,
And Mr. Chairman
If this were just a word for
word.
Statute for what's in place.
I
don't see the industry would
even
be against this. I think that
you would see, since that has
been, uh, what they have been
putting in place and, and, and
Madam Chair and Mr. Chairman,
the, the
Bad actors and the folks who
cannot comply.
Um
They've been put in a position
where they have to sell.
Um, because it cannot comply.
And and they're being sold to
Larger independence in
particular, I know this is
happening in, in, in San Juan
County, larger independents are
buying up.
Those properties because they
have in place the ability to
In mass
Put in place the carbon capture.
But it takes pneumatics because
You're out in the rural part of
the state, electricity is not,
is not near.
It is not available in many of
these locations.
So, um,
I, I am concerned, and I, and I,
if you could, uh, I would ask uh
Mr. Shelton.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd ask Mr.
Shelton.
When
Was this ever discussed as a
temporary stopgap. I, I would be
very interested to hear that.
Uh, madam chair, before my time,
I was not part of those
technical working groups.
Nematics are um.
The
The modern pneumatics if you
were building it, you know, if
you're putting in new equipment
today modern pneumatics are not
a concern to us in terms of the
amount of uh of gas that they
lose. So this was designed as a
um
As I, again, as I understand it,
it's not putting this into the
statute allows the department
potentially to remove this as it
becomes a dead letter because
we'll get to a point where the
the pneumatics that are utilized
broadly across the oil field are
not a concern.
From a waste perspective, I
think as you indicated with the
compliance curve in the industry
we're on our, we are on our way
there now, but this was meant to
accommodate older equipment in
the field that is in the process
of getting updated.
So, Madam Chair, uh,
Chairman McQueen and Mr.
Shelton.
Um
The, the concern is the moment
this goes into law,
People who have spent businesses
have spent.
Millions of dollars trying to
comply with this.
That many of them will be out of
compliance just
For the fact that electricity
doesn't exist where the wells
are.
So I'm, I'm, I'm concerned that
we, we're going to take people
who have
And businesses who have done
everything they can to comply.
With just us passing this
automatically being out of
compliance.
And, and I don't know how that
would not be the case. Statute
overrules.
Rule
The moment this goes in and it's
signed by the governor.
You're out of compliance,
whether or not the rulemaking
has caught up to it, rulemaking
will have to match.
Statue. So the moment statute.
Once this becomes law, they are
automatically out of compliance.
I, I don't believe that that
Necessary is the intent and and
on top of that, Madam Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
I, I don't believe it's what we
want to do to industry, which is
Tell them this is how you
comply.
And then
Once they're
closing in on
100% compliance, we pulled the
rug out from under him again and
and move the goalposts.
Madam Chair.
Uh, representative of Mr.
Shelton.
What is in rule, what, what is
in rule now?
is working
And if all this were
We
A
A
Codifying of that rule.
I think you would get a lot of
votes here that you don't
normally get or that uh Chairman
McQueen doesn't normally get on
some of these bills. I think if
we do that, and the purpose is
carbon capture.
Obviously, any new, uh, any new,
uh,
Wells going online are much more
efficient.
And the concern is less and
less, but
Uh
Concerning, concerning wells
that are producing.
And
Frankly, need more time.
To recover the investment that
was made in carbon capture
because a lot of this did go on
to marginal wells. uh, and to be
able to recover, recoup those
costs.
Uh, I don't think we're there
yet. Uh, a lot of these, uh, a
lot of these wells have been
retrofit.
And, and are in the, in the
process of being retrofit today.
So, um, Madam Chair, I, I'll,
I'll.
I don't really need an answer on
this, but I'm gonna have a hard
time supporting this.
Uh, when we're going to take
folks who are in compliance and,
and immediately turn them into
noncompliant. Thank you, madam.
Representative Murphy. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Sheldon, uh,
Mr. Sheldon, um.
You opened your remarks.
Uh, with one I believe that.
Along this line that it was not
your intent to reopen the wet,
methane waste.
Did I hear that correctly?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, no, not
substantively.
Um, that's what I Madam Chair,
uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's, I believe, pretty close
to what she said or at least
what I heard.
But regardless,
Um, I submit to you that this
legislation does exactly that.
By reopening the methane rules
and the provisions that were
agreed to, but however, changing
key elements of them.
Um, I understand that it was
your understanding you were not
part of it. You felt like that
removing number 4.
Um, was something that was
intended from
Very beginning
It's a temporary measure. I, did
I hear that correctly, Mr.
Sheldon? Madam Chair,
Representative, I think the
The striking this committee
removing the pneumatic exception
of the pneumatics language from
this statute does not change the
presence of the pneumatic
exception.
In the rule
Does not change whether it will
be there tomorrow or next year
because this is not a
substantive conversation that we
are reopening. This committee
removing that language from
proposed legislation does not
compel the division to remove it
correspondingly from the rule.
Madam Chair, uh, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Sheldon, with all
due respect, if this bill goes
into uh into law, it will
absolutely require real change
to conform with it my
understanding is that not
correct? The rule, Madam Chair
and Representative, no. The rule
conforms that this statute as
written.
Madam Chair, Mr. Representative
So why make the change? Why not
just restate the uh the rule as
is Ma'am Representative Murphy,
as we say at the outset, we're,
we're basically codifying the
rule.
Um
To give it more durability.
And Madam chair Rosa Murphy as,
as we talk, I know this Mr.
Shelton has the rule up on his
screen.
He scrolls back and forth and
checks certain language.
The rule is quite lengthy. It is
not something we would enact in
the statute, uh, so the statute
is 8.5.
Codifies the rule
Um, the, the rule still has
specifics, the specifics might
evolve over time, so.
the entire rule on the statute
is not the way we typically do
statutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for that explanation,
Mr. Chairman. However, though,
on the, on the face of it, it
looks like the, the rural and
the standard is being changed
and I guess I would.
And that was after lengthy
negotiation, uh, Madam Chair,
Mr. Representative, uh, Mr.
Chairman.
Um, it was after lengthy
negotiation between industry,
um, the division and all
interested parties.
And I go back to your statement
earlier about um having
Um
Some faith in the divisions, um.
Uh, having some, some, some
confidence in their good faith,
and I would submit to you from
an industry perspective, this
does not look like good faith.
Um, it may not be intended that
way, and I certainly don't mean
to ascribe uh anything to you
or, or to Mr. Shepherd, but
whoever drafted this, uh, is,
um.
Um, flying in the face of long
negotiations that were um
realized for very practical
reasons.
And um I I made my statement but
I'll move on to the next
question and I and I wonder what
the alternative is because as
someone that's very familiar
with pneumatic devices and
controllers. I would agree with
Mr. Sheldon that they shouldn't
be.
Um, however, they're very, very
necessary in the safe operation.
Uh, in the oil and gas field,
especially where we do not have
access to electricity.
Um
We do in some cases have access
to electricity where we can move
emissions.
Generators and that's uh.
Or excuse me, compressors and
things to generators.
However, in this case, if we're
not allowed to use pneumatic
devices.
Our alternative is going to be
set, uh, generators in the field
these generators will will
actually generate more
emissions.
And not allowing us to use um
pneumatic devices. So,
Um, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Sheldon, isn't this really a
step back, both in terms of good
faith negotiations and just
practical consideration.
Ma'am Cherubs and Murphy that
Bill does not prevent the use of
pneumatics.
Madam Chair, um,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Shepherd,
thank you for your comments.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Sienna Cortez.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Shelton. My
questions are, are bill
specific. So if you'll go to
page one, line 25.
It says released during an
emergency.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton, can you tell us what
qualifies as an emergency.
Uh
Madam Chairman
And to look and see if we've got
emergency, yeah, we'd have an
admission or definition of
emergency in 1915, 1927, 7H.
Um
It's lengthy, but let me, let me
give you the headline. It's a
temporary infrequent and
unavoidable event in which the
loss of natural gas is
uncontrollable or necessary to
avoid a risk of an immediate and
substantial adverse impact on
safety, public health, or the
environment.
And then it goes on to does not
include an event arising from or
related to and there's a list of
items. OK.
Thank you so much
um interject something.
So
We, we're a little bit.
What we're doing here is a
little bit different than what
we normally do. Normally we
adopt the statute and we
authorize rulemaking and then
the rulemaking.
flushes out the, the terms of
the statute. We're, we're going
in the opposite direction here.
Where the the rulemaking was
done and there other other
authority were codifying the
rule by adopting the statute. So
a lot of the details about
these, these terms.
are laid out in the very lengthy
rule which was the subject of
much negotiation and much input.
And we're not attempting to.
Change this, you know, that
really the intention of this
bill.
Is to put uh
The rule
The authority for the rule, the
impact of the rule into law.
To make sure that it is
enforceable over time.
Thank you for clarifying. Thank
you so much. Um, oh, hi.
Um, I'll go ahead and ask my
next, my next question, um.
Do I still call you Mr. Chair?
OK, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Shelton, um, my next question is
on page 2, line 1, it says
beneficially used by the
operator and I just want to
understand. Um, could you
explain that? It seems uh broad
and vague.
Uh, Madam Chair, that, that
definition is again also
specified in um.
In the rule, but generally
speaking, that some of this gas
will get used to run.
Uh, various pieces of equipment
that pneumatics that was that
that were indicated earlier, um,
there is some sort of on
in-field use or on well-pat use
of of some of the gas that comes
out, and so we wanted to make
sure that uh
That that is not considered
invented in fla or wasted,
basically. OK. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, and
Mr. Shelton, um, and then I have
2 more bills specific questions.
There's an end coming, um, the
second one is on page 2 line 8,
and it says rolls necessary
again seems broad and like that
that could change midgame.
Could you explain?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, and Mr.
Shelton. Madam Chair, again,
those are referring to the rules
that are already promulgated and
NMAC 191527. OK.
Last question.
Now we are switching to Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton, um, what is the basis
of at least 98% capture.
That
Man chair um representing Santa
Cortez, that's what's in the
rule. So the reason that number
was picked is because it
reflects the rule.
I would also add, Madam Chair,
those that number was based on
the uh governor's executive
order in 2019, um, directing the
state to reduce emissions
attributable to all sorts
really. OK, thank you for
clarifying, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, and Mr. Shelton, and this
may be a simple question, but
what are the operators gonna do
with the
captured natural gas.
Adam chair, that's kind of a
million dollar question. If you
can solve what the operator is
supposed to do with captured
natural gas, they would, they
would love a good answer to
that. It's a challenge right
now, um, they.
pipelines and move it around,
they um they do all all sorts of
things, natural gas and water
management are a couple of the
biggest production challenges in
the program today. So maybe that
wasn't so simple, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Shelton, um,
I'll conclude with, um, the last
couple of thoughts, you know,
you keep telling an industry
they're not welcome in our state
by over regulating and moving
those scope, those goal posts,
they may just pack up and leave,
and we better all pray that they
don't because as.
A reminder that is 50%, almost
50% of our state budget. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Shelton.
Do you have any more questions
from the committee.
Um, I just have a comment, um,
we, we, we have
Per Secretary Kenny, 70% of the
polluting beyond the legal
limits when it comes to air
emissions, so this is just
another way to.
Somehow keep them regulated or
or in control.
But um
What is the will of the
committee?
Representative Abeda.
here? Yes. So we, we have an
amendment which we did not
adopt.
We move the amendment for
discussion, I think we need to
vote on the amendment before we
vote on the bill.
All right.
So let's, um, we're gonna vote
yes.
The amendment, um.
So we, we, we need a motion to
adopt the amendment.
And, um, we take a role for that
one?
Yes, I think so.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative girl, yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Represented Montoya.
Represented Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez.
No.
Representative Small, yes.
First year, yes.
Jerry McQueen.
74, we have the, the amendment
passed.
Your next up with the book.
So we would either motion the
pass as amended.
OK
Thank you.
Right.
Give motion in a second.
Um
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gorola, yes.
Representative Henry? No.
Representative Montoya.
Represented Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez.
No.
Representative Small.
First yearana.
Yes.
McQueen. Yes.
I voted 7 to 4. The motion
carries, and you have a due pass
on. Thank you very much.
