Representative instruments.
Vice chair and CEO here.
And madam chair.
Welcome to transportation
everybody were Senator Sedillo
Lopez is running late today so
we're gonna start with us before
thirty three expansion of moral
Care passenger capacity to.
Senator expert and great so
that.
Chairman committee.
this is a small of a legislation
passed three years.
This option creates a fund
works to raise and and to modify
themselves to allow for
regional.
Airport use here and at the time
the capacity the aircraft
at current conditions is
capacity for there are several.
Our own state that looking to
the regional air service.
Connect with the.
That will connect with fees
Alice
Hello world.
I think this and of clothes are
there is looking at that looking
at that and what this bill
simply does increase capacity of
New York so that those airports.
This would have those funds
available to them.
And that in the field is that
the.
Submission comes.
The shooter thank you madam
chair.
Committee.
This bill will allow.
To.
Regional jet for.
To facial so also for those of
you who have services across
the.
you wish we were out here.
Two wives.
right here Representative
Hochman Vigil reversion
shearwater full story if the
issue that to show up.
Issues drug grow up a little bit
the health board.
I share it will save creation
here out of necessity of very.
But currently not all of the
issues so they're showing very
little if we're
of the actuation.
Situation we're hopeful that
this Alamogordo.
The two.
Sure.
You very much for questions.
I'm a great deal of.
Thank you.
At
Thank you so much is there
anyone in the audience here in
favor of this bill.
Yes.
And madam chair members of the
committee I think it's just a
prayer and I represent the city
of possible of the economic
development corporation of the
can get these opportunities that
will allow us to continue
reading the business insurance
area is it's so much easier for
customers especially because we
live in the middle of nowhere.
Thank you very much for your
support he's in the house.
In online.
Anyone here in opposition to
the.
That.
Okay the committee committee
members.
Thank you very much of Madam
also how much the gentleman is
in the budget currently for
this.
Resent us out of here gentleman
I know I'm familiar with this is
brought up during LESC meeting
house last year.
Your.
This is broader LESC meeting
last year it's house to expand
the eligibility to larger
planes.
That I don't know if the money
was expended because when this
bill was Kerry there was X.
number of dollars inside the
budget for the smaller
communities because they don't
have the capability of taking on
larger planes because of size
are point yeah the wrong way so
my question is did we put more
money in the budget on the
Senate side for this program
does anybody know.
Chair I can relate
is the question that there is
fifty million dollars in the
budget was put on the side for
the aviation department
generally and I do believe that
could be can be used to
subsidize this program okay so
Mr Cerna is the plan if the
dollar stays there.
Representative.
Our understanding is that the
fifty million will support some
capital infrastructure.
From those.
Boards and the C. I. P. fund for
their federal capital program is
that they submitted that we're
aware of certainly some of it
could be carved out to support
this program will allow for
madam chair that was what my
hope would be this because
you've got some smaller airports
quite candidly let Gallup we
just started yes a year ago
filing a passenger service there
and it is because of this
program.
Thank the sponsors for working
on that a couple of years ago.
But I I just want to make sure
the it's not the same size hi
it's now being and sliced the
slices are COVID even smaller in
other words we want money to
accommodate this so but it's a
good bill by supported their
point they need to have the
ability to expand take on these
bigger planes I hope this is
that the money is going to be
there also.
Just because these requests are
rolling out thank you madam
chair.
I'm listening I think that
Representative reported user.
Madam chair in senators are just
want to mention the FIR says
that do you she has in a beauty
is awarded seven point three
million so far but six point
seven million remains an income
so there's a fourteen million
dollars I need to start with and
some of it has to go to a bank
thank you madam chair and
Representative it does there's
still left over from I think the
the last.
This is.
Expand number point and maybe
use some of this and and
hopefully
this budget you know as Mexico
becomes better known and more.
and.
Part of this is due to a
military base.
And one of they have estimated
three times for the two thousand
ticket sales on an annual basis
to make this this work so
We were we have no thank you
tourism and.
so what cultural affairs and for
doing this economic development
and as we grow we need to
accommodate that growth to be
able to bring people here come
here and we know that so then
the one move your business some
some.
Is just one more tool boxes and
can use.
Grove the state of New Mexico
hospital thank you very much
Senator.
You must.
During the past and so that bill
for three percent.
Any opposition.
Thanks for coming in today.
Thank you.
Thank.
I never say that.
a city Senator Sedillo Lopez.
Hi Representative.
A number three on the Sanchez
said.
tell A. expert witness.
Okay
This is a positive for Senate
bill sixty nine which assisted
by school definitions.
It's.
Should.
Representative development yes
okay so we'll discuss in.
I move the amendment for
discussion first session.
Second.
Right from members discussion on
this amendment first I'm sorry
first explain the amendment
representative and they will
discuss.
welcome series and links.
Playing a little bit the Senate
Judiciary some
assistance I definitions
definitions one of the only
states that don't have the.
the C. classifications class one
which was twenty miles an hour
have to have the.
Thank you to which has a little
starter motor C. don't have to
always be kindly last three
month up to twenty miles an hour
last three goes up to twenty
eight miles per hour.
Check out the amendment
in the Senate Judiciary
substitute they said that that
class two and three have to be
written on roads the original
bill was wanted to Romero which
is consistent national practice
so we just returned of the
amended returns to the bill to
the original four which is in
line with national standards and
I'd like to my experts explain
why that more about the man okay
sure chair of the committee my
name is Judy and I represent
people provides coalition this
is the national of bicycle
advocacy group that is working
to pass these laws across the
state.
As a representative here it's
one of the only states it does
not recognize it statute these
classifications which are
stamped on the bicycles by the
manufacturer.
Class one and class two electric
bicycles are the same by the
motor provides assistance up to
twenty miles an hour you wanna
go faster than that you could
panelists with the motor
disengages at twenty miles an
hour the only difference is a
class two does have a throttle
to provide further assistance if
you're pulling a stroller with
kids if you're starting up the
hill or if you need a little
help stir up hill or if you're
somewhat physically challenged
and you have been able to enjoy
life path.
You can this you know it's
another assistance device on
bicycles that can help a lot of
a lot of different people so
what this and then the office it
makes it very clear class one
and class two our legal to ride
a bicycle paths.
Thank you very much for class
three has to be on.
Because it the motor disengages
after twenty miles an hour just
to
pass
add on the amendment.
A municipality if there's like a
delicate special I after
something they can do color by
their own statutes that only a
certain like only one can go on.
That that.
The members.
Representative presenters and
wants to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for.
Thank you show me where
The use of local agents are the
local.
Hello the the ability and.
Do this we're not Senator will.
I think it's sections seven.
The.
Fifteen.
Seventy eight.
Page sixty.
The item the US seven B. M. P.
H. fifteen percent to a person
shall not by three eight I think
a lot of by the because we have
and less than a gives the Mrs to
political subdivisions state
permits the operation this is
class three it's the same first
that about two of.
The jurisdiction to decide.
Madam chair of Representative
Harper question
Those are somewhere in the
legislation that would allow
local municipalities to not
allow class one two or three
of my past.
So.
Yes the jurisdiction decides it
says of Madam chair
representative pollution
subdivision of the state permits
the operation of the class three
it doesn't I don't see anywhere
and I can be wrong.
Where.
Okay the political subdivisions
has.
In other words we're not
mandating local level one.
So madam chair Representative
Pettigrew on page fifteen line
fourteen.
With this on that.
That that section.
Sen.
A person a lot of class one or
class two electric assisted
bicycle on that screen password
bicycles are all travel.
It further says provided that a
public public subdivision the
state may prohibit.
So they they can off the
basically get popped up that's
what this does you are you are
making it legal this legislation
for class one and class two the
on bicycle path this legislation
also says that the municipality
decides that it doesn't want to
allow I just wanted to invite.
Then they can they can past
ordinance to prohibit.
which alone and then thank you
okay
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair at the honest
about the amendment madam chair
with concerns about the fact
that you can have an electric
electric bicycle on the sidewalk
at twenty miles an hour.
And I'm looking here at the bill
where it says
you can actually have of two
wheel bike as well as the three
will by.
According to this.
Give us a line I'm on page four.
On page four line for and I
think the system by four means a
vehicle having two or three
wheels.
I would be concerned because it
doesn't say.
Call in I mean it be nice if it
was on a five half of those I I
I've seen these kind of by in
larger cities.
Rent that kind of thing.
And I just I'm just curious I
can see why sent by the Senate
with the amendment on their
thinking that you'd have to have
plus two on a roadway.
It seems like there
Better of.
It's designed for that kind of
that kind of speed.
Madam chair right for.
Madam chair representative
lesson that's a really great
question this isn't out to by.
It's my understanding we see it
all the time more staff
tricycles I don't think they're
authorized to be signed.
May madam chair I don't do it
tell me they don't do that in
New Mexico all right.
To see it all the time we see it
every day.
They're not they're not laugh I
understand that the are we
adding complexity when we put
something on there this
motorized Madam chair
representative was from I think
I think you are addressing force
that issue here that is is going
to be an issue for local police
and and and enforcement but
we're not changing existing law
and there are there are electric
bicycles.
Three wheels I I've seen so by
civil and has two front wheels
I've seen that have okay
tricycles right so
but there are bicycles that are
on Howard also have three cables
thank I know okay.
Madam chair but I I just I'm
just concerned about having.
Something that can go up to
twenty miles an hour.
And not on a roadway.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative the amounts.
Representative Garrett so I I
work with you a little bit on
this ammendment and I know that
it came through various
communications I had received as
service committee from people
with disabilities who fell by
more in bility to read a class
two bicycle on half
because of the amendment on the
Senate basically force them to
be opted out from that
experience which I thought was
was the path fair so you know I
I don't know about you guys that
I received million emails about
that and and so that was kind of
like the basis of the amendment
hoping knocking of those are
icicles are.
No there know the limits of the
of the bicycle their writing and
no limits they have themselves
and and make decisions but I
hope that kind of helps put some
more context entity and then
then to not notices sensually
allowing those individuals who
depend on these processing this
process by.
the ability to enjoy passed the
same way that you are I do so I
hope that's helpful yes thank
you for this I just.
West side of the perky where we
constantly have
no on the left right by people
who are basically practice or
going forty fifty miles an hour
thirty miles an hour this is
quite different of.
Only about politics is that I.
Committees.
Mr Clinton.
At anything are you looking at
thank.
Well insurers I think this is a
good time for this and it's
you want to since our.
The main reason you need
additional.
Is that we only have right now a
regulation for the motor vehicle
division that simply says all
motorized bicycles are.
That's what you have right now.
There are unclassified electric
bicycles and I've got one with
thousand watt motors brothels
they can hit thirty thirty five
forty miles an hour and without
this law it is legal for me to
ride on a bicycle path.
Because alright says all
motorized bicycles are by
this is a very serious growth
public safety issues here that
Representative Lundstrom is
identified so this statute and
this ammendment now is going to
say only class one and class two
can be on bicycle paths this is
how he wants to create a they
can.
Miles an hour is not a an
unreasonable speed ahead with
you when you're paddling.
But last three twenty miles an
hour is forty percent faster.
Want to see what the differences
between us to class one and
class two madam chair are
exactly the same bicycle the
motor provides pedal assistance
up to twenty miles an hour in
the motor disengages it's up to
you our.
Class to go just have a little
throttle by the handle by the
hand.
Which which can propel the the
bicycle.
But it's designed to help you
get up the hill for starters to
hill.
It started.
Or get started with the stroller
I'm at the throttle drains
battery very quickly it's it to
propel the bicycle.
They're on a very far distance.
What what keeps the fight going
is that you're paddling.
With motor assistance it's not
that long.
So essentially it Mr Clinton one
helps you pedal and the other
help to get started Campos
that's correct.
Anybody else.
The motion.
With a doctor.
Thank.
let's vote on.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative.
Representative Cruz yes.
Representative Harkins yes
Representative Johnson yes
Representative Lundstrom no.
Representative Madrid.
Representative editor.
Representative Romero yes.
Mr Burciaga.
Madam chair thank you yes.
Okay.
No still thinking.
For those states
The
statistics.
Where are you have a minute bill
Representative and so let's go
back to the committee amended
face Representative Madrid do
you have a question really go
for the we're for Iran the
connect the now mended Committee
substitute.
So my question is I'm on the
rural part I have of what I've
just realized created a great
bike path Representative Madrid
the stop you for just you hold
your question we did in the
recent audience this is there
anybody here in favor of self
yes gentleman back.
Share this article more relevant
today was your last two.
River trail.
Only able to come here.
Access to that trails really
makes a difference and I think
this bill will help clarify of
the rights of what I said was
very much thank you.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Susan couch I own the
lecture I company Albuquerque
New Mexico I've been an academic
for thirty years however I left
that job in Los Angeles because
I bought my first E. bike in two
thousand seventeen ostensibly to
take my dad daughter and her
friends to to school I realize I
can get five acts of groceries
on ninety five I eventually
realized I was never using my
car anymore because I started
writing the bike to work with
this eleven to thirteen miles
depending on our right.
That anybody I did pay four
thousand dollars for that very
first one it is a class one E.
bike the motor is right near the
pedal is a high performance
motor made by Paul arch to
European by today.
I would say ninety percent of
the class one people have that
Bosch motors that is easily over
a thousand dollars more for
that.
Today in my shop I specialize in
the motors that are on the back
they are class two by and large
Munoz my estimation of working
with the slide community in
Albuquerque and greater New
Mexico is ninety percent of the
by on the road today forecast to
largely because they are the
most affordable.
You can get these under two
thousand dollars unlike a cost
one you might you're looking at
over three thousand dollars for
that.
So you can get a class two for
like fourteen hundred Bucks.
Most of the customers that I
work with are doing this for
transportation.
Just decided Representative my
car that would appropriate this
is the E. I did track others
have heroes help here I lost a
lot of the desk.
It was a profound change for me
this is exactly why I am back at
my down Albuquerque because I
know the potential of you by the
transportation all the health
benefits sustainability benefits
and it's affordable
transportation is the number two
expensive expense for most
Americans.
Thank you bye in Naples people
who want to lower their budget
substantially media they can do
that with the class to the fact
that formal studies now we're
showing provides more safety
than not because you're able to
get yourself out of a tricky
situation intersection that
perhaps you should buy members.
That I can get you out of there
most of my customers are in
their late fifties and older of
seven years old that flow is
super important for them because
their needs are a little after
we get that first pedal if
you're on the slides of incline
said that first.
New Mexico and with it is
treacherous you have only do it
quite heavily in the throttle
enables the safety peace studies
are showing that Colorado the
county boulder has all kinds of
data that demonstrates that
bottle actually provides for
safety not not just for the
riders but for the pedestrians
or anybody else on mixed use
trail and that is proven to be
the case with the settings and
still early and that's what
we're getting thank you very
much so anybody on the line who
wants it thank you.
Close.
Speaking out sorry.
Great.
I wanted to speak in favor the
bill with the amendment.
I love you guys remember me I
was the OPC guide the long grey
here that spoke in support of
representatives bill last week
and is it'll be for.
I say this so you know
accredited by then I have all
banned eight.
Last week I took these then lays
out for a ride on my old like
the thirty three still by and I
managed to get up to thirty
miles per hour on these old
ladies.
Files for hours two miles back
to the thing that you and the
class three D. but.
What I'm saying is if you're the
of folks on the trails doing
speeds of these bikes of quest
to impress three are doing of
any the trails therefore doesn't
make much sense.
and then back to the
disabilities issue.
my dad who has heart failure and
ask month is and it's ninety
three year old needs a class to
the bike to ride the trails with
the not alignment or others
folks on the trail I we would
violate the Americans with
disabilities act would probably
open the state up to legislation
our litigation.
So please support the strokes
thank you very much thank you
Alex.
Thank you Mr.
Hello
I would like to
I would like to ask for some
clarification because how I
understand it
section seven of bill sixty nine
that the I guess it's the
amendment that I'm referring to
the provided that a political
subdivision of the state may
prohibit the operation of a
class one or class two electric
assisted bicycle on a bicycle or
pedestrian path within its
jurisdiction I'm concerned as an
owner of a class to the bike
that I could be riding along a
multi use paths state down by
the river or up on tramway or
any of the multi use paths that
I have been using the past few
years since buying my electric
bike that I can certainly see a
sign because that municipality
has decided that in their
district they do not want to
drugs and
my husband I have been enjoying
the multi use paths the state
riding on them and I would like
some clarification on that that
clause in section seven that
allows municipalities to decide
no we don't want elector bikes
on our multi use paths
I'm not in favor of that wording
and I'd like to see how that.
My concern is addressed here if
you take thank you Mr leader I
it's my understanding of the
bill that that this ammendment
hi no effect on that particular
clause that causes from the
original bill but we're gonna go
to the bill sponsored insurance.
Right.
Right madam chair and to the
percent us it's always been in
there that accounted
municipality can prohibit their
use of pedestrian or bike paths
these issues to.
Thank you Mr.
so.
How old is I mean.
That's similar to saying that a
disturbing let's say that was
analogous to.
A municipality saying we won't
allow electric cars we've
decided not allow electric cars
on our district roads I need to
have that that that disrupts the
flow.
Of a vehicle movement it is
it creates inconsistency and it
doesn't support consistent
safety as well so I'm just
wondering why that's why we're
allowing.
Different municipalities decide
whether or not.
Why are we allowing them to
break up that continuity.
I'm thank you Mr I'm allowed
Billsponsored to respond to the
need to move on to other
testimony.
As of Madam is my madam chairman
of the committee it's real
simple to explain.
If you take that out what you
have to preemption the state is
going to preempt every
municipality from passing
ordinances on bicycles and that
is not the direction you want to
go so right now they're allowed
but you know I think we don't
think it's a good policy for you
present preempt every
municipalities state and not
allow them to pass so we're
that's what you do if you took
this out.
Thank you and thank you for your
testimony today with Taylor one.
Sure.
Good morning members of the
committee thanks for allowing me
to join your conversation both
myself and my partner we live
here in Corvallis we bought
class two E. bikes shortly after
we moved to Kerala's Los Angeles
California we're definitely in
support of the legislation but
there's two areas that I think
you've already talked about that
we just wanna re stress again
and that is to allow class two
E. bikes with throttles to be
used on local trails in our area
I happen to be seventy three
years old myself and it's
difficult to get our bike
started without using the
throttle to provide additional
of the motion and then usually
after that we ride the trails
only on pedal assist own slides
I just want to make sure that
the legislation that you adopt
allows us to continue to use
those bicycles in that manner
and as to the subject that you
were just talking about let me
give you a concrete example when
we are writing hearing for Alice
we do ride on the bus you trails
on our class to buy
usually under pedal assist at
all times we are very
conscientious on the trails we
stop whenever we see our riders
and we make sure that we're
going out of an appropriate
speed were limited to twenty
miles an hour anyway whether
we're under pedal assist or
using the from so we're good
citizens in that regard but we
just noticed recently that the
village of Carrillo said posted
a sign that one of the trails
multi use trails that we like to
use quite often will no longer
allow E. bikes all so here we
have an example where a local
municipality has decided that we
can't find that trail in their
area and I think a better way to
go is for the state to have a
bicycle that preempts local
regular.
Ations because in the end what
happens is if you allow local
municipalities to adopt their
own E. bikes.
It's you'll end up
discriminating against seniors
like us saying no you can't be
on those trails because we just
don't want you there we don't
think it's safe so I'm in
agreement with the speaker just
prior to me who spoke about that
issue and already it's being
played out in our local
community at least here in
Kerala so thank you very much
for your time I appreciate it.
Thank you very much next.
But if you will.
Madam chair representative I am
for that sure model a practicing
physician in Albuquerque and a
professor of medicine I care
about health and safety issues
here and I guess the bill with
the amendment.
Less to eat by F. throttle
the capabilities and are not
electric assisted bicycles with
SB sixty nine four point to be
about last week the Senate
unanimously passed a substitute
SB sixty nine which recognizes
this and the classroom by are
motor driven vehicles and should
not be allowed on pedestrian and
bicycle pass that class to eat
bikers and easily accelerated go
up to twenty miles an hour I am
very pressing a button on the
handlebar throttle it's not a
luxury assistant it is electric
motor driving twenty miles per
hour is fast although some
recreational bicycle is going
twenty miles an hour to order
friends the racers average only
twenty two to twenty four miles
an hour on their streamlined
ultralight bikes.
Because it's become part sizes
become bona momentum which is
being multiplied by weight is
even more important less to E.
bike can weigh up to sixty five
and seventy policy which is much
heavier than traditional
bicycles increased support
control momentum turning
stopping and changing direction
is the primary reason why the
bikers crash more and more and
are more seriously injured than
traditional by service data also
show not surprisingly that older
II binders disproportionately
involved
in navigate a path which can be
narrow and winding and populated
by people that's and bicyclists
on a heavy losses E. bike was
considering a crippling go fast
requires great strength
coordination reflexes vision
hearing and trail seven as we
age those functions as a
minister and when that happens
we should not be riding that
bike on that path please do not
support plus you buy for
throttle should be driven on
pedestrian and bicycle path
rattles are not electric
assistant last year by the easy
speed and heavy weight and low
madam are more days to writers
and others on those paths these
are not passed the bill with the
amendment thank you thank you
Mr.
He'll get would.
In.
Can you hear me we can.
Okay hi I'm Jill gap but I live
in Albuquerque New Mexico I am
sixty eight years old and I ride
a motorcycle and and he I my
motorcycle to go up to a hundred
twenty miles an hour usually do
that but
obviously at any speed a
motorcycle you prefer to be in
traffic.
I start riding the bicycle part
partly because I blew out my
knees were writing traditional
bikes years ago on my eight by I
can't keep up with my husband on
his traditional bicycle one
thing I think that's really
important understand is.
The acceleration the torque on
these key by is really wimpy you
can't you don't go immediately
to twenty miles an hour it takes
quite a while in fact I would
guess that my husband from a
stop to get up to twenty much
faster than I can
Dr Hashimoto what sounds like
he's saying is it elderly people
whether on traditional or on a
bike should be on by passing the
first I don't think anybody
agrees with that
it might have changed everything
for me I agree I get my
groceries
I try I just for transportation
all around we really lucky to
have the bike trails because
it's very dangerous for a bike
as slow as in P. by to be out in
traffic with cars if we're
concerned about safety we should
be looking at I mean obviously
this is related but you know
cell phones should be usable
should be active when a car is
in motion that's the kind of
thing that affects safety
in reality I mean it might see a
radically the state that.
An electric vehicle would be a
safe but if if you've ever used
one I I really encourage you to
go out rent one and try it and
you'll see that this is not a
speedy vehicle.
so anyway that's my point is
that it's a I've never I've
never heard of an example of.
And he by being dangerous
because of the speed.
and as far as sidewalk snow
bicyclist wants to ride on a
sidewalk with the with all the
dips and and barriers it's just
not something that we do so I
don't think that's an issue
thank you thank you Mr Allen.
Okay
now we're going to opposition
sure the bill is anybody here in
opposition.
Sir anybody in opposition
combine.
Okay.
Now the committee
Representative.
I guess the question I have is
because it comes in the way of
me being on the road pardon me
having created a really nice
walkway the the visions of walk
through with the the capacity
handling the.
And
now looking forward to the
future something like this this
line is increased and yet I need
to do in order to accommodate
the premise of Health walking
and and what I.
So now the position where we
would just be able to move the
company responsible in my case
of those policies we have the
county.
And the you up so the concern I
have is
We would have the ability up.
If the county adult offices or
in the incomes.
Our handful devices which is a
it's a concern of the habit on
windows in the main point.
Traffic.
Schools built.
Industrial somehow so the
recommendations of this much
sooner then chair and
representative the county
policy on this but it would be a
policy group madam chair
Representative would not be a
policy that's across the board
for one term.
Madam chair and representative
he can actually like in the case
prevalence there's one path.
Requests are allowed you could
say that on the walkway
looking bikes or bikes whatever
was decided the flight to that
specific area I think the
amendment madam chair came up in
the Senate because there's one
very sensitive path in Santa Fe.
Is it doesn't have to be county
wide policy you can.
At.
I appreciate that the Madam
chair representative I think
this is a good house viability I
just think that the in those
options for comments I have some
reservations
I would like to say maybe was.
The service.
In the way it it's been madam
chair there is an Representative
there's been meetings about the
summer for about it because of
the concern that there's no
regulations period.
other than the ones that.
Side.
Madam chair representative to
the listening.
Thank you madam next
Representative Brown thank you
madam chair good morning
Representative this you need to
do is well.
I I noted in our fiscal analysis
madam chair that according to a
certain survey the sales of the
by a hundred forty five percent
last couple years it is
estimated and another study
report Madam chair that we may
have a hundred thirty million of
these.
The call contraptions.
and that's what and so I think
this bill is really finally and
I think it's important that we
grapple with this so madam chair
representative already I really
think we need to keep the local
option here we're local
governments.
What is suitable for each of
those communities we have a
beautiful walkway along those
rivers calls bad and its use by
pedestrians and I've seen a few
cycles there as well and that
might actually be it's wide
enough and good enough that the
bikes could probably part of and
you know that equation
there are other paths that we
have that would not be suitable
for other than yesterday and so
I think it is important that the
communities have some control
over that and madam chair I I
think this really is a local
issue as to what is appropriate
so I I do I think that should
stay in the bill and it's not
meant to discriminate against
you by writers at all it's all
about safety that's that's the
number one concern would have.
I appreciate the bill thank you
very much Representative next
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
there's a very good issue this
morning
so I I just wanna make sure.
I understand we all understand.
section seven as amended as.
Correct Representative the bill
is now the substitute is now
amended that we met husband.
So as amended.
Just walking through because
section a and B. are are
different now and they.
Kind of have a different default
position by Representative
percent is right.
As a person.
Services section seven.
A person may ride a class one
fourth class to.
Assisted by support from the
fund the fight for production
half.
For voice or voices are
authorized to travel.
Provided the local subdivision
neighborhood so this is saying
that class one or two of these
above the system was not fully.
Electric class three.
The default position purpose
here is that they can ride on I
just have.
But the political subdivisions.
Has.
The authorization to read this
pathway that has for that.
Chair representative that is
correct Madam chair
representative okay.
Going on a section be this is
the Madam chair representative
of these are the class three
bikes which are.
Perhaps a little more dangerous
All right.
It says a person.
Shalott ride last three
electrified.
Fund of bicycle or pedestrian
path.
I was just is.
With in a street or highway.
Or the political subdivisions
has.
Granted permission.
So so this is kind of all of the
offices alright eight point the
default is the this was as they
cannot.
at last it's on a street or
highway for the subdivision has
recognition for that particular
pastor that pastor that.
Here Representative unity sect
of correct okay.
I think that's a great.
thank you madam chair thank.
Thank you very much president of
heartburn is here
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
Know that I think I understand
everything.
I'm the star of the question
that probably didn't expect.
Madam chair so if if we have a.
Bicycle paths for pedestrians.
Within the schools of.
Mr during.
the schools of time when the
lights are blinking and their
drugs twenty miles an hour to
fifteen mile an hour speed limit
I think you take.
And
chair representative great
question.
already we have icicle this has
nothing to do with electric
assisted bicycles.
My own experience is that some
slow down some go.
Madam chair representative of
understand first typical bicycle
it's not our now we are power.
Those are good and
What's DPS is positional.
I
you for reading shares of the I
I don't know Madam chair and and
I will see madam chair that I
have seen please ticket
bicyclists and I don't know if
they were electric power not but
I have seen to get bicyclists
state to obey by the Los.
Madam chair representative I
think the before this comes to
the to the house floor it would
be good to have a GPS.
From from my standpoint and what
maybe I'm the only one seventy
to care about that.
So I would like to know what
that positions.
Madam chair and representative
of the usability and emails I
received
sixty nine.
There.
I think the majority of them.
Were.
He's not in favor of the
amendment.
It was pretty close.
Madam chair representative what
I can say is they all came from
either Albuquerque the
Albuquerque area Santa Fe Las
Cruces so with respect to that
matter Representative was our
local ordinances attempted in
each of these this is the
forecast and or counties before
this came close at the state
level and if so what was the
outcome of the.
Representative Madam chair
representative I'm not aware of
them myself thanks for this if
we're Madam chair representative
Pettigrew that the City of Santa
Fe city council and I did pass
an electric by four minutes
before this for this bill came
in front of you I can't tell
you.
I can't tell you what it says
right but the point is.
They're all local ordinances are
popping up on a lecture on a
line by already the problem
you've got at the state level is
that these bicycles are
manufactured with the class one
class two class three
certifications on them we have
Way too many bills in the brief
So.
Up madam chair my experts will
answer that.
Madam chair representative
Garcia.
What we're talking about when we
say you know class.
Mr way
dedicated pipeline that we see
all the time it's on the side of
the street on the social that's
what we're talking about here.
Class three electric bicycle the
motor a disengages that speaker
twenty miles an hour.
It is still going to fall under
the definition of electric
assisted bicycle and therefore
is not going to require
licensing or registration.
However it is important to
remember another reason you do
this bill is there are elected
to systems bicycles.
That have motors that are more
powerful than seven hundred
fifty watts which is your
vacation.
And they are capable of speeds
that vastly exceed thirty and
forty miles.
Those are now in a different
definition those will be
required to be licensed and
registered dental driver's
license for those types of we're
not calling alleged assisted
bicycles they're not.
Thank you for your anyone else.
I'm.
Representative this is I'm
obviously an interesting topic
and I think you know I am aware
that we need to have some sort
of regulation put in place so
that we can prevent to situation
that actively happening right
now the way I can look at this
bill Representative and Mr
Clinton is kind of a starting
point.
We we may make some mistakes
along the way that you need to
get something
we need to get something on the
books that says very clear so we
may needed to come back we need
the bill later but I can see
this is being can to and on the
apprehension issue I can see
this is a canned to those
communities that prohibit ATVs
on you know for a trans range so
I I'd like the other others of
my colleagues I to feel it's
really important to preserve six
colonies ability to make that
decision that is that is part of
what municipality does so I I do
appreciate that part of bill in
terms of the amendment I mean
it's just it's just a real tough
eight community gonna argument
argument in those who need the
extra help the momentum or are
we gonna worry more about having
I and I agree with Dr Hashimoto
it is a motorized.
It does give assistance online
so I think this is just the
beginning of this issue I do
think you'll probably be back
here again Representative I I
yeah I want to thank you for
bringing the bill so at this
point in time I think we're
gonna go to
a motion
capture hi this is Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate is amended in this
committee yes thank you.
Representative.
Unsinkable.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative.
Yes of.
Representative yes.
Representative Parker yes.
Representative Jones yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative
Yes like to.
Representative office Romero no
yes but I don't.
Three more.
Right.
Yes.
And the other chair of the yes
as of today Mr thank you very
much Representative you have
yourself thank you madam chair.
And very quickly I did hear and
just wanted to say about that I
appreciated the lots of emails
without expressing safety
considerations.
the different classes of the.
Our.
I don't want.
Go for you I.
To the point that.
Do Judiciary estimated like in.
Like three AM.
The actuals.
I would just it was my first
knows all morning.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Apple I took part along with
seventy heard last time from
members and software we've.
Session around visions you a
little bit and so I'd like to
read a brief description of the.
With that in mind so what is the
role.
Vision zero is for traffic
related deaths per year but it's
not so much more but it's so
much more than that is the
program for communities to come
together to find solutions for
traffic related death it began
Sweden in the nineteen nineties
and it differs from the
traditional approach traffic
yes.
First zero fires the assumption
that if and so.
All preventable certain visions
rollover collision will have.
Oldest street in less severe
injuries twenty three if we were
reported two point seven.
Deaths per one hundred thousand
inhabitants in twenty fifteen
the state of New Mexico have
fourteen point seven yes.
Eight thousand.
The vision fund highlands
Sanchez Bill witty that
policy makers since.
And while others need to me to
take in this epidemic using the
vision outlined we could
increase transparency and
accountability.
Madam chair and this morning
with me all of that and
secretary Sir.
I'm sure.
We don't have a plan that.
We have some very capable staff
and and so the the do everything
that they can to make sure that
we have the roadways walkways
are safe responsible I
understand and that's why I
appreciate what the members were
saying at the lost and we
presented but what's missing in
this case.
To.
C. Y. so that we can prevent
this.
And and it isn't just the.
Cells it's very clean from
helping to increase better
behavior by increasing people
wearing helmets.
For calling up and raise your
seat belts and and any other
things in my community has.
At this point four questions on
this the secretary said.
Thank you secretary.
Early on in the audience is in
favor of this bill.
Hello Madam once again and
Representative Representative
minuses and average and I I
fully support this bill along
with what I'm sorry about.
Safety components whether it's a
regular five electors.
Dentistry and others who were of
our.
We are in a transformational
period I believe in the United
States and to have a coordinator
at the state level for vision
zero is crucial given that the
policies Albuquerque number two
and the highest level of
fatalities across the country
the state of New Mexico is
number one I apologize if not
already but I do believe that
safety is going to be a critical
piece and we do have more
availability here along with
everybody else in the state so I
fully spell as it gives us a
good foundation for other local
jurisdictions.
To follow up on I appreciate
thank you very much.
Else.
Contact us.
Mr Applegate.
Thank you madam chair for the
open space
The transportation working group
of around us across this you
still support this bill
something was from last time
we're not saying that roads that
have been built are in safe just
that the drivers on the roads
are.
And this is our work to
counteract this mission zero
accuses data to analyze crash
sites in dangerous intersections
and things like that
and that's why it is the.
Also truck drivers do exist but
dismissing the bill because of
this does not prevent the
seventy percent.
Of deaths that do not involve
alcohol.
And again we are.
The worst state in the nation
for
Protecting vulnerable road users
and having a state level
coordinator with help present
this and go to New Mexico das
website you can see that most
legislative place in rural rural
areas of the state and this is
needed to protect those people
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Read there's someone who has my
phone number can't get on can't
calling for Dominic Silva he
says on the surface of the task
force bridges status for deaths
by suicide since there's an
added strain last year there
were there zero nine deaths.
So anybody in the audience
opposed to this.
Anybody online.
Okay we're gonna go to the.
Representative Lundstrom Sir if
you thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and staff I
yes my initial review and I I
looked at this earlier a little
concerned about being too
prescriptive madam chair members
when we start talking about a
very specific planning document
particularly done in another
country when I know the Federal
Highway Administration requires
plans of the DOT it does not
make sense to me that we would
do something that overlays that
and I and I I know that madam
chair that the Feds require this
part of the safety plans and so
I'm gonna have a little trouble
is for thank you madam chair
thank you very much for.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you for bringing this
forward by I know your hearts in
the right place we all want to
use axes noted was ways to help
Yes if you're from.
from committee so that you know
we had issues with the Taos
gorge bridge and the result.
Without having this in place.
The all to say I think.
There are great lessons to learn
from what was done in such a
wonderfully New.
and
hello good discussion
transportation interim committee
look at how the office of the
storms.
At I'm not sure.
Maybe this just becomes a rule
or a process that this part of
does
I was able to say is.
Your work.
Spent.
Eighteen years working in social
biology chemistry
labs and the the most brilliant
person I've ever met got his
degrees from cal tech and MIT.
He was.
getting into this lab to our
city people.
And one of the safety person
person said
eight what do you we're we're
setting up this effort to Sandia
Gen zero accidents what do you
think of that.
And the he's actually reverse
that person down said the only
way to not have accidents is to
not to work.
and and so I know that's not
what you're proposing here you
know this Eurovision plan you
know I I get it but as long as
there are vehicles they're
going.
Thank you mentioned.
Yes Representative
The person quarter to note is
that I cited Sweden because it
started in Sweden and and the
clearly have a.
Right that side well.
It's here the spending nineties
now for one.
in various states and most
recently Dr Albuquerque have
their own version version zero.
And so are you going to think
that if there and.
Also view firefighters dress a
little bit.
Representative Jim madam chair
Representative Lundstrom said.
Issue question around the plan.
there are requirements for plans
I.
The plan is listed in the sense
that it connects with the rural
areas this whole area is trying
to get this practices that
solutions new solutions I think
I think what vision zero more
than eighty strives to do is to
create new solutions yes we have
great ideas and engineering
around safety I recognize that
but it's it's about the
solutions to those one point of
statistics I would like to sign
because this came up last night
is important we were talking
about maybe this is really and
phone been issue so more than
role because will roll no
there's just so many high result
there will there were four
hundred four hundred sixty seven
dollars and twenty two.
For two hundred forty two of
those rural rural areas two
hundred twenty five of those
were in the area.
Hello don't necessarily know off
and maybe the secretary Donald
and speaking and.
Was it near walkway over a movie
pass.
The the locations for could we
have done something better
different in those spots this is
it isn't just I would venture to
say that most of tell you where
Morton and in the areas where
there's no money village town
the the the secretary speak
madam chair.
They are here are a couple of
things one is
Representative Harper I think
one for all of the divisions are
accidents.
And so I think from a level city
perspective the traditional
method is that truck to get
started right the vision zero
traffic deaths are preventable
accidents are for our entire.
You know we can get rid of them
set your example about the
library serves the Legislative
accidents but I think as soon as
a death occurs in Sandia
national there's gonna be some
strategic thinking about how we
could the way that.
this general does notice that
and recognize that certain the
rural communities are occurring
right and you can think about
that pretty clearly when you
consider that in larger urban
areas where residents can leave
an apartment complex on walk
within a mile to a grocery store
to a drug store to convenience
store that the most likely to
get on the road perhaps less
likely to have an accident with
rural communities where
residents are going to have that
level of access with their two
three or four miles away from
whatever it is the need for them
and the families that the
likelihood of you getting into
an accident increases with the
fact that they have to get into
a car drive right so there is an
equity component that comes as
the agency that is certainly
aimed at reducing deaths within
rural communities.
Thank you very much sectors.
I'm not sure COS.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the.
I understand we want with the.
I need to.
Representative Manuel mentioned
the federal highways
administration already has.
So okay not a problem with the
rule of public.
Is not respected of.
Bottom line is that.
The Federal Highway
Administration are we have the
please you know full therefore
I'm going to have a heart and
important business station if
we're adding more rules to rule
there are uses thank you madam
chair chair I could have.
The secretary described the
difference perhaps understanding
that we're not necessarily only
a lead and this.
Sure Madam chair of the
essentially the federal highways
in order to use the occasion
requirement that we reduce that
year over year and a set
threshold thrive although that
will be for the state to develop
an action plan for.
The performance of those in on
those measures publications
dissention we do is.
In statute stated in New Mexico
inspired to do better than what
those.
So it is essentially not
conflict with the rules it would
call for tighter measures that
stripper my state statute rather
than federal requirements thank
you much Representative
Lundstrom physics thank you
madam chair all right I'd like
you
Representative to give me an
example of safety on four ninety
one which is old triple six is
the highest accident Porter in
the state of New Mexico it's a
road that goes north of Gallup
Shiprock.
Currently there is a design that
includes a limited speed it
includes pull offs includes
lighting their safety corridors
give me a concrete example of
what would be different ons
trouble six between Gallup and
Shiprock that this plan would
provide.
Madam chair Representative
Lundstrom I'm not sure that he
was specifically for that
location I'm not familiar in the
department Madam chair of a what
would be different you guys have
designed a four lane road
there's pull offs for big trucks
their safety corridors along all
the access points to do the
chapters there's lighting what
else would we think about
outside and have a and there's
as much of share of sin state
police as you can possibly get
there what with a plan like this
find that isn't already
happening to the federal safety
program.
The Representative Lundstrom.
This part of the flood
commissions price.
Talk about new solutions madam
chair I'm just trying to get my
arms around that because we're
talking about eight state road.
And we're talking about all
those safety components that
have to go into it so I'm just
curious when you say to the
committee that there would be
new solutions what would those
be thank you madam chair
representative Custer that's the
whole point of vision zero
you're actually getting and
right on the head.
There are situations that
occurrence will talk about new
solutions it doesn't suggest
that I have a solution the
secretary has a solution as we
all have a stake in this to try
and find a solution Wirth a
solution the minutes of the
state needs some help reserves
are a similar role we that would
be identical or similar to that
bring that idea here so it
coordinator on vision zero with
symptoms those kinds of things
so I I appreciate what you're
saying because it's actually
will strive to do when you have
a child in certain areas we're
doing the best that we can is
there something out there that
we're not doing that's what
we're trying to do.
Madam chair representative I
think supporting Representative
point right is
Hi has identified so these are
not any less rights right as a
senator said these are taking to
the doctor for your primary care
check payment rights so in
twenty other states and
Washington DC bailout price
companies like uber and left to
become an authorized non
emergency medical transport
provider under the name Katie
and CEO after their specific
approval from the Medicaid
office what we're trying to do
is fix conflict that exists in
law so currently in order to
become a non emergency medical
transport provider the company
has to get a P. R. C.
certification and then they go
to Medicaid in the fall the
Medicaid process role as the non
emergency medical transport
provider but a transportation
network company like Lister
Hoover they actually go to the
peers the under a separate
statute the transportation
network company acts not the
motor carrier act and in order
to become a non emergency
medical transport provider you
have to be certified under the
motor carrier act so all this
law does is it says if you go to
the PRC under the transportation
network company act get your PRC
sort of Asian which is exactly
what the writers are supposed to
do you can then use that
certification under your ruling
statute to go Medicaid and go
through that the Medicaid
process to become approved under
a Medicaid and CEO to become a
non emergency medical.
So it's just fixing not little
conflict that exists to make
sure they can use their peers
the certification today the
second step of actually getting
and rolled with Medicaid.
Render.
In the audience here figures go
right let's start with
cornerstone class.
And
madam chair members Matt
Thompson
this for who were technologies
we have provided the service
since twenty eighteen in other
states as Kerry pointed out we
are happy to be here to support
this bill for all the reasons
that that senator Kerry just
laid out we are sure support as
well thank you.
Mr Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for lift and we to
stand in support of this bill it
gives in seo some patients just
another opportunity to get to
where they need to get to and
being a little of visually
challenged as I forgot my
glasses but and chair members of
care and transportation manager
organization also stands and
supporters thanks anybody else.
Online at yes Representative.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee watersheds
religious.
For Blue Cross blue shield of
New Mexico and we stand yes
sorry can you we can hear you
now so please thank you yes our.
Jim Bob our reserves registered
lobbyist Blue Cross blue shield
of New Mexico we stand in
support of this legislation and
thank the sponsors for providing
more options for our non
emergency medical
transportation for Medicaid
members thank you.
Gerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Sarah
fitzgerald senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce.
This is something we can all get
behind with this bill or filling
a transportation gap that exists
for many people in New Mexico
and that's going to help reduce
no shows for appointments and
the tendency of honorable
populations to delay getting the
medical care they need it will
also help Medicaid patients get
a reasonable lowcost right to
the doctor as opposed to an
unnecessarily expensive one and
of course for ensuring that
ambulances are available and
used to transport those with
serious emergent medical
conditions all of this is good
for patients and taxpayers alike
and it's helpful to improving
access across the board we thank
the sponsor and we urge
Committee support thank you very
much image credit.
Hi good morning I'm Amy creek
the government affairs chair for
motive Care we are non emergency
medical transportation broker
and the last two years we have
provided over one million rights
to Medicaid and Medicare
beneficiaries in New Mexico
taking these members to vital
medical appointments we support
Senate bill four eighty five as
it enables us to leverage a more
appropriate level of service for
members who only need an
ambulatory Curtis Kirkbride
while in turn it will help to
free up critical space on are
more specialized fleet for those
who require additional
assistance thank you.
Okay do you have anybody here in
opposition.
Then what yes.
Mr hi my names Alyssa the
campers can you hear me we
can't.
R. I work at the PRC and I
represent the transportation
division staff there I've also
worked at Medicaid and
specifically worked on
transportation issues with
Medicaid and I'm offering COVID
because what happening in this
bill is you're creating two
separate agencies to oversee our
these non emergency medical
transportation they've going to
have HSD and PRC both rating
regulatory framework when we
already have a regulatory
framework for this with just
under four motor carrier at the
transportation network company
that was never intended to allow
those carriers to provide non
emergency medical services that
there's not an inherent conflict
right now with the statute of it
the non emergency medical
transport is covered under the
motor carrier act this bill.
All right here six five seven
three of where the
transportation network companies
are not to be dean to provide
services that are defying under
the motor carrier act so there
are but definitely thank but
requirements under the motor
carrier act that will not apply
to the transportation network
companies unfortunately this
bill with not brought before the
PRC we were not able to of with
love to work with the sponsor
these issues we think that we do
a lot to improve the the of
Medicaid four but of yeah I
personally am not for this
that'll.
Thank you.
All right let's go to the
committee Representative Lund
thank you madam chair of the
couple of questions I guess my
first question is is Senator why
wouldn't the PRC the soffit and
the development of this bill
what we were.
Madam chair members the
committee there's several
conversations happening between
both agency and peers see with
in particular in particular the
transportation managers under
the and CEO contracts so what
happens now is anybody who is in
the non emergency medical
transport world is getting their
certification from the PRC under
the motor carrier act so the PRC
says you're certified you've met
the normal requirements for you
to do non emergency medical
transport and then using that
piece of paper any current non
emergency medical transport
company then goes and works with
the transportation managers
under the NCOs to become
approved by the Medicaid office
actually bill for Medicaid so
that is the regulation that
happens right now there is a
provision in the motor carrier
act that says the transportation
network companies are not
regulated by the motor carrier
act right so when a
transportation network company
goes to the PRC take gas
certificates they say well you
have to be under the motor
carrier act the motor carrier
act specifically says they can't
be under the motor carrier act
right because the right company
so this would basically allow
the same process that exists
under the motor carrier act for
those non emergency medical
transport companies are
currently in existence to just
be able to go to the PRC and say
we are getting certified under
the T. in CA the transportation
network.
Once we have that certification
will follow the same process
that all the current non
emergency medical transport
companies are using with the
transportation managers under
the NCOs with Medicaid to be
able to that the rules and Phil
Medicaid for the services okay
well madam chair registered from
the PRC this worked.
Consult.
So.
Madam chairman working at a
lower level you're working at
the transportation level or what
were you doing madam chair
members of the committee on the
conversations that were
happening with the rights years
in the PRC and agency actually
do that the needs of the staff
that were in the loop but yes it
was lower after transportation
level.
And madam chair it does say that
there was a response at least it
from eight F. I R. that there is
a public regulation commission
and responses from and the Human
Services so I guess I'm a little
confused just say that they were
part of it the other question I
had is so are you telling us
madam chair and senator that
under the current Human Services
and CEO contracts that Medicaid
can be used for this purpose
madam chair members the
committee of foreign and CEO
tracks there is a transportation
manager that like Blue Cross
blue shield contracts with one
of them is the motive Care so
what motive here does is motor
cares responsible for making
sure that there is non emergency
medical transport available for
all of Medicaid enrollees under
that and CEO and a bill Medicaid
for those rights and they are
using traditional non emergency
medical transport company.
Alaniz we are not meeting
adequacy standards there's not
enough right all so what twenty
other states have done is they
said those transportation
answers instead of just working
with the current line and our
non emergency medical transport
companies can now also work with
all rights your company so long
as they get certified in the
same way that the non emergency
medical transport companies in
the current space are getting
certified so that's what this
bill would allow those
transportation answers today
added tool to their toolbox and
say we can also arrange
non emergency medical transport
through lift for Hoover or let's
say a more Albuquerque guys
wanted to start right here
online so it's it's another way
for them to the advocacy centers
under their current requirements
and and so.
So madam chair under those
adequacy standards what does
that mean what level are we
trying to achieve.
So madam chair members the
committee there are advocacy
network standards for all
different types of benefits and
services under health insurance.
they are regulated by publicized
to make sure that there are I'm
not so rights available so that
people can cannot get to the
doctor there's anyone's right to
the oval there's nothing non
emergency rides available and
those standards are established
LSI the insurance companies when
they receive the contract for
the state of New Mexico to be
Medicaid and CEO they're
supposed to meet those accuracy
requirements which basically
says there's enough services
available in the community to
take care of all of the patients
on that were enrolling within
our health insurance plan so
this is just the specific one
for transportation basis for
primary care basis for surgery
cases all over the place madam
chair over how MCO contracts
work.
My question to you is what is
the adequacy standard we're
trying to me because when I look
at what this budget impact is
and it says indeterminate to me
how much are we proposing that
Medicaid will be paying in
addition to try to per to
provide these rights do you have
a sense of the madam chair
members the committee we don't
have a sense of the exact dollar
amount but the transportation
requirements that are in and CEO
contracts or forty they're
they're already accounted for in
what the contract is supposed to
be that like Blue Cross blue
shield is providing to its
patients but we'll cross
BlueShield has a gap they're
supposed to provide enough
transportation for let's say a
hundred patients the only have
the ability right now to provide
services for the this is going
to fill the gap between eighty
and a one hundred to make sure
that those twenty people who are
already counted for I supposed
to be getting right to the
contract actually can find me
ask madam chair since we don't
have any contracts now.
It's all that's been delayed.
With the Human Services
department are Senator cios
bringing this forward so when
they're evaluated on whether or
not they get a contract they can
say they found a way to meet
adequacy.
madam chair members the
committee that would need to be
a question for and CEO I'm not
working with and CEO I mean I
would imagine that yes as the as
you say we're doing it because
during the LFC hearings we were
very concerned about whether or
not these NCOs were meeting
their requirements and they were
not we just for some specific
questions to be put into the
Human Services contract process
and this was one of the they
people can't get medical service
thank you madam chair thank you
very much next we have
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
So.
Maybe federal office question
currently active in Albuquerque
able.
madam chair members the
committee and the taxi service
got their certification from the
PRC to be a non emergency
medical transport provider and
then they went through the
Medicaid process over HSD thank
yes they are allowed to non
emergency medical transport.
Okay.
I.
I get pretty creative ideas it's
a good idea to be able to do
that of Madam chair
representative I'm actually
surprised.
In opposition from the from the.
Your last.
Next we have Representative
Harper he's left so
Representative Madrid questions
have been answered but okay so
we're gonna go to I just had a
couple of questions so.
Senator.
I looked up sixty five seven
three and I'm gonna read it
really quickly to the committee
on transportation so sixty seven
sixty five deaths dash seven
dash three not other carriers
transportation that we're
companies and transportation are
company drivers shall not be
subject to the border Care Act
or deemed to provide
transportation services to
provide **** Care Act.
Cation that are still not be
required to register personal
vehicle as a commercial vehicle
of your vehicle for hire
suspension my understanding of
this bill is that this would
create an exception to that in
which these drivers would be
registered with the PRC to
transport these types of
customers is that correct.
Okay
What's the committee.
Madam chair of the pass.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Jones yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes no explain my vote.
Representative address yes.
Representative yes.
Provision of this program yes.
This is.
Chair of the yes.
Thank you very much.
I
wanted to spend about thank you
madam chair I think this.
Out time.
Latest out time is an accident
falling behind the curve on what
they need to do these billion
dollar contracts
that nobody's doing anything
about so I hope that we get some
better reports on that the
transportation for these
patients thank you madam chair.
Our last not least house
memorial eighty one.
Good morning little how are you
I thank you.
Right.
Thank you.
Thank you for having a committee
I am very forward has.
The one.
Which
to which is a proposal to
requested Mexico.
Transportation since the team
improving on civil.
This is
the
The intersection of Irving and
paradise Boulevard.
it is to have a ticket to
connect this to to increase the
safety of vehicles and
pedestrian traffic and reduce
any related risks so with that.
Second question thank you.
Right here in favor of this bill
on the public.
Members of the committee
on education and the THX
we are in favor of of the house
memorial however we think that
it would be better placed in
order for City of Albuquerque
New Mexico your Bernalillo
Unser's of their jurisdictions
such decisions of the of the
staff and capability to take the
lead on its merry feasibility
study for possible are they also
sit on the end to get to be
medical forms all of which they
have the majority of the votes
to facilitate this type
feasibility study DOT of myself
in district engineer three zero
just to get some also sit on the
board but we have to both
between the City of
Albuquerque's.
There's really of the big the
big vision almost all of with
respect to the memorial role for
it we just feel that it would be
better six with that with those
entities I don't think they
really want to go to the back of
their own all studies.
Thank you thank you Mr
container.
Yes.
We have anybody on the line.
To anybody opposed to this
memorial.
You all right committee members
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I think this is
a very good Morial I think that
having of state leaders
identified here pulling the MPO
and into the process is is good
and I just hope everybody votes
for thank you very much
Representative Madam chair
representative little just to
confirm is that stretch of road
the city road a county road or
state in the next thank you
madam.
Representative mix I
the conversations with brilliant
twenty actually that Bernalillo
county pastors over the north
south piece of it but at the
intersections of the City of
Albuquerque just as was
described so it's a mix the
study would be very helpful to
the school office report staff
thank you Representative chair
indigenous.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for this hi
I agree with the comments from
the DOT right.
This should be handled with the
Albuquerque level since the
nineteen needs to be done here.
The commission's.
Representative little so I'll
add my voice on this this seems
to be an ongoing battle with
this road in who will take
responsibility for it and who is
in charge of it and what your
section is and so I I commend
you thank you very much for
bringing this city I if I now
have a signed on to it miss so
Mister king Thomas comments are
very interesting I he's not
