Is here.
Here.
Here sorry.
Supporters.
Okay we have a quorum
and so I see senator
so come on in
welcome to.
Sure this is my first time being
in the Indian hello leaves here
faces early in the morning thank
you very much.
Well we have great Canadian
senators right well.
I appreciate that.
Everybody count down toward the
end.
The light at the end of the
tunnel I do appreciate this
madam chair committee
Talking about the Senate bill
two seventy one just let you
know when I defended this on the
floor it was quite entertaining
because several of my colleagues
in the chamber were named in the
career just as I was talking
about this bill and and I think
it's about when I was a of
remembering years ago I had a
part right who is very much our
lever just barrel racer in
Alamogordo and competed and
sources were always part of
really who she was and I am not
the most graceful of course you
can hear me a mile away on our
adult and that but I would go
out to the stables with my
partner time and there is one
our eight silo and this is a
reason why I'm such a strong
support this bill is that child
was clearly reflected her owner
paid for the stable fees in the
food and that was about it and
while my partner was out riding
horses I would not be silenced
all.
Shiloh I would give Shiloh Care
issues sweet sweet girl
and she was neglected her owner
didn't do anything for her and
so madam chair committee this
bill really in addition to
providing the definition of the
crime of what it does is it
allows nonprofits in our state
that are forced rescues to have
right of first refusal
many times when these forces are
acquired by the license bureau
they can go right back into
option.
And what this does for these
nonprofits is if you've worked
on profits they have limited
budgets and this allows them to
have that first it really giving
those forces a decent life and
thriving and care for for the
rest of their lives instead of
going back into either situation
where they're going to be left
to begin or even the purchase
water and so we have eleven
state registered and provide
rescue run by dedicated
hardworking people and
volunteers and twenty twenty one
the last four in law enforcement
agencies took in sixty eight
horses donkeys and mules were
found abandoned with out of home
or seized from cruelty and
neglect cases and once found
abandoned were to be date were
able to be transferred to the
rescues thanks to an internal
policy if the last four but the
one saved from cruelty had
option which just puts them at
risk again and puts them it
forces the find rescue staff to
spend their donations to compete
against other agencies to try
and claim these animals and
stuff is it just like homeless
dogs and cats which shelters are
states homeless forces should
have a chance to go to those
recipes for care and adoption
not options to the highest
bidder and you know in addition
to because this was probably
twenty five years ago when I
first met silo
we have a great rest here in our
area which is dom or seaplane
sanctuary run by a woman named
Catherine Priestley and she does
such a great job and really
giving these majestic creatures
the life that they deserve when
they've been neglected and
abandoned before and so just be
two seventy one would make sure
that every horse donkey and
you'll have a chance to get that
C. treatment and with me I have
a list of our own who's the
director of the New Mexico
livestock board and just a
Shelton who is here from animal
protection voters and I look
forward to the discussion madam
chair and committee.
Thank you senator Commission The
now to the audience are there's.
R. which members of the audience
are you supported this bill.
And how many of those.
Okay we'll start with the
propose Sir.
The difference and we limit
debate to the other or comments
to one.
planetary models around posi
December if you I would refuse
to be part of the rescue at the.
By sector had to go state in
their thing they have a you can
come on people's property
anytime they want without notice
and I don't think that's
property level the for the rest
of thirty five years two dollars
gas or whatever outlined black
as help with all that stuff in
the.
This bill has been brought to
the public for meetings that.
Hello.
let's see that although it does
a and the other other areas
they need to.
Presented to the public before
Before going forward with this
bill
I just like to re alligned they
refused to all the meeting and
and gave me a really bad time
online and the.
The person.
Representative and.
And thank you.
Thank you.
Then.
The help what the best horses
and horses to have a word right
now already asked to use of and
that's all we can get your name
I'm sorry these are downtime the
pheasant wild horses are
association person for his court
dina yes well first protection
act which we have which is
quite.
And which seven four judges have
agreed that in it's good and
that nobody has jurisdiction of.
After two so of one.
The this Legislature routinely
hi prove both behind and.
This system conspiracy against.
This also this
is the one definitions and and
that's a seventy seven eighty
five in this bill does not.
Three it also has a
specification.
This will what are the main
ones transferred to our
constitution article twenty
section twenty one thank you
ma'am and I think we have one
more gentleman thank you madam
chair members of the committee
James River with the well we're
standing.
I just like to say that we
location of the.
This should never be an option
of what was.
In order to restore
building which is now private
property we've got.
That they are not really notices
because.
The.
Of course a group that does not
have jurisdiction over wild
horses.
This bill is a yes protective
New Mexico natural resource
there has not.
Our vision or other vision in
your here is for smart concern
we.
We have not sat down with the
women's hoops to that's because
get to the bottom of this is to
something right
there is a section
of there are over two hundred
thousand year over seven
thousand of the rules.
And madam chair one us thank you
Sir that that was amended.
Work thank you for the funds
thank you thank you and I think
we have one person in favor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Susan
hammer and the executive
director of our children's Rios
I'm also the chair co chair of
the New Mexico we provide rescue
alliance which includes all the
register best.
We are in support of this bill
we do admit as trees as from
eight to four and asked so
Senator have the said.
Last last year we have a several
seizures of the admitted over
sixty wise is to be one of our
we have to admit eight hundred
fifty dollars on just to keep it
safe the rest to specialize in
real power resources and
opportunities.
We don't care for that thank you
we make a.
Hello and other available New
Mexico without.
And we're sort of.
Representative first.
The
thank you.
Whether any other participants
in the audience now up to the
I consume and we have Cheryl.
Yes.
Hello my name is Cheryl Gibson I
live in Albuquerque New Mexico
A rescue facilities have had the
right of free speech it is all
thanks twenty nineteen when the
animal be instigated are
installed that policy this bill
primarily affects wild horses
because it can present them with
live.
We support Prakrit ministration
PCP to control wild population
however the animal B. is not the
proper entity to make decisions
that have anything to do with
wild horses whether it be
choosing experts or providing
employees a conflict of interest
with the animal B. will color
every action the MLB takes
regarding wild horses.
We need to over the years a PNM
APP have done nothing to enact
legislation to create a reserve
this bill is bad for wild horses
and it is a masterwork of duping
hopefully you have read the
written statement submitted in
opposition to just speak to
someone like this time thank you
this can now go to the speaker
and that is my new needs.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is Mike needs
and I live in policy yes New
Mexico I strongly support this
bill as is but I do offer one
change for consideration I live
in Santa Fe County home of more
than one hundred seventy five
free roaming or feral for
formerly known as livestock
courses this bill is designed to
fill a gap in existing statutes
but as it is it does not clearly
fulfill all potential gaps on
page six line nineteen please
consider that the decline
definition should include all
horses ponies donkeys or Haney's
and that definition of the
client should extend throughout
the bill thank you.
Thank you okay so now we'll turn
to members of the committee
questions
Representative Kate's thank you
madam chair and committee
Senator an expert witness so I'm
gonna just ask a series of
questions and and I'm not sure
who wants to answer them so if
you could make that decision for
me Senator thank you
one is
this is gotten all the way
through the Senate correct it
yes chair committee it has
has it been a can you tell me
either of the the vote counts or
if it was a fight fires an
effort thank you for that
question mentions Committee yes
it was a bipartisan effort in a
remarkably in the debate on the
floor there asked actually no
debate just as I mentioned
before from all of my colleagues
little horse races throughout
the chamber and so I I think
this this was a really good
example of understanding of
connecting with other folks and
and going across the aisle and
making sure that my colleagues
who really I mean might my
commitment to this bill is
because the story that I told
you but I have you know Senator
Woods as a service supporters
well understanding he was of a
lot more understanding about
forces and situation with
courses and then I am and so
grateful to have him as a co
sponsor on this I do want to
clarify if you look on page five
of on the first line the
definition of reform this is not
about wild horses madam chair
committees about domesticated
horses investigative animals and
so I appreciate the efforts that
folks who are working with wild
horse population you many years
ago I was on the radio and I
remember reading as a news story
about the Mustangs on white
sands missile range and
understanding that's a
challenging situation it goes
back decades if not more but.
This is really about
domesticated animals that have
been neglected this is not about
wild horses
thank you madam chair and thank
you senator that's that was the
will slip right into my second
question so that was very so
this is about either of the
Indian domestic courses for
forces stated in teens
there have been neglected
cruelty so so currently.
what is the process these horses
are picked up or identified and
what is the current without this
bill process and we're is that
cap that this bill will help
thank you thank you madam chair
and and Representative ahead let
the director of the livestock
bureau make that comment few of
Madam chair representative
Kate's committee members.
Where this bill fills in that
gap is right now The New Mexico
livestock or under the direction
of distributes for in the
previous director they developed
a direct the which the director
has the authority to do based on
Mexico state statutes that any
is straight livestock that we
pick up we allow the rest use
first rate with use a lot of our
in that process we do
advertising for ownership for
five days and once that five
days past we allow you to set up
for auction and the rest use
in disgrace have stopped at a
report it up since the district
one out where the gap is is our
cruelty laws say that they
should go to the highest bidder
and these horses that we pick up
on cruelty cases where we have
to go to the courts to get
seizure warrants and he sees
these horses these horses
typically are in the motion they
need they are in desperate need
of care because most of the time
they've been mistreated starved
Sometimes just really tied down
there's lots of very sad cases
out there for these horses this
law really allows the rest you
first right she's on these
horses because they are needed
most care and I see that you got
my hand out that are brought
this morning and I apologize
madam chair for not getting
prior approval for these that
thank you for the these pictures
are good examples of the good
works rescue to these two horses
the first our general and job
rescue to occur they saved her
the picture on the right is just
beginning our the same with the
second our these cattle
literacies are down in the
middle part of the state they
took they took him to hostility
and they got a better shape that
the these cattle were actually a
seizure the page at the bottom
or seizure cases while they went
to a rescue facility for
patients so the rescues do
extreme work we just need that
gap fields work forces that are
typically the most abuse and
really need the most here are
having to go out to the highest
bidder.
So thank you madam chair and
thank you for taking the time to
explain that I have one last
question or maybe it is just a
suggestion is what is your point
I I love to see on the lifestyle
for an animal protection right
city the table same topic thank
you very much and that we have
bipartisan effort for the.
Dignity of these animals and the
safety of these animals what are
you going to do to educate the
public so that they understand
that this is not a request a
cation for slaughter.
Chair committee first and
foremost it and I'll let my
experts also address that this
is the second year second year
that I continue to get money to
the horse rescues because
they're in in need of that and
they have been really pleased
with the work that they have
been able to do I am terrified
of the semi creatures because
the one thing I've learned is
that you always have your hand
on them so they know where you
are so is the ticket
and understandably so but I've
I've learned a great deal of
respect for this and I think
with the organizations that we
have and I think with the
nonprofits that are doing
incredible work dom our for
example uses their social media
to help educate people about
what they're doing and just what
is happened to these creatures
and and all that Shelton
director drove also answer
legislative the feeling
consignments.
Madam chair members one think
that I would like to say is
that.
There is a District Court
decision that the New Mexico
livestock or does not have
authority over wild horses since
that decision was issued The New
Mexico livestock or has not
picked up in the wild horses we
have honored that for decisions
we we deal basically just what
the story livestock seizure of
the animals that we have to deal
with so I believe that our good
faith effort has been
Really demonstrated since that
court order was issued.
Madam chair representative K.
press at you know I I think this
the close proximity of the two
bills this year it and number
and then pass through the
legislature is.
perhaps because of confusion but
this this bill in particular you
know it is separate and it does
have a history it it was
introduced several years ago as
well it passed the house fifty
seventy two I believe was that
the number and then it got stuck
with a hearing on the Senate
side
and
animal protection in Mexico does
a lot of work to support both
the force the rescues and the
last four and helping to care
for these domestic courses that
are strays or from cruelty
situations we have an equine
protection fund where we provide
direct assistance for feet.
More and even financial costs
for the worst cases for that the
forces can't be saved
and will continue
thank you representative
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill forward
Senator and a little bit about
forces.
So I they have questions for
you.
Senator I was a stay at today on
the lust of currency.
Everything in the we do need to
update some of these that in.
Seventy seven one B. two it
gives the definition of
livestock which means all
domestic or domesticated animals
that are used raised on a farm
fresh and exotic animals in
captivity includes horses ****
mules.
And I noticed in your definition
of it that you changed it to.
Include ponies mules donkeys
Hindi's as well as our can you
tell me why you are planning on
changing the definition of force
madam chair and representatives
all at I think one of my experts
co he answer that question.
Sure and madam chair
Representative Ezzell so the
definition change was really
just to
Help the language act
efficiently in terms of
referring to the disposition
options for these animals and
the rest use that specialize in
saving these animals and just
using an all encompassing term
like you climb there is there's
no policy that's that's taking
place in changing the language
it's just that.
Easier to refer to the groups
and the disposition options for
all clients and then moved those
specific species into a
definition of money.
Thank you madam chair Senators
maybe one of your experts would
like to chime in on flight
academy is what a mule is what
this what India's as well
sources thank you madam chair I
I and and Representative wallet.
Do that thank you senator Madam
chair representative these out
I'm sorry your request what
apple.
First of counties so a party is
typically of small equine
they're they're small in
stature.
Physically.
How the state was that in the
five years apple of chef that's
the best description I can give
citizen will to managers yes yes
that would be a good then let's
go to meals.
So I'm you'll is a cross between
a donkey and horses it is
typically a male in their spare.
Okay share hybrid donkeys.
Addanki is a form of equine yes
and
The best way to this I guess
they have the long careers in
the state and federal any.
Handing.
Okay here's what I kind of
struggle with any I believe it
is a cross between it's when the
donkey here is the full.
And the horses the staff and
they are also still so there are
yes so I'm kind of curious what
the fall under the definition of
just regular meals because like
you said they are sterile their
hybrid.
Okay now our.
The horses are of full full
grown equine there's various
multiple breeds of horses and.
So I I.
I think that's the best
description to make their okay
all right thank you for that.
I'm gonna started on the bill
now miss madam chair and senator
okay.
I just heard the New Mexico miss
garland say that.
Under her statement session
first right of refusal went to
the rescue facilities is that
correct madam chair and senator
and representative director
garland Madam chair
representative the Ezzell that
is the case in the that is how
the stories are handled approve
the cases are different okay.
But.
After if there's no rescue
facilities that wants to take
anymore courses because they
it's it's an expensive.
Aspect too for bodies life it
takes a lot to care dedication
for that so one of Ruth there is
not a risky facility that's
available to take the systrace.
What happens if.
Currently so madam chair
representative Representative
Ezzell we have not encountered
that since this directive came
out of twenty nineteen of
rescues have stepped up and
taken every of story that we
have picked up from the
livestock for an upgrade I want
to just maybe give a shout out
to the rescues this
here recently we have a very
large facility in the Dinning
area related links thirty one
head of courses over to the New
Mexico livestock or and the
rescue stepped up and took every
single one of.
And madam chair I did read about
that case and I do appreciate
the people that did come forward
and say yes we can do this.
But is there any means there for
madam chair and senator and
stricter guard.
For an individual to say yes we
will take instead of them going
to a rescue facility the service
Madam chair representative the
felt no not at the time okay all
right I will I would like to add
that there have been some people
interested in horses we direct
them to the rescue which
purchases them and they
typically I am from the last
okay and madam chair I I do want
to point out that there.
I have first hand knowledge of
this because.
Of.
Somebody is pretty close to me
my son and his wife to take in
rescue forces they do take it
risky you'll see I do tech take
care of or even from out of
state they have a couple of
minutes ago keys that they're
also taking care of a couple
weeks ago they were able to
rescue.
Beautiful right in our that was
starving to death that she went
in.
Back inside but these out of
state animals that they are
taking can.
They have to.
Take care of the animals they
have to write them for their
human friendly of where they not
necessarily in all cases because
obviously the little managers
that cannot be.
But the horses can be both of
those kids are calling kids and
they're all now madam chair
there's so.
They do a good job on break in
the sense they do it the right
way that up just settlement but
the man that they do it the
right way so I have to plug in
for that everybody that does
work with these animals to save.
But there there in lies the
problem.
Madam chair I'm gonna turn three
more.
Papers that in reading for a
couple of days now
of Senator Hamblen on the on the
F. I. R..
I noticed one thing that really
stood out to me.
C..
They did this change would be to
limit the time frame for
claiming histories to five days
after the publication of the
notice instead of five days
after the last publication of
the notice can you tell me why
that changes may madam chair
committee we that's been a
popular questions we can bring
this up in committee so I'm I'm
glad that you answer that to
clarify that for you all at
director garland okay.
Shelton actually Senator
you madam chair Representative
Ezzell if you're referring to
the amendment is made and the
Senate Judiciary.
I can explain that
This is the the time
houses for the last four to
I owner for the straight for the
disposition option would take
place is not.
In this bill what happened was.
One of the senators at serving
on Senate judiciary had noticed
that there was a discrepancy in
the language where there was
references to the disposition
happening after publication
after publication of the notice
but then there was one line
where it said after the last
publication of the notice and
and that made the language
stating that is existing law and
then the head coach bill have
copy that for also the equity
disposition and so just to make
sure that the same language with
you throughout the statute
the word last was review so that
it's just referring to industry
K. five days after the
publication of this for equines
running at large is is days
after publication of this that
disposition option would take
place.
Okay well my concern there is
we.
We have some unscrupulous people
out there that do steal animals.
And madam chair and senator
one instance happened when
numbers people were.
Team roping you know there's
always lots of people that take.
And some horses first of.
And.
People that did.
Still these horses realize that
there might be a problem with
thank you the law after more
constant you know.
Especially the livestock board
forces were turned out.
So these horses are planned on
eighty five property and just
doing a lot of K. here if these
horses are turned out somewhere
else far away.
And
Last of borders called in to get
these forces up think that came
from Texas okay.
Of the return of somewhere in
New Mexico.
And the last four digits get
them up and make shaped in that
particular county.
Anybody from Texas be able to
realize that these might be here
and there wrote forces.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of what Mexico.
Chair representative he's the
self we actually don't
advertising in that particular
location we put them on our
website you guys were anybody
can access them
In the best case scenario it
would be that we know that the
sources were stolen we have a
really good communication with
our surrounding states we have.
We work well with Texas Arizona
Colorado Utah.
There were there have major
livestock operations usually.
Down so the best case scenario
we know that these forces could
possibly that would be those
that were stolen in the worst
case scenario nobody ever
realizes any of this five days
pass and rescue to.
That's the good part about them
going to rescue their at that
rescue and rescue really they
don't want to hold the sources
on a you know I'm in the home so
it's a good possibility that we
can get them back to their
original homes okay which brings
me to my next question in that
chair Senator.
Forces carrier quite a few
diseases messy drive Hanisch is
sitting today miss garland we
had of this of and I can't
remember how many years because
this is been mistaking this time
of that as we all remember that
when we're shut down any
movement of any our and our
state.
The H. B. one viruses.
Arcuri with all those forces
were pointing down there nobody
these there.
Of whenever these forces do go
into a rescue facility are they.
What about a Coggins test
resources what about it maybe
the vaccine does the.
Is a veterinarian called in to
check them over are they given
vaccines they isolated from the
other questions that might be in
the so.
Madam chair representative
itself I can get money money
experience and all that in turn
it over to doctor brown I know
our Katherine
she will isolate support to the
horses she well she's also super
great about trying to do
whatever natural is can help
heal our she uses us over some
of the that helps what is it.
Colloidal silver gray to help
she's she's been very public
about like all the different
treatments that she does but I
know that they make every single
effort to try and make sure that
the horses okay and that the
vaccinations are well as
director garland go ahead and
add to that okay so Madam chair
representative these L. R.
assistant state veterinarian
goes out and checks the forces
she keeps on sheets have some
options
I know that most of the rescue
facilities we have situation
with walking in circles in
Edgewood they helped us pick up
a couple of really six forces
and support them working their
way forward for anything else so
they do have procedures okay and
madam chair and.
Senator in director garland and
and that there are formulas is
out there for the way you can
keep pay and income one way from
your.
Stop of the stock is beneficial
to everybody concerned.
If we had one comment that I've.
It.
This is through the NMDA the
definition change from our
equine will not address ongoing
issue of online at our and state
and madam chair and senator
Hamlin we do have enough
population of forces that are
just out there.
At these have been.
There and one of our we've seen
the problem that has happened
did.
Representative DELLOSO
These horses secretary member
how can director garland you
might be able to answer this for
me because I really can't
remember whenever these.
Feral horses out of.
Persons private property and
they were of making in this set
themselves but trying to tear
down the fences a breeder
registered stock the list goes
on and on the livestock board
was called the she had every
right to do that it was her
private properties that she was
protecting.
These feral horses can be very
destructive we all know that I
see people in the back there
shaking their head now and I
will disagree with you all day
long.
madam chair whenever these
forces we're.
Gathered up all the livestock
board where were they taken what
was what was that how long were
they help but love stuff.
Madam chair representative so
that was before I became
directors enrollment of state
set off of the best I know okay
the horses were picked up they
were taking to the state prison
which is used as a facility for
us to hold a stray livestock at
that time
there was a restraining order
placed on New Mexico livestock
one word I will that time and
they were held at that facility
for.
I want to want to stay close to
here yes but that's where that
District Court decision came
from was off of that lawsuit
that New Mexico livestock or has
no jurisdiction over what our.
Madam chair of Senator and
director I appreciate that
comment and I disagree with that
judge.
And I will continue to
participate that judge.
I think that was a pretty.
By this decision that we made
regarding this particular forces
that were picked up and I really
don't like that person behind
the director shaking his head no
madam chair.
madam chair whenever you brought
whatever the sources are brought
up to the state penitentiary and
help for that.
The last four sort of the cost
of all the to get care of those
animals did eight plus the
transportation plus a
veterinary these isn't that
correct chair representative
telling us that is correct okay
madam chair one of the sources
went back to rid us of there was
a facility had agreed to help
the source and the after a while
people right at the start page
did in the thanks for the feed
for these our and madam chair
after twelve that interest in
these horses candid died down
and the people that the facility
said with three taking care of
these forces and people just
come in here Representative and
everything else because at that
point they were not wild anymore
they were not fairly new.
Madam chair those forces we're
taking care of.
They had food to eat they have
water to drink.
And then all of a sudden the
people said we can't do this
anymore.
They could not do it anymore
that could not afford to do it
anymore resources related turns
back out so right now the right
does so we're I cannot say
anything about the place C. to
area of the the emails that
I've.
During the winter time these
horses that are in the rid us
area.
They are abandoned horses is
what they are.
Whenever Sir please don't do
that.
Well you're very distracting and
I have the floor right.
Madam chair and senator.
Right now these horses are being
hit by cars.
They start whenever there's a
draft going on during the winter
time they're expanding its note
with Newfie.
The only water that they have to
drink is out of the river.
And madam chair.
I would rather see these horses.
Put in the facility for somebody
might be able to take care of
them the way that they're
supposed to be taken care
instead of left out there were
possibly more well I don't more
kids in the past.
Two years I think that there's
been six sources kids up there
let them run across and running
into the vehicles not the
vehicles run into them but I'm
running into the girls cause us
all one personally myself and it
was a tragedy.
What is going to happen madam
chair Senator.
Whenever our is it in most cases
whenever there it at all they go
through the windshield of the
car.
What's going to happen whenever
people start getting killed and
that's my concern right there.
Madam chair I will go on with
the rest of this land that was.
I'm talking way too long but I
am passionate about this.
For.
That part of it the attorney
general's office of.
See what that down.
I do have a question that they
propose to you about the
disposition of claim to straits
could anybody explain that to
me.
Madam chair and and
Representative before I I turn
this over I see with some of the
concerns you have I see there's
some opportunities that you and
I can have conversations about
of course I'm not somebody who's
so deeply involved in this but I
have a genuine concern for that
as well and so if those are
conversations that you and I can
continue to have us in the
future I would like that Madam
chair Senator Hamblen as I
understand your passion
otherwise you wouldn't be
carrying this bill actually but
my concern is what happens when
numbers of facility cannot take
your these horses anymore or the
big points up at that with
equines anymore.
Or any of the people that have
adopted the what happens those
sources the we know that our is
get out we know what their age
late this especially if they
have been start down that
they're just.
They're a little less likely to
be able to live out their full
adult life so what happens in.
Well it can't just keep very.
Can't keep very Madam chair
representative all of my to my
experts answer that question
Madam chair representative is
also in
if you're asking about the
scenarios where the for example
the straight courses or equine
are they go through that the
five day
waiting period the five day
search part owner no one turns
out it's offered to the shelters
that for the right of first
refusal and no shelter can take
a course that forces would
continue to go through the
actual process just like I said
I stopped so it's just about
adding in that stuff at the
beginning for the.
Equines for the shelters to
protect them so madam chair of
Representative.
Mr Johnson is that correct is
that your last name job to it's
a feminine name libraries in the
shelter and okay I'm sorry to I
go I I okay so Michelle to one
of the sources to go to auction
anybody can get on the sources.
It Madam chair representative
itself yes that that's correct
that's standing and maybe that
director and miss madam chair
because I do have a passion for
horses side I've seen.
Well I'm not going to go down
that route.
Never mind.
Madam chair.
Senator Hamblen.
Currently in the United States
there is not a slaughter house
for our.
They have been our is that
broken their leg Sabet there's
no fix and they just have to be
put now we have a divorces they
can hardly walk I had to put
down my twenty eight year old
our.
A broken heart.
An estimate our replacement.
The second time in our life that
his in the black is.
He has a lot.
I don't like to see these horses
going down to Mexico we.
Sometimes that the end result.
What they do New Mexico to the
sources and constable.
And until we as citizens United
States understand that part of
the money.
Care for these forces is end of
life in a humane manner.
We're gonna just continue to see
horses in people's backyards in
the more urban areas that have
died that kept the head off of
the drug we've heard that many
times from down in the south
valley from down in the area.
Where the horses cannot be
identified.
There has to be some way to take
care of this madam chair.
And the that is my question what
about the afterlife okay.
Let me see what else I have
because of the wind thank.
This year spread throughout the
state you're not only dealing
with our issue dealing with all
the other aspects of a lot of
stuff that I read off earlier
specially one of those cattle
sales going on and there's at
least.
Six of them a week I do believe
so your inspectors at them
making sure that these cattle
that come through there are
branded which forces in our
state do not have to be so.
That is not a law.
Whenever we're talking about
humanely euthanizing equine by
a licensed veterinarian is that
going to be up to.
The.
Rescue facilities to retirement
facilities the individuals.
To have my head does that is it
just any licensed veterinarian
or is that a licensed equine
veterinary Madam chair
representative so all of my my
experts jump in here the main
guy do rock paper scissors
seeing goes first okay.
Madam chair representative HBs
L. I believe that's just a
license for that near okay okay.
Appreciate that answer
It
real fast.
There's a page fourteen of the
bill madam chair and senator.
Online eight is said if the wind
is not purchased through the
seal built sealed it processes
this is Nate language the board
made percent alternative
placement for peer with a last
resort option to humanely
euthanized equine by licensed
veterinarians.
So I've written back.
But if we're talking about the
board that is talking about.
The livestock board.
And I know that doctor Han H. is
part of the last four is he
going is he the one that you all
designated to go up to these
places and euthanizing horses
Senator Representative Ezzell
specifically not.
We have our state veterinarians
drops in enrollment and he has
to assistant that's correctly
under him that are in charge of
the field work basically okay
doctor had to suspend higher to
set up the meeting all three
sections okay thank you very
much for that.
I was curious though about the
fees that are charged once the
sources or help on the line
stuff for madam chair and I
can't seem to find the right now
is very well.
This case intensive some money
our system for you as of
at eight seventeen on the.
Thank you.
House for two years
Representative.
C. seventeen.
Section eight section ten.
The.
There's two different most have
options.
I.
It was from the New Mexico
livestock board of.
Forty five days comes to the
dollar.
Today they are shaking their
head with the bills.
Five days from fifty dollars to
the microchips to those faced in
dollars of.
So we know what the numbers were
whenever you had to go down and
get the horses from the rid us
area.
Madam chair as far as these
histories barrel horses the
funds what project term you want
to use their.
Whenever they are trespassing on
somebody's property setting is
just like cattle.
At the last second sectors
double out there together that
owner of that private property
does that to do together is that
correct and then they place
college a lot of stuff.
Madam chair representative
though but it's correct okay so.
We have seen what the tourney
General has said in the past
regarding the feral horses that
the rid of sept area because
they are roadways stable of to
the state if they are on federal
lands that belong to businesses
stayed with same goes their
private property private
property Allardice.
Taking the brunt of it Mr
speaker madam chair.
On page seventeen at the very
top and I don't know which.
Representative Zamora is looking
get at the directive is section
two in a.
And it has to do with left up
the interest that.
And there is spelled out in this
bill and I notices changes that
you've made Senator why did you
make those changes.
Because paid online for page
seventeen hundred pay.
It says upon pubblico a spans
both sides ready large within
the limits of any municipality
town or village whether
incorporated or not within the
military reservation.
You tell me what those changes
would put it sure madam chair
and Representative Ezzell.
Michelle can go ahead and answer
that
because it seems like it's it's
really kind of clarifying is
covering some of those instances
specially what you're talking
about what happened so.
We have madam chair and
representative about my
understanding is that this is
something of the bill drafter
added if you if you just there's
no added language online for I
whether incorporated or not but
they're striking that same
language online census they just
was in a different place in the
center okay do that to that of
but that was bill drafting
decision.
Okay.
And then down on the part see I
noticed that the at the board
shall designate the stricken the
person added to could study.
Okay so that could either be the
rescue facilities or a person so
I get that.
But I did want to point one
thing out on page eighteen
online agency.
It looks to me like this make
reference to this I'm not real
sure livestock can be either
singular or plural madam chair
and senator so I was kind of
curious what that made it into
the.
Plus or of some.
That's a good question madam
chair and representative
Madam chair representative
that's all I I do not know if
she'll drafters bill drafters is
okay.
Madam chair thank you very much
for that
Madam chair as far as this bill
goes.
There is a difference between
the wild horses those are
designated many years go by
those I can't remember his name
that he was a doctor he was a
senator chair members stay home
coming dina.
That is not the case in other
areas of our state the sources
have been turned out they were
dismissed at one time now
they're just feral animals
whenever we have that group
feral horses it doesn't some of
those horses it's very evident
that that problem with Pompeo
some of those have been gelded.
Museveni can go up and you can
see that in your hand.
They're not wild horses there
just bear our.
The populations are growing even
with the vaccines that are shot
to the merits which are.
It's a hit or miss pardon the
pun there.
the depends some of you look at
it now the audience but not able
to.
Of like fine sense there yes.
And the only way we're going to
stop these hurts from growing.
Is to do something more than.
Chemically trying to keep the
spares from cycling.
We have to do more than.
Let me these cults grow up to be
students because sometimes
they're breeding their sisters
or their mothers I've seen that
happen just very recently.
These herds are growing all of
our state and before you know it
ladies and gentleman of this is
real hard for me to say because
I do love forces I love.
That is come to the point where
the for service.
It's taken means to replicate
livestock.
Out of these for us and it's not
gonna be long before they start
coming after the our.
And they're going to do just
what they do the chasm.
It's going to be fairly
slaughtering them not and not to
keep that in mind.
Because what they shot over
there in the last they didn't
kill.
A lot of those were wounded and
left to suffer and die.
And that's what's gonna happen
to the source so as we started
seven that.
Madam chair Senator thank you
very much thank you all for your
responses thank you thank you
madam chair is there any more
comments questions.
Senator.
Presenters
I sent a couple questions was
legal definition of ministry.
Madam chair committee thank you
Representative Matthews because
that's been also question his
come up and and I think one of
the reasons why it's really
important for us to have that
definition and somebody within
themselves so that thank you
thank you madam chair and and
Representative Matthews so there
is.
At twenty one at a definition
for very.
Last October.
So important it needs live
stuff.
That because of the definition
provide.
The mastic animals livestock
founding running a club found
running at large upon public or
private lands either funds or
fence whose owner is unknown for
that is stranded with a grant
that is not on record in the
office of the board the last
four or as a freshly branded or
marked offspring not with its
branches for marked mother on
the next page on the other.
This produce.
Thank thank you for pointing
that out.
In the last few weeks we've had
a number of animal bills come
before us and I kept wondering
what the world is in the state.
As opposed to simply a story.
So.
This bill has based on all the
things I've read here and she's
discussion has.
Is not going to with your bill
relates to districts is that
correct domesticate.
Caters.
so there's different we have a
straight domesticated wild is
there another category of
course.
Madam chair committee I have
feeling you're calling
Representative Ezzell might know
that given the.
but I also would allow for my.
My the experts here to clarify
the ball madam chair
Representative Matthews
so I think there's domesticated
and this is why and then the
strays are have a offset of own
work these strays is basically a
terminology used for livestock
that we at that time do not know
who their owners.
Okay.
And madam chair the presenters
do you always know I see the
always know whether they.
Our domesticated or wild but
sometimes domesticated animals
become wild thank.
And madam chair Representative
vice versa absolutely okay and.
And what we have in to see this
with our last meeting we had.
Testimony about bill relating to
the situation proceeded to read
does so where we were talking
about.
Essentially wild horses.
Verses domesticated horses.
That have become wild in my
right about that.
So Madam chair representative
Matthews I I think the.
On Senate bill three oh one that
we heard on Tuesday that's more
about trying to begin to manage
the wild horses this act this
bill actually addresses the
the care and the homes of the
straits or the cases that we
have these are these at this
bill is strictly about
domesticated okay okay and and
madam chair presenters it has
nothing to do with that
situation we haven't proceed as
Andrea does so we're we have
substantial numbers of forces.
Wild horses what Madam chair
representative notice.
Differently from our madam chair
three presenters I really
appreciate that trying to
understand the categories of
forces Fund guessing there's.
Madam chair representative there
are many of us were not in the
our world who are just
overwhelmed with the complexity
that is this.
Madam chair and senator.
The reason I ask that question
is because and listening to the
comments of pro and con when we
begin the discussion is
obviously a lot of.
Strong feelings among people
about this issue and.
And we heard today as we heard.
To see that there's no meetings
there's no getting together I
don't know if that's accurate or
not if that if if you all would
agree that that is that there's
that.
Let me back up Madam seems to me
we a lot of people very
interested in horses and
probably are very fine
questions.
And there seems to be a golf
though and chair in how people
are relating to the issues of
the populations and
overpopulation.
And I'm just wondering
as we consider these bills Madam
chair and senator is there.
It has been an effort to bring
people together on this and and
if Y. eight and if that happens
if that has occurred why not and
if it has occurred.
Is there some way that we could
spend this call.
Madam chair representative I I
do want to reiterate that we
have the eleven register our
rescues in the state and this
issue is coming forth because of
that the challenges that they're
experiencing when we start
talking about wild horses that's
a whole different creature and
so I I do want to reiterate that
that's what this bill is
focusing on is what the needs
are of the register of course
excuse.
Madam chair and senator I
appreciate that but but some of
the comments today were.
In reference to this bill and
reflected some real hostility
toward this.
This put this trying to
understand this environments.
But as cherry discotheque driver
saying it's no different than
any other you will have people
in every community the MMA
poster or in favor of the F. any
bill whether its forces are not
in the committee room and and
and the fact that.
You know not everybody has the
public meeting when they bring a
bill before this body and and
should the committee desire in
the inner to take a look at
these issues I I think we can do
that and the and and maybe a
it's an interesting people
together to bring forth
legislation and endorsed by the
interim committee that's what
that's maybe what I would
suggest.
Committee appreciate that issues
that communities in a row here
people are meeting but they all
of questions and answers seems
to we need to be figure out some
way maybe this along so but
those are all my questions thank
you again
I'm obviously not our person.
That I appreciate what you all
do.
Thank you Representative
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative so in the
definition of industry.
This straight Madam.
Our could be in a straight.
Want to find it and inspect
Department brand on find an
older it comes back policy is
very.
Mr right that is owned.
That is correct yes thank you.
And madam chair presenters we
heard some testimony earlier the
young man what he walked out
because he's that show some
respect for the committee as it
is distracting when the support
somebody in the audience are
selected from the gestures or
something but he was concerned
about people being come on
somebody's land and confiscated
them.
Is
going to that a little bit.
As for the procedure all I madam
chair and representative and I
know that this was this was
partially brought up by the
conversations spurred on by
Representative Ezzell director
garland go ahead and respond
more to them so Madam chair
representative the more I think
what the gentleman referring to
is the license rescues because
they are licensed and regulated
by the New Mexico livestock for
we have the right to go in and
inspect them which we do once a
year are one of our assistant
state veterinarians goes and
checks the pandemic additional
these to make sure that the
horses are being cared for that
the.
Possibility of disease spread is
controlled all of that is
expected we as a regulatory
agency do have the right to
going in fact that and and madam
chair I was positivity for to
the animal that's going to be
confiscated for the rest.
To to be rescued how how does
that procedure take place where
like like say if there's
somebody saw this animal that
was here in this page on the top
left.
Maybe maybe respond or something
it looks like he's in a good set
of panels prizes that then.
But if somebody reports that
animal.
Then you guys have to go inspect
to see what's going on how does
that play a.
Displace.
Chair representative Zamora so
that's where our law enforcement
capabilities come in we were if
we have a report such as this
for us and just this Madam he's
in pants that we put in an act
thank you we picking up the
road.
So
We we follow our law enforcement
if we observe like we try to
get permission to go in and look
at the animals if a neighbor
says is this forces extremely
thin and needs some attention we
try to contact that property
owner we go when we talked to
see what the situation is if.
They're not cooperating and we
feel that the animals needs our
immediate assistance we don't
support together the report and
then go back and then get those
we do not have the authority
to school property and take
them.
Okay thank you service us
anything can you kind of.
You know we have this.
Our system of.
To to to pick up horses and make
them better and I understand
that part of it and I'm all for
but we also have the stream the
forces live forever and they're
always gonna stay I pretty
they're always of the somebody's
pet.
There's all sorts is out there
that I used to break horses for
for a school for some side money
and their son that then you wish
there was a slaughter slaughter
plants.
The actors I thank you so so.
I want to kind of piggyback off.
Representative results comments
are years about for.
The end of the life of the of
this our and and can you just
for the record give us an
average age of the horde my face
to our so the public can
understand.
What we're looking at.
So Madam chair representative
Laura.
The life expectancy of our can
rates I think anywhere from.
One minute old to we actually
have a roll for some I wrote IT
she was thirty six.
That that's very helpful our but
it is my dad love that our and
to related care of herself but
normally age of of the death of
horses around twenty give or
take some years right there and
and that's why this picture on
the top of this page is so
impressive because you see a
our.
That
Thirty five years old one
correct.
The second half.
The second is thirty five and
the public doesn't take a state
held is no so yes thirty five
year old our to be doing really
good is is amazing so so I think
as a whole what we're doing
these things we need to keep
that in to perspective.
And.
And not.
Think that our very big fat
birdies for forever I mean we we
need to we need to consider that
Madam chairman and presenters
thank you for the bill and
that's all my questions thank
you madam chair representative
for those questions and
thoughtful saying we have one
more question for an
Representative Senator.
You madam secretary.
Chair just drove us question
many years ago
Representative two thousand
maybe you could help me out I
think of this to this question
before I can't remember the
present level nation was.
It came to my office we were
visiting about forces because
that was one of the issues that
was brought up during that
particular session.
And the he verified that there
was over eight thousand head.
Of feral horses up on the Navajo
Nation.
Can you tell me what what the
status is there Senator and
director garland.
Can it or maybe this Shelton
can.
So madam chair representative
these out we don't really have
jurisdiction on the reservations
we do try to assist in any type
of situation that comes up
Representative Allison might
know but I do feel that he's
there are a lot of.
What we would refer to as a
stray horses up there
that cross over into other
people's property
we actually had a situation
without a year ago that there
was probably about ten
proximally giver takes more
strict up they were branded
forward because that we knew
that they were domesticated but
we never could find the plan
holder to.
So I I think there's there's a
lot of courses on the
reservations Representative ECL
and I think Representative
Allison.
Shares of.
On the basis of because of the
evolution of the majority of the
name is in Arizona we're talking
about courses that were strays
in Arizona as well and what they
did back then was
as of September to the slaughter
house that was the only means of
Collection of.
But personally.
Whether I do mail orders.
Introduce legislation.
I. Leri cooperation
communication and collaboration.
Some of the emails that I have
been receiving she is asking
about public input.
Just wondering how much public
input did go into research for
the
the writing of this field
because I think that is very
very important the needs of the
co collaboration to.
Of the success of legislation
that was one of my questions is
how much public input was there
sure absolutely thank you
Representative and Madam chair
what about the self image that
question and madam chair and
representative Allison thank you
so much for that question the
opportunity to address it so.
The comments that we now have
been said about this bill in
regards to public input.
They're the same comments that
are were made about Senate bill
three oh one and really focused
on three aligned and and the
concern that maybe Senate bill
two seventy one has something to
do with with files forces which
it does not and I I could
talked at great length about all
from.
Many many years on the wild
point issue has actually taken
place
on this particular bill the
focus on input was with the New
Mexico last four and eleven
register for shelters because
that's really the the interface
of the disposition process is is
the seizing agency and the
agency offers that um has what I
would like to extend the right
of first refusal to all cases
instead of just a straight cases
according to directive
again I could go a Great Plains
talking about that the public
input and participation on the
wild horse issue that would
probably take a lot of time and
I and I don't want to distract
from the fact that this this
bill today does not affect those
forces about expected concern.
Thank you for that sure I would
also like to share a perspective
from the native Americans.
Of we respect.
All living things all creatures
as in our culture the horse is
considered sacred.
And.
It is used as special medicine
that is the only time that.
The horses use as you might say
and the terrible animal you know
this go out of the slot like you
do the cows and sheep and goats
but the the horses considered
sacred where it is needed like
for example during the pandemic
I know of a family that
slaughtered in our state.
Of.
I can truthfully say that it's
stopped the pandemic where it
was happening so the horses used
in that way so to.
Yes Representative economic
slaughter is not good in the
opinion of the Navajo the Navajo
Nation so high so to you thank
you very much thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
I see no debate Senator
Wodehouse we have to do for us
on six.
Senate Bill.
Seventy one as amended quick
follow.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative Kate's yes.
Representative Ezzell yes
Representative Lara yes
Representative Matthews yes
Representative Zamora yes
Representative Nelson yes
Representative yes Senator you
have a bill to pass you madam
chair committee.
And I would like to offer up
Representative small is the
house sponsor but if any if you
would like to sign on before it
gets to the floor that would be
greatly appreciated and I
appreciate your input and
comments and feedback on this
thank you very much thank you
senator.
Thank you for.
Thank you.
Systems.
So.
One of the money going out of
the state.
All.
Thank.
With.
Thank you very much everybody
we.
This.
This
will.
Hello.
This is.
This is here okay.
Tobacco tests supported system
so I I understand the concern I
just worry about to just I it's
just it's just outcomes.
Who here Fleischer and stuff and
I thought it is just in our
State.
Million oz felt like you're
being really dedicated to jobs.
The health is more important to
me than that which
is okay thank you and his
dedicated I always worry when
Austin is here.
Anyhow I don't.
Senator.
Very very nice.
