Yeah.
don't need.
ready for this
Welcome to the Republican
caucus.
Roll calls closed. We have
Quorum.
General lady from Santa Fe
representsansky with today's
invitation.
Please rise and bow your head.
Dear Lord,
We thank you for your grace,
strength, and wisdom. May wisdom
guide our final deliberations.
Ma patience abound in these last
hours and may grace fill our
tired hearts. We honor the
dedicated staff whose tireless
efforts have sustained our work
through long days and nights and
whose expertise and service
often go unseen.
Please bless every member of
this house, and as we return to
the sunshine and care of our
communities, help us to reflect
on the good that we have tried
to do here and to strive to
always do better.
May we carry with us not the
weight of division, but the
lightness of shared purpose and
common good. Please bless the
fruits of our labor, help us to
heal the wounds of our
disagreements and prepare us for
the path that lies ahead. And
Lord, we pray that you would
bless and keep our members, our
staff, and their families safe
and healthy in the interim until
we are together again. Amen.
The lady from Serras Coro
Valencia, Catherine
from San Juan with the pledge
that the Mexico flag.
Wow, that pleabo was very
enthusiastic.
Kind of scary.
Generally from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I mean we go to that
order of business messages.
Mhm
It's a
Clerk to read.
Good morning everybody.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill.
156 is amended by the Senate and
requests the concurrence of the
House to the Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
Bill 458 as amended in the House
and further amended in the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Sherry de Gohan,
Senate chief clerk. Message will
be entered.
You leave from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
concurrence.
So no objection is ordered from
Donana. Are you ready?
On concurrence item.
Number one.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker.
Good morning, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House concur with the Senate
amendments to House Bill HB 71.
Mr. Speaker, uh, the Senate
added two categories to, uh,
House Bill 71. They're now, uh.
Asking that we do a Medicaid
fund and they are also asking
that we do uh behavior health
fund, and they also um put up.
They raised the amount um by the
100,000 that we had taken off
and with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions.
Right, no debate. We are on a
motion to concur with Senate
amendments to House Bill 71 is
amended all in favoring it I.
Close Nate.
The Abbott, the House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 71 is twice
amended.
You lady from Berlin
representative Garrett, are you
ready on concurrence item number
2. Yes, I am, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House concur with the Senate
amendments to House one bill
157. This is the bill to uh
well.
Have me explain it.
Jane Le explain the amendments.
Yes, House Bill 157 increases
training for superintendents and
principals, the amendment.
The amendment, um, addresses a
technicality and says that a
licensed school employee holds a
valid 3B license on July 1st,
2029, shall be granted both
professional site administrator
license and a superintendent
license. I urged the body to
concur.
We are on a motion to concur
with house with Senator 150
Senator so I amended. All in
favor of signified by say aye.
8.
The habit. The House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 157 is twice
amended.
lady from Donana Gallegos are
ready a concurrence calendar.
Item number 3.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I stand for, um, I moved that
the house concur with the Senate
amendments to House Bill 178.
And later explained the
amendments.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, what
does the Senate made amendments
to 178, uh, what they have added
to is it uh updating the nurse
practitioner at, um, it makes
information about complaints or
disciplinary actions open to the
public and on the Senate floor,
uh, they corrected a lettering
error and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I stand for questions.
There is a bait young lady from
Dona Anna.
Glura, Representative Jones. Mr.
Speaker. Does the gentle lady
yield? I yield to my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, uh, signed on to this
nurse Practice Act changes, um,
I was excited to do that because
there's a lot of really
important updates and changes
that we're making in it and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it was
voted on unanimously in the
House Health and Human Services
Committee in, in the house, but
there've been some changes like
you just mentioned that I'm
really um wanting to question
you about.
Um, this specifically, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
looking at the amendments in
order where it is on page 26.
Any person filing a complaint
shall be immune from liability
arising out of civil action if
the complaint is filed with
reasonable care, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, how long has that
been in law?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, my, uh, witnesses telling
me a number of years.
Uh, yes, thank you, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I know
that it has been at least since
1993. I have that here, uh.
Since 1978 that has been part of
the law.
And so there is a protection
there for.
For any person filing a
complaint, which would be more
than likely I'm, I'm thinking
would be a patient. It's kind of
it looks to me like it would
more than likely be a patient
protection, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, so I'm just wondering,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, why we
made that change. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the
term reasonable care is not uh
is not language used in, in the
not recognize
It's not recognized in as the
standard and so with that uh
they wanted to make
clarifications.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
Gentle lady,
That entire passage is struck.
Reasonable care was not
redefined. I, I really think
that this.
This takes away immunity from a
fire and I, I really see that as
a problem, um, I'm supporting of
every other part of this bill,
but this I feel like I can't
vote for this now and I'm
disappointed, um, so.
I will not be supporting this.
The important changes in this
act, I would hope that maybe we
could work this out this
morning. That's my hope. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you gentle lady. There is
for the debate, gentle lady from
Eddie N Lee, Representative
Brown. Thank you.
Um, will the gentle lady from
Donna Anna please yield.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you so much. Well, I, I
rise also to express some
concerns about the amendment
that was made by the Senate
Judiciary Committee. I think
it's actually detrimental to the
bill and to the nursing Act.
And so I'll just uh briefly go
through my concerns, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady. So the
um Senate Judiciary Committee
amendment removes language which
would have provided
confidentiality, protection for
any communication to the board,
uh, regarding a disciplinary
action against a nurse.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm looking also at page 25 and
um I just wanna start, uh, what
was before it was struck, um,
subsection C.
And here um this is the
confidentiality protection,
which I think is necessary to
have, especially in the early
stages of a of a complaint being
reported, um, this would open
up.
Basically any information uh as
a public record and I think
that's not fair to um to the
person who's, uh, this complaint
is being filed against.
Um, so.
And I'll mention too here, um,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, that,
um, in striking this language on
page 25 and following on 26.
The um according to amendments
and context, the title of the
bill was not modified to um
reflect that change. The bill
title still says requiring the
confidentiality of
communications relating to
potential disciplinary
disciplinary actions so if the
amendments in context are
accurate and I'm reading them
correctly, uh, that is a problem
with the bill. The bill no
longer describes the bill title
no longer describes what's
actually in the bill, but just
moving on and I'll.
try to be as brief as I can, Mr.
Speaker.
The person filing the complaint
um as the representative who
spoke before me mentioned that
there was this reasonable care
standard.
And maybe words have changed,
but that's, I think pretty well
understood. It's, it's subject
to some interpretation, of
course, like a lot of our, our
words are.
Uh, but I think this could have
by striking this it would have a
chilling effect.
On people actually bringing a
complaint because now they're
not uh they don't have any uh
liability protection with the uh
bill as it has existed for many
years. There's at least um.
Some range there where they can
say what they want as long as
it's, and if it's not
vindictive, it's if it's not
that if it's not vexatious and
there's a range there where it
could be considered.
Um, protective of the
complainant.
And then um I also would like to
mention, um, Mr. Speaker.
And gentle lady that um the
existing uh statute has some
very good guidance.
For the board and for others
regarding
A certain exceptions, so there's
this currently this
confidentiality.
Protection, but it's not uh it's
not 100%. There are some uh, uh,
except exceptions that are
listed.
In the statute and those were
now struck and so I think we're
leaving sort of a black hole for
uh the board to kind of know
what it's uh it's lane is on
these things so for that reason,
and for those reasons, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I would
be hesitant to concur with this
bill. I think the Senate
Judiciary Committee has a little
explaining to do.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate on
concurrences, generally from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
gentle lady from Donal.
Yield
I yield.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, so,
What I'm hearing now is that
there are some really big
differences from the, uh, the
bill that we had here that we
all voted on and had bipartisan
support on now, I think the,
the, the concern I'm hearing
mostly that it's perking my
ears, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
is on the confidentiality
portion of that was that an
amendment that was given in, in
the Senate, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
was.
Can you tell us what, what was
changed there, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, please.
There is new language that was
put into the bill that was then
removed.
Mr. Speaker, General, you be
more specific, please?
25
OK, on page 25, all written in
oral communications made by any
person to the board relating to
potential dis disciplinary
action including complaints made
to the board, um.
Are confidential.
That is a new language, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
generally, so does that
So the concern I heard um is
that, does that open up to um
information being released that
could be um harmful to the
parties that
They have that that information
released, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
it's intended to protect um
those people that are making the
um allegations.
Thank you Mr. Speaker generally.
So, so just to be clear, those
that are making the complaints
they're their personal and
private information will be
protected, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Generally, that's my,
thank you.
Right, more debates. The gentle
lady from the, hold on, where
are you from?
I got this
I'm gonna get this by the end of
the session. The gentle lady
from Catherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, I, I really don't
need the gentle lady to yell.
I'd just like to ask for a roll
call vote on this, uh.
Raise your hand, guys roll call.
We are on a motion to concur
with Senate amendments to House
Bill 178 as four times amended.
I would have, yes, and we would
have concurred. I would have no.
And we are in the twilight zone.
I don't know what happens, so
let's not try it.
The vote is now open.
Close by the close. The vote is
not closed by a vote of 38 in
the affirmative, 23 and 23 in
the negative. The House has
concurred on Senate amendments
to House Bill 178 as 4 times
amended.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo
representative Garrett.
Are you ready on concurrence
calendar item number 2.
Uh, yes, I am, Mr. Speaker. I
moved that the house concur with
the sentiment Senate amendments
to House 156
amend
House Bill 156 increases the
minimum teachers' salaries by
5000 to 55,000 for level 1,
65,000 for 2, 75,000 for level
3. The amendment is about uh
using um structured literacy.
Um
And I do wanna add people need
to know that that amendment also
says that literacy instruction
for English language learners
shall include evidence based
practices for biliteracy
differentiation and culturally
and linguistically responsive
instruction.
I would ask that the body concur
with the amendment.
All right, we are on a motion to
concur with Senate amendments to
House Bill 157 is twice amended.
All those in favor signified by
say I.
Postate.
The eyes have it, the house has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 157 is twice
amended.
Do you remember from earlier
Romero, are you ready on
concurrence calendar item number
4. Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I
move that the House concur with
the Senate amendments to House
Bill 63 as 3 times amended.
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendments. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Bill 63 is the
two year long, um, well, the
culmination of the two-year
study on the state equalization
guarantee, the Senate did put in
the entire secondary factor
money. So if you remember in
House Bill 2 that we passed out
of here, um, that did not
include the increase to the
secondary factor, the Senate put
that money in and we had to make
the amendments so that the
Bill reflected what was in the
budget.
Right, we are on a motion to
concur with Senate amendments
to.
House 63 is 3 times amended. All
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Don't suppose name.
You guys have it. The house has
concurred with Senator
amendments to House Bill 63 as
three times amended.
To leave from Ber Seth Thompson,
are you ready? Is calendar item.
I believe it's number 5. House
Bill 78. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
So, uh, I move that the house um
concur with Senate amendments on
House Bill 78.
And the only amendment is they
added a start date of 11-26.
We are on a motion to concur
with Senate amendments to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 78 as
amended.
Must be a good deal. All those
in favor say aye.
Proposed name.
Should I just do it? You guys
have it. The house is concurred
with 10 amendments 2, House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for house for 78 as
amended.
Hi Claire.
Is gen lady from Donana ready on
Chris's calendar item number.
I think it's 6. My thing is all
cra uh, crossed out.
How's 117 is swman. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I move that the House
concurs with the Senate
amendments to um
House, um.
House Bill 117 as amended.
to explain the amendments.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
the, um, House Bill 212 phases
out and prohibits toxic POs
chemicals in the products we use
daily and it also provides for
over a dozen broad exemptions to
allow PFOS in products where
their function is.
I mean unless POS is related to
this bill, which totally
possible. I don't know.
People confuses me.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I
totally, um, yes, um, there was,
uh, the slight change um in the
Senate, um,
To make it so that it was 365
days instead of the 180 which um
we didn't get changed in the
house, so I, um, Mr. Speaker.
Um
I do know that uh.
The house concur.
PAS is a.
Risky thing, I guess.
Especially if it gets in your
brain.
I, I didn't say it. That was
you.
We are on concurrence. We're on
a motion to concur with House
Bill 117 and twe amended.
All those in favor of saying
saying I I.
Well supposed say PFAS.
Yeah, have it, the house that's
concurred with Senate amendments
still has 117 as to why amended.
The lady from represent Dixon,
are you ready on concurrence
calendar item number 7.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move
that the House concur with the
Senate amendments to House Bill
458 as twice amended, thrice
amended.
Young lady to explain the
amendments. Thank you.
Sorry, this is, uh, House Bill
203. My apologies, um, hold on,
hold on, are we awake yet,
everybody?
I'm not, so there is, there you
have it.
My bad.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, the Senate
amendment simply clarify that um
for a CYFD employee to be
removed, they still have to go
through, uh, standard sO
procedures.
There is debate. The young lady
from Catherine Sierra scoresia
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to the gentle lady
from all those counties. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does
this conflict with what we
amended House Bill 343 into last
night?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
this is um exactly the same
language and 42, yes, correct.
We are on a motion to concur on
Senate amendments to House Bill
203, so as amended all those in
favor, signified by saying I.
Well, suppose me.
You guys have it. The house has
concurred. Oh, Senator
amendments to House Bill 203 is
twice amended.
Young lady from earlier Borego,
are you ready on item number 8
on the concurrence calendar and
just for the record, this is
House Bill 493 as amended.
Morning, Mr. Speaker. I am.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House concur with the Senate
amendments to House Bill 493.
The lady to expand the
amendments. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, the amendments to,
um the public accountability Act
or on page one, basically it's
adding a phrase related to an
annual audit of one of the past
two fiscal years.
Um, items 22 and 3, adding the
word significant.
Um, on page
Um, page 3, line 12 on page 3,
line 14.
On page 3, line 21, adding the
word years.
And striking the remainder of
the line.
Strike line 22 and 23.
And some grammatical uh changes
and also uh 5 and 6, adding the
word if necessary on page 4 line
10, on page 4, line 15, the same
thing, and then number 7 is
adding the word
on page 4, line 15.
We're on a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for housing
before 93 as amended also in
favor, signified by saying, see.
See.
I suppose say no.
The sea's habit. The house has
concurred the House
Appropriations Finance Committee
substitute for housing 493 as
amended.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You're
welcome, lady.
A gentle lady from Berlio, I
believe is Representative
Garrett, but stand by.
So Garrett, are you ready on
concurrence calendar number one,
I guess it should be 2, but it's
on your desk.
Mr. Speaker, I.
Um, how's 156 for the record?
Yes, thank you.
I, uh, move a concurrence on 156
with.
Uh, for the amendment. This is
the
Three tier license, uh.
With the $5000 increase to
everybody, uh, in the teaching
tears and it adds the literacy
amendment to it and I urge the
House to concur.
Should we do that one twice too
or just one time?
Should we concur twice or just
the one time?
I want to make sure on the other
one.
I wasn't sure about the vote
earlier, so we did it twice.
I need to explain the
amendments.
Uh, yes, the amendment adds to
the um 3 tier bill.
The Literacy amendment.
Uh, that we discussed in depth
last night and I urged the body
to concur.
We're on a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to how's your
156 as amended, all in favors 85
and say no.
I suppose.
Yeah I have it. The house has
concurred with the house.
With Senate amendments Bill 156
is amended.
Stop making me laugh, everybody.
You're texting me, making me
laugh, cracking jokes.
of money in our stop.
Yeah, it's a young lady from
Vern Lee Representative Dixon
ready on concurrence calendar.
Number
To
But it says one.
House 458.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Interesting, uh, co-sponsor
there, um, Mr. Speaker, I move
that the House concur with the
Senate amendments to House Bill
458 as thrice amended.
The gentle lady to explain the
amendments and the co-sponsor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, the
Senate, uh, added the definition
of poor space to the carbon
dioxide storage stewardship
bill, which simply
puts in statute, the definition
and understanding that has been
in case law for over 100 years.
The lady to explain poor space.
We are on a motion.
This is not a license plate
amendment, sir.
Gentlemen from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
gentle lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, yes, I will yield.
Mr. Speaker, generally, you have
two bills that were related. I'm
trying to remember them. This is
this the bill? Does it still
have the state taking over
responsibility for the storage
of carbon dioxide after, I think
it was 30 years.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, this is the,
the bill that, um, set up the
long term stewardship fund,
which involved, um, the state
assuming stewardship
responsibilities.
AKA monitoring.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
We are on a motion to concur
with.
What is he standing behind me?
He's freaking me out, Senator
Blanc.
I'd be whipping bullets from
back here. Get out of here.
We are on the motion to concur
with Senate amendments to House
Bill 458 is three times amended.
All those in favor of saying I
was saying poor space.
I suppose.
The poor space fans have it. The
house has concurred with Senate
amendments to House Bill 458 is
three times amended.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I got that order of
business 3rd reading of
legislation.
See no rejection. It is so
ordered.
You guys having a party back
there?
Thanks for the invite.
Hall the 2nd.
Jo lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, uh, on the consent
calendar number one.
I move
That house commerce and economic
development substitute for House
Memorial 52.
House Memorial 59 and House
Memorial 61 do now pass.
All right, just for the record,
we've consulted both leaders on
this consent calendar.
And I believe it has been passed
out to all of you.
And it is posted online.
Just got it.
The board looks like it's right.
Alright, we are on a motion.
The DuP pass motion for House
commerce and economic
development substitute for house
Memorial 52.
Has more of 59 and has Memorial
61.
The vote
is now open.
Wow
The board is now closed by a
vote of 63 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative.
The house.
Has passed on consent.
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for Memorial 52, House Memorial
61.
And how's Memorial 59?
We're going to say on 3rd
reading.
We're going on 3rd reading
because we are gonna do.
Regular calendar item number 37.
And I'm looking forward to
hearing the debate because I do
not know.
With the official bread will be.
But if it's not what I think it
should be.
We're gonna go 3 hours on this
one.
Said Block and I are gonna tag
team this one got a lot of
questions.
The lady from Donana.
Are you ready? Oh, we're waiting
for your experts, OK.
Are you ready on item number 37,
3:15. Let the record reflect
that election necessary for
placing Senate Bill 3150 on our
final passage has been taken. It
is subject to debate. Amendment
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This
bill is proposing that the that
the tortilla be named as the
official bread of the state and
with that Mr. uh Speaker, I need
to introduce my,
my witness Adeline.
McIntosh.
And with that I stand for
questions Adeline McIntosh.
There is debate.
The gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Yes, Mr. Speaker.
Um
I was just wondering, we've got
an expert witness, uh, the
gentle lady, so, uh, does a
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I do
yield.
So, Ms. Speaker, uh, just
wondering, you have an expert
witness what uh what is your
expert witness, uh, expert of on
this bill, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, she
is the expert at eating
tortillas, ballet, and being in
the 5th grade. Excellent, that's
pretty amazing, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So I really only
have one, question on this
because it's been uh something
uh all year long that uh just
has kind of been plaguing this
uh chamber, uh, does this uh
bill create a fund?
And a license plate.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentlemen,
you know, this bill does not
create a fund, but I think we
can create, you know, if you're
up to it, we can create one to
make sure we get tortillas every
year and we can make sure to uh
to get that license plate, uh,
with pictures and all.
I think you would probably have
to get uh Representative McQueen
to help you with that license
plate. You know, Mr. Speaker,
you know, hearing, uh,
Representative McQueen's heart
grows 3 sizes yesterday was
just.
amazing and so I think he would
be on board.
And it's actually smiling. Wow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have
no further questions.
There is further debate, the
gentle lady from Donana Socorro
in Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Religion
yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
will yield to the gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, can you tell me what kind
of data was gathered to
determine the tortilla versus
the fry bread.
Good question.
Inquiring minds want to know.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There
was lots of data that was
collected, uh, South Dakota, uh,
already has.
Right fry bread as their state
bread and so we could not go
with that.
And we have respect for the
sovereign nations and so we
wanted to make sure we were very
much um keeping that at the
forefront. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I like this gal. Um, did she
give any consideration, uh, to
the soapopia.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, you know, we should
know this, but the soia is
considered a fried pastry, not a
bread.
Oh.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
being told by my expert witness
that that's only outside of New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
does the young lady know that we
like to do things differently in
New Mexico is Pluto a planet in
New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, let me consult with
my expert witness.
Is this in the bill?
Mr. Speaker, we're going to go
with yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, according to New
Mexico, that would be the
correct answer. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, she's definitely
smarter than a grader. Where
does your expert witness attend
school? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, legacy oats preparatory
Academy. Well, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
well done, and I'm looking
forward to um supporting this
bill. Thank you.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lee, represented
Pettigrew. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Does the gentle lady
from Donana Yild.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, we do
yield.
Thank you so very much. I, I
have a couple of questions that
are clarifying because Senate
Bill 315 is not in my book, so I
can't read it. So is this
Tortilla, corn or flour.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, thank
you, gentlemen. You know,
there's many kinds of tortillas
and we are gonna take a, we're
gonna say all of them are gonna
be what we, uh, what is New
Mexico tortillas? It can be
blue, it could be corn, it could
be flour.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
love that answer. You know, I, I
debate when I make chips at
home.
Do I make them out of flour or
do I make them out of corn? Do I
make them out of blue corn, so I
appreciate that answer very
much. I look very forward to
supporting your amendment.
Sorry, your bill.
There is a debate. The gentleman
from Katherine Grant Hidalgo.
about the tortillas.
Speaker, talk about the tortilla
text that's not your no
no no no no, no, no, we can't
tax tortillas hombre, Mr.
Speaker.
With the gentle lady please
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask
if the expert witnesses is.
Feeling OK to do this unanimous
consent from the body to a
louder answer questions
directly.
Yeah
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I
think that would be up to the
speaker.
They're friendly, Mr. Speaker.
See the objection is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can I
please have, uh, the gentle
lady's name so I can address her
properly.
Adeline Mac Adeline McIntosh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. McIntosh.
My question to you is that would
be.
Let me rewind a little bit, Mr.
Speaker. Ms. McIntyre.
McIntosh,
Mister Speaker.
I'm thinking of butter. I was
gonna ask you, miss Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, do you like your
tortillas? Do they have to have
butter?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, with
butter and cinnamon sugar.
That's very good, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady is your school or
your teacher, are they gonna
give you extra credit for what
you're doing here today?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
yes, if we don't screw it up for
her.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't wanna, I, I don't want to
mess that up for you. I want you
to get extra, extra credit. So
Mr. Speaker, generally, do you
like, do you know how to make,
are you an expert at making
tortillas or eating tortillas?
Thank you Mr. Speaker gentlemen,
uh, she says a little bit of
both.
Well thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Let me tell you my
mom can make tortillas if I walk
in the in the door to my mom's
house. We all have moms like
this. A lot of us do our
grandmas, but I can walk into my
mother's house, Mr. Speaker, and
within 13 minutes of her just
not being ready to say, Mom, can
I have some tortillas in 13
minutes she'll have that placa
that's a keyword, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the pla on should
be heating that up and within 13
minutes the first hot tortilla
comes off the off.
Placa and probably 13.2 seconds
after that it's in my stomach.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
There is for the debate. The
gentle lady from Berlin
represented Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield from Donana
County?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will
yield to the kind lady from
Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, it's
really a delight to see this
young lady in our chambers today
and I just want to welcome her,
but I also wanted, had a
question for her, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Um, I wonder if you make your
tortillas round or irregular?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. She
says she hasn't mastered making
a round yet so they're more
misshapen.
Mister Speaker and gentle lady,
I think, uh, that's kind of how
my tortillas are. They're
usually a regular, um, I also
wonder if you would consider
making a tortilla, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that looks like
the shape of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, she will work on
that. That's awesome. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
The rest of the debate
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Madam Speaker,
uh, well, the gentle lady and
Miss McIntosh yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, I
yield to the gentleman.
Thank you, uh,
as Estimoa representante, uh.
gentle lady from Bunama.
Does, uh, your expert.
Know the origin of the white
flour tortilla.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, she does
not, but I'm wondering if you
would be able to provide her
with that answer.
As the mo speaker Jim Lady from
Diana.
Uh
The Spanish
Spaniards
Mr. Madam Speaker brought wheat.
In New Mexico.
The white flour tortilla small
speaker is made of wheat.
Ground up wheat.
A speaker
So the white flour tortilla is
the uh.
Um, um,
from
And Ms. McIntosh is an
invention.
Of the native New Mexican
Hispanic people.
To the world
The white flour tortilla
originated right here.
In all Mexico because the only
tortillas that existed in the
Americas up to that point in
time when the Spaniards brought
the wheat was the was the corn
tortillas, the blue, the reds,
the whites, the yellows.
So thank you as a gentle lady
from Dona Ana and thank you, Ms.
McIntosh for shedding light on
this real significant invention
of the Hispanic people of New
Mexico to the world.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you for the education.
There is for the beach,
gentlemen from Otero
representative block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Would you please
yield
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, uh, of course I yield to my
friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I guess I'm just gonna
start on page one, line 5 of
you, but no, I'm just kidding,
Mr. Speaker.
I would, but, but I, I'm not
going to.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so.
I don't, I don't know if I heard
this before, but could you ask
your expert?
Ranking her favorite tortillas.
What goes first, flour, whole
wheat flour.
Then we got corn and then we got
blue corn, and then we all got
etc. on the bottom. What is her
favorite on the tier system.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, corn flour, and blue
corn.
Oh, that's a good, that's a
really good way to do it, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I thought
you were, I was gonna get an, it
depends answer, like we always
get with some of these
attorneys, Mr. Speaker.
General lady, I think.
I agree with you on that one,
especially when it comes to the
blue corn. I like those on my
enchiladas. Those are my
favorite. I love blue corn,
green chili, enchiladas.
Sometimes if I'm extra spicy,
I'll go for Christmas
enchiladas.
You never know, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I really appreciate
this, this information that
we've gotten on the bill. And so
when it comes to the actual
tortilla, I'm so glad that we've
heard that it is native to the
great state of New Mexico with
the flour tortilla. I had no
idea, getting a history lesson,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
does
Your expert witness, does she
prefer to make tortillas.
Alone at home or with friends?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
with friends.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, that is the correct
answer. It's always better to
make a tortilla with family or
friends. I know my mama when we
were growing up, she would make
the best whole wheat tortillas,
and I, you know, I used to not
like to eat whole wheat bread
and my mama was like, OK, here's
some tortillas instead. I mean,
there's a little lard in there
and everything, but that's not
going to hurt anybody. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I am
inclined to support your bill. I
do like to say that I like fry
bread as well and
So appears, but as we've noted
earlier, the sopaia is
technically a pastry, which I
did not know, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So this has been
the most entertaining and
educational bill hearing and so
I won't go down the line of
every bill on the FIR on the
bill and uh every analysis, but
I'm sure they're all gleaming
and they're all very good. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, and it's also
been a pleasure to meet your,
your expert witness and her mom,
Jaylene, great lady I'm
So glad, uh, we've got good
neighbors in Donia Anna County
and uh we will have to get
together and make some tortillas
with friends after this passes,
which it better. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
There is for the debate. The
lady from earlier cereal.
Thank you Mr. Speaker will the
um gentle lady and Ms McIntosh
yield. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
We do yield to the kind gentle
lady. Thank you. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady and Ms.
McIntosh, I have just a couple
of questions. How would you say
bread in Spanish.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, it is pawn.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady and
Ms. McIntosh wonderful that is
great.
So for the record though.
I need to make a point.
Because we can't amend or nor do
we want to amend um this
wonderful bill however, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and Miss
McIntosh.
How would you say tortilla in
English.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, uh, tortilla.
That's exactly right, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so for
the record.
Because in our Constitution.
We Spanish is the official
language.
I would say.
That if the Mr. Speaker allows
it.
Which I doubt.
Um, this should be reading.
The state tortilla.
And not the state bread.
Because
As we just
He
There is no translation for
tortilla.
tortilla is tortilla in Spanish.
And so I hesitate slightly in
voting for this bill?
Because of the reasons I just
gave that the young lady of Miss
McIntosh, I believe received
real good historical um a
history lesson earlier by my
colleague.
And now a little bit of a
language lesson.
And so the next time when you're
here as a state representative.
Um, I urge Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady.
To make an adjustment or
amendment or to change the
language in the bill, so.
As to reflect.
Our constitutional uh.
Language
Second language actually it is
the language of the state, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady and
Ms. McIntosh, thank you so very
much for um.
Being a great uh presenter today
we appreciate you being here
thank you.
See, you know for the debate to
generally close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
before I close, uh, Miss, uh,
McIntosh did bring his tortillas
yesterday, um, but since, uh, I
didn't get a chance to make that
announcement. Those were on your
desk yesterday, so a gift uh
from her family to yours and uh
with that Mr. Speaker, I ask
that uh SB 315 do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Bill 315. The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Bill 315
has duly passed his house.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages
Julian from McKinley.
Stand by.
Just
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House taxation revenue
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 19 as amended by the Senate
and request the concurrence of
the House to the Senate
amendments respectfully
House executive message number
9, Mr. Speaker.
Honorable Speaker Martinez and
members of the House, I have
decided to veto House Bill 65
with emergency clause which
would have added a new provision
to NMSA 1978.
Section 22-2-8.1.
2023, providing that local
school boards and charter school
governing bodies.
Shall determine the total number
of instructional days per year
and the number of instructional
days per week that students
shall be in school programs.
Respect for yours, Michelle
Lujan Grisham, Governor.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Judiciary
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 131.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 284 in
return same herewith,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson a chief clerk.
Mrs. Binter from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Rules
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 42 as amended by the House
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
The lady from Santa.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535
as amended by the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry
Debuhansson chief clerk.
This should be entered gentle
lady from Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker,
I move you go to that order of
business 3rd reading of
legislation.
And the objection is ordered
lady from Donana said Ferrari,
are you ready on item number 32.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point action necessary
for placing.
Senate bill
122 as final passage has been
taken and it is subject to
debate amendment or substitution
and later to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SB 122
is amended expands the
prescription drug donation
program and it permits greater
participation in the donation
and distribution, um, of unused
and unexpired prescription drugs
excluding controlled substances.
And with that I'll stand for
questions.
There is a bit, the gentleman
from Korea, the Baco Guadalupe
Rizo how we get.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker or the
gentle lady yield. Yes, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I will yield to the
gentleman.
So gentle lady in reading the
bill right quick. I look at it
and I see that there's hardly
any liabilities for anybody that
deals with this program.
Is, is that how you feel about
it, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, the liabilities are minimal
because they are um uh donated
prescription drugs and um they
um.
are under the pharmacy, the
board of pharmacy, um, and they
oversee it and there's very
little, you know, risk.
OK, and
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady on page 6 of the
bill on, on F.
Almost to the bottom of the page
it says any person who exercises
reasonable care.
In donating, accepting or
redistributing.
Prescription drugs pursuant to
this section shall be immune
from civil or criminal criminal
liabilities or professional
disciplinary action of any kind.
Any related injury, death, or
loss.
And to me it seems like we're
taking it a little far.
On how we're going to regulate
or make sure that
People have a safe product that
really, really gets me nervous.
Do you have some explanation for
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
the, um,
Just the drugs that are taken in
by the pharmaceutical, uh,
pharmacy, um, they, uh, have to
comply with the federal laws and
um and they have, they deal with
inspection storage, labeling,
and redistribution of donated
prescription drugs, so it's very
much regulated. And madam, uh, I
mean, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
It, it makes me nervous to think
that somebody's gonna have.
A prescription.
A drug.
And, and, and maybe I should.
Describe it more as a pill.
And have it in their home and if
they have some kind of ill
intent.
They could maybe lace it with
fentanyl or something.
And then
If it doesn't. When the pharmacy
gets it, what kind of, what kind
of inspection are they gonna do?
Are they just, is it gonna be a,
a, a physical inspection? Are
they gonna run this, this drug
through.
Some kind of chemical.
Uh, lab or facility that's gonna
test these drugs, see if they,
they haven't been tampered with
or to me it sounds like a scary
road to go down through, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, they, um, examined the
donated prescription drugs, um,
to determine if they've been
altered altered.
Alterated, adulterated, I'm
sorry, um, or misbranded and
they certify that the drug has
been stored in compliance uh
with the requirements of the
product label.
So they, they know what to look
for and if there's anything, you
know, um, different about them,
then they will dispose of them.
And Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady, this
This to me looks looks pretty
scary, uh.
I know the intent is good. I can
see the good intent part of it.
But I wouldn't want a pill in my
house that somebody has been in
somebody else's house and I
don't know the person and.
And then it's going back to
procedures and then we're not
going to hold anybody.
Really responsible for any of
the actions or, or mistakes that
might happen or, or
Or something that might get by
him. I'd rather see.
Our people
Get their drugs directly from,
from the, from the places where
they make them and, and the
pharmacies be the only ones
handling him. I, I think we're
going down to slip slippery
slope here.
Uh
I, I just don't feel like I
could support this kind of
legislation with, with drugs
being handled the way this bill
shows to be handling them.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd just
like to add that this helps
people who can't afford the
drugs, so, um, for them to
benefit, you know, having these
available and um not, uh, you
know, also wasting the drugs,
um, makes it so that this
program, you know, which is in
many other states that um 45
states, DC and Guam have laws
establishing prescription drug
and this is just expanding it a
little bit.
With that, I yield my time, Mr.
Speaker. There is for the
debate, gentlemen from Lee
Pettigrew.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker, does
the gentle lady from Donana Yi.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
last minute Bill.
I appreciate the bill and I
appreciate the intent.
Um, I'm trying to cram a bunch
of stuff down my head right now
with respect to this and
I understand my, my colleagues.
Uh, concerns from Curry Dubaca,
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel and
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
didn't memorize this. I just can
read the sign right now. So,
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady from
my standpoint.
If we have a prescription drug
within our household. I know how
they're cared for and being able
to turn them over to the
pharmacy.
is one thing, but Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I, I'm not sure
that
Um
Everything is, is that.
Every person out there is that
cautious and I don't understand
how you can tell the difference
without a chemical.
Um.
Review
Breaking that pill down and then
remaking it to make sure, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that
nothing's been added to that.
Can you give me some confidence
there?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
this program has been in effect
in New Mexico since 2011 and
we're just expanding it a few,
in a few different places, um,
to describe, um, clinic and who
the donor is and the patient and
um so and also striking the $20
fee to be charged um to just
reasonable costs for the
collection that the pharmacy
might take, but, um, this has
been in effect.
It's just expansion and they
haven't had any problems that we
have heard.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I, I hear you. We haven't had
any problems that we haven't
heard about, but we went through
a few years during COVID where
we didn't report a whole bunch
of stuff because it wasn't
convenient for the news and so
that concerns me with respect to
that.
Um
I like the idea.
I would like
A little bit more information
and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, well I like the
idea, um.
This came
On a supplemental at the very
last minute, and I can't support
it because I haven't had a
chance to review it and
determine whether or not it's
good for my constituents, but I
thank you very much for your
time and effort and, uh, you're.
Willingness to answer some
questions. Thank you.
There is for the debate you from
Don Donana, they'll go and Luna
representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
my Health and Human Services,
um, colleague.
Thank you gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'd like
to put a little perspective on
this issue, um, from, from a
nursing perspective, I've
administered medications for
decades and um so I'm also
familiar with uh the pharmacy
board and there are strict
requirements surrounding
medications and so forth. So I,
I know that I have a confidence
that they, they are regulating
their um
They are inspecting, storing,
making sure that medications are
stored properly before they
would redistribute them or uh.
That sort of thing. They, they
also, you know, have rules,
pretty strict rules surrounding
those things, but, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I just
wanted to speak to the, the
terrible waste that goes on and
the tax dollars that we spend.
Prescribing medications that are
perhaps in a facility setting uh
which are never even opened and
uh so I feel sure that Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the, the,
uh, the pharmacy board does have
strict requirements. I wish we
could speak to those
specifically, but I have
confidence in them. They don't
let medications, um,
They don't, they don't put
patients in unsafe situations
and so I, I'm very much in favor
of this, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think I may have showed
you a picture I received from
the clinic just recently they
had an just one month's worth of
waste, pure and simple, have to
go in the trash type waste of
medications that were never even
opened, that were probably all
paid for with our tax dollars.
Those were stored properly. They
could be um donated into this.
program and redistributed and
I'm confident that that would
benefit everyone involved. So
thank you very much for bringing
this gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
moved that Senate Bill 122 as
amended do now passage of Senate
Bill 122 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Door is now closed by a vote of
56 in the affirmative, 6 in the
negative. Senate Bill 122 is
amended as it pass his house.
The lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business messages.
members, there should be.
A supplemental concurrence
calendar.
Number 2.
On your desk.
from McKinley.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I move.
That the house concur with
Senate amendments to house tax
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 19 as amended explain
the amendments, Mr. Speaker, the
Senate did some, some good work
in tightening up the
requirements regarding the P3
portion of the bill.
He did that by making sure that
the P3 agreements could be no
longer than 30 years, and that's
all inclusive, um, all clawback
issues would be handled out of
the AG's office and not the
economic development department
office. No economic development
employee that helped in
negotiating a P3 agreement would
be able to work for that private
sector partner within a 2 year
period and also um considerable
oversight by DFA and approved by
the board of.
Finance, so we have lots of
oversight on the P3, uh,
portion. We are on a motion to
concur with Senate amendments to
house taxation revenue Committee
substitute for housing 19 as
amended. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Pos name.
The guys have it. The, the house
has concurred on Senate
amendments to House taxation
revenue Committee substitute for
house with 19 as amended.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and Miscellaneous
business so
the lady from Caierra Soto
Valencia Armstrong, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
of the House that the chief
clerk be directed to obtain
House Bill 65 passed by the
first session of the
fifty-seventh legislature and
vetoed by the governor and uh
that such bill be placed on the
table.
All our members, we are on a
motion to obtain.
How's Bill 65 passed by the
first session of the
fifty-seventh legislature and
beat up by the governor.
All those in favor say aye.
Proposed name. The eyes have it
motion.
Succeeds
The lady from Catherine Cerros
Cove.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent of the House that House
Bill 65 of the first session of
the fifty-seventh legislature be
removed from the speaker's table
and made the next order of
business.
All those in favor and if I may
say no.
Proposed name.
Motion passes, gentle lady Mr.
Speaker, pursuant to Article 4,
Section 22 of the Constitution
of New Mexico. I moved to
override the governor's veto of
House Bill 65 passed by the
first session of the
fifty-seventh legislature.
Right, members, we are on a
motion to override the
governor's veto of House was 65,
which was passed by the first
session of the fifty-seventh
legislature. We will do this on
a roll call.
I have yes, we would have voted
to override the veto.
The vote
is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. The House has
voted to override the governor's
veto of a House Rule 65.
Members have an announcement.
We have a few items coming back
on concurrence.
So we're just gonna stand in
place.
Unless you all want to do more
3rd reading, Happy to do some.
All those in favor of xenophobia
saying I stand in place.
We're expecting 3 items back on
concurrence.
But we have to wait
For the paper.
To get here.
We don't believe in email.
lady from Achilles San Juan with
an with an announcement and
perhaps some miscellaneous
business.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
members of the House colleagues,
I just wanted to take this time
to thank State House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
I appreciate my colleagues we
worked really hard we were
assigned 218 bills and we heard
10046 bills and we uh rolled.
Uh, or killed 23 bills and uh we
met 3 days a week and several
weekends for and we had about 23
meetings, so I wanted to express
appreciation to my colleagues
from the bottom of my heart. I
thank you. You worked really
hard. I appreciate you very
much. You're amazing, wonderful,
blessed colleagues in your own
special way we spent a lot of.
time together and I consider you
family. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. A round
of applause for the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee and to the
chairwoman.
Representative Wanda Johnson.
I'm afraid to go to the next
person because she probably is
gonna tell us that she had a few
more bills than you did. I don't
know.
Let's find out, gentle lady from
Berlio Speaker, and, and, um,
colleagues, I, I don't know the
number of bills, but we did work
hard and I want to thank all the
members of the House Health and
Human Services Committee, if you
will please stand up.
Members of House Health and
Human Services and
representative Martinez for
being the only man who who
braved with us, um, and
especially for our staff in the
committee they have been
wonderful and this is the time
when I say all of the staff in
this building is incredible.
They take such good care of us,
they clean up after us. They
open doors for us, they treat us
like.
Royalty, so please let's give a
huge round of applause to all of
our staff.
Round of applause to all our
stuff.
Generally, Mr. Speaker, I have
an amendment to my appreciation.
I would also like to ask my
committee members to stand,
please, and I would also like to
thank our committee analysts and
our uh majority minority
analysts are legislative staff,
our sergeants, and our committee
staff. Thank you. And I see
George Hadi over there. Thank
you.
Thank you.
To all the members and the
staff.
Gentlemen from Santa Fe, Santa
Senator McQueen.
Mr. Speaker, um,
Uh, since we have the time, I, I
would also like to, um, thank my
committee.
We had uh 5 rookies on House
Energy, 4 of whom were rookies
in the legislature.
Uh, and they all did great.
Um, I don't see him in the
chamber, but I would like to
especially thank our ranking
member, uh, the gentleman from
San Juan.
Uh, who came to me at the
beginning of the session and
Suggested the reset and offered
to talk and collaborate and work
together and that was really,
uh, effective in our community.
I really, in our committee, I
really appreciate that.
Um, and finally, I, I don't know
if she's listening, but, uh, to
our vice chair, uh, we miss you,
uh, we hope you're well and we
hope to see you soon. Thank you.
Thank you to the house. Energy,
natural resources and
environment committee members,
you guys can clap for them too.
He's a ranking member of your
committee also bald.
Mr. Speaker, uh, it's a, it's a
good look.
We're having a meeting of the
bald guy caucus 15 minutes.
After conclusion of the floor
session.
Gent lady from Santa Fe Los
Alamos is going to think.
Us
The hard-working members of the
House Judiciary Committee.
How did you know Mister Speaker.
I just had a hunch. I had that
look so I too wish to thank the
members of House Judiciary
Committee. It, it really was a
fabulous committee this year. We
have really hardworking members.
It's a courteous committee. We
disagree, but it's all on the
basis of the, our differences in
policy. We have not had personal
conflicts in any way, and I
appreciate all of you so much.
For your support and cooperation
and I wanna call out our ranking
member, the gentle lady from
what county is that? Eddie Lee
Lee Chavez, Roosevelt and Lee
and Curry and we would meet
periodically to review what our
priorities were, and I do want
to note the last time we checked
we had over 385 bills assigned
to our committee. So it was, um,
it was a heavy year, um, and
many of them were complex bills,
very important bills to move on
over to.
the Senate to see them change,
Mr. Speaker. How many bills were
assigned to your committee? 385
we only like 22. Yeah, it's
true, but we, we, it's not the
quantity, it's the quality of
the review, Mr. Speaker, and it
was, we did a lot of discussion
on those bills, Mr. Speaker. So
I do want to thank everybody. It
was a very good year this year.
And so thank you very much.
Thank you. Hall, he had a lot of
discussion on some of those
bills. He had a lot of
questions.
So you paying attention.
To the members of House
Judiciary Committee, round of
applause.
For all of our hard work.
You guys can stand and recognize
us.
Truth be told, I only went to
like half of the meeting.
Actually the one meeting I went
to on Thursday, true story, I'll
put this on the record. I walked
into the room and I learned that
part of my culture is.
All about cockfighting.
Somebody on Zoom and I looked up
and then for some reason the
entire committee looked at me
and I'm like, OK.
I'm Mexicano and I like
cockfighting apparently, so.
There you have it.
Members take note.
And I won't even tell you the
joke that the gentleman from
Sandoval.
played on me yesterday.
But let's just say.
It involves
She went through a lot of
trouble to like.
They were knives taped to this
thing.
Statute of limitations has run
because that was yesterday that
was legislative day 18 we're on
legislative day 19, so you're
good.
You leave from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
clerk to read it.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 113 House Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 158 as amended by the House
and return same herewith,
respectfully submitted. Sherry
De Luhansson, a chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 519 as amended
by the Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments. Respectfully
submitted, Sherry De Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Me be entered
Message from the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, I'm director inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 346 as
amended by the Senate with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhansson, a
chief clerk will be entered from
the Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
Bill 252 as amended by the
Senate with the emergency clause
and request the concurrence of
the House to the Senate
amendment.
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Lu Han, son of chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Yes.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 199 as amended
by the Senate and requests the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments. Respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhansson,
the chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Members, we're gonna pass out.
Concurrents calendar number.
3 and perhaps 4 and maybe 5.
OK, for real, calendar number 3
is on its way as well as concurs
calendar number 4.
With 3 additional bills on
concurrence.
Joe learn from San Juan Montoya.
You were not in the chamber, but
you were
There was a lot of love
expressed for you by your
chairman of House Energy.
No, we're not an announcements
you cannot reciprocate at this
point, but I'll come back to you
later.
But I'm making the announcement
because why not?
Except the mic.
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Herndon. Yes, Mr.
Speaker.
Are you ready on uh item number
2 concurrence calendar number 3.
I am Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker,
I move that the house concur
with the Senate amendments to
House Bill 519 as amended.
Amended
gentle lady to explain the
amendments.
Mr. Speaker, the, the house
originally uh submitted. If I
can have the attention of the
people in the house, this is an
important amendment.
Um
Mr. Speaker, the House
submitted, uh, House Bill 519.
It was amended in the Senate and
then the the amendment was
removed and the removed
amendment uh referred to the
consultation that the new board
of direct that the new board of
directors for the African
American Performing Arts Center
would have would be uh making
their decisions and consultation
with the Department of Cultural
Affairs.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for any questions.
There's debate. Did you from
what that representing block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the gentle lady from
Bernalillo, please yield.
Um, are you, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
Liddy. So my first question is
I'm, I'm trying to figure out.
Why the
Don't want consultation anymore
with the Department of Cultural
Affairs. I, I believe that's
what I understood. Our amendment
was stricken. uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, no that is not
correct. So what was uh added
was putting back in the language
that would require the
consultation with the Department
of Cultural Affairs.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then when it
comes to the Department of
Cultural Affairs, would it be
the secretary who would be in
consultation with the board. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you are
correct. It would be the
secretary of the Department of
Cultural Affairs.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so I'm just trying
to understand.
So
Where
So we, in our chamber,
We chose to take.
We chose to have the
consultation.
And then in the Senate.
They stripped that portion,
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you are
correct.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Do we know why they
stripped?
That portion, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we don't know, but
the bill was restored to its
original state, so we're very
happy.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker Jim
Liddy. I thought so the original
state of the first bill not
amended on our side or I'm so
sorry, these amendments are very
confusing and I'm just trying to
figure out which, so your bill
that you passed or you, you put
forward first before it came to
the committees that is kind of
what they restored it to and was
the amendment that we passed in
our side unfriendly to the
building.
So Mr. Speaker, let me explain,
gentlemen. So when the bill was
originally sent to the, to the,
to the Senate. It required that
there would be consultation with
the Department of Cultural
Affairs, the Senate removed the,
that portion. Now it was put
back in so that the bill was
restored to the way it was
originally sent to the Senate.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, that's so I
don't know why this Senate would
do something like that. It's
kind of interesting. I've no
idea, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so who put the amendment
on first? What committee was
that?
So, Mr. uh Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, I, I don't
remember who did that, but what
we are excited about is that the
bill was restored to its
original, uh,
The way it was sent to the
Senate originally.
OK, thank you, Mr.
Speakerimmaly. It just seems
like a weird about-face in my
opinion, because one committee
in the Senate says this is a
great idea. Let's just do this
and then a different committee
or maybe it was the floor on the
floor, they stripped it back. So
I think the maybe the Senate is
fighting amongst themselves on
that because it's not us,
correct, Mr. Speaker? Generally,
we didn't put that on there. So
Mr. Speaker, we are happy to
report that the bill was
restored to its original.
position at the time that it was
given to the Senate, and that's
what's most important, Mr.
Speaker, and gentlemen.
OK, great, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, so SIRC put that
maybe no they took it out, wait,
they put it on.
What's SIRC? Do we know what
that committee may be?
So Mr. Speaker, the, the Senate
took off the last part of the
bill, uh, and if you're looking
at, uh, section 8 of the bill,
the Senate removed the
consultation with the cultural
affairs department.
And then it was restored on the
house floor, so the bill was
restored to its original
position, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, someone just told
me it's the Senate.
Indian and rural committee.
Mr. Speaker, General, um,
gentleman, that's right, the
Senate Indian Affairs and
cultural.
Department
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I, uh, I was so
confused with, with that because
that's the cultural affairs
committee, and they wanted to
take away consultation with the
department of cultural affairs.
So
I just don't understand how
that, why they would do that,
Mr. Speaker gentle lady, that's
very interesting to me. Can you
tell me a little more about
The vote on, I didn't see the
vote on that committee. Do we
know if it was passed
unanimously there?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it was
passed unanimously.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and so were you, I mean, I'm
just wondering, so who brought
forward this amendment to the
bill.
Who brought forward that
amendment to change it and then
who undid the changes. Was it
someone in like a co-sponsor in
the Senate?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
don't know either, but thanks
for the information. I, it's
just it's weird to me when the
Senate does something and then
they undo exactly what they did
and then they forced us to
concur with what they just, you
know what, it might have been to
try to kill this bill, which is
bad, and I think we shouldn't
try to kill this bill because I
actually I'm inclined to support
this bill. So, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I think that's weird
and I'm really, I hope that's
not the case in the Senate, you
know, I've, I've all the respect
in the world for the House and
the Senate is great or
something, so Mr. Speaker, thank
you so much for that. Appreciate
that and uh I appreciate your.
answers on your bill. We're a
motion to concur with
Senate amendments.
To houses 519 as amended, all
those in favor and if I would
say no.
Post me.
Yeah, have it, the house has
incurred with an amendments to
House Bill 519 as amended.
Members concur calendar number
4. Item number 1.
Howsville 252 is a gentle lady
from
All those amazing beautiful
counties.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move that the House concur with
Senate amendments to House Bill
252 as amended with an emergency
clause,
the amendments, uh, really at
the, at the request of our
partners on the other side of
the aisle was to change specific
counties to 5 to 7 counties in
New Mexico and that's all the it
was a friendly amendment and we
did it.
We are on a motion to concur
with Senate amendments to House
with 252 as twice amended with
an emergency clause.
All those in favor of say no.
Pa's name.
BA Sabo, the House has
concurred. We send members to
House Bill 2 SA amended with an
emergency clause.
Members from Curti's calendar
number 5, item number 1.
The gentleman from Ria Riva
Sandoval San Juan, Grandpa
Linte.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, good morning,
Mr. Speaker. I move that the
House concur with the Senate
amendments to House Bill 199 as
amended.
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendments include references to
the tax administrative Act also
requires confidentiality
training for legislative finance
staff. Third requires timely
destruction of tax records and
finally it clarifies the
penalties for unauthorized
disclosure of private
information.
We are on a motion. There is
debate you know from San Juan
Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
uh, Mr. Chair, could you go into
a little bit more about the
destruction of uh of what was
the last thing you said on that
struction of uh private.
Information
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is
the uh timely destruction of tax
records.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Can you tell me what
timely means?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
imagine in this case it would be
uh 30 days after that.
They make reference to those tax
records.
They're gonna burn them
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, and,
and, uh, chair, wanted to make
sure that uh they're going to be
disposed of properly. Can you
also talk about, um, you'd
mentioned on there mm, let me
see if I can remember exactly
what you said, uh, first part of
what you said, can you, can you
address that a little bit?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
requiring confidentiality
training for legislative finance
stuff.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker and Chair,
that's it. Can you tell me what
that, uh, what that will lead
what the training is gonna be
and how will that be affected?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
already the chain that's already
requested that TRD takes. So now
legislative finance committee
staff will also have to take
that as well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Chair, and, and what is that
exactly?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
training that is required by the
IRS.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Chair and what training is that
I do you know any of the
specifics? I know you've got an
expert witness there.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, she's
whispering to me from the
hallway.
Mr. Speaker, can you invite her
in?
Yeah, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it's training that
the IRS requires TRD uh to take
and that keeps information
confidential, so the Legislative
finance committee would also
have to take the same.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, can you elaborate a
little bit on what that training
is though is what I'm trying to.
Drill down on.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, she's
making mention that it's several
hours, but it's kind of the same
thing that folks had to take
when they uh manage HIPAA
Records.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and and
chair, but I don't know what
that is and that's why I was
asking.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
as reference to HIPPA, it's
confidential health information,
but it would be for financial
records in their case.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Mr. Speaker on that.
Um, so is this, is this a good
thing?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
a great thing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Chair. I think it is to thank
you for that. That's all I have,
Mr. Speaker.
We are on a motion to concur
with Senate amendments to House
Bill 199 as amended. All those
in favor signify by saying I.
I'll suppose they.
The eyes have it. The house has
concurred with Senate amendments
to House Bill 199 as amended.
Everything went really silent
all of us. We are waiting for
the Senate.
You know how we put in all that
work early in the session?
So toward the end of the
session, we're not as busy.
And we get to chill out.
So everybody chill in place
except a block, go for a walk.
For real, go get your steps in.
Come back at noon.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
We were already there, but
thanks for taking us back.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 553 as amended
by the House and returned same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhansson a chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Will the members in the gallery
please start the wave. You guys
are gonna have to try again.
That was weak.
Well, the members of the
gallery, please start the wave.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, I move to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Objection ordered Members, I
will direct your attention to.
The regular calendar.
Business
On the speaker's table.
My table.
Members
Mr. Speaker,
I move that
House Memorial 8.
House Memorial 10.
House Memorial 28.
House Memorial 30.
And House Memorial 46 do now
pass.
All right members, we are on a
motion.
We're on a motion to remove
House Memorial 8, 1028, 30, and
46 off the speaker's table and
make it the next order of
business.
See an objection. It is ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Memorial 8, House Memorial 10,
House Memorial 28, House
Memorial 30, and House Memorial.
40
46
Do now pass right members we are
gonna take all of these items
and do a vote on the board, 30
seconds.
No running in the chambers.
The vote
It's now open.
What about clothes?
The vote's not closed by what of
67 the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House memorials 8,
1028, 30, and 46 of duly passed
this house.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, uh, we are on
announcements and I just wanted
to take a minute to recognize
the leadership teams on both
sides of the aisle, um, it's
been an honor to work with all
of you and um I just really
appreciate the collaboration and
working hard on some issues
together, uh, just wanna take a
minute to recognize the leaders
of both parties. Round of
applause.
For the amazing teams.
members and I like to take the
opportunity as well to extend.
My gratitude
to every single one of you for
all of your hard work.
Over the last 60 days, um, I.
What?
I appreciate
I can't walk and chew gum at the
same time as you could tell. I
appreciate how um collegially
have been we've had some tough
debates we've had some heated
debates at times, um.
But I've got to tell you from
the bottom of my heart, this is
a place that I cherish, um, like
my own home.
And what happens on this floor,
um, is.
Something that I take very
seriously and I know that up
here I, I.
Um, um, I know that I break the
corum and all that and probably.
Try to be
funny too much of the time, not
very successfully.
Uh, but look, we're here, we're
away from our families, we're
away from our jobs. We are away
from our communities. I'm lucky
because I get to just go home
every night, uh, back home in
Albuquerque, but some of you are
here.
Grinding it out for 60 days, um,
and I cannot thank you enough.
Um, I know that the work is
hard.
Um, I know that the next few
days will be hard, readjusting
back to normal life.
But please know that, um,
from
My family to yours. Thank you.
To each and every single one of
you for your hard work and your
dedication to the people of the
state of New Mexico.
I'd also like to thank the
incredible team that makes this
House of Representatives work.
Our staff.
From the staff in my office led
by the fearless Alicia Manzano
to
To the staff of each of your
offices, the leadership offices
as well as each of your LA's.
To our clerk's office to our
sergeants to our custodial staff
who uh keep this building
running to the folks out in the
kitchen to our security
personnel to our law enforcement
officers up there.
Thank you for all of your hard
work.
And then lastly, um,
To each of your families. I know
some of them might be here with
you, others may be webcasting,
um, others are probably eagerly
awaiting your return, so from.
Where I sit
To your family's, I wanna thank
them for sharing you and your
Talents with this great state.
So a big round of applause for
your familias.
I'll come back to announcements
in a minute. We've got 4
minutes, so real quick.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that or business messages to
read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 431 and return
same here with respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhan,
Senate chief clerk. Message will
be entered Message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has receded from
Senate amendments to House Bill
167 as amended by the House and
further amended by the Senate,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson and chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
There's an emoji of a little
flex.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Speaker, we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business from
Catherine Sierrasor Valencia.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to rise and say thank you
to all my colleagues, uh, but
most of all my team, my
incredible team over here, um,
my, the staff in the office,
Rick, Ryan, Rachel.
You guys rock.
Uh, Josiah, um, and then to the
ladies and the gentlemen that
feed us in the office where you
smell the pozole, you smell the,
the, the, uh, pulled pork, uh,
keeping us on a home cooked meal
every once in a while, it, it
really keeps us close to home
and reminds us why we're here,
Mr. Speaker, and, um, and to the
speaker for keeping his word to
me and being honorable. I, uh, I
really appreciate that, uh, as a
new leader here on the house.
floor, uh, my incredible whip,
my incredible caucus chair, and
all my members that uh lift me
up and protect me and uh watch
out for me. I appreciate you all
so much, uh, the other side of
the aisle, um, sometimes we have
very heated debate, but we all
are just people of New Mexico.
Trying to do the right thing for
the people back home, so we
appreciate you.
lady from Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Uh, I do
wanna take the this moment just
to say thank you to the Commerce
Committee, uh, we are the best
committee in the house and uh I
appreciate uh just the fun we
have in that committee. Um, I
think we did do some really,
really good work, but at the end
of the day, we've always been
able to um walk away and honor
each other and uh have just a
good relationship and so I, I
really wanted to say thank you,
thank you to the staff who
was there with us when we work
late nights and thank you to the
speaker for just his leadership
and his friendship, so thank you
all for um.
A wonderful 60 days.
Thank you gentle lady.
Right, I, I can take like 3 more
12 2nd announcements, gentlemen
from River Sandoval San Juan,
Valente, the members of the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee please stand to be
recognized for being the the.
best committee in the House of
Representatives we heard over
1000 bills this year and you all
did great. thank you all so much
members take note.
General lady from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your CPAC
committee did a great job too,
um, and we also had an honorary
member Macon who gave us really
great advice. Our analysts and
um and my uh uh assistant Cheryl
Bush was really great too. So we
appreciate um Carol.
Men canning for helping all of
our analysts to do a great job.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
members say no, gentlemen from
Bern. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
want to give a shout out to the
House Education Committee for
being the most knowledgeable
committee in the House. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Members say
no, gentlemen from Donana, only
if you're gonna talk about
turkey hunting, Mr. Speaker,
your house appropriations and
Finance Committee will meet 15
minutes after the
I hope to see everybody in the
turkey woods, and I want to say
a giant thank you to the staff,
our uh budget director, the
minority director with Rick May,
Amanda Briding, Rick May, and
HAFC raise your hand, please.
Great job. More to come, thank
you, gentle lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We need
to give a standing ovation to
our speaker.
That's gonna make me blush.
Thank you, gentle lady, very
kind of you and all of you,
thank you, gentlemen from you're
the, you're the last person
standing between me and hitting
the road. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I want to thank you and
thank our leadership team and
also on the other side of the
aisle as well, Mr. Speaker, the
most traveled road is to your
house transportation and
infrastructure committee
toughest, toughest group of
committee members best members
of all, sorry guys, last word
thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Literally
1202
We might be in a constitutional
crisis right now.
So I'll do like 10 more seconds
first with generally from Bern
Leo. Mr. Speaker, thank you. I
have one last joke. How do baby
geese get out of their shells.
Oh.
They follow egg inside.
Yeah
Gentle lady from all those
counties. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. On behalf of the
freshman class.
We want to thank you, your team,
and all the members in this
house for supporting us, helping
us, lifting us, and taking care
of us during this session. We
had a very successful freshman
year, and we look forward to
seeing you all in the interim.
members take notes, gentlely
from Leo quicker.
I want to thank members of the
House Labor Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee and
we salute you all and wish you
safe travels and particularly to
ranking member representative.
Bless us and all of his members
for keeping us in line. thank
you members take note.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I move that the chair
appoint a committee of 3 to
inform the Senate that the House
has adjourned and has completed
its work and is ready to
adjournine DA
will resentativesta Ortiz and
Senna Cortez to inform the
honorable members of the Senate
that we have completed our work
and are ready to adjourn CADA.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
chair appoint a committee of 3
to advise the governor that the
House has completed its work and
is ready to adjourn CADA.
Second motion.
The chair will appoint
Representatives Herrera de la
Cruz, and Duncan to inform the
honorable governor that the
House has completed its work and
is ready to adjournine.
Mr. Speaker, I move the House
postpone action indefinitely on
all bills remaining on the
speaker's table on the calendar
or in committee accept the bills
in the enrolling and engrossing
committee here second the
motion.
The house
Has adjournedine.
