Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum. The gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Duncan, not
with a joke today but with
today's invocation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Emily, Father, as we borrowed
this morning, how grateful we
are that we woke up to a
beautiful wintry day. Father,
we're grateful for the blessings
we enjoy. We're grateful for the
health and strength as we're
here with lots and lots of
folks, uh, many, many illnesses.
We pray for those who are sick.
We pray for those who are out.
Father, we pray for continued uh
health and strength as we
continue to do the work that
needs to be done here for the
state of New Mexico.
Father, we pray for wisdom that
uh as we debate, as we talk, and
as we learn about bills, we pray
that we might have
understanding and we pray that
we might be able to do those
things would benefit the entire
state of New Mexico.
Father, we also know that uh the
uh bills that we make and the
votes we take we'll answer to
thee as well, so bless us with
wisdom and bless us with
understanding.
Father, we're grateful to be
able to serve. We're grateful
for those who make this, uh,
roundhouse work for those who
are protecting us and those who
are doing the work within the
offices and, and helping us out
and then the clerk clerk's
office and all of their offices
to help us out.
Father, we, uh, are grateful
again to serve. We're grateful
for the opportunities. We pray
for our families through home
supporting us and, and pray for
them and our, our families.
Father, Father in heaven and
again we express our gratitude
and love to thee and and love
for our Savior Jesus Christ and
in his name we humbly pray in
the name of Jesus Christ our
Savior and our friend. Amen.
The lady from Berlin of Anaya
with the Pledge of Allegiance.
And the gentle lady from.
Roosevelt Chavez, Representative
Reed with the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
lady from Santa Fe. Good
morning, Mr. Speaker. Good
morning.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business objection to this, so.
Good morning members.
Good morning members.
Happy Wednesday legislative day.
13.
Soon to be 13, almost there.
lady from Santa Fe with an
announcement and special guest.
Mr. Speaker, um, thank you, uh,
today we have a very special
guest who have been part of a
lot of the things that we do
here throughout the years in
Santa Fe and.
Um, I
We are paying special
recognition to girls Inc. Santa
Fe.
Um, we have some special guests
on the rostrum.
We have some special guests on
the floor, but before I
introduced them. I just wanted
to ask if it's OK if I have a
few words.
Certainly, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, in recognition
today March 5th, 2025, the curls
Inc of Santa Fe day, um, for 70
years, Girls Inc of Santa Fe has
offered exceptional programs and
services for Santa Feirs
resulting in a positive impact
on their lives, families, and
community.
And Grill's Inc of Santa Fe
offers comprehensive programming
activities, education,
counseling opportunities for
growth for youth aged 5 to 18.
Girl's Link of Santa Fe provides
a safe and inclusive space for
participants can grow, thrive,
and discover their potential.
A girl's Inc of Santa Fe
encourages all participants to
become strong.
Smart and bold leaders.
Gris think of Santa Fe champions
after school programs, summer
camps, and specialized
specialized incentives that
foster leadership and
communication skills as well as
personal advocacy, integrity,
and achievement. And Girls Inc
of Santa Fe has earned national
recognition for it for its
excellence in programming and
delivering quality services and
programs for girls here, Mr.
Speaker, um, I'm exceptional,
I'm so proud of them. My
daughter Olive
Who's 11 years old and is now in
her 2nd year at Girls Inc. My
sister, who I won't mention her
age, went to participated with
them, um, way back in the day
when there are they're still on
the hill, um, but they were
called the Girls Club, and they
have evolved and grown and are
growing our, our beautiful uh
women and girls and our leaders
of tomorrow and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I just want to say, um,
happy Girls Inc of
Santa Fe day in the legislature.
Um, girls ain't they at the
Santa Fe.
Roundhouse.
Mr. Speaker, on the rostrum,
when I call your name, please
stand, we have Becky Calhoun.
We have Madonna, Madonna
Hernandez.
Jolene Duran and Diane Ramsey.
Welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, on the floor with
us today we have when your
name's called please stand
Kathleen Kylene.
To Lula Ryder.
Alian in, Bianca Sisu, Evelyn
Villegas Espinoza, Leyla Madrid,
Malanie Rodriguez, Doris Page,
Diane, we already called you
Diane, you're on here twice. Zoe
is it, uh.
Yanana Harris Linda De Wolf, and
Faith Gomez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We welcome
you all today and thank you for
being with us and happy Girls
Inc. of Santa Fe, a 2025. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady, and welcome to the
house.
Gentlemen from Valencia Baca,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I rise on a point of
personal privilege.
Mr. Speaker, um,
Legislature or or house. I, I
just want to basically let us
know that our friend and our
colleague Representative
Saignana, she lost her mother.
So if uh if you guys can keep
both the representatives Sannaa
and her mother in her prayers. I
just wanted to know that we're
thinking about her, so thank you
Mr. Speaker.
Yankee gentle lady in our
prayers and good energies go to
representative Serana or our
dear colleague and her family in
this in this time, um, and if
you would all, uh, please rise
for a moment of silence in honor
of her mother.
Thank you, members.
Gentlemen from
Colfax Mora Ria Riva, San Miguel
and Towers Representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'd like to introduce my guests
from the Norte, uh, they're
with, uh, Upper Chama soil and
Water Conservation District. I
have Mr. Agapito Candelaia, Mr.
Max Martinez, Mr. Tio Lopez, Mr.
Gary Mora.
And uh Miss Rachel Mora, let's
give him a round of applause.
Welcome to your House of
Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, thank you folks for
making the trip and, and joining
us here today, always happy to
see you and to have you in our
chamber, gentle lady from Bern
Learresentative Homanby Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
have a guest on the rostrum I'd
like to introduce, uh, Joshua Al
Halloran
is the district manager of the
Ciudad Soil and Water
Conservation District. um, he's
also my constituent and we're
happy to have him here today.
The Ciudad soil and Water
Conservation District promotes
the conservation, improvement
and
Responsible use of the natural
resources on the rural and urban
lands within its boundaries. The
function of the out is to
acquire available technical,
financial, and educational
resources, whatever their source
and focus on coordinating those
resources so that they meet the
needs of local land and water
users, users. Our constituents
are the citizens, land, water,
natural resources, and wildlife
for the Siad soil and water
conservation District, and we
work to promote stewardship
protection and conservation of
natural resources for current
and future generations within
our district.
Thank you for being here today.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Valencia, do I
make the announcement or do you
make the announcement?
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, you can,
well, you can go ahead and make
the announcements, I will call
your attention to the gallery.
We have a very special guest,
uh, of Representative Mirabel
Moya.
That is Jason Moya.
Her husband of 20 years today.
Happy anniversary.
Jason, um, the representative
promised me on the floor earlier
that she is going to take you to
dinner tonight at the bull ring.
And she is paying, that's what
she said.
Mr. Speaker, I have to say this
has been, I, I never thought,
um, when, when we got married 20
years ago that uh 20 years could
be so sweet. He truly is my
favorite person in the entire
world, and my life would not be
the same without that man. I
think you made him blush.
Happy anniversary. Very happy
for you too.
Jolene from Donana Socorro and
from Sierra Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
want to, um, let everyone know
that today is soil and Water
Conservation Day in the Rotunda
and our, we have 47 stormwater
conservation districts across
the state and lots of folks do
have their district supervisors
and their, their managers here
in the Rotunda today. They'll be
there till 2, I think, maybe 3,
if you want to stop by and say
hi, um, you know, so water
concert
v ation districts are over 150
years old. They are the only
entity that is statutorily
allowed to work on public and
private land, and so they get
the work done and even when
there's hiring freezes at the
federal level, if the dollars
are allocated, they've been
stepping in the gap,
particularly on Hermit's Peak
Caf Canyon fire and doing the
work through their partnerships
with New Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts and
directly with soil and water. So
they have a very, very important
role of getting dollars out the
door and boots on the ground.
Um, I, there are some
in on the rostrum that I do get
to introduce and Chris Lucero is
here from Cuba and since
Representative Herrera, my
co-sponsor, is not here right
now. I'm going to introduce her.
Uh, so Water District. So this
is the Cuba Swan Water
Conservation District. Everyone
is a little bit different. This
one, they do a 50/50 cost share
program. They help landowners
offset the expenses of
implementing conservation
practices. They manage a grant
for tree thinning, assist
landowners in creating
defensible space.
on their properties to reduce
wildfire risk, and they are
committed to the ongoing fight
against noxious weeds, providing
resources and guidance to
control invasive species and
protect local ecosystems and so
they, they cover several miles
of reservation land. They have
Navajo Hickora, Apache Hemes,
and, and the Zia Pueblos. Thank
you so much for being here. This
is Chris there, the manager of
the Cubba Sw Water Conservation
District. Welcome to the house.
I also get to introduce a couple
of the folks from Donana County
first, um, is Josh Smith. He is
the, the Donana Swim Water
Conservation District chair,
he's also the manager at the
Elephant Butte Irrigation
District, and he's also serving
as the president of the New
Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, aren't
you on the national board too?
So yeah, he's got a lot of hats
and uh uh great to have him here
today from Donana.
Welcome to the house.
Raphael Rideroso, did I say it
right? I did not.
Rovio Rosa.
Almost, almost. OK, all right.
He's a pecan farmer from Las
Cruces, and he's also the vice
president of the Elephant
Irrigation District, which is a
huge partners with stormwater.
They pair up for lots of, of
efforts. And uh thank you so
much for being here. And I get
to introduce a personal friend,
probably a familiar face around
the roundhouse, Jim Beli.
He is a New Mexico cattle
rancher and has served in the
East Torrance Soil and Water
Conservation District for the
past 23 years. He's the past
president of the New Mexico
Conservation Association of
Conservation Districts as well
as serving two terms on the
executive board of directors for
the National Association of
Conservation Districts. He's on
the board of directors for the
National Conservation
Foundation, and he does have a
capacity here during the session
representing the Mexico
Association of Conservation
Districts.
But mostly I just like to call
him my friend. And he does ride
horses, but he also has a
Harley, which when he drives
through TRC sometimes he stops
and says, hi, he's a pretty cool
dude. Thank you so much for
being here, Jim. Welcome to the
house.
And the cookie is also a gift
from the, um, this is from the
Donana soil and Water
Conservation Districts. Thank
you guys for being here today.
Welcome to the house, gentlemen
from Ria Riva Sandoval in San
Juan with a very special
announcement and a song.
Announcement in a song, Mr.
Speaker and, and uh members of
the, of the committee in the
House, uh, this morning my
daughter gave birth to our 2nd
grandbaby.
And
And uh it's been a hectic 24
hours in the Lenty household,
but nonetheless, uh, my daughter
Jay did great, uh, over the past
24 hours she gave birth to our
second granddaughter Elia Ray
Lenty. I was born this morning
at 5:15 at 8 pounds and 3 ounces
at a length of 19 3/4 inches.
And so with that, can I sing?
Gentlemen to sing happy
birthday.
To
The
you
Happy birthday, dearly
happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, Lea.
Representative Grandpa
Chairman Grandpa.
Abuelito.
The lady from Taus. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I rise in support
of our houses soil and water
conservation District, um,
they're an incredible partner in
the county, um, they think that
Mr. Speaker, um, Peter V. Hill,
who is the executive director of
the Tao Soil and Water District,
uh, Conservation is on the
rostrum right now, um, I'm
really proud of the work that
they do in Taos County. They
work with ourseki Associations
to um to construct a psych
infrastructure they've um
they've.
built over 1500 irrigation ditch
projects, um, in collaboration
with all of our state partners
Office of State Engineer,
Interstate Stream Commission,
um, but they don't do just that.
They work with private
landowners on range on
improvement and soil health, um,
they've, they protect uh 200
acres plus per year, uh, to
bring those soils back to life,
um, they work with, um, private
landowners on animal damage or
rodent control, water quality
projects, um, with our ski
alley, Tao Pueblo, local
farmers, they do a lot
stream restoration, uh, with the
environment department, River
sewers program and um really
work with our partners to
maintain our forest health
because we, you know, we are,
um, we're really uh focusing on
that so that we can prevent um
catastrophic, uh, fires, so I'm
grateful for the work they do in
our community. Thank you, Mr. Vi
Hill.
Welcome to the house.
lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also
have uh an opportunity to
celebrate our soil and water
conservation districts are Santa
Feuaque, uh, representative
Champy Green, isn't that the
perfect name for the job, um,
Champy is, uh, he's, um, been
operating and maintaining.
And leading 7 high hazard flood
control dams in Rio Riba and
Santa Fe, we get the Rio from
the Rio Grande, then we also get
all of the beautiful waters
coming from our sangre de
Cristos, the district fiscally
supports the healthy soil
program practices, defensible
space, and forest thinning on
private land, um, community
wildfire protection planning,
emergency watershed protection
projects and local youth
participation at the New Mexico
State University Youth Ranch
management camp. Uh, please help
me in.
exciting Champy to uh our the
people's house. Thank you, Mr.
Welcome to the house.
Any other announcements. The
gentleman from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I
want to welcome Jennifer Cleitz
who's the manager at Donana Soil
and Water Conservation District.
Mr. Speaker, this year, the
legislature led by our house is
taking unprecedented steps to
support and partner with our
soil and water conservation
districts, uh, Jennifer's work
like the work of so many others,
uh, works with communities,
their first largest program
planting trees in neighborhoods,
uh, the neighbor Woods program
in Las Cruces.
New Mexico and surrounding
areas. Second, Mr. Speaker, uh,
the embody it includes the
healthy soils program that we're
also investing more in, uh, soil
and water conservation district
serve an increasingly important
role, the more partnership that
they can do, the better we are,
and I'm proud that we're
supporting them and they're a
key support for the state. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen and welcome to the
house.
announcements.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
See no objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 125
has had it under consideration
in reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house consumer
and public affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 125 do
pass and this referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Joanne J. Ferrari,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, moved to adopt?
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report
files Bill 125, but a favorable
committee report for House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 125. All those in favor
Sabasena.
How the supposed name, the I
have a committee report adopted.
Miss,
excuse me, Mr. Speaker, your
labor, veterans and Military
Affairs Committee to has been
referred Senate Bill 161 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Roel
Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker,
movedoption favorable report for
Senate Bill 161. All those in
favor if I say a.
I suppose
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and finance committee to has
been referred House Bill 156 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr.
Speaker, adoption for 156. All
those in favor, and if I say I.
All the supposed name, the IAA
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred House Bill 175 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
an adoption of a favorable
committee report files Bill 175.
All those in favor I would say
no.
I was opposing a, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee, to whom
has been referred House Bill
191.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill 191 due pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan Small chair.
Mr. Speaker, adoption.
We're in adoption of a favorable
committee report. No, we're on
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report for House Bill
191, but a favorable committee
report for House Appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Bill 191. All those in
favor of C C and I.
I suppose, yeah, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 240 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, adoption adoption
of a favorable committee report
files 240, all those in favor
signified by saying I am.
I suppose,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 449.
Has had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption favorable reports Bill
449. All those in favor signify
by saying a.
I suppose,
yeah I saw it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
to has been referred House Bill
487 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G Andres Romero,
chair. Speaker, I move adoption
of the committee report.
report for I 487 and all those
in favor of say if I say aye.
All those supposedsonate. The
ISI committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to has been referred
House Memorial 32 has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted Gro
chair. Move adoption of the
committee report. We are
adoption of a favorable
committee report for House
Memorial 32. All those in favor
of Saint Papa say no.
I was supposed.
Yeah I saw it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Memorial 43 has had it
under consideration report and
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted.
Greer, I adoption of the
committee report. We are
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Al Memorial
43. All those in favor signified
by say I.
I suppose nay,
the Iabic committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 19 as
amended, has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and the
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Gans from
her chair, I move adoption of
the committee report.
We are on adoption of a fair
report for Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 19 as amended. All those in
favor baba say a.
I suppose, yeah, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee team has been
referred House Bill 368 has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Del the chair.
Mr. Speaker, move an option.
We're an adoption of a favorable
community report files with 368.
All those in favor sitting C and
I.
It's
Of the supposed name.
I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 494 has
had it under consideration in
Port Sa with recommendation that
it do pass respectfully
submitted. Derek J L the chair
Mr. Speaker, we have an option.
We're a favorable report for
House Bill 494, all those, all
those in favor say 9.
I was supposed, the IAA
committee report adopted.
one message.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
to read. Message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed
Senate Bill 37 as amended.
Senate Bill 179 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Lohan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended that the journal show
that all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon session. It is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
Business Committee. See an
objection. It is so ordered.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation so
ordered.
Clerk Reed.
Senate Education can be
substitute for Senate Bill 387.
An act relating to public
schools changing the amount of
community school implementation
grants, renaming the community
schools fund in honor of Doctor
Jeannie Oaks, Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 387.
Mm-hmm
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 387
have been reized by toddlers
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 249.
An act relating to healthcare
requiring healthcare providers
to be reimbursed for gross
receipt taxes. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249 Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 249 have been
read by title is referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the House taxation
and Revenue Committee.
Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59,
an act relating to public works,
defining site of the project,
which includes off-site
fabrication. Senate Tax Business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59.
Senate, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59
have been read twice by title is
referred to the House Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee.
Senate Bill 63 introduced by by
Senator Ezel and others and act
relating to the state flag.
Establishing the manner of
retiring a state flag. Senate
Bill 63. Senate Bill 6 have been
by title is referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 236 as amended,
introduced by Senator Bergmans
and others. An act relating to
motor vehicles, providing for
the issuance of look twice for
motorcycles, special
registration plates for
motorcycles amending section
66-3-424.40 NMSA 1978 being laws
2023, chapter 73, section 1,
making an appropriation. Senate
bill 236.
as amended. Senate Bill 236 as
amended have been read to us by
title is referred to the House
Transportation, Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 37 introduced by
Senator Stefaniks and others,
and act relating to water,
creating the strategic water
reserve Fund to be administered
by the Interstate Stream
Commission, providing that the
strategic water reserve shall be
used to assist in water
management and conservation
efforts designed to support
aquifer recharge or reduce
groundwater depletion, allowing
the interstate stream commission
to prioritize, prioritize water
transactions that provide
supplementary benefits.
In addition to at least one
authorized purpose, making an
appropriation. Senate Bill 37.
Senate Bill 37 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house
agricultural se and Water
Resources Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 179 introduced by
Senator Trujillo and act
relating to the rental Purchase
Agreement Act, providing for
electronic disclosure of
required information for
property displayed or offered
online. Senate Bill 179.
Senate Bill 179 have been read
twice by title is referred to
the House commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Memorial 51, introduced by
Representative Lundstrom Lenthe
Duncan Kadena, and Senna Cortez,
a memorial requesting that the
consensus revenue estimating
group investigate and reports
the implications of static
scoring and dynamic scoring on
fiscal policy proposals, House
Memorial 51.
As more of 51 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Memorial 52 introduced by
Representative Dow and Henry. A
memorial requesting the economic
development department, the
tourism department, and the
taxation and revenue Department
to establish a work group to
study the economic impact.
Taxation and regulatory
framework of short-term rentals
across New Mexico.
Requesting suspension of
reclassification of short-term
rental properties and until
completion of the study. House
Memorial 52 2 by title is
printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Joint Memorial 10
introduced by Representative
Parajuan.
A joint memorial requesting the
higher education department to
study means and strategies to
create lifelong voters, House
Joint Memorial 10.
How's Joint Memorial 10?
Haven't been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the house Education Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements.
I have an announcement. We're
gonna do 3rd reading after this.
Just for a little bit.
Quick, quick 3rd reading.
Um, then committees will meet
this evening, and then I believe
there are respective.
Caucus dinners, if I'm not
mistaken.
Can I come to your
dinnerpresentative Vincent?
I'll be there.
make an appearance.
Buy me a beer.
The announcements you from Santa
Fe, announcement.
Mr. Speaker, your House
Judiciary Committee will meet
today 15 minutes after the floor
session.
Members take note.
lady from Santa Fe Riseransky.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation. It is so
ordered.
Gentlemen from
Santa Fe and Sandoval said
McQueen, are you ready on item
40.
I am Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to the point
that all action necessary for
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 284 on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 284
provides for the adoption of
free roaming horses, the
relocation of free roaming
horses if there's a suitable
place to take them in a
prohibition on slaughter of such
horses, you know, with that,
I'll stand for questions. There
is the gentle lady from Dona
Ana, Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from and Santa Fe,
please yield, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, for many years
we've been concerned about the
free warming horses and um their
care and making sure that they
were able to be free roaming
horses. Can you tell me how this
is going to change that.
Mr. Speaker, generally, as I
believe you know, um.
The, the issue we face with free
roaming horses is that there are
too many of them.
Um, we have herds that are
greatly impacting the
environment, uh, we have horses
who are emaciated, uh, and
starting with horses who are uh
getting hit by cars, which of
course is bad for the horse but
also bad for people in the cars,
um, because of this population
pressure.
What we're trying to do is, uh,
limit the size of the Hertz so
what this bill does is it
provides a mechanism for
adoption. It provides a
mechanism for relocation only
when there's a suitable place to
take them. It provides for the
continuation of the
administration of fertility
control.
And it prohibits slaughter, so
we're trying to reduce the
population pressure of the
herds, the herds will remain
free roaming.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, how
do you guarantee or what guard
rails do you have that the whole
herd isn't going to be
eradicated and euthanized or
taken to another place.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, general lady,
uh, if you look at the text of
the bill, they can only be
moved, uh, if there's a suitable
place to take them and the
unfortunate reality is we don't
have enough places. Um, I've
thought about this in the past,
um, and if you imagine our
animal shelters, like what would
our animal shelters do if all
the dogs and all the cats got
adopted.
That's not really an issue we
face because we have more dogs
and more cats and then we know
what to do with. It's the same
with the horses. So we can only
move the horses if we have a
suitable home for them, and we
can under this bill, you can
only euthanize them if they're
injured or sick.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, being injured or sick, um,
would malnutrition, um, be one
of those reasons that you would
also.
euthanize them.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, nutrition standing alone, I
don't think so, uh, only if, uh,
the horse was suffering or could
not be brought back to health.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, my other concerns
are, um, the
Alto horses that they have um
been injured. We don't have the
um uh crossings that we need in
our state even though they're
the Department of Transportation
is trying to do that and provide
that.
Um, but with that be a reason,
just because one horse.
gets killed that you would be
able to remove the whole um
herd.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
what's the guarantee when you
have the experts being approved
by um the um.
Livestock Board who is more in
favor of protecting the
Cattle and um.
Being sure that they have the uh
the.
places to graze, um, and they're
competing against the wild
horses and where they roam.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so the
way this bill is structured,
the, the livestock board.
would write rules and approve
the free roaming horse experts,
the free warming horse experts
would then if they determine
that the herd had exceeded the
carrying capacity of the land on
which they were, uh, they can
enter into a contract with a
governmental entity, so a city,
a county, potentially a soil
water conservation district some
political subdivision say in New
Mexico at that point they could
only remove the horses if there
was a home for which they could.
be adopted or if there was a
horse sanctuary where they could
be moved to. So under the terms
of the bill, it's really fairly
limited when it when you can
remove the horses and where you
can take them.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
that really concerns me because
we don't have very many
sanctuaries, and those
sanctuaries really aren't where
horses can.
Have free roaming uh capacity.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
there's no place to take the
horse, you cannot remove it.
And also what are the
safeguards, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, for, um, making sure
that um someone who adopts a
horse isn't going to, um, you
know, uh, take them to slaughter
into Mexico or somewhere else,
even though we say it's a
misdemeanor, um, what Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen,
How do we protect them from that
kind of situation?
Mr. Speaker, generally, uh,
first of all, as you allude to,
we're making a misdemeanor to
slaughter any of these horses,
so that's a protection that does
not currently exist. Secondly,
once a horse is taken off the
range, it's to be microchipped
or freeze branded for
identification purposes, so we
will be able to identify the
horses in the future, um.
It's not 100%, right? Uh, if you
put a horse in a trailer and
drove it off in there under the
darkness of night. I, I mean we
we're not tracking every single
horse, but we're putting in
protections that don't currently
exist.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
is there a way to call the herd
without removing the whole herd
if there is, um, uh, if there
are signs that they are um
Not having the grazing and
they're losing weight and things
like that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, not in
this bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's why I can't vote for this
bill. Thank you.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and
Oteroent Vincent. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Does the gentleman
yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
When we talk about are we
talking about spay and neutering
these horses. How, how are we
gonna do that?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Spain uh is an option, but it's
difficult. You got to capture
the horse. It's a surgical uh
procedure. It's, it's hard for
the most part.
Uh, the fertility control is
called PZP. I cannot tell you
what that stands for. It's
administered to the mayors by
darting them uh from a distance,
uh, so they have dark guns and,
and you shoot the mayor in the
rump, uh, and they try to do
this on an annual basis.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. So I want you to
think about this.
How do you know how many times
you've darted one of the mares.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the, the people who are out
there darting mares. Um, they
try to identify the herd, the
family group.
The horses have different
markings. I mean, they do their
best, um, I think and I, my
sense is they do a pretty good
job.
So I don't think we're, you
know, there's no reason to dart
the same mayor over and over
again in a single year, uh, so
they certainly have um an
incentive, uh, to be efficient
about it and once they've darted
the mirror, you know, they
tracked that, they identify
that, and they, uh, when they go
back out to to other mayors will
attempt to avoid darting the
same mayor twice.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
Gentlemen
So whenever, say we have, I
don't know, I don't know how
many herds we have in my
district, probably 4 to 5.
And we have people out there
darting these mares with this
fertility drug.
TZP
P2P or PZP Mr. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, PZP.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So we're darting
these animals, are we going to
be marking them? Are they gonna
try to be familiarized with
them. How, how do they know what
these mayors that they're not
darting them twice.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
again, they, you know, they
identify the, the herds, they
identified the family groups,
they identified the markings.
They wouldn't mark uh uh
microchip, a horse, you know,
without capturing it, they
wouldn't freeze the horse
without capturing it, that would
only happen if a horse was being
taken off the range if it had
some place to go. Otherwise,
it's just sort of a uh, you
know, a visual census of the
herd.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen. What,
what's the price of this P PZP.
How much is it per unit?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
my expert today is Jessica
Johnson Shelton with the Animal
Protection Voters in Mexico.
She tells me that PCP is about
$22 per dose.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
and is this, is this PCP and
every time we dart a mare.
It's billed to the taxpayers.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, so,
uh, there's no funding in this
bill, uh, and, but there's also,
uh, you know, no specific fiscal
impact. The way it works is once
the the free roaming horse
experts are registered with the
Livestock Board.
Local governments can enter into
contracts with the experts to
perform the service, so for
example.
Sandoval County has been working
with some experts, uh, for a few
years to dart the the herd in
Placitas, uh, so that's just
something that the uh county
government chose to undertake
and so it's, it's really up to
the local uh governmental
subdivision whether or not they
wanna use this structure.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but at the end of the
day, the taxpayers will still be
on the hook for these darts.
Whether it's at the local level
or the state level.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
potentially, yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So how, how do we
manage this herd?
If we're just uh if we're just
doing fertility drugs on them.
Um
There's gonna be a few that we
don't, we're not gonna be able
to capture probably and this
herd just grows and grows and
grows and we get to the point
where nobody wants to, to take
on these herds or the, you know,
they don't want to adopt these
animals.
Where do we go from there?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
there is a population pressure
and um the herds are the herd
has been fairly stable through
these efforts, but their herds
increased not only through
reproduction, but also, you
know, people dump horses, you
know, so we get more horses put
out on the range, uh, we're
trying to manage the population
pressure, uh, it's been, I
think, I think this has um been
somewhat successful and has the
potential for more success, so
again.
we're focusing exactly on that
issue if this bill is not
sufficient in the herds continue
to grow, then we're gonna have
to look, um, uh, for, for other
solutions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. So, I wanna, I
wanna give you a story on how
they, they take these horses, so
in Lincoln County, we had a, a
stud farm.
And this stud, this high dollar
stud was in his pen, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and one of these
wild horses was fighting this
horse.
This high high dollar stallion
over the fence and the property
owner,
Rope this horse.
Put him in a trailer.
And hold him out north of
Capitan, which is 25 miles away.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, he
got in trouble for it.
Because you're really not
supposed to do that.
That horse.
was back at the same location 3
days later, traveled 25 miles
because I guess he wanted to
fight some more. He wasn't
finished. And not only
They move this horse over two
pins, so he had to jump a gate.
And damaged the gate and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, what do we
do a nuisance horses like that.
What, what in this bill would,
would combat that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so this
is my 2nd time working on this
bill. Uh, it passed the Senate
two years ago, um, and I have
always said of this bill that
it's a positive step in the
right direction.
That it doesn't solve all the
issues we have with free roaming
horses.
It just, it just doesn't, it's a
difficult issue because
You know, horses have a special
place in our arts, right? We're
not, we, we, we want to be uh
kind. We want to be humane, um,
a lot of people are really uh
inspired and thrilled to see,
uh, free roaming horses, um.
But the reality is we have too
many, we have this population
pressure, so this is a bill to
address that. It doesn't, it's
not going to address every
situation that comes up with
free roaming horses as, as you
can illustrate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. So I wanna, I
just wanna give you, uh, another
story that
You know, I like cows.
But we still eat them.
Mm
And
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh, I
have an outfitter friend of mine
that went to Tajurkistan this
last season to go over and hunt
Marco Polo's.
And because I'm kind of a food
connoisseur, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I asked him, because
he wants me to go with him.
And I said, what do they eat
over there?
And he said mainly horses.
And they even drink horse milk,
Mr. Speaker. I didn't know if
you knew that, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, they, he, they drank
horse milk.
And we're used to drinking cow
milk, which is white.
And usually cold. I mean, most
of us drink it cold.
Mare's milk, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, kind of has a blue
tint to it.
And I was trying to think what I
want to drink ma's milk.
That has a blue tint to it. I
don't know why my brain is not
wanting to take a drink of that.
But I think it's just in our
mind. And Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
Is there, is there any talk
about, and I'm not trying to
rile anybody up. Is there any
Is there any, uh, talk about
possibly butchering some of
these horses to feed our, our
folks that need protein, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I
think different cultures, uh,
different societies, different
countries have a different
relationship with different
animals. Um, there are certainly
societies that eat dogs like I
don't want to eat dogs, you
know, we want to take care of
dogs. Uh, we also have a dog
overpopulation problem, you
know, so similar to horses, um,
Mr. Speaker, this, this bill
would prohibit not only the
slaughter of these horses once
they're taken off the range, but
also the exportation for
slaughter. So what has happened
in the past.
At times is the horses were
rounded up and driven down to
Mexico and slaughtered, uh,
potentially for dog food. um,
this bill prohibits that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, would
you ever be in favor?
Of horse slaughtering.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for
human consumption for dog food,
for those purposes? No, it's not
in this bill, uh, you know, if
that goes on in other countries,
you know, I'm perfectly happy to
be respectful of local customs,
not my thing. Like if I travel
there, I'm not gonna have, you
know, a, a horse meal, um.
Just not my thing.
Well, Mister Speaker and
gentlemen, if I ever try some,
I'm gonna try to get you some
because they said it's pretty
good. And I think that because
of that blue tinged milk that I
was telling you about. Maybe we
just have a mental block that we
can't do it. And all I'm saying,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen is, we
have a horse problem.
And I know that we call things.
Sometimes we don't call it like
we see it. We, we want to make
it feel good and these wild
horses that we talk about,
they're not so wild, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Because wild horses do not have
brands on them. They don't have
shoes on them, and I see that
people, especially during the
COVID uh era.
They couldn't feed their horses.
They really weren't worth
anything. They couldn't afford
to take them to an auction
because the closest auction is,
you know, almost 100 miles from,
from Lincoln County. And, uh,
they just, it was easier for
them to just go out and open the
pin and turn them loose, and
they all get together. And, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
they're very destructive,
especially to our golf courses,
um, a lot, a lot of our kids
can't even kick a soccer ball
around a.
filled because they like to get
out there and eat green grass.
And when horses eat lots of
green grass, you know what comes
after that?
And there's just piles
everywhere.
And the kids can't even, they
can't even roam around. They
can't play, they can't do
anything. And so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I appreciate the
debate, um, I hope that one of
these days you and I might even
be run a build to where we can,
we're gonna have to manage these
horse populations. It's just
gonna have to happen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
There is for to be gentlemen
from Curry Debaco Guadalupe
Roosevelt, San Miguel,
Representative Samoa.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I was surprised.
When I
was elected to this seat.
How much
There is on this wild horse, uh,
Population
All the concerns with it.
And out of all the things I've
seen, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Through the through the years of
legislation, I think your
legislation that you're carrying
here today.
Is
The best
And, and a, and a good
A good way
For people
And, and, and correct me if I'm
wrong.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
This is all voluntary, right?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
So we're not
We're not forcing Mr. Speaker,
anybody.
To go
vaccinate the horses or
sterilize them.
We're giving them an option.
To do so if they have a problem.
With the wild horses and the
population.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I don't know if people in this
chambers understand.
How much
It takes
To have a healthy horse as far
as feed consumption is
concerned.
And when you look,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen across
the state of New Mexico.
And the drought situation that
we're in.
And every year varies.
And I could just imagine that we
have been losing some horses,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, to
starvation.
Do you think
That that statement holds true,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, I do.
And there's nothing worse, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, to see a
horse starving.
Uh
To me, that, that would be so is
so inhumane and that's what
we're doing with them today if
they run out of pasture.
And if they're hungry and we're
not doing.
anything to alleviate the
problem.
That we can help the horses
themselves with.
Not only the humans that that
have.
To control the population, but
we're also helping the horses in
this with with legislation like
this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
stand today in strong support of
your bill.
Uh
I know horses are a touchy
subject, but this is one good
part of.
Being a legislator is seeing
legislation like this and, and.
And fixes
The problem that we have with
the big populations and
starvation of horses in New
Mexico today. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentlemen
There is for the debate,
gentlemen, from Travis, Eddie
and Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I yield.
Mr. Baker, gentlemen, uh,
How will this bill
Is this bill for only state
land.
They owned land
Mr. Speaker, and, this bill
would, would cover state land
and private land. It does not
cover federal land or tribal
land in any activity on either
state or private land would only
be conducted with the permission
of the property owner.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
thank you, gentlemen. Uh,
So in relationship to private
land, uh, you know, as it was
said.
These horses are very
destructive when during the time
of drought, uh,
But does this
On my private land, say I have
a, a ranch and I have a herd of
these horses on it. Is this tell
me that I cannot do anything
with them without.
It's contrary to this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this,
this bill sets up a process, uh,
for a, uh, registered free
roaming horse expert in
cooperation uh and under a
contract with a government
entity to perform these
services. Anything beyond that
is beyond this bill.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Mr. Speaker. So,
You know, uh
As we said, you know, horses and
cows in these areas compete for
the same.
grass, you know, it, uh, so if I
have a ranch that run 100 head
of cows and I've got 408 horses
running on there too.
You know, you've limited my
ability.
To raise cattle in a profitable
manner. Is that true, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
don't disagree that the horses
complete compete for forage with
the cattle, but there's nothing
in this bill that would, would
limit um your cattle operation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, General,
gentlemen, yes, it does. I
cannot.
Get rid of those horses on my
land.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you can,
um, you know, we, we're a fence
out state. Uh, there are other
things you can do with the
horses. What this bill does is
it sets up a procedure for the
adoption and relocation of these
horses that is done with the
registered horse expert under a
contract with a governmental
entity, and that's just sort of
the, the piece of the puzzle
that we're addressing.
You know, as, as I've said, and
as, um, has been observed, we
have, we have other issues with
free roaming horses that this
this bill just doesn't get to
you.
Thank you gentlemen. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I guess
that's, that's to my point. Uh,
I, I personally love horses.
I've had horses all my life.
And I agree with uh
Zamora.
There's nothing sadder than
seeing a horse starve to death.
And uh I would like to see
something in the legislation
that
That actually
Pertains to that.
That scenario.
And
Mr. Speaker, gentle, uh,
There is there, there's nothing
really in this legislation that
protects the private landowners.
In the state of New Mexico.
I
representative?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I, I
hear your point. I appreciate
it. That's, it's just beyond the
scope of this legislation.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. That's all.
Seeing no further debate,
gentlemen, close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, members of the
body, thank you for the
questions. Uh, this is, I
believe, a, a reasonable, a
humane, a, a, a good step
forward for managing wild horses
and I urge you to vote for the
bill. And with that, Mr.
Speaker, I move that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 284 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 284. The vote is
now open.
Vo's about to close.
The voices are close by a vote
of 54 in the affirmative, 4 in
the negative, how the judiciary
can be substitute for House Bill
284 Haulli passed this house.
You leave from earlier we said
Anaya, are you ready on item 33.
Yes, I am Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that all
necessary for placing house with
15 as a maned on final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you body um in front of you
today you have House Bill 15,
uh, which is our strategic
recruitment, uh, program for
healthcare workers, um, I'm, I'm
pretty sad that my co-sponsor is
out today, um, Representative
Jones, um, is my co-sponsor on
this, and, um, Mr. Speaker
Mbari, I wanna explain fairly
quickly how the program itself
is set up, um, so this is a
program that will be run out of
the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
Um, it is already in the budget,
Mr. Speaker, however, we want to
be sure that there are
parameters that come along with
the program itself, um, the bill
came about because of course as
we know we are um seeking
healthcare providers just like
uh every other state in the
nation. However, Mr. Speaker,
um, before I became an elected
official, I was very much so
traveling alongside the um
interim health committee and
with that, Mr. Speaker, um, I
visited with a lot of rural
health care, not just provider.
hospitals, um, but also those
within my own district, um, in
my district I have UNM I have
Presbyterian, and what occurred
to me, Mr. Speaker, and body,
um, is that many of the um HR
programs within our hospitals
are a bit overwhelmed and um
they're not necessarily aware of
all of the incentive programs
that we've passed for health
healthcare workers, um, over the
last few years. So essentially
this is a program that is a
headhunter program and a
concierge program.
Um, it recruits our healthcare
workers that have graduated from
our own institutions within the
last 10 years, um, and it's
specifically, um, goes after
those who are no longer in
state.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and body, um,
not only that, um, we are
actively recruiting, which means
we're not waiting for healthcare
recruits to come to us. We are
recruiting them actively um by
using our own graduate data, um,
when we get a hold of these
recruits, we also lay out all of
the programs that, uh, incentive
programs we've passed for
healthcare workers like loan
forgiveness, like tax credits,
um, and then Mr. Speaker, after
that we, uh, go into the
concierge program and
Um, the concierge type program
walks them through licensing,
walks them through
credentialing, um, and then Mr.
Speaker, um, if they continue
through this, uh, we also start
connecting them with any of the
childcare incentives that we've
passed, we help their spouses
find jobs as well, um, we'll
help them with house hunting,
um, and with that, Mr. Speaker,
um, I will stand for questions.
There is debated from Eddie and
Lee, Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Bernna Leo,
please yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield. Thank
you so much, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so, um, we did
have a hearing on this bill and
House appropriations and finance
and.
I definitely see the need to
expand our um health care
workforce, Mr. Speaker. I think
we all agree about that, um, I
did have some concerns though
about the.
The way the bill would work and
I just like to explain that just
for a minute, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, so this would be a $2
million expense to try to bring
healthcare workers back into the
state. These are people who went
to uh school here in New Mexico
and have been away from New
Mexico for about 10 years. Is
that correct, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker. Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, it would be graduates
within the last 10 years, so
they may have graduated and left
within a year or two, but up to
10 years, uh, Mr. Speaker and
dental lady.
In Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so the, the $2 million
if I understand would be spent
to reach out and try to recruit
them, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that is
correct.
OK, thank you. And um I know a
very gifted doctor, Mr. Speaker,
who did go to school here at UNM
Medical and.
You know, there are a lot of
reasons people decide to leave
the state and, um, usually those
are, uh, reasons that are well
founded, uh, maybe, you know,
it's a family move or employment
of a spouse, for example, takes
them to another uh place outside
of New Mexico and.
I just, I think my overall
reservation, if I may say,
gentle lady and Mr. Speaker, is
that I think there are better
ways to spend $2 million in
trying to lure people back into
the state, um, I think if we did
some basic reform in terms of
our malpractice laws and do a
few other things that that would
truly be the way to go to get
our workforce back and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it's my
understanding that.
The UNM graduates, uh, in the
medical field, um.
A lot of them stay in New Mexico
if they come from, especially
rural parts of the state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is, is that
your understanding as well?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, that is my
understanding.
So it, it seems to me, uh, Mr.
Speaker, generally, that the
crucial time here.
To keep these graduates in New
Mexico is just before they
graduate.
And make sure that they know
they have a home here and very
welcome to practice here.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um.
I understand that this money
would be used also to set up an
office with equipment and other
things for workforce solutions
to actually have a base camp.
For making these recruiting
efforts, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is that
Is that a large part of the $2
million appropriation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
wouldn't be an office, um, but
it would be a program within the
Department of Workforce
Solutions.
Thank you and um so Mr. Speaker,
General Liddy, there would be
some people hired I would take
it, or at least assigned to uh
the recruitment team, is that
correct? That's correct.
Thank you very much. So I, I
guess, again, I'll just say that
I, I know we need to build our
workforce. We need to retain.
The medical students that we
have, um.
But again, am my one concern is,
is $2 million and I think our
efforts are better uh spent in
other strategies uh to to get
this workforce here, so Mr.
Speaker, thank you very much,
gentle Lenny. Thank you.
It's for me, the gentle lady
from Cibola McKinley, Valencia
Socorrolio and San Juan,
representative Abeta.
Thank you Speaker, does the
gentle lady from Bernelio Yil.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
roommate, uh, the gentle lady
from all those counties.
Thank you, Office mate, gentle
lady. I really like this bill. I
like it for a number of reasons.
Um, I served on the school board
for 8 years and sometimes our
students go to college out of
state and we want to bring them
back, um, one of the things I'd
like to know and just get some
further information about is.
How this program works. Can you
walk me through it just a little
bit and that way I can put into
perspective how students who may
go out of state for school, how
they might be.
The ones where potentially
targeting to come home.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentle lady, yes, um,
I wanted to give a quick
introduction in hopes that
somebody might ask this
question, um, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, the way that it
works is we are actually using
data from our own uh
institutions of higher
education, um, to make sure that
we are recruiting our own alumni
from here in the state, um,
after we use this data, we
proactively reach out to them,
um, when we reach them, uh, we
let them know, hey, we have
passed a bunch of incentive
programs throughout the years.
And guess what? We want you back
home, um, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, so that is um the
second portion of this, um, if
they are interested, we say,
hey, look, we've got some job
bings for you. Here's everything
you are qualified for and we lay
that out in front of them, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady, and if
they're like, man, this sounds
really great, but you know, I,
uh.
I really want to work in a rural
area. How can you help me with
that? Hey, well, we can say
we've passed tax credits, we can
help you with the childcare
incentives, um, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we lay that out
next. After that, um, if they're
like, you know what? I like
this. I want to apply for XYZ
jobs, uh, then we say, all
right, like let us help you get
there let's say they get the
job, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we will walk them through
licensing and credentialing,
which has been a big problem,
um, for many of our healthcare
workers, um, after a licensing
credentialing pieces, we can
also help them, Mr. Speaker.
a lady, um, with, uh, helping
their spouse find jobs to
helping find housing to hooking
them up with, let's say, uh, the
childcare incentive programs
that we've passed throughout the
years, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Thank you Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. I appreciate that.
That was gonna be my next
question because so many of us
when we go out of state or we go
to college, we meet our partner
and we want to relocate. We want
to bring them back, so I was
concerned about how that piece
was going to fit into your bill
and how we were gonna be able to
keep families together when they
relocate back to New Mexico, so
I appreciate that part of your
bill, especially as a
non-traditional college student
and um I look forward to
supporting.
this. Thank you.
There's further debate. The
young lady from Grant Hidalgo,
and Sierra. Well, that's wrong.
It's wrong on the screen. Hold
on, I'm gonna get this right.
The gentle lady from Donana
Sierra a representative down.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I
still claim Grant and Hidalgo.
I, I happy, happy to um elevate
their issues as well. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentle
lady yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do yield to
my colleague from Donana Sierra
and Socorro,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, are you
using the, um, the workforce
solutions list of high demand
jobs where the, you know, they
have the official shortage for
jobs. Where will that list come
from?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, we are actually, um, making
sure that we are expanding to
all healthcare providers. So
this also includes um PTs, OTs,
SLPs, uh, social workers, uh, I
know I'm missing like 10,000
people. But Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I also wanted to
make that clear, um, because I
believe a lot of the time, uh,
we focus on doctors and nurses,
um, when we have a pretty good
big shortage um across the
healthcare areas. Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I think
everyone that you name
is part of the high demand jobs
that we need. Um, so which types
of providers wouldn't be on the
high demand job that you would
be targeting as well.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um.
There would be no, uh,
healthcare folks, uh, left off
the list. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so you're gonna include
plastic surgeons on the list.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
their background has to do with
healthcare, we will be reaching
out. It doesn't necessarily
mean, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that there are positions
available, um, and it also
doesn't mean, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and gentle lady, um, you know,
that they wouldn't use their
skills for a different area.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so yes, you'll be recruiting
plastic surgeons. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if their
credentials, say, um, that they
have any sort of uh dealing with
healthcare and um they could
contribute to our healthcare
workforce. Yes, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, they would be
included on the list. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. Um, I'm looking at the
last page on the appropriation.
It says $2 million and it's, is
that, that is a one time
non-recurring 2 million,
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
the committee substitute should
have stripped that appropriation
that is in the budget, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, you are
correct, um, this is a one time
appropriation, um, originally,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
we were hoping to, uh, to be,
uh, qualified and get some
growth funds. That was the
original intent of this program,
but Mr. Speaker, General lady,
we did manage to secure, um, 2
million, uh, one time recurrent
or non-recurring apologies.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank
you.
gentle lady, um, so if it's not
reoccurring and it's a one-time
$2 million appropriation. I look
at your expenditures, it's,
there is staff, but there's
equipment, furniture, supplies,
and other startup costs for the
strategic, uh, but not, it
doesn't say recruitment. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
something you plan to have
happen in the future here?
No, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, this would be for the costs
as well for the program workers,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
I'm not mistaken, um, this is
boilerplate language that we
typically use for um all the
preparations and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, the program
would start, um, hopefully as
soon as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, you know,
I wanted to support the bill,
actually I did in um in House
Appropriations, but now that
you've made it clear that it's
not the, um, traditionally
identified high demand jobs that
in better all New Mexicans. I
think I can fill in the blank of
those other jobs that you'll be
recruiting and I'll have to
oppose. Thank you.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Sandoval,
Representative Alan Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the, uh, lady from Burnley
Yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Sandoval County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
I, I know you said this before,
but how many people would be
hired by Workforce Solutions to
run this program?
One moment, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, or
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I would like to
introduce my expert witness. I
have beside me Secretary Nair,
uh, the cabinet Secretary for
Workforce Solutions and
Secretary Nayer has informed me
it would likely be 41 for each
region of the state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, so.
4 people
Do we, the $2 million that's
appropriated in the House Bill 2
that would pay for the office.
Um, and all the necessary
equipment.
But it, you just said, Mr.
Speaker.
kind lady that um this is a one
time.
appropriation is this gonna be
absorbed by
Future budgets for workforce
solutions.
Um, Mr. uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you clarify, um,
your last question. Is it going
to be absorbed by
Mr. Speaker, um,
You said that the $2 million in
hospital to now is a one time
appropriation.
My question would be, is the
ongoing um.
Cost's gonna be absorbed by
workforce solutions.
Oh, thank you. uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and, uh, and
gentlemen, I now understand your
question. I appreciate it, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
we are actually hoping to get
results before we decide whether
or not this is a program that is
continued. Um, I do want to
speak to a couple of the
concerns on the monetary
portion, um, Mr. Speaker, um,
and gentlemen, um, I actually
did take to heart, uh, something
that one of our colleagues
brought up in the appropriations
committee, um, who has spoken
today.
the floor as well. Uh, the $2
million appropriation, and I
want to address this because Mr.
Speaker, um, and gentlemen, um,
we did the math on this and
we'll, I'll just take nurses as
an example, Mr. Speaker. Right
now we have nurses, um, who make
about 8584 $85,000. We're also
now hiring traveling nurses at
almost double that rate. And so,
Mr. Speaker, um, and gentlemen,
I wanted to talk about the cost
savings of this program as well,
um, Mr. Speaker and general.
And, um, even if, and I hope the
numbers are not this low, but
even if we only recruited 25
nurses throughout the entire
state. It would actually be, uh,
equal to $2 million in savings.
And so, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I wanted to talk
about that $2 million number
because I do believe it is
important not just when we're
talking about um cost savings in
terms of healthcare workers, but
also uh cost savings when it
comes to the actual care of
patients and those patients
getting care, hopefully a little
bit quicker than they would
previously.
Hopefully with that we're also
um uh uh.
Directing folks away from
emergency room, emergency type
care if they're able to get this
care right away, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and will
my colleague from Bern Leo.
Uh, go with me to page number,
well, before I ask that.
Uh, you said that, uh, you want
to compile the numbers. Is there
a sunset clause in this bill?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there's not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and will
my colleague from Bernnelio.
Go with me to page, um,
2
Lu.
Line 16.
Um, it says certificate granting
educational program in a
healthcare shortage field.
Can you tell me
Which healthcare shortage field,
um,
You're talking about on line 17.
Uh, yes, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
Healthcare shortage fields are,
um, something I know that we
have heard about Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen in on the healthcare
committee often, um, oftentimes
it is defined by our uh UNM
healthcare workforce report. I
know that is what we have gone
off of, um, in years previous,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
lady from Birming, so we don't
have uh a current list it's
just.
Um
Open-ended and the uh.
Committee
Made up of the healthcare
authority Department of Health,
higher education.
They would decide.
Which feels these are.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, there's not necessarily a
committee that is formed, um, I
need at least not in this
legislation, um, the Department
of Workforce Solutions itself,
um, will be in charge of this
program. They are, however, uh,
uh, named to collaborate with
those agencies in this piece of
legislation, um, but Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, let me ask,
uh, my expert one question
before I finish the rest of that
answer.
Uh, Mr. uh, Speaker and
gentlemen, um, the Department of
Workforce Solutions also works
with um the Bureau of.
Labor statistics. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, as
well as, uh, the UNM health
healthcare, uh, workforce data
report, um, they actually
collaborate with that group of
folks who put out the report and
so Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
do want to assure you that um
when we're talking about health
care shortage areas, um, that
those are aligned with the UNM
report that gets put out every
year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, lady
from Bern Leo, I, I want you to
stay with me on page 2 and I'm
gonna start reading.
On line 4.
The healthcare strategic
recruitment program is created
in the department.
The Department in collaboration
with the healthcare authority,
the Department of Health.
And the higher education
department shall promulgate
rules enumerate.
The healthcare professions.
And allied health practices that
shall be targeted in the
program.
Including qualified healthcare
providers in healthcare shortage
fields.
Mr. Speaker, lady.
Does that mean that this group.
Will do what is talked about in
line 16 and 17.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the department itself is in
charge and um it, it's very
interesting. I know, um, Mr.
Speaker, and gentlemen, you're
on judiciary Committee, so you
know we definitely know the
importance of commas, um, but
the department itself um in
collaboration with the named
entities, um, and there's a
comma at the end of that shall
be um in charge and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the
The intent is that the
Department of Workforce
Solutions itself will be in
charge, and they are mandated to
collaborate with the other
agencies.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, lady,
I'm trying to see what it says.
In charge after the comma.
Apologies, Mr. Speaker, I was
paraphrasing, um, but it says
the departments on line 5 and
then it names um who they need
to collaborate with.
shall promulgate rules.
So the department
The list and then shall
promulgate rules.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, lady, I,
I understand that the department
may chair this group.
Um
But it, it
would seem that this group.
Is the one in charge of.
Uh, naming those, I'll, I'll
move on.
Go to page 3.
Uh, page 3 line 3.
Um
Incentives that New Mexico
offers.
Can you tell me what those
incentives are, Mr. Speaker
lady?
Of course, um, Mr. Speaker, and,
uh, gentlemen, some of those
are, um, our loan forgiveness
programs. I know that has been
um one of the, I guess most
hotly talked about, um.
Uh, incentives that we have
passed, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, one of the things
that occurred to me during my
visits to some of the higher
education institutions, um, when
I spoke to the folks who were in
charge of recruitment, um, they
actually didn't know that we had
passed, uh, loan forgiveness
programs here in our state and
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
part of what this program does
is try to fill that gap to make
sure that, you know, even folks
who are, um, in charge of
recruitment for.
Um, hospitals or for clinics,
um, etc. have one place to go to
if they um need to know about
incentive programs that we've
passed so they can also um use
that data as well, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, if they
are in fact recruiting on their
own.
That's great, um, Mr. Speaker,
lady, um, line.
7
Provide other assistance. I'm
still on page 3.
Um, what, what other assistance?
Are you, um, referring to.
On line 7.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, and
gentlemen, um, one of the things
that comes up, um, in my mind
is, um.
Folks who are in um.
In the health care field.
often have a lot of moving parts
when they are applying, um, so I
think of not just um licensing
and credentialing, but I
actually think of um
The actual payment, uh, for
their license itself, um, I
actually have a friend right now
who is trying to come back home
and he said this is crazy, you
guys are one of the only states
that actually have, um,
Uh, payment necessary for your
licenses and I thought, oh, OK,
well, um, it's not necessarily
enumerated in this, um,
legislation, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but I wanted to be
sure that if there were issues
like that that they were being
compiled in the data that's
necessary for this piece of
legislation, uh, to ensure that
we um have an accurate view of
what's going on and where folks
might be getting stuck in the
process.
That's great. What, uh, Mr.
Chair, um.
kind lady with that include.
Housing, schools.
Um, employment for a spouse.
Um
Because it seems pretty
open-ended, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, you are correct. Um, one of
the other visits to another one
of the hospitals, um, I spoke
with their uh person in charge
of recruitment and they actually
named that um.
Their partner, um, or their
spouse who is looking for, um, a
job is often hard to find. And
so Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
wanted to be sure that we
weren't just addressing some of
the logistical challenges, um,
but that we were also thinking
about what is their quality of
life when they get here, um,
what we often hear in the
healthcare committee is that we
also have a lot of um healthcare
providers who are coming here
and maybe they're the only one
in their specialty and or Mr.
Speaker, they are looking for
housing and it might be a little
bit difficult.
And or, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
Um, their partner may be seeking
a job. They may may be having
trouble finding childcare, but
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if we
can roll out the red carpet, uh,
for our own graduates. I think
it'll be a really great thing to
be able to not only get our
folks back home, but to have
them think about living here in
a more holistic way.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
lady from Bern Leo.
Um, this is a, this is a pretty
good idea.
Um
Why is the Department of
Workforce Solutions not doing
this now, they, it seems like
everything.
Talked about in this bill is
something that should be in
their wheelhouse currently. Why
is that not happening?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
actually really glad you asked
this, um, because this is the
first program of its kind in the
entire nation. uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, one of the things
that I really hope to bring to
this body and to this floor, um,
was new ideas. So thank you for
asking Mr. Chair and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, lady.
The title of the department is
workforce solutions.
This is a great solution.
It would seem like they would be
in charge of doing this now.
So I don't understand why we're
giving them another $2000 or a
$2 million.
Um
Giving them the green light to
hopefully hire more people. This
is what they're supposed to be
doing.
That's this is like saying the
Department of Veteran Services
will now serve veterans.
Um, it just seems to me like.
Maybe we should run a memorial
and
Tell the department to do what
they um in charge of doing.
I don't understand why um.
We need $2 million.
To, for them to do what they're
already um responsible for
doing.
Can you, um, ask your expert.
Why
They haven't been doing this
type of thing.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
will answer that question. Um, I
will go back to the fact that
this is the first program of its
kind in the entire nation. I do
want to make sure, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, that as we
are standing up a new program
that it's adequately funded, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I know
that often we talk about, um,
lacking sufficient funds and the
ability to maybe not have a
fully staffed department or
something like that that might
hinder the actual production of
that program and.
Speaker gentlemen, I want to be
sure that we are accurately
funding that.
Mr. Speaker, um.
lady from Burnley, I, um.
was involved with the Department
of Veteran Services from the
very beginning when it became a
department, we stood up every
single program.
that department because our
title was Veteran Services, so
we
Try to figure out what services
veterans needed what?
Uh, programs we needed to start.
Not once did I ever come to the
legislature and say I need
$2 million to start a program we
would do is start the program.
And then figure out, OK, we're
going to need 3 more people.
Um,
the fact that the department is
the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
I would think that they would be
doing this on their own without
us coming up with a first in
the.
Nation type program. I think
it's a great idea.
I think we need to do everything
we can to recruit healthcare
providers. I just don't think.
That we should be telling the
department that's in charge of
doing this already.
We're gonna give you $2 million
to do what you're supposed to be
doing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, lady.
There's for the debate,
gentlemen from Ber Lee or
Representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's a gentle lady from
Berlioil.
Mr. Speaker, I do yield to my
colleague, I believe, from
Bernalillo as well.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I appreciate that.
Can I assume, gentle lady,
Speaker, that this is a
Department bill
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
actually really proud that this
came from my very own head.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I only
outside because typically if
it's a department bill you have
the support of the department
versus they're just providing
general information.
Mr. Speaker, gentle Lee, how
many people are we talking
about?
How many people are the target
that you wish to recruit somehow
back to New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, if
you give me a moment, I can get
you that number.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
may not have a total number, but
I can give you a bit of a
breakdown just depending on
which, um,
Medical profession we're looking
at, but here is a good example,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
We have 52% of physicians who
did their MD in residency at
UNM, uh, they're still
practicing in, in New Mexico
that leaves 578 physicians who
were trained between 2002 and
2022, who did their entire
medical training in the state
but are not practicing here, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, so for
that particular profession, um,
that's a good estimation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Only so I
could gauge in my mind, you
know, the volume of potential
work that would be involved.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I thought I heard earlier and I
may have missed it if you would
elaborate if I missed it.
To arrive at this point where we
are in the bill.
I assume, and can you expand on
who you talk to related to
existing medical facilities that
would hire some of these folks
back.
Absolutely, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I will highlight
a couple of them, um, let's see,
uh, the University of New
Mexico, of course, um, once
again this is in my district
Presbyterian, um, I also spoke
with them they're also in my
district. I wanted to be sure I
was covering my district bases,
uh, Mr. Speaker, Linda, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, but
the other one that comes to the
top of my brain is actually a
GIA regional as well as I was
following the um interim
committee.
Um, I made sure to speak to any
um folks in administration that
I was able to to say, hey, where
are your gaps? What are your
problems, and how can I help
them, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. So let's
talk about that for a second.
We're talking about gaps, can I
assume also that they have their
own efforts they have ongoing
efforts to recruit people coming
out of medical school, people
that have left might come back.
Can you describe what they told
you related to that. Let's talk
about those gaps, Mr. Speaker.
Sure. um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I, I also am
assuming based on our
conversation that they do have
um recruitment programs when I
asked um how they were
recruiting, however, I think
that was where I saw the biggest
gap right now we are um going
to, uh, job fairs we are putting
uh material out there, um, but
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we
are not actively recruiting. And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
is a gap that I saw that I
wanted to fix.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, let's talk about that
for a second.
What are the tools in the
toolbox that are going to be
available by expending this $2
million.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
can you rephrase the question by
which tools in the toolbox?
So the private facilities.
Including the public facilities
make effort to recruit.
And I'm sure that they have some
form of inducements.
Those would be the tools. What
would be the inducements.
Specifically in this bill.
That would assist in that
effort.
I wanted to be sure I was
understanding your question, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
what what I understand your
question to be is essentially
what other types of supports are
going to come, um, with this
program is that accurate, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
We're going to spend $2 million.
I'm living out of state. I'm a
doc, I'm a nurse.
What are you gonna do for me
that's meaningful related to
that expenditure of $2 million
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen, for rephrasing so
many times, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, we are unlike
we're doing right now, um, we
are rolling out the red carpet
for these folks. So instead of
them, um, uh.
Going to uh recruitment program
and seeing 10,000 other folks,
um, we are making sure that we
are saying actively tracking
what they need. So Mr. Speaker,
um, and gentlemen, the
concierge, um, part of the
program means that they would
get a uh file open for them and
we would essentially start
tracking them, um, as if we were
doing wrap around services for
them. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, what we would do
is we would have a file open.
And we would be proactively
making sure that we are checking
on their licensing application,
their credentialing application
right now a lot of it, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, is, um,
getting lost technically in the
process right now, um, from what
I understand, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that is one,
beneficial piece of this, but I
think Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
as we keep going, um, we are
also handing them, um, all of
these different opportunities
that they may not know about,
um, and so we are also handing
them, um, jobs that they would
be.
qualified for. We are making
sure that we are handing them,
um, any of the applications for
uh child care programs for um
any of the tax incentive
programs so we're handing them
this to take away some of the
challenges, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, that folks are
either having in that
application process and or um in
regards to the larger landscape
when they get here.
Mr. Speaker, with all due
respect, I don't understand what
challenges there will be if I'm
a nurse, I'm a nurse. I know
that I'm qualified and licensed
to be a nurse.
If I'm a doc, I'm a doc. I'm not
sure what.
You would have to offer me if,
if, if the inducement is just to
I'm qualified.
So what is the inducement?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, from the folks that I am
talking to or who are actively
um applying, there is no way to
find this information in one
place and so it never quite gets
used, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, generally, let's,
let's talk for a second about,
you said you could help them
find housing. What exactly does
that mean?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the Department of Workforce
Solutions, um, when they have
their case open, um, they will
be actively talking to um
recruits and asking what they
need next and if Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it is flagged that,
um, let's say housing is an
issue, let's say they, you know,
want to go to a rural area and
maybe they're not finding
housing or maybe, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, they
don't have time to do so, um,
then, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we would.
Assist in that process.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. General
lady, you also said that you
would help spouses find jobs.
Can you describe that for me?
Of course, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, in the same way that
we would be collecting a pool of
um of jobs for healthcare
workers. We would also be doing
the same for um any of the
industries in which they name
that their spouses work.
But you're not actually, Mr.
Speaker, generally, you're not
actually finding jobs.
Certainly that's not part of
this deal.
That's, that's a fair argument,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen. Um,
it is not guaranteeing them any
jobs. It's just trying to make
the process and the shift a
little bit easier, um, also our
folks being local here, they
know communities a little bit
better. So let's say, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um,
someone is hired at
Presbyterian, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, if we are looking
for a job for their spouse that
might be something we might
highlight in saying, um, you
know, if your spouse is wanting
to come here.
as well. We actually found a
handful of jobs that are near
you, um, if in fact, Mr.
Speaker, they are in person
jobs.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady.
What are the measures of this
program should it be enacted?
What are the successes? What are
the failures, what metrics is
gonna be, are going to be used,
Mr. Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, I do believe, um, as I, I
quoted a little bit earlier, the
success of the program, it is
not spelled out here. We do have
a dating data reporting
component and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that is reported back
to the legislature as well as
the governor where we will
assess um our own uh evaluation
of if this program is worth it
and if it's working and Mr.
Speaker, um, and gentlemen,
whether it gives us a
savings or not.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
thought I heard the gentleman
from Sandoval ask a question. I,
I, I apologize. I missed the
answer of it was asked, so I'll
ask it anyway.
What steps
Is the Department of Workforce
Solutions taking now to
undertake somewhat of this. I
mean, certainly.
You're supposed to solve things
around employment or work or
lack of
So
What is
been done historically now?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
conferred with my excerpt just
to make sure I was on the right
track here, but, um, Mr.
Speaker, an expert, um, quite
frankly, we don't have a program
like this, and I'm really
excited to bring this forward.
Mr. Speaker, I'm disappointed at
that, um.
So
This will be my last question,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
How does malpractice figure into
this formula because my
understanding is that there are
many docs that leave because of
our current laws. Does this take
into account any of that issue.
Um, thank you for asking, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
actually am glad to address
this. So there are a couple of
components to this, um, one is
that we are actively recruiting
pretty recent graduates within
the last 10 years or so, and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, brand
new or newer, um, docs and
nurses don't typically work and
open their own private practices
of many of them actually work in
hospitals and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, hospitals do
pay for malpractice insurance,
um, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I also wanna um point
you to the, um, data reporting
component because Mr. Speaker,
this is data that we are looking
to collect as well, so on page
4, line 2 and 3, part of the
data that we're collecting is um
reasons an applicant may or may
not want to want to come here.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, I wanted to be sure to
include a data component in
this, so, um, we can see why or
why not folks are choosing to
come.
Mr. Speaker, if I might, I had
wanted to stop there. I I'd like
to ask one more thing if that's
OK with the speaker.
Generally
Not everybody, not every medical
operation is a hospital.
Not everybody's a Presbyterian
or a UNMH.
In my district, Mr. Speaker, I
have Casa salud.
And they struggled mightily.
How is, how will this
Medical malpractice impact
those.
Individual docks that are not
part of a large organization or
they're part of.
Family, uh,
First choice
Casa salud.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill is not about medical
malpractice itself, um, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, would you
clarify your question?
Mr. Speaker
If I'm going to recruit docs
back to New Mexico.
They graduated from UNM.
We understand that
They want to practice community
health which isn't.
UNMH it isn't necessarily
Presbyterian or the like.
And
This law
could impact me mightily if I'm
just wanna open up my own
practice.
Does this do anything to try to
tell me that's out of state.
But that it's a good environment
because I do think this has to
be an aspect of it if it's gonna
be a holistic bill that's
meaningful to docs that may not
want to be part of a large
corporation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen for that
clarification. Um, I actually
think this is where actual um
case workers themselves, um,
would actually come in handy
because these folks are not part
of a national group, um, they
are local to the Department of
Workforce Solutions if, um, if
in fact our applicants had
questions they're more than
welcome to discuss them with
caseworkers who can help them
navigate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One
more, please.
$2 million.
That's a fair amount of money.
Has the
Department of Workforce
Solutions.
Delineated
Quantified
Specified either through human
resource or through expenditures
for actual.
Material
Do you have that in hand and can
you describe that?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we do have it secured in the
budget.
So it's lying item.
Describe, Mr. Speaker.
I can pull it up for you, Mr.
Speaker. It's on my computer,
not in my notes.
Um, it is in the specials, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'm done.
You know from the representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. So,
We're going to create this.
Workforce solution to this
department.
It's gonna cost $2 million.
And I wanted to go over to page
2.
Line 14 and we're on number one,
it says graduated within the
last 10 years.
So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
heard you say that we need to
roll the red carpet out for a
lot of these people, and I, I,
you're all right, I agree.
I agree, you know, sometimes
that's not a bad deal, but do
you feel like sometimes with all
the, the opportunities with
scholarships and things like
that. Haven't we already rolled
the red carpet out to a lot of
these folks.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen, um, I, I would
actually agree with you in a
way, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, because I do believe
that we are, um, doing our best
to try to pass these incentive
programs, I think that the real
gap is in letting folks know
that they exist. And so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen right now
our incentive programs exist in
several different departments
and so when I think about
rolling out the red carpet, I'm
actually thinking about the fact
that we would have this data in
front of them, um, when they
need it most.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady from
Bernal Leo. And what comes to my
mind is.
The $2 million and I am a big
fan of workforce solutions, and
we have a, a great program where
I'm at in Lincoln County at the
college, and I just think of
this $2 million do you think
this is the best way to spend it
and
Would
Wouldn't this impact just
straight patient care even
better than maybe trying to
start a program like this, and
this is kind of a two-part
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, so I would have to agree
with some of the debate earlier
that we should be.
Talking to these students now.
And we should be keeping them
here now. And I would like to
roll that red carpet out to him
now with all these opportunities
scholarships and people being
unable to come in and um with
the opportunity scholarship, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady is
We're really giving them a
A once in a lifetime opportunity
to become medical doctors.
And we should be talking to them
from the day they start till the
time they, they quit.
And we should hold them here. I
want to hold them here. I think
it shouldn't be their choice. If
you want this, you gotta give me
this, and this is what's gonna
be in return, and I'm gonna need
you for at least 3 to 5 years.
Do you agree with that, gentle
lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you, uh, for pointing that
out. That is actually built into
part of our loan forgiveness
program and knowing that these
are our own graduates that we're
recruiting home, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I definitely
agree. I also um want to say Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, if this
is a future partner Bill, I
would gladly be your co-sponsor,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady from
Bernal Leo. And, you know,
Just reading this bill.
And I'm not even trying to beat
it up that bad, but I think it's
a great idea.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do
you think this bill could set a
precedent for other industries
like
We're struggling in education.
Uh, I know that law enforcement
has a lot of positions they need
to fill, um,
paramedics, firefighters, all
these.
Social workers.
So
What I'm, what I'm asking, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, are we
gonna set this fund up for all,
is it setting a bad precedent
and are they gonna come to work
for a solution and say this was
a great idea. Is there any way
that I could get a couple of
million for social workers and a
couple of million for first
responders and a couple of
million here and there so that
we can fix this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
one of the things I want to
point out is this does include
social workers, so I wanted to
just make a clarification, um,
but also, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that is part of the
reason why we housed it in
Department of Workforce
Solutions and not necessarily
the healthcare authority is
because Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, if this is
successful, I would like to, to
grow it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady.
So let's just.
Let's just say this if what if
the program is not successful,
what happens to that money?
I'm sorry, what was the last
part of your question, Mr.
Speaker? If the, if, if it's not
successful, what happens to the
money?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that means we do not renew these
funds.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Singing or for the debate and
later to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
body for a healthy debate, um,
I, this might be a little bit,
uh,
Uh, selfish, but I do hope to
get my friends back home. Uh, we
were part of the first
graduating class for the BAMD
program at Valley High School
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I do believe that our healthcare
workers across the state, um,
maybe need a little bit of a
battle cry to come back home. We
miss you and we're ready for you
and that and with that, Mr.
Speaker, um, I am finished here.
I move that got it first bill. I
move, I now move that house
still 15 do now pass. We have a
final passage of.
We are on final passage of House
of 15 as amended. The vote is
now open.
What about clothes?
The boys are close by a vote of
39 in the affirmative, 21 in the
negative House Bill 15 as a
Hauli pass this house.
Congratulations.
lady to sing.
Right, Mr. Speaker, I did think
about this one,
Proud Mary, although I guess
today we can call it proud May.
Left a good job in the city.
Working for the man every night
and day,
but I never lost a minute of
sleeping, we're in that the way
that things might have been big
wheels keep on turning.
proud
and we rolling
rolling.
only on the river.
Wow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think
we found our official happy
birthday singer.
Your lady from Tahos, are you
ready?
Yes,
I am.
27.
I am Mr. Speaker. Can you get me
to that point that placing House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
93 as a mandate on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Bill 93
encourages our utilities in New
Mexico to use advanced grid
technologies which are basically
like energy efficiency for the
transmission grid. These
technologies allow our existing
grid to have more capacity and
reduced congestion, making it
more able to carry more of our
abundant electricity and with
that I stand for questions from
San Juan, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, does
generally from Taos yield. Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
Just for the sake of the body,
most folks, uh, don't understand
the difference between
transmission and distribution.
Could you explain more
specifically what your bill does
and what portion of the grid
your bill would encompass. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
um, the, the grid has different
parts, right? They have, it has
the generation where the
electricity is made, the
transmission, um, which carries
electricity at high voltages.
is usually above over 115
kilowatts over the long
distances and distribution,
those are the lines, those are
the power lines that you see,
uh, every day that get to your
house, businesses, these are at
lower voltages and so what this
bill does Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, is that it allows, it
asks the utilities, uh, to, uh.
To report on whether or not
they're going to use advanced
grid technologies, um, within
their, um, integrated resource
planning that they have to
update that every 3 years and so
we're asking them, please tell
us if you're gonna use advanced
grid technologies or not as part
of your IRP reporting, um, and
if you do use them, um, we, this
bill allows the PRC to consider
cost recovery for those uh
advanced grid technologies that
they might use um these are
much, much cheaper than.
building new transmission lines,
uh, so it the bill spells out
sort of the conditions under
which the PRC will look at
whether or not they can use, um,
they can get cost recovery.
Thank you for that. I appreciate
that answer, um, gentle lady,
um, Mr. Speaker in, and gentle
lady. So uh you said you
actually went further into, uh,
maybe deeper into the questions
that I have, so I'm gonna go
back just a little bit. So I
understood you to say, um, Mr.
Chair and, and Representative,
it allows.
For the utility to ask for cost
recovery and it allows the PRC
to make a determination as to uh
granting the project or granting
cost recovery, is that correct,
um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that is correct.
Uh thank you, Mr. Speaker and,
and gentle lady, um.
Just, uh, for your sake, I, and
for the body's sake, I did reach
out to the PRC to ask whether or
not
Uh, this was prescriptive.
Uh, whether they saw this as
prescriptive on them that this
would mandate.
Cost recovery and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, what I
heard back from uh the PRC was
that this allows them this this
might suggest to the utilities
to consider, uh, the, the grid,
the modernization, and when they
do that they should include it
in when they're asking for rate
recovery for these uh um.
Uh, additions, let's say.
Um, and Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, to, to that point, um,
I, I, I've got to let you and
the body know that the PRC was,
um,
Let's say uh to the to the
positive side of neutral.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
think that's probably about as
far as the PRC would ever go,
um, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I would like to thank
you.
In this legislation for putting
forward uh legislation that that
is allowable.
For the PRC to consider rather
than prescriptive and saying you
shall.
Uh, give cost recovery. This
allows them to give cost
recovery, uh, when it's, uh,
asked for and approved, so, um,
surprisingly, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I am going to
support your legislation today.
And I encourage the body to do
so.
There is further debate,
generally from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, uh, with the gentle
lady from Taos County, uh,
yield, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady. We
have this bill in our committee
in house government and um.
I had
A few questions then and I might
have a few questions now regards
to what this allows or what this
um.
Allows yes, the PRC to do as far
as when they're engaged in those
um um.
rate, um, hearings, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, but I'm just
gonna ask a couple questions
regarding the the finances here
in the FIR it's suggesting it
says it's gonna be uh FY 26 will
be 55.
$1000 and then it's a minimal
amount, but is that
Artie, is that
Funding for the PRC I assume
here is that something that's
already in the budget, Mr.
Speaker generally.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, as far as I understand, the
PRC has asked for an expanded
budget to cover that, uh,
potential cost.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Speaker, the
reason why I'm bringing that up
is because we have
We're seeing legislation run
through here and I want to
really make sure that we are
covering the costs of of the PRC
and all the things that were
we're asking them to do, so I
really, I really appreciate
that. I hope it is. I have not
asked that question to them
myself. I really just want to
emphasize that that the future
of what we're doing and
expansion in our.
Our grid and electrification and
all those sorts of things that
we, um, we need to be, you know,
talking about those costs and
how and making sure that they
are covered through our budgets,
so at this point I really don't
know that, but I, I just want to
emphasize that I'm always
speaking on behalf of of that
because of of these uh we're
gonna see even more legislation,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and as
it affects the PRC and I believe
there is already another bill
that that you put forward that
did that and
and I voted for that bill and I
supported it. um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but through your
amendment process, was it the
amendment on the bill as we have
it in front of us today is that
the amendment you had in house
government?
Uh
Um, madam, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
Yeah, the, the, we did have an
amendment and what it's um.
It was a sub in government.
So can I um ask your, can you
ask your question again, Mr.
Speaker, General Ladies, so I
understand it. I appreciate
that. Thank you that that that
will clarify my question, Mr.
Speaker General later. So the
House substitute you had uh has
substitute you had in
government, though there's an
amendment. Can you explain what
that amendment did in your bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
yeah, that we did have an
amendment in um House commerce
as well, uh, gentle lady, uh,
and that fixed some uh language
that hadn't been fixed in the
committee sub from House
government um it realigns some
numbers.
Mr. Speaker, and generally it
changed one definition, um, to
just make it a little bit clear
clearer and technically
feasible. OK, thank you, madam.
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um,
I don't know if you can be, if
you can explain it just a little
bit more because I had a lot of
questions on this bill in House
government and I wasn't able to
ask those questions because the
committee said just came minutes
before your presentation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
It feels like a lifetime ago,
but
I will say I apologize for some
reason, no, it just, it does,
it's, you know, legislative day
13 or whatever we're on now, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, so
the amendment um took out
Uh, plans and focused on
projects and so we, we fixed all
of that with, with the
amendment, uh, we took out some
language as well to make uh to
give some clarity around the
FERC process to make sure that
the FERC language was consistent
and that we, you know, we were
sort of not running afoul, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker General.
That was exactly what was
What was uh pressing my
questions here today, Mr.
Speaker, General, thank you for
that. I, I mean, it was, that
was, that was really the crux of
it. So thank you so much. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, generally.
There is further from Lincoln
senator Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the
gentle lady you.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady. So, Jim lady,
how much, how much will this
cost the public utilities to
develop and implement advanced
grid technology plans.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, it
ranges in costs. What it just
depends on what they're doing.
Um, if they're doing like
dynamic line readings or other,
you know, highly technical
advanced grid technologies, um,
but it is.
A lot cheaper than building new
transmission lines and getting
right of ways and paying for,
you know, for all the lawyers to
do that stuff. Um, it's, uh, the
costs are so much cheaper if
you're putting things on a grid
that already exists, uh, rather
than, you know, um,
On a line that already exists
rather than building new lines.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. When you say
it's, it's much cheaper, is it?
A little bit cheaper, is it
about the same price?
Like, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
somewhere like 10% of the cost
of building new transmission
lines significantly cheaper,
which then makes um those costs
less for ratepayers.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. That was my next
question. Will these costs be
passed on to the consumers,
resulting in higher electricity
rates.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
it really depends, uh, if a
utility is asking for cost
recovery, and we've outlined
here, um, the criteria that we'd
like the PRC to use to do that,
um.
You know, the
The utilities ask for cost
recovery when they do these
kinds of big infrastructure
projects when they're building
new lines, um, you know, they'll
That goes into a rate payer
case. Uh, so this could as well
go into a rape beer case, but it
is significantly less than the,
you know, big infrastructure
projects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady, and this is,
um, so since I've been put on
appropriations.
Representative Small has made an
animal out of me and, and I like
numbers now.
And I'm getting really educated
on that, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady has a cost-benefit
analysis been conducted to
justify the financial burdens on
utility taxpayers and, you know,
is there any information that
myself as well as the body would
be able to look at before we
voted on something like this,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
we haven't done a cost analysis
on this in New Mexico because we
haven't done this yet, so we
don't know, but it has happened
in other states and the PRC also
has economists and they look at
that really delve deeply into
the details of these kinds of
things. So I can anticipate that
they will do um a cost analysis,
um, but in other states what
we've seen is that um this these
kinds of technologies um
advanced grid technologies.
Grid enhancement technologies
which are called gets, um, they,
they save billions of dollars in
congestion fees, right? They
make the lines more efficient,
um, they can get renewable
energy under those lines more
quickly. You can have more
reliability on the grid, um, on
those lines, so you, they say
they do say they've saved
billions of dollars.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
just want to point out the, the
cost-benefit analysis is a
criteria is, uh, that's
something that the PRC will be
asking the utility to provide.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady.
Could you give me just a couple
of states that have done this,
and is there a place that I
could go to maybe look at those
analysis and just see for myself
and maybe kind of get a ballpark
of what it might cost.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
Virginia in Minnesota have
passed legislation to do this in
New York also has, um, advanced
grid technologies as part of
their.
You know, PRC PUC.
Activities.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There's no further debate
generally close. Mr. Speaker, I
move that House government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee sub for House Bill 93
as amended do now pass. We are a
final passage of government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute substitute.
Substitute for house 93 as
amended. The vote is now open.
The buttons are not working.
Keep trying. I will keep the
vote open.
Are the buttons working?
Did everyone's button worked?
OK.
Try again. I'll leave the vote
open.
Yeah.
call and try again.
Did everybody vote? OK, the vote
is now closed by a vote of 52 in
the affirmative, 8 in the
negative. House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for as 93
as amended.
Hauli passed his house.
Which general lady from Berlio
will be working on supplemental
calendar item number one.
Representative Garrett, are you
ready on that item? Yes, will
you get me to that point, Mr.
Speaker is replacing House Bill
167 as amended on final passage
has been taken, and it is not
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, House Bill 167
is amended directs the New
Mexico Higher Education
department to provide free high
school equivalency credential
test to New Mexican residents
and with that I stand for
questions.
Mr. Speaker, I now move the
passage of House Bill 167 as
amended. We are on final passage
of House Bill 167 as amended.
The vote is now open.
Oh.
Well, it's about to close.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 59 in the affirmative. 2 in
the negative. House Bill 167 as
amended has duly passed this
house.
Good.
Gentle lady from Berta
Presentative Parajon, are you
ready on supplemental calendar
item number 3. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
would you get me to that point?
that has served for place in
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 296 has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the general
lady to explain the bill only
allows more pathways for um
someone to become a CPA while
keeping the high standards that
we have here in New Mexico.
There is debate. The gentleman
from Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Berlioyield.
Yes
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
This is a good bill.
And I would suggest the body to
vote for it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Seeing no further debate
generally close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 296 do now pass.
We are our final passage of
House Judiciary Committee
Substitute for House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 296, the vote is now open.
What's about to close. The boats
are closed by a vote of 61 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee,
substitute for House Bill 296
has do we passed this house.
lady from Berlin or
representative Onon Arnu. Are
you ready on item 39 on the
regular calendar.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I asked his
unanimous consent of the House
that the rules be suspended and
that the records show that all
action for placing House Bill
281, our final passage has been
taken and is now subject to
debate amendment, and
substitution.
So House Bill 21 that seeks to
remove cosmetology licensing
requirements for hair braiders
and electricians. Um, we are one
of 3 states that requires a
cosmetology license to braid
hair and braiding is a safe
non-invasion chemical free
practice uh of generational
tradition and culture and a
pathway for women of color to
own their own business.
And attain financial freedom and
with that I stand for questions.
Seeing no debate generally or
close Speaker, I move that House
Bill 281 as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 281 as amended, the vote is
now open.
What what close?
Representative Cates, sports
about clothes, Representative
kids.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 61 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
House Bill 281 as amended Auli
passed this house.
No, no.
Folks, we, we don't do that
unless it's somebody's first
bill, please thank you.
Gentlemen from San Juan Sandoval
andrival Representative Lente,
are you ready on item number 42.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you
please get me to that point the
record reflect that a necessary
for placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 308 with an emergency class
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you Mr.
Speaker. The House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 308 simply seeks to remove
the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district, as well as
ArchHurley Conservancy District
from the Local Elections Act,
and with that 10 for questions.
Gentlemen from Santa Fe, just
it's gonna pull a fast one
gentlemen from San Santa Fe,
represent McQueen. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, do you yield? I yield
at my neighbor from Sandoval and
Santape.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, so we saw this
bill and House Judiciary and
voted against it there. Um, I
just want to say the, the local
election Act, by the way,
there's nothing, it's MRGCD. I'm
fine with you guys. Local
Election Act was a really
substantial democratic reform in
New Mexico because we took all
these little elections that were
scattered across the calendar
and we put them all in one day,
every other year.
And as a result, we get much
better turnout.
People show up, people vote.
And we have done this for all
sorts of local governmental
entities, including soil and
water conservation districts,
you know, which have similar,
uh, issues with ownership with
boundaries that don't follow
counties. Similar complications,
and I'm just loath to start
chipping away at it, uh, by
eliminating other, you know,
governmental subdivisions from
that act.
And that's why I can't support
this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if you'd like to
respond, that'd be fine.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
sorry you feel that way.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, fair
enough, um, uh, I appreciate you
even if I don't appreciate your
bill.
So you know for the debate you
me to close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I now move that House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 308 do now pass.
Well, we're our final passage of
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House with 308
with an emergency clause. The
vote is now open.
What's about to close?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 55 in the affirmative, 6 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
with 308 with an emergency
clause has duly passed this
house.
Gentlemen from San Juan, are you
ready on item number 30 on the
regular calendar.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm ready.
Would you get me to that point,
please? that election is
replacing House Bill 251, our
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
House Bill 251 is a is a bill
designed to give beneficiaries.
Or give the people under the ERB
the chance to have another
beneficiary like PERA is
currently set up.
There is debate. gentlemen from
San Juan, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen from San Juan is a
gentleman, uh San Juan yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I just didn't go
through any of the committees
that I sit on, so maybe you
could give me a little bit more
information before I can
determine whether or not I can
support your legislation. I
would be glad to do that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
This is, uh, goes back. I was
contacted by a retired teacher,
and he had discovered that he
didn't, was not able to change
his beneficiary.
To his new wife, and so,
As a result of that, we began
looking into it. I contacted
ERB.
They said, no, you can only do
it once. We don't know why that
is.
So we made a bill, we changed
it, and now the people on their
ERB have the same opportunities
as those under PERA to name
another beneficiary, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and, and gentlemen. That's a
very good answer. I think that
this might be worth my support
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. There's a
gentleman from Sandoval,
Representative Martinez.
thing, Mr. Speaker, will the
kind gentleman from, uh, San
Juan.
Mr. Speaker, I yelled to the
gentleman from Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What
happens if this bill doesn't
pass?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
You'll be leaving many poor
beneficiaries out in the cold.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, what, what are they
doing now? if if.
Somebody dies.
What are they having to go to
court to kind of determine that?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, they have to go to court to
determine it.
Um
Go, they don't have a way to
leave it to a, uh,
Oh, what's that?
Not just the beneficiary, but
it, you can leave it in a trust.
Under the way it's proposed now
before it simply has to go to
court. If there's no other, um,
arrangements for that person's
beneficiary upon their passing.
Mr. Speaker, a kind gentleman,
what if
The deceased left a will.
I, I'm sorry, I didn't hear you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, uh, kind gentlemen,
let me rephrase the question for
you.
What if somebody dies and they
actually had a will naming.
The current spouse.
I, I believe it has to go to
probate and then the district
court, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman, you
passed the test.
There is further to be generated
from McKinley Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, he yield to the
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to ask the gentleman, Mr.
Speaker, do the education
retirement beneficiaries, are
they required to attend an event
at the Globe and Laurel.
Several people are asking Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would you
repeat that? They just so they,
and then I will explain the
question.
Mr. Speaker, um,
Gentlemen, there is a uh special
tavern that the gentleman and I
have been to, uh, years back and
I thought maybe that might be a
place where this kind of
legislation gets decided and
talked about and gee, we're
better come back and work on it.
The special tavern and the
gentle lady's referring to, Mr.
Spiegel, is the globe and
laurel. It's a Marine Corps
tavern off of Quantico Base
Marine Corps Base Quantico,
Quantico, Virginia, and we've
had some many good times there
through the years with my
parents and the gentle lady.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
can you tell me who the um owner
is.
He may have passed, but you, you
can tell us.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, the
farm owner was Major Rick
Spooner.
Uh, retired Mustang marine
turned 17 on Guadalcanal and
went on to
Do great things in the United
States Marine Corps.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. You know, this
sounds like a pretty good bill
and it's something that we need
to do and I appreciate you
answering the questions. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. There's
further debate from Otero,
Representative block. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Would the kind gentlemen please
yield for 3 hours.
Only if there's a floor
substitute.
I yield
to my friend, Representative
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, your bill is quite
interesting to me.
And I've read it many times. And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
just gonna start on the FIR.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, I see some issues, maybe
when it comes to
What the agencies say and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
wondering when it comes to this.
Analysis that I'm seeing now,
there's a $100 fee to board.
And I'm wondering what that
means, Mister Speaker,
gentlemen. What's that $100 fee
do? And where does it go? And
who pays it?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you for that question.
The $100 is a fee paid to change
your beneficiary. The person who
wants to change it.
Has to pay it out of their own
pocket.
Mr. Speaker.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and are they
currently paying a fee at all?
For the initial beneficiary, no.
Mr. Speaker, gentle person, but
to change the beneficiary, it's
consistent throughout ERBs in
the way the statutes are written
that they pay the $100 fee
should this bill pass. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. And
then one other question that
could lead to 10 more questions.
Earlier you said people would be
left in the cold if we didn't
pass this. How many people
currently are left in the cold?
Mr. Speaker.
Gentle person, I'm thinking of
I'm thinking of one right now,
Mr. Speaker, point of order.
I don't.
I don't have an exact number,
gentlemen and Mr. Speaker.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
person, uh, you
You didn't know how many people
are left in the cold, so I might
be undecided on this, on this
bill. I might have to ask a few
more questions, but I see a
couple of people are on the
board, so I will let them grill
you profusely, Mr. Speaker.
We'll come back to you for a
second time, gentlemen.
Young lady from Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, uh,
gentlemen from.
All those counties.
San Juan County, I guess.
Um, would you yield?
I yield the floor.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
I'm just wondering, so this bill
is really just bringing ERB to
be comparable with PERA in terms
of.
Adding
an option to change your
beneficiary wants. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that,
that is correct. From the
initial one time to giving you
yet another.
Opportunity the way it's
currently written, those under
ERB cannot
They don't have a chance to
change their beneficiary other
than the very first time.
And Mister Speaker and, and
gentlemen, um,
I was involved actually when we
changed the bill for PERA to
allow the one time change for uh
beneficiary.
And it has actually functioned
in a very positive way, um, we
often don't anticipate, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, life
situations such as unfortunately
divorce or death of our spouses
or such, um, and so.
My circumstance, I was able to
change my beneficiary from my
partner who passed.
To, um.
My nephew who is still very much
alive, thank the Lord and um.
It has functioned in a in a very
positive way for many of us that
are.
her recipients of our uh state
or educational retirement, so
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
just want to support your bill
and stand uh stand here, um, to
let you know that in my
circumstance it was a positive
thing to be able to do that and
it hasn't really been that many
years, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, since PERA actually
made that change. I think it's
been maybe.
Maybe 10 years or something like
that, maybe something maybe 10
to 15 years. I can't remember
exactly, but
Um, it was a very positive thing
for uh PER and PRA members and I
see it as being a very positive
thing for ERB members. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
for the gentlemen from Lincoln
Opresentative Vincent. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. There's a
gentleman from San Juan you.
I yield to my friend from down
south.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Does allowing retirees.
To change their beneficiary
designation after a divorce
undermined the original
retirement.
Contract.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it does
not.
It, uh, the, they've been able
to, they can go back to the
divorce court and show decrees
as long as the ex-spouse or
partner is amenable to it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
Could this create legal disputes
between former spouses and the
ERB leading to litigation and
administrative burdens.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't
believe so. No.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so
If I'm divorced 3 different
times.
Does my first wife still have
A stake at my ERB.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Efficiency
Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen,
Um, that's a good question.
I don't know how that would work
after being divorced 3 times,
um,
And
I believe unless you had
changed, you, you can only
designate the one.
In the beginning, so unless she
agreed in court documents, if
this passed, then you could
designate it again. Otherwise,
it stays with the first wife of
the 3 that you gave the
retirement to.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Appreciate the
debate.
is for the debate, gentlemen,
from Katherine Grant Hidalgo,
Representative Terazas. Mr.
Speaker, with the gentleman from
San Juan Mi Amigo, please yield.
I yield to my office mate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, you
know, I'm just wondering, you
were, uh, you're retired FBI
agent for how many years, Mr.
Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, 24
years.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do you
think
You're feeling the same feelings
you had when you interrogated
people.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I'm
starting to feel like a suspect,
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Congratulations. I'm gonna
support your bill.
Well, don't congratulate him
yet. We haven't voted.
A lady from Berlin Cibo
Mainliucoro San Juan Valencia,
representative. Thank you,
Speaker. There's a gentleman
from San Juan Yil.
I yield
To my friend. Thank you.
Thank you Speaker, thank you, my
friend. I have one quick
question on page 5.
Item C.
It states there that the retired
member's spouse needs to provide
a notarized written statement
expressing consent. Can you
please tell me what options will
be available if the spouse does
not provide consent. Thank you,
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle ladies,
just one moment.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm guessing there would be some
type of legal recourse.
If they don't do this, the basis
of this bill since I'm getting
beaten up pretty good on it.
It's simply that it gives the
member of the ERB to the ability
to designate
Another beneficiary. If there
are people who are already, who
are already the beneficiary,
then it'll become a legal.
Issue, um, and they'll have to
seek, um go through some
lawyers, I would imagine, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. That's all the
question I have.
There's for the debate, lady
from Sandoval, Representative
Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or the
kind gentleman from San Juan
Yil.
I yield to the lady from
Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
gentlemen, uh, first question
is, um, so you have the initial
beneficiary, and then you can
change it a second time now. But
what if I got married 10 times
and divorced.
Is that not an option?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lana, it
allows
One change.
How you decide to make that
change will be on your
shoulders.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, my
other husbands will not like
that very much.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
there is another question that
um.
Other gentleman asked me to ask
you, who is?
Who is your expert in
qualifications to be an expert
on this issue.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
expert has been David Archuleta
from ERB and I thought he would
have been down here with a life
raft about now.
But uh here I am, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Oh, Mister Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, yeah, you might want to give
him a call.
So thank you are you
you know to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I vote
now that the House Bill 251 do
now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 251. The
vote is now open.
Wow
What what's about to close.
It's about to go down.
The ball's not closed by 62 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 251 Azuli
Paz's house.
Congratulations.
Gentlemen to sing Speaker, I
probably ought to do something
from Rocky since I just got the
hell beat out of me.
But I'm gonna try this.
I feel good. I knew that I would
now. I feel good. I knew that I
would now. So good, so good.
I've got the bill passed.
Is there a motion to reconsider?
lady from Bern Leo, are you
ready on uh.
Supplemental calendar item
number 2.
I am Mr. Speaker. Would you get
me to that point?
House Bill 217 and final passage
has been taken and it is subject
to debate amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, I'm presenting
House Bill 217. It enters the
state of New Mexico in the
counseling licensure compact.
The purpose of the compact is
described in the bill is to
facilitate interstate practice
of licensed professional
counselors with the goal of
improving public access to
professional counseling
services, the compact
establishes flexibility for
counseling licenses and member
states to obtain compact
privileges.
See no debate generally close.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
with that, I do.
I moved that House Bill 217 do
now pass passage of House Bill
217. The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 217 has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports disordered.
cle r k to read.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 405 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Do you want Johnson, chair?
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of favorable report
files Bill 405. All those in
favor of COSA and I.
Although supposedly, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 427 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report seen with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do Wanda
Johnson, chair. Move adoption.
We adoptional favorable
committee report for House Bill
427 as amended. All those in
favor of 5 by saying no.
I suppose the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to whom has been
referred house labor, veterans
and Military Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 438
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair? Move adoption.
We report files labor Veterans
Military Affairs Committee
substitute for hours before 38.
All those in favor signified the
same no.
All the supposed name, the I
have a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 439 has had
it under consideration reports
in with the recommendation that
it do pass, respectfully
submitted.
Do you want Johnson chair
committee report files Bill 439.
All those in favor of 75% 9.
I suppose
the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 459 has had
it under consideration reports
saying with recommendation that
it do pass and it's referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair
of committee report files 459.
All those in favor in the public
eye.
Well the supposed
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 468 has had
it under consideration report,
same with the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair. Move adoption adoption of
a favorable report files Bill
468. All those in favor say if I
say a.
I suppose nay, the report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 477 has had it under
consideration report with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that a House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 477 do pass and
thence referred to the Taxation
and Revenue Committee
respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson, chairavorable
committee report from Alice
before '77, but a favorable
committee report for House
government elections the Union
Affairs Committee. So substitute
for Als bill.
77, all those in favor of 75 by
saying aye.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 518 has had
it under consideration reports
with recommendation that it do
pass, respectfully submitted. Do
you want Johnson, chair. We're
an adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
518. All those in favor of 75
and say no.
I suppose, the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 571 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted.
Do you Wanda Johnson, chair?
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report for Housing
Bill 571. All those in favor of
75 I.
I suppose me. Yes, it can be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 42 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair.
Dobson.
For an adoption of a federal
report for housing more of 42.
All those in favor of 75AI.
I suppose nay.
Yeah, it's report adopted. Mr.
Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Joint Resolution
11 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to Wanda Johnson,
chair adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate joint resolution 11. All
those in favor signify by saying
a.
I suppose, nay,
the eyeabic committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 347
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption favor
347. All those in favor signify
by saying aye.
I suppose, Nate, the I have that
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 505 has
had it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are on adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
5505.
All those in favorite saying no.
I suppose say nay.
The eyes have it, the 505s have
it committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 513 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, adoption. We are an
adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
513. All those in favor of 5 are
saying aye.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 517
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the education committee,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson's share of favorable
committee report for House Bill
517. All those in favor of 5
would say no.
I was supposed
Yeah, it's how it can report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred. House Bill
527 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 527. All those in
favor of saying I say no.
I was na,
the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Memorial
15 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Al Memorial
15. All those in favor of saying
5 but say I.
I suppose nay.
Yeah I saw that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred Senate Bill 283
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson's
chair. Move adoption. We are
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
283. All those in favor 5 but
say 9.
Hobosna
Yeah I it committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
objection is ordered. Clerk to
read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 88 as
amended. Senate Bill 123 and
request the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
Sherry de Mohan and a k.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Last call for announcements,
announcements, gentle lady from
Santa Fe. Oh, thank you Mr.
Speaker. Your House Judiciary
Committee will meet at about 3
o'clock, 15 minutes after the
end of the floor session be
great if people are on time so
we can get to dinner tonight,
Mr. Speaker. Why were you
looking at me when you said
that?
Are you feeling guilty, Mr.
Speaker?
Never
Generally from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to
the rural Development, land
grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee for always being on
time and as a reward, you do not
have to come to committee
tomorrow morning. Committee is
canceled. Thank you guys.
Well, I, I thought my bill was
up tomorrow.
I said what I said, Mr. Speaker,
thank you.
lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after floor session ends.
Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
house commerce will meet at 3
o'clock today in room 317. Thank
you gentle lady from Taos. Mr.
Speaker, your house agricultural
and Water Resources Committee
will be meeting because we have
Senate bills.
9
A a.m. tomorrow.
That's it, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, gentlemen from Berley
or de la Cruz. Mr. Speaker, I
have a very, very, very
important question for you.
What did the cholo say?
When the house fell on him.
General from San Juan. Any idea?
What did the cholo say when the
house fell on him.
Speaker, I don't know.
Get up for me, Holmes.
That's a good one.
That was a good one, lady from
Brin Leo, do you have
announcement?
Gentlemen from San Juan, do you
have an announcement?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
In honor of the serious debate
today.
Um, there was a pony and he
wasn't feeling very good and he
just, he was just sick and, and,
uh, he finally decided to go to
the veterinarian.
And uh and the uh doctor said,
you know what the doctors told
him?
Mr. Speaker.
What did they tell him? It's OK.
You're just a little hoarse.
All right, and on that point,
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
in recess until 10:30 tomorrow.
Thank you for a productive day.
