Thank you madam chairman and and
that members of the committee
this is a bill that the
department of health is
requested us to to take up it's
a question of the trying to
make the medical cannabis
program of less expensive for
the participants in it as you
know we we currently have a
situation in which they only
have to renew every three years
we knew there the program.
But they have to go every year
the law requires and to go every
year to see the doctor who will
put them into the program in the
first place and that is proving
to be pretty expensive some
cases upwards getting upwards
close to two hundred dollars per
visit
this bill coincides the renewals
with the doctor's visits and so
do every two years for both that
would save the patient's.
Have the money that they're
spending on it that and with
that I'll have the money to
expert witnesses the doctor's
Dominique zero and Gerry French
Committee medical cannabis
program at the health
department.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and thank you
senator this bill would really
help to streamline the program
and reduce some of the barriers
for some of our patients that
are currently enrolled currently
with the process of having a
three year administration but
having to do the annual
enrollment it essentially means
that we still have an annual
part so every year the patient
has to do the same thing to
renew to remain eligible for the
program this would help to
reduce those barriers and this
is especially important in areas
that are parole and frontier
because it helps relieve some of
the burden not only from the
patients but also from the
medical providers one of the
biggest budget about this though
is the savings to the patient
collectively with the over
hundred thousand patients that
we have in the program they
would end up saving
approximately eleven million
dollars or more Justin the
expense of these doctor visits
and.
And this would of course be a
big impact we know that over
forty percent of our patients
were enrolled in the program I
want to low income categories
and many of the patients are not
able to see their primary care
providers to get the signature
for the program because they
also are under either federal
programs such as veterans
administration or the Indian
health services and the
providers they are not able to
sign or certify due to federal
restrictions that forces those
patients to go to other
providers and have to pay out of
pocket in order just to get
their signature and what we
really are hoping to do is
reduce that burden save those
patients money reduce the
burdens on the providers and be
able to have a much more
streamlined administrative
process.
All right so we'll go to the
audience all those in favor of
sorry all those opposed to
Senate bill two forty two.
I just got your text message.
Well it's a little like the is
there anyone online because of
those that.
Okay.
Is there anyone in favor of
Senate bill two forty zero.
In favor anyone online in favor
of Senate bill two forty two.
Okay
so no one in opposition to one
in favor
is there anything else you
wanted to state before we go to
the committee you madam chairman
it's it's a relatively clear cut
issue and and we would love the
support of the committee thank
you senator alright we'll go to
the committee hi and welcome
anyone online.
Want to comment.
Madam chair this is our
prevailed I'm going to do pass.
Representative we have
Representative Rubio making the
motion for to pass
Representative Ferrary second
did you want to comment on
Senate bill two forty.
Okay great so we'll go to the is
there any opposition to Senegal
to forty two.
State line you have a do pass it
on.
Thank you all.
Are you still can't find.
Yes there's not helpful for hi
fourteen I'm so we'll keep
moving through this and I know
that the Senate is on the floor
right now so we'll go ahead and
text Senator schools
chairman I know I don't know if
you can hear me if you're online
so Senate bill eighty three is
actually more both something
we've seen are you okay with
hearing that now
the
ones having and slamming its the
telecoms Bill.
madam chair.
I don't know how we want to do
this is just a Senate tried to
try to stop well you chair the
meeting like present the bill.
Here are two okay great is a
okay we'll just roll through
this.
Okay
This is we're doing all of it
today.
And your bill thank you madam
chair.
This is a very familiar bill
Senate bill eighty three mirrors
house bill one seventy one this
is broadening cramming and
slamming to include be inclusive
of what other forty nine states
due to allow for multiple
billing on a on a single bill we
talked about at Verizon wireless
and the ability to have access
points such as Disney funds and
other services we just have
fallen behind since nineteen
ninety nine when we lost touch
this line we would look to
update it and with that
And madam chair madam chair.
The Senate sponsors Sanchez is
the ability we are Santo
dominated Center dining.
Or also.
Things to do so with that.
It was just me of course.
Okay we'll go to the audience is
there anyone here in opposition.
I don't see any is there anyone
on soon that is in opposition.
About okay all right we'll go
for it is there anyone in the
audience in support.
All right.
Okay good like would they like
to speak.
I.
Good afternoon madam chair madam
chair members of the committee
Rikki Lee Chavez on behalf of
the AT&T we stand in strong
support we appreciate the
Sanchez work on this bill and we
appreciate rise and leading the
way on this important issue that
will affected impact all of our
customers in positive ways thank
you for your consideration of a
do pass.
There's no chair.
Okay thank you is there anyone
on soon who would like to speak
in support.
Seeing that okay is there
anything you'd like to stay
before we go to the to the
committee all good mentor we
stand for questions.
Okay I did not the committee
would like anyone want to see
any okay madam chair I move the
deep.
Currently.
I was.
Okay we have in the past hi
Representative block in the
second by Representative Thomson
and less that was Representative
Lord I couldn't really
understand Representative
Lawrence okay the.
Lots Representative block is do
passing Representative Lord as a
second
is there any objection to.
This having a do pass.
Seeing none you have a two
past of one two three four five
five six.
Six zero.
Hey and there's not one.
Thank you.
Madam chair of the head and do
house bill seventy seven okay.
so seventy seven is Senator
souls.
The.
You
should.
So we're gonna go ahead and
present Senate bill seventy
seven virtually
Or is ready to present that go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair
Let me grab my notes I'm sorry
Seventy seven
And then the construction
industry licensing act to
require all new residential
construction after of the.
Of but we see we.
I do have an amendment
To change the date I started to
say
After January first twenty
twenty four is the need to amend
it to have photos of takes
systems installed that are
designed to supply usable solar
power to residences and to be
tied to the grid hybrid grid or
off grid system and the system
must provide one what per square
foot of heated area and at least
one lexical receptacle for
charging electric vehicles.
And including solar systems as
compulsory elements of new homes
will help drive the cost of
electricity down as utilities
will need to add fewer new
resources and the the state's
transition to renewable energy.
And.
With that I'd like to make an
amendment.
Madam chair so we understand so
you had sent some additional
language amendment that we have
in our package on page two nine
nine.
Change the date
From July first twenty twenty
three to January first twenty
twenty four so that changes are
already made up it did you want
to change in another place in
the bill.
yes madam chair I believe it's
on page one line twenty five.
Where it also has the
construction after of July first
of twenty twenty three to
January first of twenty twenty
four and as that is the date the
only change Madam chair.
Yes madam chair that's that's
all just to line to date okay.
well up to date on the late
amendment.
Discussion okay great so madam
chair you have a we're we're
discussing the amendment is
there any discussion on the
amendment.
Madam chair I just wanted to
clarify that the one change on
page two line one was already
made.
Madam chair of
the change was made on page two
line line for the effective
date.
That was already changed Energy
Environment and natural
resources the change you're
making is on page one.
followed on to page two.
To changed to July first twenty
twenty three to January first
twenty twenty four is that
right.
Yes madam chair but it was
mentioned it was also page two.
I.
The date on our copy madam chair
goes from the first page of the
second page I think that's why
it's causing confusion but the
the section to the effective
date has already been changed.
Okay.
I think we.
I might have just.
Thank you madam chair is there
any opposition to the amendment.
It amended will.
Senate bill seventy seven twice
amended.
to the committee for discussion.
Good I'm.
Representative Lord Senator to
to chairman for our okay so it's
okay
I'm sorry one moment we'll do
public comment quickly
Any folks in the audience in
opposition to Senate bill
seventy seven.
Folks in favor anyone off on the
sand on on opposition Hey what
if favor Senate bill seventy
seven to kind of a self service.
Here
Please state your name on.
Go ahead.
Excuse me thank you very much
and chairman members the
committee my name is Jim Daschle
to represent the renewable
energy industry association of
New Mexico if approximately
sixty members and we've been
around since two thousand and
four.
And
Those are just.
It is important that as we
transition to one hundred
percent renewable energy that we
make the best use of the built
environment having solar
installed a new home
constructions make sense that is
most cost effective to install
having energy generated the
point if usage offers the
following advantages less energy
loss differs grid investment.
Grade resiliency since the
energy is from disbursed sources
and conserves real rural and
agricultural land while we were
disappointed at the recent
amendment that removes the
mandate for selling all new home
construction we believe that
require builders to ask
homebuyers if they want solar is
a step in the right direction
thank you very much we support
this.
Thank you anyone else in favor.
All right anyone else online.
Okay great alright.
Sorry say that again former
but I would go ahead.
Good afternoon madam speaker and
committee members I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico eight
supports policies that would
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by developing renewable energy
sources we're fully in support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else on.
Okay up to the committee
Representative Lord okay thank
you and cheer and Representative
was it was a bill originally
that it was also including solar
rooftops was taken out later
chair representative.
Hello Karen very are you there.
Yes I'm sorry my phone went off
I didn't even expect could you
repeat that question
Representative Miller yes sorry
I haven't a chance to dig deep
into this ammendment chair
representative did it start off
with
solar rooftops as as well as the
charging stations the beginning
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative lord
does include photo Tate systems
and rooftops now but what they
did change was
all the residential construction
to be offered not that they have
to include that.
Okay so thank you mentors as a
okay so it's going to it's gonna
go when they're going to build a
house and they're going to say
would you like to have this
versus mandating that it must be
put in as out of understanding
Madam chair representative.
Correct.
Okay also there's one of the is
anyone Madam to this gonna be
any information given out to the
homeowners just that they
understand maintenance costs by
any chance mostly for the solar
just something so they
understand it they get that I
mean yes you could say my ever
but there's maintenance costs of
acts chair representative.
Madam chair representative lord
I'm not sure exactly how
You know.
It will be presented by the
company or the or the builder
I'm trying to see if there's
anything
The electrical here are self
recommend rules to be approved
by the commission to modify
Mexico's electrical code.
to implement the provisions of
this section so they might put
that into
What what.
People are presented.
Okay yeah thank you madam chair
representative yeah that makes
sense we're going to do that
that would lay out here's a
budget is pros and cons of that
nobody gets excited thing you
know this would be great to look
all I had no idea that it was
going to cost me X. amount of
the so others of the question I
have thank you.
And to Representative
Representative walked thank you
madam chair thank you Matt madam
chair so.
I'm I'm my big concern with this
bill madam chair is the cost of
these new newly built houses
with this increased costs for
new houses with these new
mandates madam chair.
Madam chair representative block
yes there will be an increase in
the cost but this stating that
people have over there
utilities and especially if they
go all electric
the savings
will be
You know really great.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair so is there anything
in the bill that would prohibit
these newly built houses from
having natural gas stoves for
instance madam chair I know we
said we wanted to promote
electric but is there anything
precluding them from getting
this natural gas or any other
kind of.
Yes our manager.
Madam chair and representative
law
no it's just that they will have
design into their home being
built an opportunity to have
the solar on.
Receptacles I mean the solar
already in.
The design of the home.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you madam chair so then on page
two here I see this as the
residents shall also include at
least one electrical receptacle
madam chair madam chair
what is the what's the
receptacle I I'm not familiar
with this madam chair.
Madam chair representative blots
that is like charging port you
know that you would plug your
own.
All I'm sorry you're talking
about the receptacles for
their charging electric vehicles
correct correct chair okay madam
chair and representative block
that would be like a plugin for
elected car vehicle.
And just so that I can add we've
had solar panels on our house
When we sold in in the one we
just now are refurbishing with
Solar panels on it and even
though we don't have an electric
vehicle yet we went ahead and
put in a charging station for
when we are going to happen so
this is basically what this bill
will be asking to have provided
for people in advance it's much
easier to do it while you're
doing a solar system.
Okay thank you madam chair and
so I guess from your experience
what what is one of these
receptacles cost is it.
A pretty nominal amount or is
that a lot madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
on hi.
I think it was like around two
hundred dollars or something
like that.
Okay thank you madam chair
Senator that's all I have to
thank you madam chair
Representative log I just have a
few questions on this and and
mostly have going back to
Representative l'assomption
about this but I got some
questions from builders in my
local area The New Mexico
homebuilders association just
like it for me that the
construction industry division
has
the state spelling have foxes
for for many years already on
renewable in our local area and
I don't know if it would be a
friendly amendment to be able to
since our amending the bill the
the the ideas asked that we
change the term receptacle to
out without.
since there is already a
builders are already providing a
conduit now the box for clients
this just clarifies what that is
madam chair I don't know if that
would be friendly.
you madam chair and
At.
Committee I as.
Presenting this with Senator for
Senator souls
I would
take that personally I would
take it isn't friendly amendment
but if I could ask him if we
make it for the next committee.
Is this is the last cater for
the for chair.
I'm sorry being at home I don't
have my it is we immunity sorry
madam chair but we heard and
energy last.
Thank you that's right I did say
that
Okay.
yes so this is coming directly
from the construction industry
division and so I just we hope
that we can make that for the
for just so we can clarify what
that is I think there is
confusion about the term and
otherwise just one other
question madam chair
Just thinking through what were
at us for the future if.
And I just want to understand
how this works so is there.
Would be a sunset on this so if
we find a new form of energy
that isn't a photovoltaic system
with this you know say that it's
we can capture I don't know.
Something else that's renewable
and have that and I could see
about our sports form of energy
would this still be in place I
guess
as a mandate if we find even
even better form of energy that
we'd like to endorse or would we
have to come back and readjust
leader.
Madam madam chair in committee I
don't see a sunset on it I it
would have to be modified but
since this is our future right
right now
I think that this would be okay
to go ahead and
you know it could.
You know easily be changed to no
I I mean anything we can do to
promote this I am all on just
thinking through you know we've
seen such incredible
Feats happen with with so many
different forms of what's
available that we're able to
collect so I just and hopeful
that we can continue to grow in
this industry as well with that
madam chair
Is there what's the little the
committee.
Okay.
You can see losses what what is
the will of the committee.
I will secretary.
We have a due pass motion for
Representative Rubio S. second
from representative Thompson.
take their all.
Representative walked no ma'am.
Lord no.
madam chair were more yes.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Vice chair review.
Yes.
Madam chair for already.
Yes.
S. as amended.
Madam chair you have a due to
some members.
All right.
Thank you madam chair a
committee and will get the
amendment from native to make on
the floor thank you.
Madam chair Jennifer Jones is
following okay.
All right well that was the
right effort from this.
Thank you for all.
For all of our members online if
you're feeling better and wish
you well and we will see you all
on the floor at four thirty
thank you.
Thank you.
Hi take care bye.
