Okay we have a house bill one
forty four office of gun
violence prevention
representative hill if you like
to go ahead and
thank you very much man chair
members of the committee to see
this afternoon we are here to
discuss the house forty four
office of gun violence
prevention or i'll as I like to
call it these them and tation of
the office of gun violence
prevention because we started
this fight a couple years ago
and were still and at this just
the next space
before he began madam sure we do
have an amendment of the two of
two number point two two seven
six six nine point one.
And if you don't mind why we're
doing this I also
need to announce for anyone in
the audience it might be waiting
for a house build to twenty six
the candidates license your
background checks is going to be
heard instead of today on
thursday.
So while you're getting that
rolled that madam child just go
ahead and describe the amendment
that's okay with you i'll
basically does this
it there was a process that we
hit the included in
move that we make a motion to
discuss the amendment thank you
any of the
takes out the we had a process
for creating the selection
committee for the director of
the office of gun violence
prevention all we did is
essentially remove that process
from the bill
and just make some them to serve
at the pleasure of the governor.
And that's it.
Thank you minimum chair
thank you try not to get too
close to the microphone so I
don't.
Make everyone death in here
manager representative so can
you tell me so you're making
your changing who to be a point
about the governor I didn't
catch that i'm serious we're
tuning I was like manager a
representative of block we're
changing the process to be
utilised
to there was going to be a
selection committee to select
the director of the office of
gun violence prevention we
simply removed that process.
And on the strategist pay
sected by the governor and
served the pleasure of the
government
thinking manager and thank you
for that i.
I do not like your amendment i'm
sorry I think we need a process
and I do not trust that any
executive no matter the one
currently or one in the future
would have the.
The correct ability to do that
as they already have four
members on the board for the
bill so it manager that's all
thank you.
I'm term of a due pass on the
amendment.
The.
The.
Representative no
representative lord
representative ramiro yes
representative thompson yes
medium vice chair rubia yes
madame cheerfur yes.
Thank you very much manager at
this moment I would like to take
the time to introduce both of my
experts sitting at the table
with me here today first I have
secretary package allen for that
from the new mexico department
of health and also been baker
who is that the governors
are on all things crime related
so if i've been one of you want
to say a couple words.
Madame terminals the committee
it's an honor to be in front of
you again rose the opportunity
to be able to have this
discussion about this important
office that will help us
understand collect analyse
process in the intern data
related to gun violence into
actionable items to be discussed
by policymakers and put in front
of the sledulated body in the
future to inform policy that
will help keep new mexico safer.
Thank you madame chair members
to commit patrick alan secretary
of the department health just
briefly in terms of of what this
bill would do i'm with this
office would do today we do gun
violence prevention work in our
injury and behavioral health
epidemiology bureau this bill
would help anchor that work and
make sure that there's a
constant presence doing that
work as well as providing
resources for it today we
collect high level data about
gun violence in the states that
we know that the mexico has the
third highest rate of gun deaths
in the country we know that guns
are the number one seller of of
kids in the state and we know
that a suicides are a a
significant portion of those gun
deaths and windows of breakdown
of accidental versus intentional
desk some of those kinds of
things but there's a lot of data
that we don't know because we
don't have the capacity to be
able to collect it i'm in
particular we don't have really
good data that helps us
understand what works and what
doesn't work in terms of trying
to prevent trying to prevent gun
violence and so we would be able
with with this office and and
with resources in this area do
things like mortality reviews
something we do very
successfully in maternal
mortality now when a mother or
or baby die within the first
year a week able to do a deep
dive into what were the root
causes of that of that death
with this kind of focus in these
kinds of resources as an example
we could do that kind of recause
analysis around gun violence and
help point the way towards.
That would help address that
they're very very things that we
can do with this work i'm all
out i'll not run through that
list but be happy to answer your
question.
Madam and man chair there is a
little bit of history behind
this bill but I think it'll
probably come out within the
discussion so I right now will
stand for questions
great think you all for being
here and thank you for your
presentation i'm so will go to
the audience we're going to do
fifteen minutes of fifteen
minutes on for proponents
fifteen minutes for opposition
and then for virtual online will
do ten minutes
for proponents in ten minutes
for opposition you do have to
one minute for each person to
speak but the quicker you go the
more will have time to hear more
people so just taking that into
consideration and
trying not to be to
provide too much repetition so
we will go first with opposition
if you couldn't raise your hand.
Are for folks who support the
legislation.
Two okay great
then go ahead.
School channels the committee.
We start one of the.
Of this office.
Costing our state one point
eight billion with the b dollars
a year that comes from
professional study as the
secretary said this gives us the
opportunity one of the meat many
things that this offs do is
correct collect work blind would
come
and those that are suffering the
most article the majority one we
do was in schools over here is
that by the time they turn
eighteen they expect to be dead
for gun balance dead or jail but
that's what we've left them this
office gives us a doc.
The.
Thank you for this opportunity
to come in violence as a
complicated situation
intersecting with problems
caused by generational poverty
criminal behavior or current
mental health crisis and easy
access to weapons while we do
have some national data we don't
have enough.
Understanding of what are
effective solutions for new
mexico and this office would
allow the collection of that for
the analysis of that data for
proposed solutions that then
could be marked and measured.
And it mirrors what's going on
around the country both at the
national level and in other
states strongly due to support
office of the increased so that
we can do a better job of
reducing an ending on violence.
Is there anyone else who would
like to speak in support.
Run hospital on forty four okay
is there anyone online okay.
And therefore opposition
so we're taking so if you could
if you're here to speak in
opposition of of the legislation
can you please raise our hand if
you're on on zoom.
Okay if you can go for go ahead.
You have one minute.
Elaine can you go.
He lay nice think I barely heard
you can you speak up please.
Yeah I go ahead.
All
the bill because
so called
we need all
of.
Okay
it is not a little bit
thank you
go ahead you have one minute
back in manchester members of
the committee asking on behalf
over seventeen hundred members
the rifle possible
if this was really only about
data collection with support
this as it stands we feel for
them temperate to the further
recognized public health
justifications against law
buying a maskings we saw last
year how easily they could be
turned against order citizens in
their everyday loss the
governor's ten prevent carrier
firearms and burning accounting
though they're terribly.
This was an misuse of a public
health justification for action
on fire pausing the sleeves I
think to a reasonable fear that
in office has gone about
spreadsheet with a focus on
public health would produce
little more for new mexicans
besides questionable statistics
designed a further agenda rather
than actually the other data and
anti again
the men at the solidarity court
coordination amongst other
things non governmental
organizations is easily read as
a way for the tax dollars of the
many wall about it again owners
in our city to be funnelled
radical organizations including
groups that routinely ignore the
universal background check law
during their so called by best
thank you thank you.
Next we have.
Summer
there wasn't some as she already
wants.
Go ahead.
Yes thank you.
Are you there.
For folks who are were still
taking testimony for opposition
if you are opposed to
hospital one forty four you
please raise your hand if you
haven't spoke.
The.
She's a proponent so if if we're
work we'll go ahead and go to
folks who support the
legislation if you support house
built one forty four can you
please raise your hand.
What were online right now
so
is there anybody on for support.
Read a go ahead.
The.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
hear you had you have one
minute.
Thank you so much
for this bill one of the things
I noticed during the testimony
on the other violence bills that
we've been hearing is people
asking for data we need data and
that is exactly what this is
what will do thank you very much
thank you we are taking.
Public comments for folks who
support the legislation is there
anyone else if you could please
raise your hand online.
Carlo go ahead.
Mel chair it's actually glary
saturday and I am in opposition
I had my hand up earlier but I
can pull that if if you don't
want to composition anymore.
Okay hold on just one second
will let me see who else is on.
Is there anyone else in support.
Yes
calling in from last cruises at
night they've mentioned about
new mexico's high rate of gun
and it was a dead that the
american psychological
association promoted considered
an office
prevention
when they know I said sound
signs does not provide fitted
advantages in one study or one
single point instead
significant development over
time and new research clarifies
an enhances pass understanding
the resource bank cited in
section seven of HB one forty
four address that particular
concern of the apa and that's
just one of the reasons I do to
pass out one forty four and I
thank you for your time and your
service to our state thank you
so much when away thank you
reader.
Anyone else in supported the
legislation.
Madam chair.
Patrick go ahead.
The.
Thank you
chairman members of the
community the committee money
was patched bear and i'm an
executive director of mesco
center black excellent and we're
all for this house bill
we work in international
district there so ease out of
curtaining mexico and gathering
the data is so so imperative but
more importantly give us a
guideline about how we can crap
or
are the programs to work all for
support of this bill.
Thank you thank you patrick
will go back to there is one
more for opposition and then
there's one in support here in
person so will go back to the
one on online it was the carlos.
Okay thirty one okay
we didn't we didn't actually
talk to him
yes
it's actually glaring to out
here can you hear me yes go
ahead.
Thank you for taking I am in
opposition of house bill one
forty four I am a retired police
officer from electorate I
actually worked with a mister
baker which your expert with
this back in the day.
And I still have communication
with a lot of effective duty
officers in fact that and that
was the president of the police
office association recently and
we talked about a lot of things
that the public could do to
help.
You know what did not come up
with another level of red tape
and bureaucracy.
This goes to like you know we've
lead the nation and autos we've
left the nation and d w y in
years past we did not have to
come up with an office to
address those issues we had to
support the officer is taking
calls for service and enforce
the existing laws better I
encourage you to not use taps
dollars in this waste forward
thank you
thank you we're going to go back
to the audience there is one
more gentleman did you want to
speak and support this
legislation you have one minute
go ahead.
Thank you sir
we're going to go ahead then and
go to committee I don't know if
you needed to say anything else
representative.
Thank you madame chairman just
to give the committee a little
bit of that history in
background this office was
actually created two budget
cycles ago when we were able to
answer it of mine item into the
department of health budget to.
Two steady violence and that
time we had done a lot with
violence prevention programs
with and a large appropriation
and so that's when this holds
aren't journey started and so we
already have
we have some data and we already
understand just how.
Erm
just how well this data can
gardise and making legal and
policy decisions as they relate
to violence gun violence or
otherwise when I talk to my
colleagues across both sides of
the aisle I say this is actually
not a gun violence bill this is
a good government bill and the
reason for that is because this
office is charged with
collecting data to tell us which
of our laws are effective one
that comes to mine is
right because it's going to help
us collect data on that and it's
also going to help us find other
grant programs other funding
than my people too a let us
expand the data that we do
collect and it will also help
the states give more education
either to law enforcement art
officers or people that are
giving
education as it relates to are
using to learn a weapon so no
this is not a political weapon
this is actually something that
we have been doing for several
years weren't looking to codify
it in statute because it's that
effective and were here to
explain to the committee and
give you expert more expert
opinion as to exactly how well
this is doing and why we want to
continue to do it today
thank you representative will go
ahead and open it up for
questions for the committee
representative block go ahead
and chairman thank you
representative and mister
secretary and mister senior
palsy adviser
something like that thank you
ma'am so first of all I guess I
have new questions about your
member or your new amended bill
so manamed her representative
i'm just wondering what
qualifications are criteria or
the governor now need to use to
select a director.
Madame chair representative
block let me find the material
give me a second please.
Section four looks like I am
h two section four new material
director appointment
qualifications are shoving
appointed by the i'm sorry
that's the older unamended bill.
Of the same thing.
The directors show you qualify
person with previous
administrative experience and
data collection and gun violence
prevention
of it thank you manager and
thank you representative
okay so can you tell me like
specifically what what gun
violence prevention would they
need to be part of for example
madam chair let's just say they
do they have to run an
organization that deals with gun
violence do they have to have
previous employment experience
where they're title used to be
gun violence or why are they a
policy person or how do we how
do we
I mean how do we judge that
that's kind of what i'm
wondering because let's just say
this is that you were I got
elected governor and we have to
appoint a new person to this
board
and the two qualifications that
they need administrative
experience in data collection
and gun violence prevention so
manager representative if I was
coming in and I had data
experience unless to say I had
personal lived experience
regarding gun violence with that
then apply or would I still not
be able to serve in this
capacity madam to represent
madame chair represented a block
perspectively I think that's
well outside the scope of this
bill that would lead back to a
state and employment personnel
rolls who gets to decide what
qualifications mean and who
qualified persons are that's not
going to be within the language
of that bill it's right now not
within any sort of rules
promigated for this bill so I I
don't think you're going to be
able to find that the answer to
your question here I think it's
outside the scope of what we're
speaking about thank you minimum
chart thank you representative
respectfully unfortunately your
bill literally says director
shell be a qualified person with
previous administrative
experience so that is in your
bill so i'm wondering what
administrative experience are
you what is I want to know what
the intent of your legislation
is regarding that verbatch what
is your intent on gun violence
prevention and what is the
intent on administrative
experience for relating to data
collection.
A man chair representative my
intent is that the director
shall be qualified and will be
found qualified by other persons
who are
put in charge of finding this
person in hiring them through
the state of new mexico employee
rules and that that person will
be directed to help us
with previous submitted
administrative experience put
together a data collection and
the series of questions that we
can use later to ask questions
that will help us gather data to
help in gun violence that is the
point of the bill.
Thank you material think you
represent overnight
I mean I I don't understand i'm
sorry I don't understand because
when I asked the question I
didn't get an answer I got well
there they need to have
qualified experience and they
need to follow the laws of the
state new mexico relating to
employment of course they do
just as every other individual
and this new person would be an
exempt employee so madam chair
representative what would this
exempt employee it wouldn't just
be the will of the governor and
there would be no
I I mean what what would the
process be right if I if I want
to be applying for this job in
the governor's office what would
I go through to get the job
manager representative madam
chepperate and representative
block i'm on an expert on how
people get hired and fired with
the state of new mexico so don't
feel
comfortable giving you an
opinion on that but I I would
assume that you would send in a
resume
for the position and you would
be
that your resume would be looked
at with the pather of others and
the best person cited for the
position will be notified
okay thank you madame chair and
think you representative I
appreciate that answer so
continuing on here with the bill
regarding the employment so how
do we ensure that there is no
conflicts of interest with the
hiring of this individual since
there is no longer going to be a
board that would independently
that this individual thank you
madame chairfai represent a
block I believe we have an
ethics commission that deals
with those exact exact questions
with one that we utilize when we
are in session that is a
comprised of our appears and
then we have another commission
that is utilized when we're
outside of session they ask in
these in the answer those
questions thank you madame
chairman thank you
representatives of them with
this individual I see we struck
out on line eleven to twelve and
pitch two we struck out the term
of six years so madame chairman
representative I guess it would
be assumed that this individual
would.
Merely serve at the pleasure of
the governor and could be hired
or fired by any governor that
comes in is that correct madame
chairman representative man
chairman represented a block I
think that might be a correct
assumption
okay thank you madame termin
thinking representative and so
how how would the.
Other members be able to
work with this individual if
there's no oversight from the
other individuals who been
chosen by legislative council
and the governor's office how
will we keep this individual in
check and how do we get the
reports that are necessary from
this bill if there is no
independent verification madame
chairman representative madam
chair for I represent I just
want to make sure i'm
understanding your question so
you're saying with this new
amended bill which gets rid of
that process for the selection
committee what what then be in
place to keep whatever director
is selected
within his role or madame
chairman representative you
could say that yes ma'am manager
for I I represent a block got
that again I give you the same
answer
would go either to the state fx
commission or to your supervisor
that at the
at the office or any other state
office where your employed those
are their rules for that they're
very well established and again
or not discussed within the
perview of this bill madame
chairman representative I
appreciate the ethics portion
but i'm just talking about the
bear necessities of the
individual who is the new
director so since they work at
the pleasure of the governor how
do we ensure that we get the
data that we need to be
collected had a windshire that
they have the proper meetings to
talk amongst themselves about
the potential new initiatives of
the office and how did those
individuals then hold each other
accountable if.
Five of them would now be
appointed by the governor and a
vast minority of them would be
appointed by legislative
council.
Thank you to a chair ferrarian
representative of block now we
are talking about some of the
substance in the bill I want to
take you to section nine and
these are the duties of the
office the office shall make a
report to the legislature of its
findings and recommendations or
important suggested legislation
shall be made available to the
new mexico legislative council
honor before december fifteenth
of each year the atmosphere of
the official maker report
publicly available on the office
this website or if the office
does not have a dedicated
website on the website on the
office's web page of the
department's website
thank you madame chairman
thinking representative and I I
appreciate that I do not
appreciate the previous comments
saying that my question was not
relating to the bill as it did
involve the new director that
you are creating so I do resent
that madame chairman
representative but I will
continue on my question and
thank you so madame chairman
representative I see here on
page six as we are referring to
the new material regarding the.
The report
so madame chairman
representative is it assumed
that by december fifteenth of
next year we will need a report
or will this begin once this
takes effect I believe it should
take effect
I don't know if there's
effective date on this can you
please just let me know what
that is
yes effective days to lie twenty
four minutes a representative
with this office need to have a
report by the end of the year on
december fifteenth of.
This year because that that
seems like a pretty close date
manager manager for a
representative the way I read
this yes I do believe that we
need to have a port by december
fifteen yesterday's not a lot of
time I agree with you okay thank
you madame chairman think you
representative so regarding the
the actual data we're trying to
try to get we're trying to put
this in a report so we spoke a
little earlier with the
secretary saying we we collect
this data already and we're
merely codifying so can you tell
me madame chairman maybe this is
a good question for the
secretary how many of the gun
violence deaths and new mexico
were rip regarding a stolen
firearm
stolen firearm.
Madame chair representative like
that's the kind of data that
right now we don't compile
readily or easily that that the
resources and focus of this
office would help us people turn
to answer okay thank you madame
chairman and think you
represented mister secretary so
can you tell me of the of the
data we do collect weak
currently know how many children
have passed away in the last I
believe fiscal year is how we
count it how many children would
be manager represent yeah thank
you madam chair representative
block it's a calendar year and
for the counter you're twenty
two it was forty forty kids who
are eighteen under who died due
to various forms of gun violence
the account of the defining
characteristic of the day that
we collect is from death data
which is is something that the
the state generally collects and
we're able to to look at causes
of death and was kind of things
to make this assessment okay
thank you madam chairman and
think you representative and I
appreciate that answer because I
think it's it's important to
correlate what what is the
highest numbers and how we can
get that so I appreciate that
that you're already collecting
it
madame chairman representative I
had so many questions about
director's selection process but
since we stripped that out
entirely and gave the part of
the government I do not have
questions about that anymore so
let me continue here madame
chairman representative okay
talking about the annual report.
Okay so manager representative I
didn't see many specific metrics
that were looking for in the
report can you just tell me a
little bit about what we would
require in that because they see
it we have a report suggested
legislation range has to go to
the legislative council and they
need to make it available so can
you tell me madame chairman
representative specifically what
are we counting and how do we
ensure that we get the data we
need such as how many guns were
used that were illegal guns
things of that nature how do we
ensure that that is included in
the next year's report manager
represent or this year's report
I guess it's do on december
fifteenth.
The.
I think you've managed
representative block I think
that I I think you know the
interesting thing about this and
the data collection is you don't
know what you don't know and so
I think a preliminary report as
you asked earlier in december
while that's quick we would
certainly be able to talk about
what are the areas of inquiry
and data collection that we
would intend to pursue in the
initial year and then what I
would expect in subsequent years
is to report on findings of of
that data I use this an example
the kinds of things the office
could do a mortality review
it would be hard to potential in
the bill talk about what kinds
of data you would want to gather
from that but after having
conducted a number of those
reviews if we go down that path
with this bill and with those
resources and we would begin I I
believe you do those things to
identify patterns and begin to
identify types of data that you
would want to collect a report
on and I would see it being that
kind of an iterative process.
Madame chairman representative
and mister secretary thank you
for that so regarding the
material on the report.
I see here on page four
i'm starting on section seven.
And we're talking about maintain
a resource bank for regularly
updated and accurate materials
and resources and repository for
the data so madame chairman
representative can you tell me
how we are going to ensure the
security of the data that we are
collecting and will we be using
do it for that will that
entirely be within the
department madame chairman
representative yeah madam chair
represented block if I follow
what you're asking I don't
envision that we would be
maintaining or or separately
reporting anything that would be
individually identifiable data
and death records are a good
example I just talked about how
many kids
died in new mexico and twenty
twenty two from gunvillance
forty single leading cause of
death of kids in new mexico that
comes from our
added data through vital records
at the department of health but
as we report that data out is
simply that whole number total
and is not reported or
Chairman and think you represent
the night and mister secretary
appreciate that answer and I
think it's important that we
don't have that native that in
the bill but I just want to make
sure let's just say if there's
only one murder that was
extremely violent and it was the
only one in the year how do we
ensure that that data is not
given out to the public so it
can be seen as publicly managed
yeah thank you madame chair
representative locking in a
public health and beating
theology we have something
called the rule of small numbers
and
there's not a specific number
that's a small number it has to
do with population and those
kinds of things but if there
were you know if there were one
one death in in harding county
you know that would be I think
the kind of a scenario you're
talking about and and that's the
sort of data that typically we
might convert into regional data
if we were otherwise doing by
county data or something like
that to avoid running into that
small number words the number is
small enough that a reasonably
informed person could f.
Think you mentioned chairman
think you representative and
mister secretary and I
appreciate that and I will
continue on the the same page
but a different topic so i'm
gonna go to line eleven.
Through twelve semantime
terminal representative I see
that you are
a member did not touch that says
the committee shows that the
salary of the director however
it is a governor appointed
exempt employee so how is that
going to square madame chairman
representative.
The.
Manor chairman representative
block let me make sure that you
haven't caught an error with the
amendment so figures give me a
second.
And i'm to represent it just for
the committee or just repeat
where that is so we all know
it's a page for and i'm on lines
eleven to twelve I think it also
talks a little bit about it with
the directors do so but when I
am concerned about his page or
line eleven to twelve committee
shell said the seller of the
director.
The.
Representative
is that taking care of in your
amendment.
At madame character we are
figuring that right right now
we're really close give us.
Thank you madame chair for or
anything you represent brought
block so I believe on the
amendment and asks for paid for
for lines
one through twelve to be struck
in their enti.
Okay thank you manager think you
represent I guess i'm I might be
looking at an old amendment then
amendment
in the mean item seven minimum
terrible.
Thank you manager thank you
representative thank you yes I
just didn't strike that on my
copy of the bill so I I
appreciate that
sorry all these amendments they
make it difficult but thank you
for them that helped me a lot to
read regarding that I was a
little confused but we're on the
same page took us a little while
to representative
alright thank you madame chair
and representative so I will
continue regarding the policy
proposals and and things that
nature regarding the bill so how
the office address and
incorporate feedback from the
previous year's data to inform
its future decisions manager
representative manager for our
representative block i'm going
to defer to my expert.
Thanks manager representative I
think that's back to the
iterative process that I talked
about before a report would
identify
findings it will identify i'm
i'm i'm speculating a little bit
since we're all kind of creating
this at the start but you know
we were enough I findings we
would identify trends would
identify
the lines of inquiry in that I
would expect the next year's
report to point back to those
things and identify continued
trends or changes and
transatdated developed following
promising lines have increased
those kinds of things.
Thank you madame chairman and
thinking representative and
mister secretary so my concern
about this actually what I want
to know about this I currently
sit on the education the
education interim committee and
we're always talking about the
data we cannot compare apples to
oranges so I want to make sure
if we we should be tracking this
data from the get go.
On the first year so that next
year we have something to
compare it to in the same
category rates the manager
representative in education if
we have a new park test or
whatever that's not equal to the
last year's test rate so we
change the actual metric that
we're measuring some manager
representative regarding this I
just want to make sure that the
deal that we are indeed
collecting is going to square
with the previous data that we
previously collected so we
actually can identify trends
managers and yet madam chair
representative locating I think
I agree completely in in intent
with what you're saying that
data is most useful if you
maintain collection
methodologies and terminology
and definitions in those kinds
of things from one period to the
next does not to say that there
aren't times when you identify
that a methodology is no longer
effective or doesn't track what
it was tracking at one time and
and that you do need to change
the methodology but I think you
know in general that if you can
avoid doing that that's better
to provide continuity and and
and.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative thank you
mister secretary that helped me
a lot regarding that and so I
believe in the bill we're
talking about a collaboration
with other entities I think we
might have mentioned ngos
research institutions
hospitals public health
departments etc
and especially organizations
that conduct gun violence
research so madame chair
representative was just say I
believe right now just to be
clear on the same page we would
put this out for is that my
understanding manager
representative.
At man and chairman represented
a block i'm going to let us
sector allen answer that since
he's one who has been the
closest this process of our.
Biggie manage everything to
block and it depends on how much
resource there is all together
and what the scope of work we
end up ultimately deciding on
you know looking to outside
parties that do research could
mean doing an rfp to an outside
organization it could simply be
are going back to cdc which are
since twenty twenty now has
finally been able to do research
on gun violence and and and
working with them in partnership
so it is a little bit premature
to absolutely say yeah we're
going to do an
I could be one of the tools that
we were other we would use.
Okay thank you madame chair and
representative and and mister
secretary so let's just say you
guys do put out for an p and you
do need a data collector of some
kind rate and it can go out to
all these organizations public
health departments in the state
or out of the state so manamed
to represent it I just want to
make sure that this procurement
process is super
above board regarding who is
getting the contract so madam to
represent it less you say there
was the crime bench crime
prevention research center was
going out for this contract and
they were the most qualified and
cheapest bid in the selection
process how do we ensure that
they are the ones who get the
contract and not some other
group manager if they are the
most qualified and the most on
budget.
Managed chairman representative
block i'm gonna assume that that
we waited here to the state's
procurement code and all of the
requirements therein but there
may be differences and again
i'll let the director and
secretary speak to that
thing madam chair president I
was going to see the exact same
thing if you're asking would we
follow for curement code to
answer thank you manager thank
you representative and I I will
hold you out to that it's on
public record they will all
follow the procurement clue code
and if the crime prevention
research center is the best then
they will get the repeat
especially if they're meeting
the criteria of the state
of a manager representative i'm
continuing here regarding page
five so we're all in the same
page here identify gaps and
available data needed for gun
violence prevention research and
develop strategies to improve
relevant data collection in new
mexico some manager
representative this sounds like
like a survey I guess is that
kind of what you're envisioning
with this to ensure that we
collect the current.
The data that we need to collect
madame chairman representative.
Madame chair representative I I
think
a survey could be a tool to
identify certain kinds of gaps
other gaps may be filled by a
better completion of hospital
trauma room data other gaps may
have to do with crime reports.
That's data or those kinds of
things I think there are number
of different pension gaps we
could certainly use surveys but
that would not be the only
thing.
Alright thank you madame
chairman thank you
representative and so regarding
this can't know that we we all
want we all agree on that madam
chair representative how would
we ensure that we have caught
newty with this extreme risk
protect far and protects an
order act if indeed this year we
change the act manager
representative because that's
kind of apples to oranges if we
change it halfway through the
year and if we're going on the
calendar year and the builders
pass the extreme risk protection
ordered changes that would
change what we collect is that
would you agree manager
representative
madame chair members the board
representative block when we're
we're talking about our post
specifically I think one of the
important things to know is that
that's an existing law that has
been existence since twenty
twenty it has been utilized at
an extraordinarily low rate
particularly in its inception
year and has marginally picked
up in the two plus years that
have have come subscribe to that
the essence will be the presence
or absence of a filed petition
and the presence or absence of
the granting of the order of
deposit a petition in the
duration those things I do not
believe change with any of the
proposed amendments that exist
to the already in place law
relative to what would happen
going forward in my experience
okay madame chairman
representative so if this was
let's just they currently this
is not being really used much
and then it is used a lot
following the passage of this
new buildings that's currently
being debated if that does
passenger there is a huge hike
in numbers of cases of extreme
risk protection ordered
uh cases filed madame to
represent it would that not be
something that we would want to
consider looking at with this
new department and then how do
we square that data with the
previous individuals who have
been
had their firearms taken from
them in the previous act.
That's kind of what i'm trying
to figure out here manager
representative it thinks madam
to representative I think I
think what you're getting at his
what I alluded to earlier that
you know ideally you would want
to maintain
definitions in those kinds of
things over a period of time but
there are going to be times for
compelling reasons when you do
have discount newty in the data
and then you know really what it
is is what is the data and what
does it mean and it's that what
does it mean portion that I
think of any kind of a report
would need to tackle it would
need to identify the fact that
it is discontinuous identify
what the changes and and if it's
if it's possible to interpret
those changes in terms of how
they're how they impact the data
to offer that is a little bit
speculative what I actually seem
with what data looks like but
that would be the general idea
alright thank you madame
chairman thinking representative
for that and I appreciate the
answer mr secretary so.
Right here let's see
manager on page five we're
talking about late my nineteen
twenty one facilitate
coordination amongst the
agencies localities and non
governmental organizations to
address gun valence
comprehensively so madame
chairman representative first of
all I guess my first question
will be what what's the process
of facilities in this quarter
cornation especially regarding
folks who are non governmental
organizations.
And chairman was the committee
represented block I think that
the facilitating coordination of
a stakeholders associated with a
problems in this case we're
talking about gun violence
prevention so
doing this work in the law
enforcement setting to address
other problems some of which
were mentioned some of the
testimony earlier when you have
a problem that arises in causes
whether it's crisis for whether
it's accessible to your death
within a community
seeking out the observations the
perceptions the practices and
the tools and assets available
from all relevant stakeholders
is a critical peace to
assessment the goal of all of
this facilitation communication
and understanding is so that
this offers in this director
will be able to report back to
bodies such as this two informed
their future decision and policy
making and to make sure that we
are taking aim at the sources of
the problems where we can make
the biggest difference and so I
think when we talk about
contacting stay holders as it
relates to wildfires that would
look one way as it relates to
auto theft it would look at
different way in this case a gun
violence has a very
deep in breadth subject matter
related to service profession on
mental health
the medical profession the
schools are just a great number
of folks that contribute to
idea generation and experiences
that would not be clear to just
a governmental body or just a
law enforcement agency and so I
think that is the purpose of the
facilitation in the
coordinations will get the best
in most comprehensive answer
thank you madame chairman
thinking representative so will
we have discussions thorough
discussions with all law
enforcement on all levels
including this is the almogordo
police department as well as the
federals in the communities that
are indeed selling guns legally
and although abiding by the laws
apparently what what kind of
information would you want to
be.
Taking from those folks as well
madame chair representative
madame chairman's committee
represented block I think that
those are excellent points and
and director attention is
quickly to page six so by seven
online two talks about the
collaboration with the new
mexico law enforcement to assist
with education which is an end
game and I go to that point
because it tells us what we will
do once we get there and I think
your suggestion is outstanding
is that certification for law
enforcement license in the state
new mexico is universal it is
independent or respective of
size of agency type of agency
jurisdiction of agency and we
expect our license is not only
to be held to a high level
professionalism but we want to
give them the best possible
training and information so
coordination within their is
good additionally like your idea
of coordinating and
understanding the perspectives
of the point of sale persons at
gunstors as it relates to
extreme risk behavior I think
that is sensational and I can't
see any reason why those
groupings of folks law
enforcement and the community
involvement retail sales would
not be integral to that informal
decision thank you madame
chairman thank you
representative in and you know I
know the fell in my area and I
know that around the state and I
know if let's just say there's a
person that they think is off
that they don't want to sell
fire i'm too they're not gonna
sell that gun to that eye or
that good girl whoever it is so
many to represent it I guess it
would be good if you had like an
open like an on the online
website to have a form for fills
to send to you to say this
person under this name.
Seem kind of sketchy and I I
wasn't comfortable selling them
the firearm then that would help
to have some kind of
facilitation I don't know if
there's already a program
involved for that but if if
there is not I think it would be
very important to to also
include that manager
represent it so i'll continue
here you alluded to pay six i'm
now in section eight here and I
was not quite clear what this
meant regarding lines eight to
ten and it says gather and
disseminate data and information
regarding gun violence in new
mexico with a focus on public
health education and racial and
economic equity madame chier
representative can you please
just define racial and economic
equity and how will that data be
different than any other day
that we are collecting
currently.
Sure madam chair representative
at a at a high level
native americans alaskanatives
in new mexico die of gun gun
related does that and much much
higher rates and other
population groups and that would
seem to indicate a need for a
specific strategies and and and
focus that that are of that
community and tailored that are
you know intended to.
And you need to know the data to
know that that's there.
Thank you minimum to
representative so my concern
with that you mentioned native
american communities there
sovereign nations some adam to
representative how are we going
to collaborate with the tribal
governments to ensure that we
are not infringing upon their
sovereignty.
Now thanks madam chair
representative III think the
development of health actually
does a really good job of
working through a both informal
the informal and formal
consultation process working
with tribes nations and pollows
across the state to identify
specific programs that that are
that are really facilitating
what it is those of the nations
want to be able to use resources
for and how we can help them
achieve their aims manager
representative so is this is
this only relating to programs
to help these people or is it
also relating to data collection
because madame chairman
representative this is mainly
about data collection but I have
reservations huge reservations
about going on to sovereign
nations and asking for data.
And then how will that how would
we know the veracity of the data
since we are although the state
we we are not working directly
in that community so how do we
get the proper data and then how
do we ensure that it is an
indeed correct madam to
represent it manager
representative data sovereignty
is actually an issue that we pay
a close attention to at the
department of health
we work with with our travel
partners to identify how data is
collected how it's interpreted
how it's released on both the
sovereignty issue as well as the
small numbers issues come into
play in terms of how we how we
do that but we work to do that
in partnership with a tribes
nations and published across the
state to make sure that we're
doing that you know in a
government to government way
rather than a population sort of
away thinking man of chairman
representative and I appreciate
that we're reaching out to those
stakeholders have we had
discussions directly with the
twenty three nations tribes and
play blows in this state and do
we know how many of them are
prepared to work with your
office to ensure that we can
bring forward this data
collection and then have that
constant stream madame chairman
representative.
So so madam chair representative
I can't speak took
conversations related
specifically to this bill I
would say that we do an annual
data summit with tribes follows
the nations with astec with
inches and other entities at to
work on a variety of expected a
data summit data issues data
collection data use reporting
those are those kinds of things
and this would be the kind of a
topic that that we would deal
with in that kind of a setting.
Thank you madame chairman think
representative in this summit is
it mainly just for the tribes
nations and quibblers or is this
every stakeholder in this state
and I just want to make sure
that we have other all the
energies at the table when we're
making decisions about what data
were collecting and then being
sensitive to those populations
to ensure that the data that we
are looking to collect is indeed
relevant culturally to these
people madam to representative
so how are we squaring both of
those the states directives and
then the nation's drives in the
plablo sovereignty and their
culturally relevant data that
they choose to give you madam to
represent him
yeah matter to representative
you're kind of getting right at
the heart of of sort of the
challenges of doing statewide
policy and in a state with 23
drives nations and weblosing and
how you deal with sovereignty
issues and then how you deal
with the breath of stay holders
it's wildly inappropriate to
think of tribes as stakeholders
because they are in fact
sovereigns who have got a
government government
relationship with us and so
there are times in the data
summit is one word no it's not a
broader audience of other
stakeholders that's a forum
where we engage with with tribes
and travel serving entities
around around data issues and
you know I think that the
challenge as we come back to the
legislature is in reporting as
telling you you know what are
the dynamics what are the what
are the issues that may be
tribal specific what are the
issues that have to do with
various communities and popul.
I'll be listed for you some of
some of those differences
intentions because there are
some intentions and some of
those
thinking madame chairman and
thinking representative and
mister secretary and I would
just stress that the tribal
collaboration is something I
would want to stress with this
this new office specifically
because I think that's super
important especially for
requesting data we want to make
sure that these tribes nations
and playblows continue their
sovereignty they're not treated
as just another stakeholder and
they indeed give us only what is
culturally relevant to them so
madam to represent it I will
continue back to the formation
of this office so madame chair
representative can you just tell
me how many folks in this office
of I believe it's nine it's nine
people on the board can you tell
me how many of these folks would
be.
Legislative council
cause I kinda got last with that
amendment and i'm sure.
The.
Manager was in a very time of
the board that selection board
that said that said eliminated
by the amendment
manager represented thank you
yes I I guess it would be taken
away right I guess there
wouldn't be a board anymore
there would be no legislative
okay got it they see section six
talked about that we we struck
section okay thank you madame
chair think you represent it so
why why did we choose to make it
exclusively an executive office
and have no collaboration on a
board with the legislature
because I don't see anyone with
the legislature who was
appointed by the minority of the
majority now in contact with
this manager representative
think you managed to
representative so it's a
complicated answer I will be
ginnet for you and then hand off
to my experts who I think will
complete it for you when we
first brought this bill for
consideration during the
interest rate of the courts
corrections and justice
committee we were given some
very forceful feedback that we
did not want to create this type
of structure because it would
not
it would not be i've used to the
department of health to we have
to go through that type of
purcederal structure every time
they wanted to.
Do something with this office or
request an additional
appropriation or an additional
fte for this office and so
it that portion of it was
we decided to amend it out of
the build the time
the intern came and went the
session started we forgot about
the amendment we are mending it
now and i'm I think there is my
experience beat more as to why
we wanted to take out that
particular procedural yeah thank
you madame chair representative
I think
the department overall is
committed to new mexico becoming
the healthiest state and that's
a multifacility strategy there
needs us to be alter advance in
a lot of it has gone gotten
violence premature death is
certainly one of those what
operationally would I believe
the department of health needed
was not for this office to be
the kind of like the spaceship
that comes in and and and is
this thing that is completely
separate from all of that work
that we need to be able to
integrate that work into all the
other priorities that we need to
focus on this raises its profile
but doesn't sort of create it as
it's on separate entity and that
we try to integrate it into the
injury prevention violence
prevention work that we do and
all the other work that we do
else we try to become the
healthiest state of the country
thank you madame chairman and
think you represent of an
amsterdam we all agree with want
to be the most healthy state in
the country and so regarding
staffing with this new office I
see that you added an
appropriation of five hundred
thousand but I see the first
states it would cost seven
hundred and forty six thousand
manamentary representative so
madame to representative how
will we square that extra two
hundred and fifty is amount and
can that be absorbed by the
department in the current
budgetary ask.
And madam separate for I
represent the block yesterday
was a profit thousand dollar
appropriation that was added to
this bill to ensure that we
could give appropriate and
accurate funding for the office
to expand and be able to
complete its responsibilities
through the appropriations
process as the rolling stone
song goes you can't always get
what you want but sometimes you
get what you need and so we are
looking to that process to be
able to
recover some of that money and
i'll turn over to
director allen to let you know
how he might be able to do that
yeah thank you a minimum chair
representative we can certainly
productively use five hundred
thousand dollars I we could we
could have productively used
more we could use more than than
even what was the identified in
the if I are the offer was a
little bit of a speculative
exercise of sort of in a perfect
world what would it what would
it look like
a better way we can do we can
mix some stantial progress on
this word for that
appropriation.
And if I may add a chance madam
chair represent a block again
they've already been doing this
work there has this research has
been going on I believe of one
ft as is so it's it's the work
has been ongoing they've been
able to get it done with what
they have.
We're just looking to expand it
great.
All right thank you madame
chairman think you
representative so yeah I see
that in the fire and page two of
the affairs says
the second license paragraph at
the bottom DOH that's you mister
secretary estimate it costs
as follows five staff and
epidemiologist and four program
coordinators at one oh five a
year and one step manager at one
thirteen year and a yearly total
of five thirty five
a lot of fives and other
expenses for after space etc so
madame chair representative if
we get the five hundred
will we only be hiring less to
send an epidemiologist and like
to program coordinators as well
as the staff manager or how do
we envision this office being
put forward with just the five
hundred thousand dollars
appropriation
yeah thanks madame chair
representative honestly will
once we actually see what the
appropriation is will need to
calibrate and it would be some
mix of staff and probably some
contracted services as you
alluded to as you alluded to
earlier you know five hundred
thousand dollars probably if all
dedicated to staff and the
associated expenses with those
staff is probably something like
three and a half.
Totally spit all in that number
as we said but you know it would
be some kind of a calibration
along those lines and we figure
out for that what's the work
that we were doing who would we
need to do that
okay thank you manager think you
representative and so what's
currently need to be too.
For this office is it currently
in there for five hundred
thousand I I have not seen the
newest appropriations bill I
apologize but is that their
minimum turn manager ferrari
representative block no it is
not in the current version of
house bill to it thank you
madame turn representatives of
does this bill now go did you
just hear your does it go to
appropriations where does it go
cause if it's not in the budget
i'm sure preparations
i'm just wondering where it goes
next
madam chair representative block
you miss under you underestimate
me sir it is going to go to has
c I believe there's a lot of
time between a house bill to
going over to the senate and
coming back.
Thank you madame chair think
representative I will see
working magic
so continuing on here just a few
more questions I I see here the
on the fire page three on the
bottom I don't think this is
financial this is just what
you've given us analysis from
deaths and it says we're looking
for
identifying root causes and
manager representative that's
what I I totally agree you know
whenever I talk about gun guns
and
preventing violence you know
folks some folks say well you're
just trying to talk about only
behavioral health and your only
care about behavior health you
don't care about true cause of
guns killing individuals are
people using guns to kill
individuals because guns don't
just jump up tables and kill
people so manimature
representative how are we going
to get this kind of data with
behavioral health because I do
want to know a correlation
between behavior of issues and
violence how will we do that
through this new office i'm very
interested in this manager
representative.
Yeah thank you matter
representative I think I think
there would be a multifacility
approach i've mentioned a couple
of times the parallel to them
attract a mortality reviews
which are deep dive into
individual circumstances of
mothers and and babies within
the first year after birth are
dying and why did that happen
and and what is the
circumstances right now what we
know is kind of what shows up on
a death certificate with respect
to gun and the ideas to get
deeper than that and find out
what are the issues that that
led to that there are there are
you know other
other research that's being done
or other kinds of data that we
can try to pull into to look at
that and so part of what I would
expect the annual report to the
legislature over time to do is
to share with you what we have
learned from those other studies
elsewhere as well as our own as
well as our own review and and I
don't want to dial myself into
telling you for sure what we're
gonna be doing is mortality
reviews i'm just trying to use
that as an example of the kind
of a tool.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative and
mister secretary so I I know
that's hard data to get right
regarding behavioral health is
the department currently of
allowed to get that kind of data
regarding individuals involved
in these violent scenarios cause
another's hypolise and
everything like that would have
been merely voluntary is what
i'm kind of wondering madame to
represent it he had represent
medium share representative it's
it's a little bit speculative
without looking at specific data
but the department of held is a
hip covered entity which gives
it
some some some latitude in
ability to said gather and or
share with gather from others
data again it gets back to the
whole inner play of of
individually identified data
versus versus not in some of
those kinds of things so so I I
much as we do again in the
terminal motality reviews I
think that we we would have
probably better access than most
entities to provide trader get
to some of those root causes but
again this is a little bit
speculative without really kind
of having something live in
front of us to to to look out
thinking manager thinking
representative and mister
secretary that's good that you
all are covered under hypothese
and things so that's good that
you can collect that regarding
behaviour or health I know in
this state we currently spend
one billion dollars a printer
the olympics the analysis from
july that was presented at the
lead just meeting so does any of
that one billion dollars that we
spend annually on behavior a
health deal with this kind of
crisis that you are choosing to
fix with this bill madame chair
representative.
The.
I'm adam term but representative
out there and quickly and then
i'll different expert but this
is that is precisely the point
of the spell
in order to identify the sources
of violence and and sometimes
you know the year that this
office was first first came into
being and we were talking a lot
about violence intervention
violence prevention you know I
think I think I really want to
continue to talk about it within
that sphere and that adding the
word gun plus violence this
should not give it a
anticipative political bent
because we are really all here
interested in figuring out what
the source corresports of the
violence is and what we can do
to prevent it so i'm about to.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative and III mean
I guess it's a good noble cause
right we want to know who's
killing who and who's but whose
violent wear and I I especially
want to know about the list it
market of guns and and where
individuals are getting them I
know a lot of them are getting
stolen and robberies lot of them
are getting traffic across the
border many of them being fully
automatic rifles that are
already banned in state law so
madam to represent I do want to
make sure that we are also
collecting that kind of data
because I don't know how we
would but I want to know.
You know I guess after the fact
what killed hoo and how and
where to come from and was it
legal wasn't legal you know
madam to represent if so I would
just are we going to add that
kind of thing in this report
illicit market and how that
affects violence in the state.
Manager representative I I think
like you I want to know as much
as I possibly can to be able to
implement if we have the tools
or recommend to you if we don't
what can what can
affectively address gone
violence as I cause of premature
death in new mexico
I can imagine that you and I
could sit down and come up with
a list that would be pretty long
of the different data points
that we would like to get and
will probably with this kind of
an appropriation will need to
prioritise and figure out what
what data are we going to be
able to to gather what's
available there that we can that
we can analyze without having to
do more collection those kinds
of things so I don't want to
commit to any particular data
point but but I think I I
completely share your desire
that we want to know everything
that we need to know to be able
to make wise policy choices
thank you madame chairman
thinking representative and then
my last question I know you were
waiting for this one is I know
in the past we have appropriate
money and speed too for the gun
but or office of gun violence
prevention I believe it was FY
twenty three and I believe
twenty two maybe I don't I don't
recall but where did those funds
go to digits automatically
revert back to the general fund
because we don't have an officer
where did those funds that were
previously appropriate go madame
chairman representative yeah
madame chair representative I
believe those were based
increases and so we have a stab.
What this really does call out
the need to do this work in
statute and then provide
additional additional funds
this bill provides for reversion
of any on
any unexpended balance remaining
at the en.
So that money managed chair if I
may represent walk that money
went exactly where it was
supposed to create this office
that we're here to talk to you
about expanding today
all right thank you madame
chairman thank you
representative so the
appropriation
shall revert to the general fund
okay got it just wondered make
sure we're on the same page
there thank you madame chairman
thank you experts perceive.
Representative floor thank you
madame chair
thank you ma'am turn expert so I
had some questions among the
department of health
website right now and they have
a ton of data already about
suicide and.
Um fire arms.
Why didn't we just
take the department a health and
expand that instead of making
this whole new different
department.
Manager representative lord I
mean essentially we are enabling
the department to do more of
what it's been doing and this is
just a small part of it that
would be dedicated to explicitly
that cause i'll defer to my
expert if he wants to add
anything
all I would say is it and this
is the issue that we were
talking about are earlier in
terms of the changes to the bill
of wanting to do I I think a
little bit more along the lines
of what you're talking about not
having it be this separate
special planning in the agency
but have it integrated into the
agency but with a statutory
profile that that basically is
is your indication that this is
a critical.
I just want to make sure they're
just looking at any types of
violence.
With a firearm with that include
cartels.
Gangs.
Um fell into the gun would they
also include lawn forcement
shootings.
At madame chair I representative
lord yes
any of that type of guy of that
violence yes.
The reason I am asking is
because I I didn't know this.
Until right now I hate looking
at suicide stuff it's very
depressive I didn't know the
leading cause of suicide for
native americans was
supplication.
The.
I did not know that so
unfortunately that will not
cover the umbrella of.
There suicides it's only going
to cover for fire arm so it's
not going to cover the majority
of native americans.
That are killing themselves by
subcation.
Memchair.
In this bill that you have
drafted here I guess when i'm
trying to figure out and thank
you represent block for taking
all of my questions I was
literally crossing the math.
So when we say.
We're looking at and office of
gun violence
prevention
let's say on page two
twenty one.
What I need to know more than
anything else in this if
somebody came and applied for
the job.
And they were from the nuray or
any other program organization
pro second amendment.
What are the chances of them
game hired versus somebody that
is very anti gun like mom's
demand action because it seems
to me that this is looking more
for someone who is very anti
second amendment.
Madame to representative lord I
very much hope that would not be
the case I hope that we're
creating an office that is data
driven and science based and
again we're not trying to create
a.
Solution without a problem we're
trying to create a tool or to
help sharpen it to all that will
help the state be better and get
from the bottom of the lists
towards the top of them and so I
would never want it I would
never want to.
And.
And further
those types of politics would
play within the creation of
something like this I don't
think that there's anything in
the language in the bill as I
read it that would again assume.
Something like that and it's
certainly not
my directive nor might choice to
want to bring a bill that would
have an effect like that I think
that if someone from the n r a
could meet the experience of
requirements of the raw then I
hope that perhaps they would be
considered and hired think you
mention and rips and I too
believe you when they said I
don't believe you be lying not
one bed I just unfortunately
been under
the ruling of the governor I
could see that happening and
that that is the biggest thing
that worries me about this
because you know I took enough
statistics and college and they
know you can throw out layers
out you can manipulate date and
anything you want to be that's
why we have so many I mean if
you look at the data on what and
a represents versus monday band
acts very different is very
skewed so the problem that I see
with this is that this is very
much under her control and you
may be looking at from a data
sign i'm sure you are but
unfortunate think under the
control of a governor and they
can go either way would pick
somebody that is more going to
skew the data into we want to
look at this
from the eyes of guns are bad
and we're going to slant all the
data that way so that's the
biggest thing that scarce me
about this overall t.
So when we're looking at this
and and
I was called representative lord
you know represent lord lord.
So.
Another kind of fear have as
what happens.
If we pull this data.
I get really scared about
profiling
let's say because we're going to
go in on page six and we're
going to collaborate with law
and force what happens.
It worries me.
If let's see the data shows
that.
Hispanic man i'm sorry i'm not
picking on ebay and just trying
to pick someone to color are
more likely to harm others with
a firearm.
That could lead to profiling if
we're teaching our lock because
it's it's a data point rate but
unless we have a bigger picture
like if I look at this and I say
ok why
why are certain people killing
themselves as a certain age
we're not going to get the
bigger picture so I worry if
we're training
enforcement then in that
particular age they're more
likely to harm somebody I worry
about profiling also worry about
our fells also getting that date
if they get the data that hey
most hispanic men age twenty one
to twenty four using this farm
to harm other now I I wear about
profiling so
the problem is if I save you
more people die in the summer
after eating ice cream it's not
because ice cream is the causes
more people eve are sorry by
drowning more people eat ice
cream and then go to the beach
go through there's no
correlation.
I'm very much concerned that if
we have somebody.
Who looks at this with a slanted
our instant appeared data
because you know as well as I do
when you come up you have
something you're looking at you
come up with this thing in her
head when you're doing science
now to develop data that says it
is more likely than not that my.
Hypothesis and not not true so I
worry about somebody coming in
and seen I hate guns I hate
farms they're the person that
got hired everything's with the
slanted eye
that's one of my biggest biggest
problems with this is that if
the date is not collected
correctly and people are not
familiar with data collection
and how to read.
Um.
Journal type articles science
base articles then you could run
with whatever you want it on
this.
Mentioned resident will this
data.
Be presented as raw data how are
we going to put this out to the
public like the doh has on their
website
thank you madame chair
representative lord I think
you've just described in a
nutshell that the challenges
that you're faced with with
appropriate collection and
analysis and presentation of
data I think those challenges
are not a reason not to collect
it and write there there are
reason to think about how you
collect it and how you report it
and that in those kinds of
issues I i'm i'm certainly
biased but I think if you're
going to have any agency
gathering that data a department
of health and it but the
meologists and people whose
academic background is in how to
do that data collection is the
place that you would want at
that you would want to be able
to do it and and the ideas to go
where the data data takes us you
know it's interesting in the
last few weeks we've been
talking about waste water
testing for substances and
schools and it's been it's been
really interesting that you show
the data to groups of people on
you say turns out there's a lot
of cocaine in schools and
and and everyone's reaction I
can't be
you know and it is it's sort of
a reluctance to see the data and
so all that's interesting where
does that take us and I don't
want to go down that that pass
and and get a side track but but
I think that's the that's our
job is to is to is to look at
the data identify and collect
the data in a way that's
defensible and appropriate
identifies those kinds of bias
issues weeds those out and be
able to present a policy makers
good solid data that's useful to
you all to to make policy
decisions.
And thank you madam chair and
represent expert nice you guys
coming from alteristic I look at
everything very cynical from
being in politics i'm very very
cynical and who knew kids could
afford cocaine.
Mentioned representative
I did have another question and
I think that's about it case as
i'm seeing I worry
I worry about the data being
slanted I worry about not
looking at outliars I worry
about that there won't be
continuity from one governor to
the next
mostly what I were about and
with all honesty and this is my
biggest saying I just really
worry about.
Putting someone in that position
that is very anti second
amendment and all we end up with
this is data that's going out I
also worry about data getting
extrapolated to give two people
for the public.
That might cause profiling I
don't want that either that's a
concern for me i'm oh I did have
a question thank you I was
trying to rent through other
questions were quick I think the
last when I have is mentioned
represent so one we're looking
at the data let's say we look
are you guys going to go through
every police report or how are
you going to get the data on
what happened.
And then I guess.
Transferred how you would.
You can't get the behavioral
health data because a hipper so
you're just gonna get the law
enforcement report is that
correct.
The mandatory representative is
going to go back to the college
way ahead with a representative
of block on sort of prioritising
what data we can get within the
huge universe of things we'd
like to know with what we can
actually gather in analyzing
process and report on within
that within the resources as we
discussed earlier as they have a
cover identity we do have access
to data that might otherwise be
be difficult to access
it and so you know I can imagine
things like like
police reports on tuning says it
has a rough data source I can
also imagine that being a really
messy data source in terms of
being collected and a variety of
formats with a variety of
terminology in something that
you find yourself kind of
thinking why i'd like to know
that but it's going to take me
eat people in fifteen years to
dig through all that to know
anything and maybe they're some
over here that's more that
that's also valuable in the lot
easier to get to in and again
there's a disall a little bit
speculative because you know we
don't know what we're you know
you don't know when to tell you
look but I see us making those
kinds of decisions as we try to
implement this okay thank you
ma'am chair represents
you and I could pay talk forever
about statistics and collection
of data and what that means and
what to let out to the public
but not to let out to the public
the delicacy sorry maybe you
know it is a delicate subject
you know we don't want to put
all the details of that stuff
but of course it would be
attached to you know nine oh two
one two two two this is the
person that without the name but
I again it goes back to I don't
I don't want to profound anybody
and again it goes still goes
back I see you guys are
alteristic you're trying to look
from the science I but I am too
scared that being under the
governor her putting in somebody
in.
Anti second amendment and then
all of the data get skewed.
To just one way of looking at
things and stuff you know in
science we want to look at
things right on the level plane
ground I mean you have to admit
even when you're wrong or
sometimes when you do a study
comes out you like I did not
expect cocaine and water that is
ouch that's true science right
there that is true rod data but
rod data can be put into
discussions at
look completely different than
what the rod data actually says
Senator marrow.
Think you matter I just want to
think the sponsor for bringing
this forth I know it's been an
ongoing
interest from our community to
have that representati.
And that when we speak to
the many issues that are in the
stories that we hear as
legislators that it as were
aggregating these horrific
situations when it comes to gun
violence that we're looking at
at holistically and continuing
to iterate on the.
And invading it into new mexico
so.
I just want to commend the
sponsors and the the various
supporters of this over the
years who have had you know
sometimes support sometimes not
in the fact that this is all
coming together now i'm is a
really great initiative serv.
Representative and secretary
allen I also agree that I think
this is going to be helpful um
to bring together
be able to work with the
different agencies that you know
might also have the same you
know.
Were you gonna address different
problems with this person not be
cylode would they be kind of
like working within your
department that you that we and
the twenty two legislature
find it three hundred thousand
for
a department.
I guess several department
positions that you've talked
about
and would they help bring cotton
newidy with the other agency.
Madam chair I think one of my
biggest jobs at the agency is to
work on breaking down silos it's
part of why we've identified
this north star becoming the
healthiest state so that
everybody can figure out that
whatever they're doing their
aiming at this place that we're
trying to get more each other
climb up that mountain in
different ways and from
different angles but they would
also have to pay attention to
and help the other people who
are claming up the mountain from
the direction they're climbing
up and so I would think that
this work would be firmly
anchored in our
injury and behavioral health
epidemiology bureau that it
would work with you know the
issues around around
substantives and government gun
violence and asus prevention for
kids these are all sort of
different faces of the same jam
is not exactly the right word
but but you know the different
faces of the same problem that
we're trying to solve and that's
what we would work to do is to
integrate that
creek thank you very much i'm
representative thomson.
Move it to pass on house bill
one forty four as amended madame
chair make an alternate motion
for a table of he won forty four
is amended okay we'll take a row
call vote on the tabling motion
that supers.
Um please ch.
Representative
yes the table representative
lord yesterday table
representative
nota table representative
thompson no matimized your rubia
madame chair ferry notity.
He.
The tabling motion
feels on a vote of ford two
we'll go back to the motion for
a due pass was it second
thank you will take roll call
though.
Representative no one I like to
quickly explain my
representative lord no
representative remarried yes
representative thompson yes
madam vice rubio madame chair
for yes so on a boat of four in
favour to oppose you have a do
pass on house bill one forty
four.
Thank you very much madame chair
members of the committee really
enjoyed the conversation tonight
thank you i'm sorry we forgot
representative block would like
to explain this
thank you manager quickly I make
my huge concerns mainly were
based on what representative
lord was talking about the
individual who will be indeed
running this office i'm just I I
just don't have confidence that
that person can be unbiased
secondly it's not going to be
contuitors because the next
governor can just refuse to
collect the same data that
you're collecting now with the
current bill and then also the
lack of tribal collaboration I
just definitely want to protect
the sovereignty of those nations
thank you manager
thank you next we'll go to house
bill one ninety five the housing
funded changes.
Representative serato and dixon.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Can go ahead whenever you're
ready think you manage her
representative in destroy this
is my cosponsor representative
and this.
Is this better.
This better
high think you better chair i'm
representative lindest rado this
is vice chair I dixon and we are
expert market a russell who is
the ceo of the new mexico
finance authority and so what I
each be one ninety five does
essentially is it expensive bill
we passed a couple years ago
called the opportunity
enterprise the fund are act a
under the new mexico finance
authority to also fund housing
opportunities and other fixes as
well in particular it will fill
the void for those who don't
already qualify for affordable
housing but still need housing
that's affordable and that's
what this so essentially would
add people to the opportunity
enterprise review board that our
experts and housing it would
also amend it so that they could
have a housing fund as well and
then some of those small fixes
that I was mentioning it would
clarify the definition of an
enterprise development project
to emphasize non owner occupied
projects and promote consistency
with other statewide economic
development projects and also
clarify the duties of the
opportunities opportunity
enterprise review board as well.
So just for some context the
opportunities enterprise act
passed back in twenty twenty two
if this was co sponsored by
myself and reptixing and it was
increased initially to increase
the inventory of commercial
facilities across new mexico by
rehabing facilities are
essentially offering that
funding that would be needed to
buy or build what meeting
and so you know I I was really
looking on this I I worked when
I was much
curry county and clovis and I
thought of the downtown part of
that area and how it really
needed an opportunity to kind of
grow and and and and be rebuilt
and attract the the jobs of the
businesses that they need it and
we saw it as an opportunity to
help businesses grow and
rehabilitate some of our our
communities in our local
economies so it just passed back
in twenty twenty two and the
first round of funding for the
opportunity enterprise find out
was earlier this past year and
it was faster to see just some
of the interesting status they
had thirty three applicants
forty two of which are from what
they would designate rural or
a frontier areas of the state on
peak folks from eddie county or
terror grants curry all included
on the mix of different
businesses really very there was
breweries restaurants
entrepreneurship centers i'm
just looking some solar
manufacturing infrastructure to
lots of different opportunities
in the end they decided that
they'll be able to fund about
seven of the projects they're
still going through the process
of ensuring that they can accept
the funds in there ready for it
but at the end of the day all of
these companies that will end up
accepting this money will expand
and we'll be able to hire more
folks locally
so what this bill will do will
allow the intimate fee to use
that same mechanism to address
the need for housing that we
have in the state arm and often
especially in the development
when they're waiting to sell
homes and waiting to make that
do that how that turnover that
early capitals necessary and
this would essentially fill in
that hall and so I think a lot
of folks here can think of
places in their district were
hey this is a really neat to
all.
And hope that our folks are
applying for this you know for
me personally we have in my
district area called cassessel
on it it was a half developed
area in my district i'm in their
still trunk that needs to be
developed and should I local
municipality because local
innocent penalties nonprofits
and private companies can also
why should they decide to apply
you know they could use that to
again attract a developer to for
that early investment filling so
that infrastructure for the
roads and the sewer connections
that maybe needed and really be
able to to offer that early help
so again we know that we need
housing and and one thing I I
left off I should be clear it's
very clear about work for
housing as well we know in order
to get the work for somebody's
we need we need housing in their
different parts of that solution
we fill this absolutely is is
targeting the housing that's
affordable category i'm gonna
hand it over to my coast or
reptics and on this as well.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee and
representatives rato I just
wanted to add a little bit about
the role that this fund six to
fill in the housing.
Continue this is not a
replacement or a change for how
we fund affordable housing and
how the mortgage finance
authority works and support
housing development in this
state this fund is complimentary
and can work in coordination
with mfa
the housing development fund
will provide access to
financing for housing
development as representatives
rator mentioned it is the
infrastructure component and by
helping with this we can help
increase the production of
housing which means there is
more affordable housing more
housing for people to move into
housing ownership all of those
factors that are part of the
larger housing shortage that we
face in new mexico.
Thank you manager on my expert
market russell can add some as
well.
Think you met him to her members
of the committee I just wanted
to mention that the new mexico
finance authority.
Both administers the opportunity
enterprise review board which is
the board that you've empowered
to say like these projects and
then we're awful also
responsible for a making the
loans collecting payments
overseeing the project
construction the primary changes
that you see before you today
came as a result of
conversations from the
opportunity
enterprise review board the
initially back into two years
ago when this law was being
constructed and the policy
makers were putting their heads
together about what would be a
good idea housing was an
original component of that law
and it was a based on some of
our recommendations that it got
stripped out now that because it
was just too big a lot of to
take on at one time now that we
have implemented in the
established all the rules and
policies for the commercial side
I think the policy makers the
board members felt it was a good
idea to start putting the
housing back into that so they
asked the finance authority to
put together our ideas they
supported these ideas with an
endorse and endorsement of our
concepts at their january
meeting and that's predominantly
what's it's before you today as
well as some additions from the
sponsors themselves so just
wanted to make that those
additional comments and i'm
happy to answer any questions.
Think you madam chair and I just
also want to mention we have
daniel we're with here who is
the governor's senior housing
policy advisor to also assist
with any questions should that
that we hear in that direction
but with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you we'll go to the
audiences there are any one in
opposition.
Is there anyone.
Oh okay
then we will go to the audience
and is there anyone in support
of this bill okay you can just
stand up from where you are will
started.
Sure
executive officer
mexico
and i'm sorry I just want to
remind everyone if you could for
just one minute thank you
enthusiastic support our local
association
association
we have builders
work for housing for this
missing
sometimes you can't pay for that
road or that sure that water and
these are projects it would not
traditionally qualify for a low
income housing information mixed
use going out as market rate
everything in between
strong support is built I think
sponsors tracking hard work
well over a year
support unlocked a new
opportunity for new mexico
desperately.
The.
Sure my name is dan weeps
we're connected for the
coalition of clar.
We're very appreciated.
And the governor's office and
working.
A housing problem.
Yeah.
My name is laura
on the governor's housing
investment plan for a year
and I think we're all here this
evening because we understand
one factor
president of housing crisis in
the state or eighty five percent
of the residents can not work
home house bill one nine five
health system dress the housing
production in our state.
So the gap
is critical to both builders
developers
because they call me access to
lower costs council
all of our residents thank you
thank you anywhere near son is
so.
Uh.
Man share members of the
committee thank you very much
thank you for the sponsors my
name is joe far
I am a commercial realtor by day
commercial state instructors
spent the last twenty years
travel the country worked in
forty six markets and I can tell
you that
this market is particularly
challenged because of the
demographics
housing is an issue across an
issue.
Being able to develop housing
the support for people is the
challenge everywhere but because
of our demographics in the
states particularly.
I should also
provide a disclaimer that i'm
also the chair of the b
i'm instruction support this.
Thank you.
What's the acronym you just
mentioned
you've worked the board that is
going to show us
the
next on the side anyone else who
would like to speak in support
okay will go to the side
yesterday.
The.
Many my name is david I am the
director of government affairs
and bobby new mexico association
of real tour representative
eight thousand mexico military
across the street living in
doing business and every
legislative district we stand
for a possible one ninety five
and think the sponsors for
introducing this piece of
legislation as you all know how
things availability and
affordability for an issue in
the state and across the nation
we appreciate the efforts and
actions in hospital when ninety
five that will work to help
address these issues in new
mexico.
We know that no one idea were
bill will completely solve the
issues and leave you this as a
step in the.
Thank you
go to the zoom.
You have one minute please go
ahead.
Hello canary yes winter go
ahead.
Thank you man chairman members
of the committee I stand to
speak it or this bill but would
like to qualitation to a couple
of matters that perhaps can be
addressed in committee or at a
later point
I am part of a group of non
profits and we were not add as
involved in the housing housing
investment council over the last
year as we would have liked to
be in and I think in part of
that we would have likely said
that.
We support and we know that
housing needs to be built across
the saturday
we do however I do however want
to point out that and and this
is not just a new mexico but
nationally.
It is the extremely low income
as had defined by hudd that are
in the most need of housing and
that are the pipeline to our
homelessness and we saw the
second fastest rate
at the growth of policies and
the nation last year so i'm not
sure if there's a way to
you know sort of balance that
thank you can you closing that.
Yes so i'd like to make sure
that the the funding that goes
through nfa is sort of a balance
with this sunday or maybe even
perhaps more which is not what
is currently in h
k next.
Even email insurance committee
members i'm doing all with the
debate change commerce and I am
pleased to be here today or the
house bill one ninety five and
one thing
because we are all to aware of
the housing shortage in new
mathematical especially bad for
affordable house this bill is
all about partnering with the
private detector to create a
standard affordable and work for
housing it is about providing a
mechanism to make it up to forty
years to development apartment
it'd be some of the oversight
board
the executive director of msa
into metorial twenty with the
disperiod and housing building
and development and it expands
that board of powers training
evaluating partners and projects
for the suitability for
assistance there's plenty of
oversight built in and that's
why we like the remain
opportunity enterprise housing
development review for is going
to report to the governor of the
legislature that ls message over
the revenue stabilization
policy committee and even more
with a detail that includes the
number of affordable and work
for development in a house
recorded we need more housing we
encourage partnership with the
private sector thank you.
Jack malark
you have one minute.
Good evening chair committee
members thank you
for here to support this bill
this was a governor's initiative
to promote housing home
ownership and that's always a
great thing we applied there
several people have talked about
all kinds of housing needed
there that absolutely true.
The.
One of the things we like about
this bill listed has some ways
to leverage local government and
local government is where the
vast majority of the problems
that get in the way of producing
housing come from we hope that
left and
success with it and would say
that the this bill is too
limiting and if you're really
expecting to do the thousands of
additional units we need a new
mexico that has been very well
documented things like where it
says affordable housing
infrastructure projects need to
support low and modern income
residents it's going to be very
difficult to put in big
infrastructure to a new
subdivision that only deals with
law and modern income I would
not urge you to drill down and
the problems is the builders
producing low and modern income
housing because it's minimal in
i'm I fear this is just
thank you
okay I think that's everyone
is there anything else you like.
Thank you madame
okay we'll go to the committee
representative of romero
thinking out of chair thanks for
bringing this forward i'm so
interested I said i'm animating
the interam
and so just thinking about how
we brought in this is really
critical I mean I just have a
few questions both been brought
up before committee and also
just how the budget might work
so I just want to clarify for
the audience to that when we're
talking about work force
development housing being added
to this fund we're looking at
below market housing and why is
that important
think you benefit think you
representative i'll be brief and
if market would like the stress
would like to add to this and
happy letter so the objective
here is to really look
the group of individuals who
need housing that's affordable
that don't necessarily qualify
for it affordable housing and so
when we're looking at work for
us needs especially I look at
that and a favorite particular
people are traveling far for dot
jobs that are you should be
local these officers teachers
etc so we want to make sure that
what this fund dies and is
focused on below market is
helping to create that.
So I mean just to clarify for
our constituency we have a
number of people who have well
paying jobs but they can't
afford to live anywhere
and that's really the critical
problem is that when we look at
you know below market is just
truly.
The fact that we're not able to
meet the demands right now and
we need to do both found and as
I see
special advisor on housing in
the audience the number forty
thousand units has hit me super
hard that we're so far behind
right now that that hits every
level of income and and whether
you're well resourced or not you
still can't find a an affordable
home.
So I just wanted to to cover
with that so my next question is
about the fact that these funds
Appropriation what are we
looking at in bringing into that
fund and and then two
my concern that i've heard from
from folks is that when we look
at it coming out with the
opportunity to build commercial
buildings how are we going to
maintain who's getting why and
that they are getting it at the
levels that were requiring and
are we prioritising housing over
perhaps commercial buildings
just i'm just wondering how
that's going to be evaluated
thank you madame chair think
representative i'm so glad you
asked this question because I
should have made this clear so
these are actually two separate
funds that housing will be one
and then the the rest of the
opportunity enterprise efforts
for ex.
If you look on the physical
impact report it's explains that
there's we do a hundred million
dollars for creation for the
commercial enterprise fund and
seventy million for the housing
development projects.
President seventy five minutes
august for those and so you just
want to mention that briefly and
also just to be clear on these
are self supporting a quasi
governmental entities that are
self sufficient so I would not
anticipate us coming back again
and again asking to re.
Madam chair don't have much to
add other than to say that it
was important to the opportunity
to review board that the policy
makers the appropriators make
the decision about how much to
put into commercial facilities
versus housing because they're
both your tremendous needs out
there and it's very difficult
for board to be put in that
position so once you've made the
decision about how much money if
any to go and into either of
these funds then they'll work to
prioritise the projects
accordingly thinking out of
chair I really appreciate the
the vision in the fact that
we'll be able to come back to
that drawing board and also the
fact that animal phase getting
involved in housing in the sense
that we are at the need is so
great.
Were quickly to try to figure
this out
that said you know our community
we repeatedly have tried
numerous iterations of how to
support folks with their housing
you know in in general it's the
greatest social program that we
have people can stay in place
they know what they're doing
every day they can work in our
communities and I know now and
the city of santa fe how.
A number of problems
so I really appreciate what
you're doing and urge this this
committee.
Representative
thank you manager thank you
representatives and marketer
good to see you again I too said
on the mfa oversight committee
it's a it's one of the fun
committees I love it it's
awesome we went to senator
ethernet we look really learned
a lot so manimated
representative might mind you
know my my number one concern as
I brought this up in the interim
and it's rurals vs urban and so.
Madam to represent it we talked
about certain other funds that
currently go through the m f a
the have requirements for
certain things with.
Regard to population but.
In previous funds all of the
funding went to larger counties
such as sand of all bernilio
donia anna and santa fe so
madame chair of representatives
I just wanted to make sure that
this would be applied equitably
to both rural and urban new
mexicans can you point to me in
the bill where it states those
things if it is in here madam
chair representatives.
Madam chair representative block
so the the doesn't state
specifically in the bill that
there is a requirement for
percentage in rural versus urban
areas but the rules established
by the opportunity review board
do require that we not put more
than twenty five percent of the
funding in any particular county
or project and so we have there
is the possibility that they
could be in the for urban
counties but the very low
likelihood that that would
happen because the rules give
more points to projects in rural
areas so as their priorities
they get fifteen points out of a
hundred if they're in a frontier
community ten points at their
own rule community so they start
a little bit ahead of the urban
communities and that's the way
in which the the board has tried
to balance that playing field so
we don't see any likelihood that
that would occur
as a result of some of the
prioritization policies and
rules that the borders put in
place.
Thank you did you have anything
to add that representatives are
thinking about i'm sure think
you representative I just one
thing that I wanted to mention
that of looking at how that as
the fund is currently applied of
the thirty three different
projects that were that that
applied for this funding forty
two percent of them were from
either rural or front to your
counties and so the county is
including
curry eddy county and grant
lincoln mckinley a terror real
reba san miguel I think the
biggest ones and house as well.
Okay think a manager think you
represented so this this immense
the current
opportunity opportunity
enterprise revolving fund is
that my understanding manager
representatives
manager there
aren't me there are two
amendments one is to make some
clarifications to the
opportunity enterprise fund and
the other is to create the
housing development fund so
there are two different sections
of most of the amendments deal
with the creation of the housing
fund however okay thank you
madame chair and thank you
representatives and marquita so
this would.
This would still need to apply
to the current rules under the
animal faye that say twenty five
percent.
Is that my understanding or will
there need to be new rules
promulgated to ensure that we
have that equitable
distribution madam chair for the
opportunity enterprise it would
apply so any new money or any
changes here the current rules
would still be in place the the
housing development fund would
need its own set of rules and
there's some direction in law in
this bill that tell the board
what to consider in making those
rules but there would be a
separate set of rules for the
housing development fund.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative because i'm just
looking at the current oerb
recommendations from this year
and I know this because i'm on
the mfa oversight and the
majority of those actually all
of them
from the current oeb that was at
the september twenty seventh
meeting they all went to either
burning donny and a santa fe or
sand of all.
And there were eight projects in
notero county that did not make
it so many too representative is
there anything in this
legislation that will help rural
counties to get their
applications done correctly so
that they can compete with the
four largest counties manager
representatives and marquita.
The.
Madame representative I would
note that when the board first
announced the application round
back in the fall they did so
right after they had actually
finished their their rules in
their policies it took a long
time to develop those rules
we're going out for public
policy extensive public comments
were made in the board took all
of that into consideration as
soon as that was finalized we
were right into an application
round because there had been
pent up demand and we wanted to
make certain we had tested the
policies in the rules so it was
a limited application round only
twenty five percent of the
funding was made available in
that first round are purpose was
to see whether or not the pub
the policies worked the way we
hoped they would and if there
were any changes that we needed
to make an infact that's what we
we came back and the policies
were amended to add more points
for rural projects and frontier
projects so the policies were
amended after that first round
we anticipate you'd see it a
different ranking with the same
applications with those new
policies in place so I wanted to
mention that the second part i'd
mention is that we've spent more
time with outreach in the
communities when talking to the
chambers of commerce we didn't
have that time the that
opportunity the first time
around so outreach was another
significant part of making sure
projects were embedded shaped to
apply for that and so that that
would be the second piece which
is but the same policies don't
apply the second round as they
did the first and we actually
had a lot more time to do a
public promotion out reach
client support then we then we
did the first time around.
Thank you madame chair thank you
marketer and so I just want to
know what what was changed right
I want to know from the original
thirty three I believe is thirty
three million that was
expenditure for them first
projects what was changed in the
scoring so that rural counties
did have that leg up they
believe you said ten points for
front tier five four.
Rural can you just tell me how
did those get tweaked from the
initial process to current thank
you madame chair represented a
block in the initial set of
prioritization there was ten
points given if you were in a
frontier community in the
revised criteria it was fifteen
so it went up by five similarly
if you were in a rural community
you got a five points the first
time around and now that under
the current criteria it's ten
points and what we did was
immend the other portion of the
rules so that we stayed within
our hundred points
policies to say there was a a
five point given for what seemed
to be more critical projects
this but for and that was a very
difficult to apply fairly so
they reduced that part entirely
so those were the two major
changes there were some also
some modest tweaks to the wind
which the language is written so
that it's a quite clear it's
transparent to our potential
applicants how they'll be
treated but that the actual chip
wins didn't change at all.
The humanitar think
representative and market is so
if we change the points and the
initial.
Packets that were put in for
this thirty three million madame
to representatives if we change
the points to current would that
make any of the rural counties
be eligible to be one of the top
seven projects that were listed
here madame to representative
a matter of chair representative
but I believe the answer is yes
and I want to get back to you
with that specific answer
because it was also the way in
which the reviewers assigned
points from the other categories
and that but foretest but my
understanding is our staff went
back and looked at it again and
they did fair are better the
second round and there were
viable projects in rural
communities in that second round
okay thank you manager thank you
market and representatives
that's good to hear.
I I would want to see that data
though I think that's important
but I know you will get that to
me because you're you're great
and we really proceed to so next
question i'm i'm gonna be real
quick here
does this change the
equalifications for getting
these loans to make it easier
for someone who may be a builder
for example who can't get credit
currently madam chair
representative I just my concern
here is I don't want to state to
be liable for a debt that cannot
be paid manager representative
madame chair representative the
lock does not change that in any
way so the underwriting criteria
used by the finance authority is
not impacted at all by the
changes in today's bill so those
are those policies and rules are
adopted separately.
Madam chair and representative
if I if I can have a little bit
more as well
again the the the pay back rate
for animal fee is fairly high I
don't know if market if you'd
like to speak to that little bit
as well
get away from
madame chair we have a very
strong record in long repayments
from loans that we have under
written so once that have gone
through our credit department we
have a separate credit
department that looks at these
different than our lender so we
have two different sets of eyes
looking at our any potential
proposal it takes a little
longer sometimes but we do get a
good result as a as a as a
matter of facts
okay thank you madame chairman
representative in marcuda so do
we know how many have defaulted
on this current oer b.
B I believe that's the acronym
how many of defaulted currently
of the other ones that have
applied and been given funds
manager thank you medical matter
thank you representative no
funds have been distributed yet
and so therefore not have been
have faulted cut rate
recommender yeah I would like to
see more date on that and yeah I
I just have some concerns but
i'll stop there I appreciate it
thank you representatives market
think you representative
representative lord thinking ram
chair thank you representatives
of experts okay if I understood
correctly on the when we were
talking about different counties
I didn't hear torrent county as
one of the priorities in there
you listen up a bunch but not
towards get the recent rate I
was a poor torrent county gets
left out of everything.
Think you madam chair thank you
representative so what I was
listing where the thirty three
projects that had applied for
the most for the only rounds of
opportunity enterprise funding
and so I don't believe
there was one from torrents
county however I believe the
hope would be that the
outrageous been done by any fa
would help alleviate that some
thank you matter chairman so how
does can you explain to me how
that outreach.
Things could be applying for
who normally would do that
or outreach on that
manager the current law requires
that the economic development
department work with the board
to do outreach not the
opportunity enterprise review
because the animal face staff
that board we're taking a a
strong role in that so
particular we've had two
different webin ours with real
with real estate folks with
developers we've done outreach
through chambers of commerce
we've been talking we've done he
blasts and then they economic
development department has
similarly been doing some
outreach so we've been looking
at it two different ways finance
authority likes to work through
the middle man and the economic
development department has a
much more boots on the ground in
their communities so we're we're
working two different ways to
get to that pant up demand
and represent think because I
don't know what it is about
torrent and I think it's just
because it's so close to alba
curfew gets left out like
transportation for anybody to
get in for medical care it's and
it's a and it's an area that
definitely could use that
mentioned representative
when these buildings come up or
whatever they're going to do
is it.
Explain to me is it specifically
just for a specific types of
housing is it just apartments is
it regular housing individual
how does that play
thinking madam chair thinking
representative I will actually
turn over to market for to more
specifics of how they analyze
this what I will say is when
they're looking at this some of
the prioritization as given to
sorry prior that the the
expected priorities and what
this bill does is projects where
they're improving their zoning
practices but I I don't believe
there is a specific type of bill
of of building that would be
preferred over another on its
face
madam chair representative there
are two types of projects that
this bill has been when ninety
five makes available on that is
infrastructure to support
affordable housing not actually
vertical construction of
affordable housing so what we're
trying to do there are support
and argument with the mortgage
finance authority does quite
well so there's no part of one
ninety five that duplicates what
the mortgage finance authority
already does it makes broader
the amount of funding available
for projects so we can do either
the affordable housing
infrastructure or we can do work
force housing which includes
both infrastructure and vertical
construction thank you ma'am
charles and the recent assets
because i'm living over here and
ago free and such a beautiful
and they put in i'm sorry if
anybody here built those the man
those appointments to put in her
hideous they don't fit in a boy
they do not I mean they're very
modern horrible
so asking because you know we
want to keep our areas looking
like they look I like where i'm
renting my house right now it's
beautiful and there's a
beautiful consistency and then
boom hideous sorry
so when you talk about.
It was in section six on eight
talks about
purchase nice projects at a
political subsovisions that are
implementing zone reforms
explain to me what that means
zoni.
Madame chair what we're trying
to do there is to ensure that
that the money is going to the
places where the communities
have given those projects the
greatest opportunity for success
where they've streamlined their
zoning their permitting where
they provided for
you know efficient construction
of projects money is time time
as money in these projects so we
want to make sure that the money
gets invested quickly in that
that results in
you know good housing as quickly
as possible so the gold from the
sponsors the things that that
were added to this from what the
oer beated was the direction to
ensure that best practice zoning
was getting prioritized so those
communities that have put in
those reforms would have more
opportunity for funding to end
up in their communities through
their developers and affected
them sorry to give someone in
there
okay
so then your man terms it so can
you explain to me because water
is such an issue had is when
you're looking at these projects
how does is there somebody
that's going to do an assessment
is earned up water for this
project because it's a big
problem in torrent county and.
Think you made i'm sure I think
you representative i'm having to
start and then i'll hand it over
again they look at these
projects and hole and and how
they come together altogether
i'll say that that's torrent
county is not the only place
where we have that issue santa
fe you know all of our
development is also based on how
much is is anticipated use and
and so that would make it how
how are zoning laws are in
sanity for example if my
expectation would make it more
difficult for us to be at the
top of the of the pile and this
housing effort only because it
limits how much we can develop
and how how that works out would
be my guess but I but again
they're looking at the entire
package so how realistic can we
get this moving quickly and and
ensuring that we're doing this
in the proper way.
Okay and mention reps when we
look at areas like it looks like
it's santa fe for example sanity
does need housing products
because you have a big disparity
between.
Is it going to go by zip code or
just the whole county or this is
an air historical area we want
to preserve and we don't want to
destroy that but.
I think you madam chair think
you representative again this is
per project and so when a
developer or a local
municipality or an unprofit that
is working on housing that is
you know again in this
affordable range out for the
housing more affordable they
will bring forward these
different efforts and so
evaluating that now when it
comes to whether it's front here
or rural I believe that's based
on county but i'm happy to turn
that over to market as well
madam sure those are based on
it's not just county it's your
location within the county
relative to
a populated community so there's
a there's a population metric
that gets into that gets
calculated into that for rural
versus front here and I would
just mention there's nothing
here these these rules that
the require some best practices
from zoning don't supersede any
existing local zoning efforts or
permitting efforts these are all
intended to be incentives for
communities to you know have a
best practice templet so that
their developers can be
successful but there's nothing
here in this law that or the
rules that could be adopted by
this board that would supersede
local control and authority so
that's all intended to be
incentive based action I see
which same mentioner or so so
you're at you're not going to
change it you're asking them to
change this on it because we
can't build this unless you do
okay i've to keep that in my way
to go to torrents county because
one of the issues to out there
is
a lot of them the water rights
are being sold off for the
because I do a lot of grow
houses out there so that is also
now an issue for building
housing and there's a big fight
over the water of where it's
going to go and how it should go
and we can't get it from here to
hear some people are taken not
to private property so they can
get it so there's the water
she's a huge out there
I think that's all the questions
that I had to stop check is
there in appropriations that I
don't think I probably should
not how is that going to be
handled think you madame chair
think he representative it's
already in the budget as it
stands now on peach.
To the FIR i'm you'll see at the
top that it has there is a
special ration of a hundred
million dollars for commercial
enterprise development so what
we are would already exist and
seventy five million dollars to
the housing development addition
that we're we're asking for here
okay minimum chair that's all
the question I have thank you
madame chairman would you pass
okay it's been moved in seconded
for due pass which please take
role.
This.
Represent a block
no representative lord i'm doing
no at the explanation
representative remarrial yes
representative thomson yes.
Mad and vice to rubia
madame church yes
can you have
have a do pass for.
House bill one ninety five with
a vote of four in favor in two
end representative lord for yes
okay thank you manager it's not
been bothering I want to do some
more information and research if
I don't fully understand the
fall.
The full concept of the bill
easy ten devote no and then
change it as I go along so thank
you.
Thank you representative
for being patient.
Yes this is house bill forty
six.
One more
thank you manager and members
house spelled forty six
is
fell in possession of a firm
in my discussions with our
district attorney there are
three problems leading to crime
in alberta the violent crime
number one is fell into in
possession of a fire room
refending number two is bringing
a firearm to a drug deal and
number three as kids with a firm
and so i've introduced
legislation to deal with the
first two
as you can see
in the bill what the current
penalty for a fellow and in
possession is three years we
raise that to five years.
And then on the second offence
we would raise it to nine years
a second degree felony.
And
I have several handouts you see
that the district attorney is
supporting this this is
something we need to go ahead
and address the
felonion possession and now for
turkey and reduce our murders
when we look at the next is data
this is data showing what we
have.
And this one is another data.
Man of chair the third vast
thing in the bill you see that I
delete.
Ten years our current was says
to a new mexican if ten years
has passed.
You can possess a firearm.
That is not federal law.
And what we're having is our
federal license firearm dealers
individuals are coming and
saying new mexico a wows need to
have a firearm and I want to
show you what the panel tears
just for fully now this form.
When you look at this form and
you look up here at the top
where i've hidewated it.
You see the felony and down here
in the bottom their answering no
i'm not a convicted feloni can
known a firearm.
So we're setting or individuals
up not only for.
Been a felon or of a huge felony
for are not completing the form
correctly but if they're caught
with a firearm they are subject
to federal prosecution not state
prosecution and I think this is
a very unfair situation in our
wall and that's what I want to
correct.
With that manager i'll stand for
questions.
Thank you okay we'll go to the
audience is there anyone in
opposition to this bill.
Thank you anyone else.
The.
Okay go ahead do you get one
minute thank you good evening
many please be forty six
continuing increase
effectively reduced crime this
is the five years in prison
instead of three or anyone
previously convicted by fell
only any money and years ago
from there because of the my
family's experience with the
addiction I know that people who
have struggled with addiction
may over the years rack up a
couple or several thousand
convictions related
because simple progression has
been taken out of the tool
people might find themselves
with a five years called for any
forty six plus years long and I
had the two or things in hands
even in a firearm was being used
in any way to threaten her
because harm even if there is no
history of your person would be
stepped in five years from this
we already have significant
consequences on the books we
don't need the out of the cost
of the more years in a
constitution that is also highly
unlikely to achieve presumable
of increasing public safety
thank you.
Go ahead
thank you members of the
committee regularly travelers on
behalf of the law the public
defenders we also stand
respectful opposition very
similar
as no different guardian ht
unlike sentencing and handsman
using a fire
this print
even if they never use it it is
already a crime for a balance
doing so hardly presenting for
anyone or dangerous with the
committee
thank you for your time and
consideration in imposing.
Thank you
anywhere else okay
now we'll go to the audiences
there anyone in support of this.
Is there anyone else.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee it's larry
retired other could be police
capital I want to think
representative bill reinforces
tenacity to bring this type of
bill forward.
I mentioned earlier what I mean
with leaders within the police
department and ask what can be
done to help you when it comes
to fit and all and drug drug and
gun crimes and where more
bureaucracy was not one of the
things I came up with does come
up is enhanced penalties that
are combined with fixing our
catching release judicial system
but that's a different bill I
grew up you to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you anyone else okay
go ahead you have one minute
thank you again.
I think we accidentally dropped
you try agai.
Thanks so much it is developed
by again from the greater
chamber of commerce and
especially given our correctly
done violence crying problem is
forty six in an overdo any
common sense of legislation this
is about ten of the clear man is
just a bit attentional repeater
standard that enough is enough
it increases the penalty for a
selling in possession of a buyer
are by two years in the point of
offices of the second resounding
with a nine year old
and it gets rid of about
language that it essentially
said hey just wait ten years and
you're no longer selling in the
eyes of new go ahead and get a
gun
while abiding the mexicans are
tired of hearing that living the
life of the client is dangerous
and that is also committed as
far as the batteries in the race
and murders just need to arm in
themselves
change will make those who have
been on the long side of the
last thing long and hard about
picking up much like using a gun
and we do the support safer new
mexico and support HB forty six
thank you.
Thank you
there anyone else.
Mention anything else madam
chair members of the committee
really as you look at this from
the days off as it's a small
number of individuals and
continue to repeat and the
repeating violent crime because
they have a fire.
Thank you manufacturer
thank you and then we'll go to
the committee.
Thank you manager think
i'm sorry
when I go first
I just have one quick question
when we heard the other felony
possession bill last week week I
don't know
it was noted by in one of our
analysis that this penalty has
been changed four times in the
last five years so I want to
know what data you have that
shows that this will actually
decrease receiving them and if
so why haven't the last four
changes to this are benefictive
thank you manager yeah manual
chair and representative tom it
thompson in the in the last few
years we've increased the
penalty slightly we haven't
ramped it up what we see with a
district attorney and the doubt
that I gave you these end of the
jobs continued to repeat and
what we're trying to do is say
okay if you're going to go ahead
and repeat we're going to make
the penalty strong enough that
you'll go ahead and stop as.
You know an albert key why do we
constantly hear we need to take
this case federally.
Because the pedal deals stiffer.
And that's what we're trying to
do is get our penalty more and
line with federal analyty which
is the five years.
The stop these goes from
reoffend.
Just to follow up but the data
doesn't show it at least the way
I be with that
increasing it I mean if we
assume that we increase it a
year and you think five years
will decrease crime by twenty
five percent one year
theoretically should do five
percent but we don't see those
numbers I don't really need an
answer i'm just kind of thinking
out about thank you madame chair
thank you representative
representative romero thinking
madame chair
I appreciate seeing some
different information from the
da and albuquerque and however
when we're looking at all of
this in conjunction I I just
have a couple questions
regarding a couple things so if
i'm clear your bill will
essentially disallow a felon
from receiving a firearm ever
again.
Uh madam chair and
representative remember
that is current federal law
unless they get a pardon
or it is expansion in some
manner federally but that is
federal law and the are
confusion is is that we're
saying that after ten years you
can possess a firearm in new
mexico but they're still in
violation of federal law and I
really think this is a problem
we've got a fix so madame chair
representative if I am hearing
you correctly.
And and just because we get the
second amendment question often
and
rates situations you would be
prohibiting someone with a
felony from ever possessing a
fire m.
A man of chair and
representative remarrial and
once they have the exclusions
such as a governor's pardon or
presidential pardon that its
current law it has current
federal law gotcha I just wanted
to make clear that that's what
your bill does
it's an interesting
second amendment rate question
since we do get it quite often I
just thought I close that to you
but nevertheless I think when we
look at the fire and what we've
done in the past five years
we've increased these panel to
use all the way up to
potentially for repeat offenders
to have eleven years for non
violent crimes or fourteen years
for serious violent offenders
from the data that we are able
to collect and obtain even with
the day's information that you
provided us today it's not
changing the outcomes for these
folks and so although they'll
sit in present for longer and
longer periods of time as we
have done since twenty twenty
twenty twenty one twenty two we
have continued to raise the
amount of time that they'll
serve
they're not getting any better
at at being different when it
comes back to integrating in
society we're still seeing the
same representative est
challenges and yet we're
continuing to raise the penalty
time and t.
So madam chair representative
i'd love to work with you on a
bill that helps with
reintegration helps with being
able to look at what is it that
we're missing when we're talking
about violent offenders or
offenders repeating those crimes
what is it that we're missing
about why
they're commit continuing to
commit these crimes why they
would possess a firearm I don't
have that data and again when we
continued to increase we're not
seeing a different result so
with all of that and with the
interest of of how it is that we
continue to pursue
you know breaking down not only
what causes these crimes to be
committed but how it is that we
look at reintegration and our
society that we would be able to
to definitively see what we.
And I would just like to add
that
the residentism might go down
because the people are
imprisoned for longer it's not
really acting as a deterrent and
the person might not even know
or care about you know what the
penalties are when they're
committing a crime but also new
mexico please arrest for state
law violations in the don't have
to arrest for federal violations
so you know trying to align with
federal isn't really i.
A good reason to do that if
they're committing a federal
crime then you know they could.
But with that
I hear yes I am a move to table.
Okay we have a motion to table
is there any opposition.
We've tabled house bill forty
six
thinking of cha.
Okay next we'll hear house bill
two thirty nine representative
zamorat the canabas as prison
contraband
thank you madame chairman
members of the committee I know
it's late and everybody's tired
it's been a long day
for everybody
madame chair members of the
committee house built two thirty
nine relating to corrections
including canabas as a in the
definition of contraband
provided being prohibited
canabas in places of
imprisonment and providing
exceptions.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The.
Horrible so.
This bill has a history behind
it
i'd like to tell the story about
it madame chair.
This bill was run last year it
went through this committee the
first time and and got tabled
with one question as.
I did take it to the.
To the speaker and.
Explained to him.
Why
we needed to fix this in the
state and new mexico.
The story was that.
How this bill came upon.
Was they constituent.
Came to me
county commissioner.
And.
In fort someno in the head.
Somebody
takes them canabas into the
jail.
They had the evidence that had
the cannibers they headed on
video.
Everything that they needed to
prosecute but when i'm waiting
front of the day.
The da was not able to
prosecute.
The person that smuggled the
canabas into the jail because in
the legislation when we
legalized canabas.
It was taken off the countryband
list.
So then therefore taking
canada's inter jail is was any
use today just like.
Taking bubble gum into jail
there's there's nothing illegal
about it.
So we're looking for a fix.
The.
In the state of new mexico to
prevent that from happening we
need to have some kind of
control in our jails and and not
have people smoking canabas in
the jails.
I will add to that that.
The.
Ccj committee endorsed this
bill.
They support this bill a hundred
percent.
The.
And.
Madam chair I don't know if
it's.
Okay with you or acceptable to
the committee but.
Represent a difficult metal also
signed under this bill last year
to.
Ter support it.
And it made
made it through committees in
the house and it made it to the
house floor and it made it to
committees through a committee
on the senate.
Senate side.
And then we ran out of time in
the session.
So I believe this bill.
Has had a lot of support we just
ran out of time last time in the
last session.
I'd like to see this bill go
through and.
I know and maybe representative
or metal wants to testify to
this that she has another
cannibers bill.
That has.
The fixed for this but my
concerns.
Are that if that bill fails for
any reason and.
This would back up that bill
and.
And we would get this problem
fix that we can.
Better operator jails and and
places of imprisonment in the in
the state of new mexico and i'd
like for madame chair for my
expert witness to introduce
themselves and.
And see if he has anything that.
Madame chair good evening I was
about to say good morning rick
tedro with the district
attorney's association we were
asked I think there the
situation that came up actually
occurred out in the tenth with
tim rose districts turning time
roses district and that's where
we
once we realized that with the
legalization of canaba's nowhere
in this statute did it talk
about canada's it took it out of
the controlled substance act so
sort of right now we're in limbo
in a situation where concerned
that is brought in his canobus
so
I was asked to come over d a
rose couldn't be here or so a
graciously stuck around tonight
to come over so if you have any
questions for concerns i'll try
my best answer thank you madame
chair thank you
representative block.
Sorry I forgot about public
is there anyone in
opposition to this.
Okay anyone in support.
Least speaking
please
call support.
Our eight did you want to add
anything else madame tear with
that will stand for questions
thank you representative black
first month here unless there's
the other comments I just okay I
just haven't do passed after
your comments a second.
Go ahead and represent a romary
thinking about him to hear think
you representative for this
effort we learned a lot from I
think the previous year's about
why this was just an overstay in
the current law when we
relegalized recreational canabas
and I just want to flag for this
committee that we already passed
this bill in our account as a
regulation changes in house will
one twenty seven so we were in
support and as a committee
previously I think minus one
vote but that said madam chair
the challenge with this bill
today is that it's in conflict
with some of the important
changes that were made in the
bill that we already passed and
this includes in this bill are
changes to some of the different
defendations and while the
substance of the bill after the
definitions is in conjunction
with the bill that we just
passed the definitions that are
proposed now would actually be
in conflict with some of the
illegality that we clarify some
of the racketeering and
trafficking provisions that were
involved in the other bill and I
just want to caution this group
that if we are except the
changes that are proposed in
this bill that we won't be able
to be more expansive about how
it is that we regularly and
criminalise bad actors within
the count of us
um regulation act so
unfortunately madam chair and I
did speak to representative
before he filed the bill about
the conflict so I hope i'm not
speaking out of turn in just
saying that I can't support the
bill as proposed today just
because of the conflicts that it
could arise should it get
through the process and then
both bills get past and then
those laws be in conflict so
with that matter those are my
comments thanks
thank you anyone else on the c.
I already have a motion madam
charm may I respond to that oh
yes so some madam chair in and
representative to metal members
of the committee.
As we go forward.
I I understand.
Partially of what you're saying
because and i'm not a lawyer and
and maybe by expert witness
would want to add to it.
But as we go forward.
If I understand right your bill
has passed one committee so far
representative.
So as we go forward.
I think.
That it would be.
A good judgment of the
committee.
If if we could pass this bill
support this bill.
And it and if we merge bills.
And down the road.
As these bills.
Go through the process.
And and we might have to change
the definition.
Or something like that but but
my concerns as I stated in in
melbourne and statements is
that.
If.
If.
Representative for metal's bill
does it pass.
We still have a problem in the
state.
And I don't see anything wrong
with supporting this bill today.
And then see how the cards play
out at the end of the of the
session.
I would hate.
For us not to fix this problem.
And and support our law
enforcement.
In our.
District attorneys.
And the people that this bill
affects the jails and in places
of confirm in in the state I
just
I just I just see that that we
need to fix this issue this bill
is in his complex as
the
representative from metals bill
and i'd hate not to fix this
problem I hope that this
committee looks at supporting
this bill
and if it needs to have.
If we need to do some different
as these bills go through
committees.
I would be willing to work with
representative of the metal and
in the legislature to do
whatever needs to be done I
think it's too early in the
session to kill this bill in
this committee and if my expert
witness manager has anything to
add to that i'd i'd like for him
to have a chance that th.
I'm sorry representative I just
want to giving you permission to
do it closing so we're we're
going to go back to.
Manager if if the sponsor would
be interested we just love to
parallel some of the definitions
since you in your bill you open
up two sections of of the count
of its regulation act and if
there was an opportunity to
memic I think some of the
language that we worked with the
it's really of the perview of
the
of the
agency so we worked with the.
So that they're all in line and
concert together if there was a
a chance to work with the
sponsor to mimic that language.
It's completely fair th.
So long as they were just
parallel like identical
essentially would that be
friendly to the sponsor madam
chair
I believe that would be a
friendly amendment and and i'd
be open to that I just I just
hate not to fix this problem
that we have in the state I
completely agree again we have
the same bills but that said
madam chair I don't know if we
want to make.
Wait until the next committee.
The.
Or depend.
Is there since your.
Representatives and more out.
Madame chair.
Representative for metal's bill
is a lot more complex and I
haven't had a chance to go
through that bill
the way I should go through a
bill if if i'm going to support
it and down we did have a
conversation about that the
other day and I just felt
at the time that that I needed
to file this bill and
and see where it went in the
process.
The.
I I would suggest that we roll
it until thursday and allow the
representative to
work with representative
remarries so that so that we be
sure that we're not passing two
bills out of here that are in
conflict with each other.
Yeah madam chair that there
would be a friendly
amendment and and I look forward
to working with representatives
of metal and I would like to
clear one thing up madame turn
and representative is you're
gonna accept me
and support and you're gonna
support this bill
but want to be changed the
definition of a little bit yes
correct they would be we are
working the same the same track
we have the same interest in in
having this outcome out of here
thank thank you madame turn and
thank you representative and I
said at the will of the
committee madame I just wonder
with draw my to pass
in the second yeah and we have
an agreement that you would like
to roll the bill we won't go
through discussion again except
for on the changes and then take
a vote will do that on thursday
if we could do that fairly
quickly
madam chairs long as we don't do
it this late in the
sorry that's our sorry
thank you madam chair and I
agree to roll the bill thank you
represent difficult metal
yeah
just a moment and before we
leave i'd like to think our
sponsors for dinner
which is a marlow showed slary
horandan weeks and charlie
marcus so we appreciate that
thank you
that we've been adjourned for
