OK call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Will the gentleman from
Catherine Grant, and Hidalgo,
Representative Carrazas, please
offer today's invocation. Please
rise.
Mighty God
As we gathered today, we lift up
our state and our country to
you.
We humbly ask for your blessings
that your hand be over us to
help guide us in the right
direction.
Open our ears that we may hear
and know the voice so that we
will not get lost on the path
you set for our lives.
You pray for we pray for the
safety of those in this country,
or state, and this great nation.
Close clothe us daily in the
armor of God that we may stand
firm in the face of adversity.
We ask you to protect us from
the unneeded division that
distracts us from our true
calling and the love that we
have for each other.
Give us the strength to defend
the vulnerable.
And the voiceless and bring
justice to those who have
suffered injustice.
We ask a special blessing on our
military, our officers, our our
officers, our firefighters, our
first responders, nurses or
teachers, miners and all those
who work so hard to make this
beautiful state of New Mexico
what it is.
Please provide the appointed
leaders of the state with wisdom
and discernment to make
decisions that honor you.
Care for the people and improve
their lives.
We may not know what tomorrow
will bring.
But help us to rest in you.
Relentlessly
Trusting in your perfect plan.
Thank you for your kindness,
mercy, and divine love.
Grant us your peace that passes
all understanding.
And pour out all the many
blessings upon Grant County, New
Mexico.
State of New Mexico and the
United States of America. Amen.
Well, the gentle lady from
McKinley representative
Lindstrom leaders in the Pledge
of Allegiance.
And the gentleman from
Valencia, Representative Baca,
lead us in the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
ball.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning, members.
It's great to see all of you.
Uh, we've got a, a guest to
recognize on the rostrum in the
gallery. We also have, uh, we're
celebrating, uh, a couple of,
um, special days today including
Grant County Day and UNM Day,
um, we do have a memorial for
Grant County Day. So before
We do that, I'm gonna go back to
the generation from Santa Fe to
introduce the memorial and then
we'll come back to
announcements. Jen lady from
Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker, I move we
go to the next order of
business. Introduction of
legislation.
Clerk to read.
House Memorial 9 introduced by
Representative Terazas, a
memorial declaring January 29,
2025, the forty-ninth annual
Grant County Day in the House of
Representatives, House Memorial
9.
I was more known have been read
twice by title is or not printed
and placed on the speaker's
table.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
gentleman from
Do you want to go first or do
you want?
Gentlemen from Katherine Grant
Hidalgorazas.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that house house
Memorial 9 be removed from the
speaker's table and be made
first order of business.
That the record reflect that all
action is replacing House
Memorial 9 on final passage has
been taken and it is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the memorial.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point, please?
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
So the memorials for Grant
County. Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I
got a lot of people here. My
wife's up here, man, that makes
me stress.
So most of you guys won't see
me, won't see me sweat very
often, but I got my wife and my
daughter up here so um but let's
explain the memorial. Grant
County is a is a wonderful place
in southwest Mexico if you ever
get a chance to come visit us,
we'd love to see you. We have
our beautiful Gila, the national
forest we have um mining that is
very, very important to our to
our economy there we have a
university, Western Mexico State
University, and we have it.
We have very good red and green
chile over there too and so we
invite you guys to come and and
and support us and visit our
beautiful town we have places
like Fort Bear, uh, and we have
Fort Bear National Cemetery,
which is next to the Fort Baird
which is I believe it's uh um.
Anyway, it's, it's an old fort
that when I was a kid was
absolutely gorgeous. It was run
by the feds and uh since then it
has declined. We're doing, we're
doing great strides and working
together and trying to bring
attention to 4 beds so we can do
and get more investment there,
but, uh, Mr. Speaker, um, I
appreciate the opportunity, uh,
for allowing us to have this
beautiful memorial today and I
appreciate it.
Thank you, gentlemen is, uh, the
debate on the memorial generally
from Dona Anna. I'm sorry.
I'm still learning the new.
The new counties, the new
districts, young lady from
Donana Sierra in support of
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield?
I have on my pin lady.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
It's such an honor to stand up
in support of your memorial
recognizing Grant County Days
and I just, it's such a
beautiful community and probably
part of the things that we
worked on the most was the
beautiful historic Fort Baird,
um, how many, I can't remember
how many structures there are
there, uh, that
I'm not sure how many structures
there are, um, some of them have
been taken down, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, we
have, but you, there is movement
right now where we're we're
investing in and getting uh a
plan completed so that we can.
Hopefully revitalize all those
structures and bring commerce
and economic growth to the
mining district in in
southwestern New Mexico. Speaker
and Representative, and I, I, I
touring those buildings together
and seeing the beautiful, the
fixtures, original fixtures,
whether it's the restrooms, the
lights, the custom design in the
hardwood floors. The, the, um,
theater that you and I both
invested in with our capital
funds to, and, and knowing how
much the community wants it and
all the economic dreams.
and, and the desires that they
have of what they're going to
use, whether it's golf course or
the RV parks or all the
different things that they want,
but it's such a beautiful staple
for that area and, um, anyways,
just happy to have Grant County
here today and getting lots of
hugs and, and seeing lots of
familiar faces. Grant County is
a great county, and, uh, just
happy to stand up in support of
your memorial.
Further debate, the gentlemen
from Lee Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yell?
Hail to the gentleman from Lee
County.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'd
like to talk a little bit about
what Grant County does with
respect to contributions, can
you tell me how long the mines
have been in in place in Grant
County.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, let me tell you that
we, I would say the late 1800s,
it's been that area has actually
been mined even way before that.
Um, there's, there's, uh,
evidence that it's been mined
for uh several I think several
100 years before that by by by
the native people and and uh and
and those type of things.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. Do you know about
what your gross revenue is that
you send back to the state with
respect to the mines?
You know, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I believe it in a in
about 2, it's about $230 million
that that it creates in in total
revenue for that area.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen, and I think
that's so important that we
continue to push what actually
happens in our mining and um
extraction businesses around the
state. I talk often about and I,
I brag often about Lee County
because we are the largest
contributor to the general fund.
But we have counties like Grant
County that the extraction of of
copper and silver from that
area. It goes farther back than
what we did. We, what's happened
with oil and gas extraction in
our side and it's so critical to
continue that.
And
I know the company that works
there, I know their processes, I
know their procedures and I just
wanna lift them up. I wanna lift
Freeport Mac Marran up because
they are environmentally
friendly.
They are safety conscious and
those are the people we want
here in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you're
exactly right. Freeport McMorran
is not just an employer there
and the biggest employer there
they actually um are very part a
big part of the community. I
mean they, they themselves uh
donate lots of money throughout
the area uh to support our
community and you said it right
if you ever go through the gates
there you'll see they're proud
of their safety, uh, uh, because
they'll say we haven't had an
incident for over a year or so
many days, so they pride
themselves in.
safety and and because we work
in the state of Mexico who's
very environmental
environmentally conscious about
about how we how we operate and
how we extract.
Being that Grant County is the
only copper producing mine in
the state of New Mexico, uh, we,
we want we wanna make sure that
they are highlighted that you
know we're not getting anywhere
they're the only place that get
that produces copper, but, uh,
Freeport is an amazing company.
They've been very good to the
people, uh, and, and our
community it's, it's they're a
blessing.
Very much so, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, very good to the
community.
Excellent when it comes to the
environment.
And that's the critical piece as
we continue to look at what we
do in mining and extraction.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
believe in Grant County so much,
um, we agreed, not that I got to
say so, really for my 30 year
old daughter to move from one
school district to Silver City
to teach special ed and Silver
City. Let's just talk about some
of the great things about it.
The, uh, the school that she's
in has a great focus with
respect to uh the special ed
focus.
Then let's talk about what her
life was like when she's outside
of work.
You have river and uh she she'll
just take off and go camping. It
takes her 30 minutes to find a
place to go camp next to a river
and fish.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, you
know, honestly, uh, she's in a
good school district, Mr.
Hawkins is a great
superintendent. They've got a
great board and administration,
um, and, and when you say things
to do afterward you can
literally from there drive 10
minutes and you can be at a
campground there, uh, little
walnut campground. You can go
up, uh, another like 15 minutes
and you're in Pinos Artos, uh,
where, you know, the Buckhorn,
uh, saloon is and if you ever go
it's known if you ever wanna go
eat a nice.
Dinner. It's a nice place known
all over all over the world just
like Jalisco says downtown
Silver City, but you can also go
to Lake Roberts. You can go to
the cliff dwellings. You can go
to the catwalk. She can, there's
so many things to do there. It,
it's in within just a few
minutes of driving, you know, to
an hour. I mean it, it's, it's a
wonderful place, Hot Springs. I
could go on City of Rocks, the
big tree, the biggest juniper in
in the state of New Mexico is
just right there visit Fort
Bear, the National Cemetery. I
could, you could overlook
The mind, I could go on and on.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you,
you definitely represent a very
great county.
And you represent it well.
You represent your constituents
well. I will tell you a fun
story, Mr. Speaker, this summer
in July.
We lead Silver City. It's over
100 degrees. We go to the back
road over the hills.
And, uh, towards tier C.
Now, 100 degrees when we leave,
by the time we get to tier C,
it's 100 degrees. We get to the
top of the mountain, it's
snowing.
Love
the, the just different climates
and the different elevations
that you guys have within your,
your own county, and it's a
blessed place for y'all to live
and uh you represent them well.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen for the
debate on the memorial,
gentlemen from
Otero, Representative block.
Mhm
You did, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, with the kind
gentleman from all those
beautiful counties, please
yield. I yield, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. And I guess I just
rise in support today because I
love your county.
Your county has so many great
things to offer our state,
including and not limited to the
healer, which I've hiked so many
trails up there, so beautiful,
such a great
Beautiful area of our state
that's really a hidden gem, in
my opinion, and I'd love for
more people to go there. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I also want
to mention City of Rock State
Park. It's probably one of my
favorite parks in this state.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if you
haven't been to City of Rocks, I
recommend going. It's kind of
like our mini Joshua tree
without the Joshua trees, but
all the really cool rocks and
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it feels
like you're in a different
world.
And I think that that's just
something that encompasses what
our state does, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. We're kind of, we're,
we're very special, you know, it
grows as it goes as our state
motto says, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I, have you been able
to go hiking and all those cool
places in your district. I'm
sure you have.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
The abbey roasts and the other
day I was drinking my cup of
coffee, and I, I broke my mug,
so I need to go take a trip to
your county, put some dollars
back in your community, get
another mug and a lot more
coffee, Mr. Speaker, and maybe
go to Latin Mass as well, Mister
Speaker, gentlemen.
So thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. I don't know
if you had a
comment on that. Just, I just,
And yield. I yield to it,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, I didn't grow up
in, in the gentleman's County,
but I grew up right over the
mountain just there, uh,
Hillsboro and TRC down in some
of that country. A lot of mining
there as there is in your
county.
Uh, when I was a kid, we used to
get down and, and just blow real
soft on the, on the hard pan
there. And when you got to,
there'd be a little piece of
little fleck of gold there
laying there, so there's gold,
there's gold in in their heels.
Love the, uh
Environment there, the mountains
uh grasslands and the, the
desert.
Did you know Mr. Speaker, that
New Mexico
is the only state to my
knowledge in the union that has
all 5 life zones.
And the thing that we have that
no other state has is the
Sonoran Desert, because you get
over there in southern New
Mexico, you'll start seeing
barrel cactus.
Uh, some of those types of
things that you only, that you
think of when you think of
Arizona, but you get down and in
the far south part of our state
and there's 5 life zones there,
like I say, including the
Sonoran Desert, it's
It's an awesome thing.
That's where my family.
Uh, homestead, that's where we
come from, and that's where we
scattered a lot of tracks. I, I
really appreciate, uh.
Really appreciate your county
and the, and the mining that's
been there and you think,
I, I've traveled those hills a
lot and you go to the most
faraway place in the most remote
area.
And you look down and you'll see
evidence.
Of uh
Somebody that's been there
before you, and they were, they
were trying to make a living.
They were hunting for gold. They
were hunting for silver.
Uh, bridal chamber mine had a
Solid gold nugget, the size of a
boxcar. Uh, have you experienced
any of that, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, there's so much to look
at. By the way, I'm gonna back
up when you told me about the 5
biomes. You're right, you took
me back to biology in 1991, uh,
where, uh, we learned about the
five biomes in in in in our
area, the only place in in in
the country I believe like you
said now the the other thing
that we're gonna say is if
you're ever traveling I'm gonna
kind of divert here from your
country right over Hillsboro and
coming over and you put it on
GPS, one of the things Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
You'll find you don't wanna go
over that area, especially
because it's a windy road, it's
a black range and so it'll,
it'll surprise you we see people
come out of there with white
knuckles on the other side when
they get there, but.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there's
a lot of mining. That's why it's
called Silver City, uh, our, our
friend, our representativelo
mentioned uh Billy the Kid,
Billy the Kid has they have a uh
a replica of the cabin that he
grew up there. His mother is
actually buried, Mr. Speaker, in
our local uh city cemetery there
in memory lane, uh, Billy Kidd's
mom, so tells you and then
mining you like you said
depending on where you go you'll
see evidence of mining all over
the place.
Mr. Speaker, there's a lot of
outlaws, gunfighters, and other
notorious characters come out of
that country and landed in that
country, some of them may or may
not have been kin to me.
Uh, I always appreciate that
area.
I think, I thank you for riding
hard on it, keeping it, keeping
it, uh, relevant to today, and I
appreciate, uh,
Appreciate having you here today
and.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I did one more
thing I wanna say is, uh, in,
you know, I'm in the mortuary
business and one of the things
because we were seeing gun
fighting and all that one of the
things that we were able to
preserve my wife and I were, we
call them red books and a red
book in the in the mortuary is a
book that we, uh, archive.
The, the information concerning
that funeral, that person vital
statistics and those sort of
things. Well, I, I was able to
through a good friend of mine
Harry Bright, who owned the the
funeral home there, uh, that he
ordered it was called Bright and
I'm gonna go back, you know, to
the beginning, it was bright and
it was Curtis bright, then it
was Curtis, then it was Coxmore
Tree. So those books, I have
them all the way since from 1901
to present and if you just read
through them.
You'll see
John Doe, I'll use John Doe died
of a gunshot wound. John Doe,
John Jane Doe, blah blah blah,
and it's interesting to see it,
it's all written in calligraphy
and real ne so something I
wanted to share. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
For the debate, gentlemen from
Valencia Senator Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
I yield to the gentlemen, my
neighbor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. I to rise in
support of uh Grant County, um,
through my.
my career in education and
through my work with the
legislature.
I have uh been across this whole
state.
And I want to just know that
Grant County is not only known
for its beauty.
Uh, for its mining but for its
people.
And so I, I very much
appreciate.
Grant County in which you add to
the state Grant County is also
responsible for 3 of my closest
friends.
I'll name them because they
don't believe in the
legislators, so Jared, Jason,
Luis, he kind of believes I'm
the legislator because I sat
with him by 4 years, but, um, I
think that's an important part
about is that we all celebrate
our diversity of our state.
I think that we always have to
consider and respect.
Healthy and nutritional food and
the New Mex.
The sewing change award for
organizations engaged in
creating sustainable food
systems. The students' success
and wellness bureau of the
Public Education department.
The heart of the land award for.
Is there a debate on the
memorial?
Gentle lady from.
4 days I'm gonna get it down.
Gentle lady from
Armstrong.
Speaker or the gentle lady
yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll use yield
to our.
Thank you, uh, kindly.
Branches around the state and
the impact of the Mexican gray
wolf, uh, in our area has been
detrimental to our food
producers in the area, um, I do
stand in favor and, and I, I
love your memorial, but I also
want people to really look at
what happens in rural New Mexico
when we do detrimental things,
uh, that actually hinder our
food supply and uh the farmers
right now across New Mexico that
have water issues, uh, trying
to.
raises crops and feed New
Mexicans and feed America so as
I stand in support of your
memorial, I really want people
to think about what happens in
real life. You do not get your
meat from the grocery store.
It's not raised in the grocery
store. You do not get your milk
or your eggs. Those are all
farms and ranches, uh, that
bring that food to the grocery
store and so please be aware and
educate yourself on what really
happens in real life, uh, and
when we don't have.
Those things on the shelves, so
thank you for bringing this
memorial forward and uh I stand
in support. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, the lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, yes, I'll be glad to yield
to my colleague. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I would be sure I have
laryngitis right now, so I'm
gonna be a little short, but I
want a stand in support, full
support of the Memorial and all
the food initiatives that we
have in our states and all the
work that you've done to ensure
that we have the funding and we
have the the capacity to meet
the demands um for our state
even though we know that the
demands are, are greater than.
mo s t I would say. So thank you
for for bringing this memorial
forward. I stand in full support
and I'd like to thank all those
that work in the food industry
and food initiatives for our
state and making sure that we
are, we are looking ahead and
looking to the future and
getting the
Getting the nutrition and
getting the programs to our most
vulnerable. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady. The
gentleman from Curry debaca
Guadalupe Roosevelt in San
Miguel, the man with the
bottomless pot of poole
representative Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
well, the gentle lady yield?
I will yield to the gentleman
with from many counties.
Thank you, gentle lady.
I, uh, take this time to rise
and, and thank all the farmers
and ranchers in the state of New
Mexico for all the hard work
that they do.
You know, we don't, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, we don't see a
whole lot of people in the, in
the legislature.
And I believe it's because
they're dedicated to their work.
They,
they know that.
Raising a calf takes 24 hours a
day watch.
They know that milking the cows,
you have to be there 24 hours a
day.
I've been involved in these ag
industries.
Across the state and
It's, it's a very demanding, uh,
occupation.
And
They work real hard to put food
on the table and as we
legislate.
Here in Santa Fe
I appreciate everybody's.
Open-minded views and, and how
we deal with the water and how
we deal with producing food in
our economy, the, the farm
economy in the state of New
Mexico is in the billions.
It, we have, uh, the largest
cheese plant in eastern, uh,
cheddar cheese plant in eastern
New Mexico. A lot of people
producing milk for it.
Uh, to produce cheese.
And you back it up and it goes
all the way to the farmers
putting the seed in the ground.
As, as we go forward into the
future, how will technology.
Change farming and how do we
look at it? How do we legislate
in the legislature to.
To help support our farmers and,
and thank you, gentle lady for
bringing this, this bill
forward. I stand in support of
it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. There's further
debate the gin lady from Bern
Leo Representative Borego. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and with the
gentle lady yield. I'd be glad
to yield to the gentle lady from
Bernal Leo.
Thank you, gentle lady. I would
stand in full support of your
memorial, um, uh, for those of
you who know me, you think that
I'm from Albuquerque, but I
actually grew up in northern New
Mexico on a small farm and um I
saw when I was a young child,
uh, my grandfather's raising
cattle. My grandfather and my
father, uh, raising horses,
sheep, pigs, chickens, um, and
so I saw the process.
from an early age um and my
father always used to say,
people don't unders they just go
to the grocery store and they
buy a can of food and they don't
know where it really came from,
um, so I, I really appreciate
that you brought this forward,
um, representative and um I
stand in full support.
Thank you, gentle lady you
gentle lady. There's further
debate, the gentle lady from Ria
Riva Sandoval Santa Peals
Representative Herrera.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, with a
kind, uh, lady yield.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll yield
to the gentle lady with from
many counties. Thank you so
much. I would be remiss if I did
not stand up and salute, uh, the
farm and ranching, um, uh,
participants in our district and
in Rio Riba I think it's between
the $30 million.40 million
dollar economy and this is with
small farms and small ranches,
uh, they do amazing work.
They're all involved in the
farmers' markets they are most
of them involved.
With the food to the schools
program, um, they are remarkable
people they do remarkable work.
We meet with them all the time,
of course, they all sponsor the
4H efforts that we have they
are, I would say the backbone of
our community in the North and
and we need to recognize these
people often.
And I don't think we do, so I
appreciate you bringing this
memorial forward and uh I thank
you for all the work that you've
done on the behalf of uh farmers
and ranchers in our state and
and those people in this
assembly who have done the same,
so with that I close. Thank you.
Thank you.
There's further debate,
gentlemen from Lee
Representative Pettigrew. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Donana Yield.
I will yield to um my colleague
and are you from many counties
too? Lee County.
Just 11 from Lee County. Thank
you.
Very close, very close, great,
great job.
Mr. Speaker, I stand in support
of the memorial, uh.
You know, this year
I, I had plans on what I was
going to be able to accomplish
and do in committees and uh um.
Our our leader and our speaker
made a choice to put to to offer
me ag
and water and
And part of that, I look back at
growing up on a farming ranch, a
large farm and ranch in
southeast New Mexico.
I look at my career from the
civil engineer, the amount of
projects that I've done from,
from aquifer work to
subdivisions to designing water
well municipal water wells
across the state and I'm, I'm
very happy to be able to sit on
that committee and support.
Our farm ranch water.
Um, debates with respect to
that. So I'm very thankful for
the blessing that I was given.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I have to tell you a funny
story.
3 years ago
Uh
My bride, my beautiful bride was
shopping here in town.
And
Over by the meat aisle.
And there were two ladies there
looking at the beef.
And they start, they were
crying.
And my wife walked up to him and
said, oh my goodness, what's
wrong? Can you, do you need some
help?
And they're like, you know,
we're, we're just so sad. We
don't understand why people
would kill a cow when they can
go to the store and buy the
meat.
So not everybody understands
exactly the process that it
takes to get food.
To the table.
And I do appreciate your
memorial that helps defend what
we do from the farming ranch
industry, the farmers' markets,
4H FFA and everything else.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
see for the debate, gentle lady
close. Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent of the House
that the rules be suspended and
that the records show that all
action for placing house
Memorial One, on final passage
has been taken and that it is
now subject to debate.
amending um
Well, we did the debate. I'm
sorry, um.
I think I did that wrong.
I moved that House Memorial One
do now pass.
And you want the record to show
that the rule has been called
and all members unanimous
consent in the affirmative.
There's been a motion to show
all members of the House
President voting in the
affirmative. see no objection to
disordered. We are on final
passage of House Memorial one.
The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How moral 1 has
duly passed his house.
Congratulations, and you have
guests, I believe too. Yes,
thank you, Mr. Speaker introduce
him.
Thank you, um, we have on the
side, um, rostrum here, um, Miss
Melanie Kirby, she is a queen
bee's farm and Field Institute.
She is uh receiving the Living
Land award for outstanding
leadership in land stewardship
and leasing Ortiz, uh, is a
student from uh Las Cruces,
Raisi de Sair Sennache.
Uh, community charter school as
well as Mr. Benjamin Hernandez.
There he is.
And Emma Luna Rodriguez.
And
Also miss Kayla Martinez is
their teacher.
Marie Johnson is from Farmington
Municipal School. She's a
student nutrition program
supervisor.
Also we have Carri Valdez. She's
a parent of one of the students
from Farmington.
Reland Shirley, Apache
Elementary School. She's a 5th
grader of Farmington Municipal
Schools.
Brian Shirley Junior, Apache
Elementary School, 2nd grader.
And Caitlyn Shirley, Apache
Elementary School, first grade
Farmington.
And
Last but not least, Haley Big
from Farmington, and she's 16.
Um, I just wanted to, um,
announce that um we are
celebrating uh youth for Food
Day today also and um thank you
for welcoming the students, uh,
their food court members and
participants who are here to
celebrate and share why New
Mexico grown food in schools is
so important to the health of
students and success of our
farmers and ranchers and
well-being of our communities
and we have lots of um uh
Family members and parents up in
the in the gallery also that are
joining us.
Please rise if you're in the
gallery to be recognized on this
special day. Welcome. Thank you
for joining.
And also I'd like to invite our
um house members to join us
tomorrow, Thursday, January 30th
from 10:15 to 10:45 room 307,
uh, to meet our food and farms
Day awardees and also
participate um to learn more
about the food and farm
initiatives and legislative
priorities which not only is for
farming and ranching, but also
our Food Network to support the
legislation for
Um, uh, food banks throughout
the state as well as other
programs that we need to make a
full um food security system in
our state. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I will go to the, uh,
I, I will go meet with these
farmers and young people and I
hope they're selling eggs
because they're very expensive
right now, and I would love to
buy some from you all. Uh, so if
you have any, let me know. I
will pick him up later. lady
from Katrin Socorro Valencia and
Sierra Representative Armstrong.
thank you.
Mr. Speaker, can you skip me,
please? My guest went to the
Senate, she'll be back.
She went to the dark side.
It's a black hole over there,
you know, where they go in they
don't come out.
Uh, gentle lady from Donana and
Otero.
Speaker, uh, members of, uh, the
house and gallery. I wanted to
welcome my own guests on to the
floor today. uh, I wanna welcome
and introduce my own doctors
from Las Cruces, Doctor Hector
Lerma and Doctor Shiny Netacom.
As well as students from uh our
local Borough College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Ana Maria
Ancheta and Alessandro Vasquez.
Ana Maria's family is from
Anthony, New Mexico where I went
to high school, go Panthers, and
Alessandro is a graduate from
Centennial High School right
outside my district, so welcome
everyone. Thank you so much
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval
Representative Hernandez. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I see, I'm an
easy one. I have one county.
The gentleman from that one
county.
Uh, point of personal privilege.
I just wanted to, as I think we
have all seen today, um, all of
the physicians, healthcare
workers that have been walking
around, um, I think there was
about 80 of them in our tax
committee this morning, Mr.
Speaker, I just wanted all of
them to stand up and for us to
thank them for all that they do
for us, for keeping New Mexicans
healthy, um, especially in a in
a time when health care workers
are stressed and there's a
shortage so if everyone in a
white coat or any healthcare
workers up.
Star can stand up. We, we'd all
like to folks in the audience in
the gallery, welcome to the
house. Thank you for your work.
Gentle lady from Berna Leo
Representative Anaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, I
don't know if any of you know,
but UNM is in the house today.
Mr. Speaker, thank you so much.
I know there should be
technically no clapping or
cheering, um, but Mr. Speaker,
if you'd indulge me, everyone's
a lobo.
Thank you, thank you. Um, good
morning. I'm happy to co-sponsor
today, uh, the UNM Day here in
the House of Representatives,
uh, I represent UNM. It is in my
district and I'm really honored
to have it there, um, I have
spent many countless hours, uh,
going back and forth talking
with our leaders, um, but also
talking with some of the other
guests that I have, uh, with me
today, um, the first person that
I would like to introduce today
as President Stokes.
Um, I have the pleasure of
welcoming UNM's president
Garnett Stokes to our House of
Representatives.
Welcome to the house. President
Stokes President Stokes was
installed as the 23rd president
of the University of New Mexico
on May 12, 2018. Here's my
favorite part. She's the first
woman to hold the post in the
university's history.
For her entire career President
Stokes has been a tireless
advocate for a transformative
student experience and empowered
faculty and a campus of culture
of continuous improvement. I
welcome her to the House of
Representatives and I'd now like
to pass this over to my
co-sponsor of UNM Day
Representative Alan Martinez
before I introduce other folks
after. Thank you. The gentleman
from Sandoval, Representative
Martinez.
Mr. Speaker. Um,
Today I'd like to, I have the
pleasure of introducing Doctor
Michael Richards.
Um
Doctor Richards, uh, is the
newly appointed.
As of last Tuesday, executive
Vice President of UNM Health
Sciences and CEO of the UNM
Health System.
A long time New Mexico resident
and advocate Doctor Richard
strongly supports the state
health care community and has
served in many roles at UNM and
the state of New Mexico for
years.
Most recently serving as UNM
senior vice president for
clinical affairs.
I would ask the members to
please join me in welcoming
Doctor Richards. Welcome, Dr.
Richards, and congratulations on
your new position. Thank you for
your service.
And with that I pass it back to
Representative Anaya. I'll pass
it back for you generally for
Bernie ornaya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, so
UNM doesn't just end while
you're on campus. Things happen
after you graduate from UNM. So,
um, there are some folks that I
would like to recognize now.
First of all, still at UNM, um,
but, uh, folks I've been really
proud to meet with throughout
the interim as well. Do we have
our committee on interns and
residents here CIR.
Yeah, right on. I'm so glad.
Thank you all. Thank you all for
being here.
If y'all don't know what CIR is
Committee on Interns and
residents. This is our union.
I'm so excited as a former
organizer I know that there's so
much power in our union. I also
really wanna thank you for
seeing your patients as whole
people. Thank you for not just
taking care of them in terms of,
you know, what's what's
happening with them physically,
but for also thinking about
things like transportation and
making sure that all of your
patients have access to health
care regardless of their
immigration status as well. So
thank you so much CIR I really.
appreciate you. Thank you for
being here.
Welcome to the house.
And last but certainly not
least, Mr. Speaker, um, we have
folks who are still at UNM and I
want folks to recognize the
faces that are here basically
every single day, um, you and I
graduates who are advocates here
in the building who work on so
many pieces of legislation.
Would you please stand up?
Thank you.
So these are folks from
organizations like ACLU, like
NAVA, and a native vote,
Equality in New Mexico, voters
first, also my friends from
ASUNM who will be working with
me on the menstrual products
bill. These are folks that care
about and work on policies like
democracy, healthcare,
indigenous rights, civil rights,
and all types of protections and
supports for our families, um,
that we hold so dear, so please
get to know these faces. These
are the baddies and the
room. Thank you so much for
being here. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Welcome
to the house. Happy UNMD.
Mr. Speaker, we have a
certificate, um, and we will get
those to um President Stokes and
President Richards after a floor
session. Thank you. That sounds
great. And, uh, for the record,
uh, should we do a voice vote to
see if everyone's a lobo?
I think the generator from
McKinley will uh will object to
that one. So we, we will not, we
will not do that.
Um, I did, I didn't get the memo
and I did wear my New Mexico
Highlands University purple tie.
I know. I didn't even go there.
I went to UNM, but I forgot.
Tough luck, um, gentle lady from
Berna Lee, you're representative
Parajon.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise
today to wish everyone a happy
lunar New Year. She and Kaila.
Um, I'm half Taiwanese, Yay.
Um,
majority leader Rena Suppanski
and I formed the two members of
the Asian-Americ caucus here in
the legislature.
Uh, this year is the year of the
wood snake and uh we celebrate
uh many Asian American cultures
across the United States today
will celebrate the new moon of
the lunar calendar. It's the
first year, day of the year of
the snake and this year, the
year of the snake is really
about shedding bad vibes,
rebirths, good luck, and
regality. The snake this year
specifically a wood animal, um.
the animals are associated with
different elements and the woods
specifically symbolizes growth,
flexibility, and tolerance.
Um
So I wish you all a very happy
Lunar New Year. Uh, there will
be, uh, Asian American, um,
Pacific Islander Day that will
be on February.
For, uh, here in the chamber.
I also wanted to rise to
recognize a few of my guests
today, uh, first is the, the
chair, county commissioner Erik
Olives if he could stand.
Welcome to the House,
Commissioner Olivas from Berlio
County.
Commissioner Erik Olivas is now
the chair of the County
commission of Bertolillo. He is
the youngest person to ever hold
that space, and we are so
excited for his championship.
General lady is Ceni.
We love him and accept him as
such.
I was just wondering.
He's a great advocate for our
climate, for behavioral health,
um, for a generation, um, I, and
I think you're the first
millennial to hold that spot
actually.
Did you just call him old?
No, millennial is young, Mr.
Speaker.
Chairman's millennial, just for
the record.
He's young too.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I have 2 more,
um, guess one is a great
constituent of mine, Doctor
Melissa Mason, who is here for
White Coat Day. She is upstairs,
just a reminder, I do the
gallery introductions, so get me
the name next time, but welcome
to the house. Great to have you.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker.
And that will be all. Thank you
so much.
Um, I do have a couple of guests
on the rostrum as well, um, for
you and MD actually one guest of
mine on the last room for you
and MD, and that is, uh, uh,
she's a planner at the
university director of campus
and capital and space planning.
So if you're hits you up for
capital loudly, this is the
person that knows exactly how
it's going to be spent. Uh, she
is my guest today. She is Rosie
Dudley. Rosie, welcome to the
house
And fun fact, Rosie is Claire
Dudley Chavez's sister, who you
all know, um, and Claire has a
long history in this building,
and I learned today that this is
Rosie's first time in the
roundhouse, so give her an extra
warm welcome, please.
General lady from Ber Leo
Representative Sereno. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
I'd like to introduce, uh, my
guest Michelle Rivera Ramirez,
um, Michelle was a guest was
going to stand up was a student
at Kennedy Middle School, one of
my students, math students, and
I'm very proud to say Michelle
is in his last semester of UNM
law school, so welcome to the
house.
He's also, uh, he's currently
the president of, of the
graduate Professional Student
Association at UNM. So welcome,
thank you, thank you.
They say that the best law
students are math.
Majors, so
That's what I've heard.
I would not know. That's what
I've heard.
Any other announcements?
Uh, gentlemen from Romero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to introduce my shadow for
today. I have Fernando Castillo,
um, who you may recognize who
shadowed me last year, um,
during the legislative session,
he is a former student of mine
at Crisco Heritage Academy High
School, and he's currently
attending um UNM as an undergrad
student and as a master's
student in political science, so
hopefully we can get Fernando a
seat here sometime soon, even if
it's mine.
It was good to see you.
District 10 is looking for an
improvement, so.
He is a constituent, Mr.
Speaker, so.
She's saying
Uh, uh, gentlemen from Lee
representative Pettigrew.
Mr. Speaker, I rise with a point
of personal privilege, if I may.
Mr. Speaker, today, uh,
yesterday was a rally for
pro-life uh Alliance for Life,
and today was a rally in the
rotunda for Save the Baby.
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to, with
your permission to read a few
quotes from the Pope.
Uh, from his New Year's Day
message.
Gentlemen, we generally don't
read on the floor, but, uh,
we'll make an exception. Uh,
please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, Pope
Francis ushered in a new year
with a renewed appeal for the
faithful to reject abortion,
calling for a firm commitment to
protect and respect life from
conception to natural birth.
Or from conception to natural
death.
He, he talked about
Everyone learns to care. Every
child born of a woman and to
protect.
The precious gift of life.
Life in the womb, lives of
children, lives of the
suffering, the poor, the
elderly, the lonely, and the
dying.
Hope continued to say, I asked
for a firm commitment to respect
the dignity of human life from
conception to natural death.
So that each person may cherish
his or her own life and may look
with hope to the future.
Mr. Speaker, I could continue to
read, but um,
And actually, I think I will. He
actually made the statement that
the prophecy had previously
followed small-minded rules
about hot button issues such as
abortion.
Mr. Speaker, before we change
the law in the state of New
Mexico in 2020, there were 5880
abortions.
In 2023, that number exceeded
20,000.
Today my intention was to pass
out.
A baby bottle
From desert rose Women Resource
Center.
Because of some rule issues we
weren't able to do that. These
baby bottles will be delivered
to.
Each legislator office.
Over the next couple of days and
they will be picked up at the
end of the end of the session or
sometime around March 14th.
Mr. Speaker, these donations
help.
Not only does a rose Women's
Resource Center that helps life
affirming service provider
associations across the state.
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk
just a little bit about what
Desert Rose does from everything
from providing medical testing?
Um
Assistance with the proper use
of the abortion pill or abortion
pill reversal.
After abortion or after birth
support.
Mr. Speaker, Desert Rose also
started.
Within the last year, a
Um, service for men.
Unknownst to some people, it
actually takes a male and a
female to make a baby. And so,
um,
They are providing.
Mail services.
To show young fathers.
Their role in life with respect
to having a child or supporting.
There's their partner in
whatever decision is made.
Mr. Speaker, once again I
appreciate the opportunity to
stand up with a point of
personal privilege. Each of
these problems will be set out.
Um, to each legislature.
Uh, if you're not willing to
donate to that, maybe, Mr.
Speaker, somebody that comes
into your offices. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, uh, and before I move
on to the gentleman from San
Juan with an announcement, um,
just to remind the body, uh,
we've got to be really careful
when it comes to fundraising,
obviously we've got rules, uh,
actually laws against campaign
fundraising and also uh there's
a house rule, um, that we
follow, um,
That prohibits uh fundraising,
so, um, you know, what whatever
you do on your all's free time
is, is, is up to you, uh, but
that's a, it's a pretty slippery
slope, so just making that clear
now so that if it comes up
later, we, we know exactly what
the expectation will be
gentlemen from San Juan
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also
rise, uh, to acknowledge, uh.
3 guests that I have here, but
before I acknowledge my guest, I
also want to acknowledge, um,
former Miss India New Mexico
who's also here and today's her
birthday if she can please
stand. Alicia Coriz.
And
Happy birthday.
They, they Speaker, um, my, my
guest I'll be introducing.
Uh, we've actually been seeing
them for the past 3 days, and
this is the 3rd day that they're
gonna be here before they will
be heading back home to
Farmington, New Mexico. I, I, I,
I mentioned home because that's
what the students told me. They
consider Farming to New Mexico
their home because there's, they
stay in a residential dormitory,
75% of of the time that that
they're here although they are
from Arizona or from other
states, uh, they, uh, consider
Farmington, New Mexico their
home.
And uh as I uh if I could have
them rise, uh, the first guest
is, uh, Colin Messi Yoma. He is
a sophomore, uh, Navajo Hopi and
Tawa. Colin has played football
and competed in power lifting
for Navajo Prep's team.
Bradley Redhouse?
is a junior. He is a Navajo,
Bradley holds the title for
Mister Atsa Hastin as a cultural
ambassador.
Hailey Redhouse is a senior. She
is also a Navajo Haley holds the
title of student ad hoc board
member and student Senate
president of Navajo
Preparatories.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen gentle lady
from Katherine Sierra Socorro
Valencia representative
Armstrong. Uh, thank you Mr.
Speaker. I just wanted to rise
and talk a little bit about Miss
Rodeo New Mexico, um, her name
is uh Lisa Sower, um, Alisa is a
proud resident of a rural
community of Moriarity New Mexic
Moriarity New Mexico. She
graduated from Moriarity High
School in 2017 where she was
accomplished and accomplished 3
sport athlete. After high
school, she chased her dream of
giving back to the.
Community and in 2021 and at the
age of 22, Alyssa.
Opened clover feed and supply
Moriarity establishing herself
as a successful business owner,
uh, selling locally grown hay
and grain and the from the
Estancia Valley, uh, farmers and
ranchers. She embodies the
principles of determination,
grit, strong moral character.
She began began her reign in
rodeo royalty when she was, when
she won the 2019 Rodeo de Santa
Fe Queen contest.
She went on to finish up in the
top 10 in the turquoise circuit
competition and was recently
crowned Miss Rodeo New Mexico
during 2025. Alicia Alicia will
be representing this New Mexico,
uh, agricultural and rural
heritage and many livestock
events throughout the country.
Last week she was in Colorado at
the National Western Stock Show
and she'll be in the Rapid City
Rodeo in South Dakota next week.
She will end, uh, her year
competing for the title of Miss
Rhode.
America in December during the
national finals rodeo in Las
Vegas, Nevada. She went over to
the dark side, but I really
wanted to talk about, uh, women
business owners, rural New
Mexico life and supporting the
local uh people in her
community, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Wonderful. Thank you.
Thank you for that introduction,
and I'm sorry she's not here,
um, but maybe, uh.
Maybe while we do the other
stuff we're gonna do today, you
guys can pull her back in. uh,
thank you for doing that, uh,
gentle lady from Los Alamos in
Santa Fe, Representative
Chandler. Um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I'd just like to remind
everyone that your House
Judiciary Committee meeting will
be meeting today at 1:30 and it
is an educational session on AI
and the implications for all of
us in society and in terms of
how it might impact us and what
other states are doing about it.
So. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Sounds fascinating. I will be
there.
Lets take note.
Gentleman from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, your house
appropriations and Finance
Committee will be meeting at
1:30 today. There'll be a brief
full committee meeting, uh, in
room 307 in order to um talk a
little bit about some of the
federal funding issues and then
we'll break into the
subcommittees, which will be
held in room 307, uh, staying in
room 307 in room 315.
Members take note.
She had a lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Serrato.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
rural development land grants
and Cultural Affairs Committee
will be meeting tomorrow morning
at 9:00 a.m. at the request of
the sponsor, HB 135 has been
rolled to a later time, but we
will be having presentations
from uh experts on land grants,
as eas, and hopefully one more
presentation. Thank you
breakfast burritos. Thank you
very much. We'll see you
tomorrow.
Any other announcements? The
lady from Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker house
labor veterans and military
affairs Committee will be
meeting tomorrow, Thursday at
1:30 in room 315 and we will be
hearing 5 bills that will be up
um hopefully are already up and
announced thank you so much.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports it is ordered.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee to
him has been referred House Bill
21 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Linda Sarato chair.
Mr. Speaker, move a
adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
21. All those in favor 5A9.
Albos, the IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, the rural
development, land grants and
cultural affairs Committee, to
whom he has been referred House
Bill 24 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Rural
Development, land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24 do
pass, and thence referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Pintoerrato chair.
adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable community report and
house not 24, but a favorable
committee report on how rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
Al Bosna, the I have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your old
development, land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee, Tom
has been referred House Bill 41
has had it under consideration
in reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Linda Sarato, chair, move
adoption. We're adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 41. All those in
favor signified by A9.
I suppose
I have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor veterans
and military affairs Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 66 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
66. All those in favor if I was
in a.
Ipone, the eyes have it be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 67 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the education
committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royval
Caballero, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
favorable report in House Bill
67. All those in favor of see if
I say no.
I suppose, the it can be
reported after.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 68 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero chair Mr. Speaker, I
move adoption adoption of a
favorable report in House Bill
68. All those in favor in 5 I.
I supposed the eyes have it be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 4
has had it under consideration
in reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Amends referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrari chair.
Mr. Speaker, we adoption.
For an adoption of a federal
committee report in House Bill
4. All those in favors say 9.
I suppose, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 12 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
report on House Bill 12. All
those in favor probably say 9
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 12 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
report on House Bill 12. All
those in favor probably say no
or.
Let's try that again. All those
favorite saying a.
A name.
The eyes have a career report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 26
has headed under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne G Ferrari chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report in House Bill 26. All
those in favor and I say aye.
Yeah, I have it. Can we report
adopted, Mr. Speaker, your
consumer and Public Affairs
Committee too has been referred
House Bill 27 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
education committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrari,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move it
adoption favorable report on
House Bill 27. All those in
favor and I.
was
I just have it can we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
asas and Water Resources
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 85 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then refer to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Christina Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report on House
Bill 85. All those in favor
signified by saying aye.
Opposed Nate.
The I have it can be reported
up.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business.
Introduction of legislation. It
is ordered.
clerk to read.
House Bill 187 introduced by
Representative Small for the
legislative finance Committee,
an act relating to the
government results and
opportunity expendable trust
requiring state agencies to
submit an accountability and
evaluation plan for programs and
projects that receive funding
from the trust to the state
budget division of the
Department of Finance and
Administration and the
legislative finance committee,
House Bill 187.
House Bill 187 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 188 introduced by
Representative Silva and act
relating to magistrate court
expanding the Dona Anna District
Magistrate.
Writing circuit to include
Sunland Park and Chaparral.
House Bill 188. 188. Haven't
been read to us by title is
order printed and referred to
the House government election
and Indian Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 189, introduced by
Representative Hochman v. Hill.
An act relating to licensing,
amending and enacting sections
of the chiropractic physician
Practice Act to require that the
chiropractic board include a
certified advanced practice
chiropractic physician member.
Requiring applicants for
licensure to provide evidence of
graduation from an accredited
chiropractic program.
Expanding the chiropractic
board's authority to create
classifications for level one
and level 2 certified advanced.
Practice, chiropractic
physicians in the advanced
practice chiropractic
certification registry,
established requirements and
procedures for certification and
certify applicants, providing
for the expansion of authority
for level one certified advanced
practice chiropractic physicians
and Level 2 certified Advanced
Practice chiropractic phys
physicians to incorporate
certain clinical procedures and
prescribe dangerous drugs. House
Bill 189.
Is the 189 have been read to us
by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 190 introduced by
Representative Hochman v. Hill.
An act relating to victims of
crime, amending the victims of
Crime Act to include battery
upon a healthcare worker and
human trafficking as applicable
criminal offenses, allowing a
victim's representative who is
an attorney authorized to
practice in New Mexico to file
pleadings and appear or
otherwise speak on behalf of a
victim in court proceedings.
Providing that a notice period
for a court proceeding that is
shorter than 7 working days is
allowed only when a court finds
exceptional circumstances.
Creating a procedure for a
victim to appeal a court's
decision to hold a hearing after
a notice period shorter than 7
working days, clarifying that a
court shall provide language
interpretation services and
other services necessary for a
victim to participate in a court
proceeding, creating a private
cause of action for violations
of duties or deprivation of
rights provided in the victims
Crime Act waiving sovereign
immunity authorizing the
attorney.
General to file a petition
against the state or political
subdivision of the state to seek
civil penalties for violations
of the victims of Crime Act.
Prescribing civil penalties,
making conforming amendments.
House Bill 190.
How about 190 you haven't been
it was by title his order
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 191 introduced by
Representative Small and act
relating to public funds,
creating the wildfire
suppression fund and the
wildfire preparedness fund
requiring reporting, adding and
amending definitions in the
forest Conservation Act, making
appropriations. House Bill 191.
Is 191 haven't been there twice
by title or printed and referred
to the rural developmental land
grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 192 introduced by
Representative Hernan Joshua
Hernandez, Senator Navas
representative.
Colin, Senator Block.
J. Block and Representative
Cates, an act relating to
communications, providing
Department of Information
Technology responsibilities to
report on digital trunked radio
communication system subscriber
fees, making an appropriation
House Bill 192.
How's 192 haven't been read to
us by tilers or printed and
referred to the House government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 193 introduced by
representatives.
G. Andres Romero Baca Garrett
Mirabal Moya, and Lara for the
legislative education Study
Committee, an act relating to
education, providing for the
legislative education study
committee to study issues
pertaining to New Mexico's
public educational system. House
Bill 193.
I was about 193. I've been there
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 194 introduced by
Representatives Johnson, Ona
Nonu, little.
And Joseph Hernandez.
An act relating to school,
protecting the cultural
expression of students at
graduation and promotion
ceremonies. House Bill 194.
House Bill 194 have been me
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house.
To the House government election
and affairs Committee, and then
after that, the House Education
Committee.
House Bill 195 introduced by
Representative Garrett, an act
relating to school personnel.
Providing a tiered salary system
for school nurses, providing
minimum salaries at the same
rate as teachers, creating a
program unit for national board
certification of certain
registered nurses. House Bill
195.
I'll be 195. I haven't been
there twice by title order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 196 introduced by
Representative Garrett endorsed
by the New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight Committee,
an act making appropriations
from the general fund to the
Department of Finance and
Administration for the New
Mexico Finance Authority to
carry out the purposes of the
behavioral health.
Capital fund, primary care
capital fund, and childcare
facility revolving loan fund.
I was 186, haven't been read to
as by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 197 introduced by
Representative Joseph Sanchez,
an act relating to public
safety, amending the definition
of silver alert in the missing
person's information and
Reporting Act to include
cognitive decline or impairment.
House 197.
I was the 197 have been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 198 introduced by
Representative Lente an act
relating to taxation, increasing
the amount of installment
agreements that shall be
available for public inspection.
Amending certain provisions on
interest on deficiencies,
increasing the minimum amount of
interest the taxation and
revenue department shall pay for
overpayment of tax, increasing
certain penalties for failure to
pay a tax or file a return
interfering with administration
of the tax administration Act
assaulting taxation and revenue
Department employees and
reviewing taxpayer return
information. House Bill 198 198.
I've been there twice my title
is.
Or printed and referred to the
House Judiciary Committee, then
the House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 199 introduced by
Representative Lente for the
legislative finance Committee,
an act relating to taxation,
authorizing the reveal of
taxpayer return information to
staff of the legislative Finance
Committee to evaluate programs
that have a fiscal impact to the
state or a political subdivision
of the state House Bill 19919
been read by tilers or reprinted
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee. There's the
House taxation and revenue
Commit.
House Bill 200.
Introduced by representatives
Grola and Torres Velasquez, an
act relating to public school
finance establishing program
units for licensed school
employees with bilingual and
teaching English to speakers of
other languages endorsements
providing for the calculation of
program units for bilingual and
teaching English to speakers of
other languages.
Endorsements providing for
public education department
verification House Bill 200.
House Bill 200 haven't been read
twice by titles or a printed and
referred to the house government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee.
There's a house education
committee.
House Bill 201.
Introduced by representatives
Era.
Bacca G Andres Romero Corola.
And Mirabal Moya.
For the legislative education
Study Committee, an act relating
to school personnel, raising the
minimum wage for all school
employees. House Bill 201.
House Bill 201 haven't been read
twice by title is auto printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 202 introduced by
Representatives Joshua Hernandez
Ree Murphy.
Alan T. Martinez.
And Dixon, an act relating to
taxation, creating the gun
storage income tax credit. House
Bill 202.
House Bill 202 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
commerce and Economic
Development Committee. Then the
House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 203 introduced by
Representative Dixon, an act
relating to state government
amending the Children, Youth and
Families Department Act
requiring the use of
state-issued electronic devices
when performing departmental
duties requiring the backup and
retention of electronic records.
House Bill 203.
House Bill 203 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 204 introduced by
Representative Dixon and Reeb,
an act relating to criminal
procedure, providing for the
right to refuse pretrial
statements or interviews by a
child victim, child witness, and
adult victim, providing
procedures. House Bill 204.
Has 204. House Bill 204. Haven't
been it as my title, old printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 205 induced by
Representative Dixon and
Armstrong for the legislative
Finance Committee an act
relating to child welfare,
creating the Secretary of
Children, Youth and Families
nominating Committee, requiring
the Secretary of Children, Youth
and Families to be selected from
a list of qualified nominees
created by the nominating
committee.
Moving rulemaking authority for
the plan of care process from
the Children, Youth and Families
Department to the healthcare
Authority.
Updating requirements for plans
of care, requiring the Children,
Youth and Families Department to
implement the multi-level
response system statewide,
enacting the family's first act
within the Children's code.
Requiring the Children, Youth
and Families Department to
develop and implement a
strategic plan for approval by
the federal administration for
Children and Families.
Requiring provisions of the
strategic plan to identify and
provide foster care prevention
services that meet the
requirements of the Federal
family.
First prevention Services Act,
providing for children, youth
and families department
consultation with the Early
childhood education and care
department, the healthcare
authority and the Department of
Health.
Providing strategic plan
requirements.
Transferring the substitute care
advisory council from the
regulations from the regulation
and licensing department to the
administrative office of the
courts.
Defining terms in the citizen.
Substitute Care Review Act,
providing for staffing of the
substitute care advisory
council, establishing criteria
for care for case review,
providing for rules pertaining
to volunteer members, providing
access to and requirements for
confidentiality of certain
records and information.
Changing reporting requirements.
Requiring the substitute care
advisory counsel to provide the
Children, Youth and Families
Department with case reports
requiring the children usingth
and Families department to
respond to case reports
requiring the substitute care
advisory council staff and the
Children, Youth and Families
department to meet quarterly
transferring employees property
and contractual obligations,
amending, repealing, and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978. House Bill 205.
Can you hold on.
House Bill 205 have been twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House government
election and Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
Remembers, before we continue, I
want to call our attention to
two bills where I switched the
order of the committees. I'd
like to get that corrected.
How's been 193 introduced by
representatives Andres Romero,
Baca.
Garrett Mirabel Moya and Lara.
I read out how government
elections in Indian affairs,
then House education, it should
be the other way around. How's
education, then how government
election in the Indian affairs.
And then House Bill 200, same
problem. I must be dyslexic.
First committee should be House
Education Committee, the the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee again
House Bill 200.
Refer to the House Education
Committee, then it's the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 206 introduced by
Representative Zerrera
Lindstrom, Lara, Ortiz, and
Zamora endorsed by the New
Mexico Finance Authority
Oversight Committee, an act
relating to finance authorizing
the New Mexico Finance Authority
to make loans or grants from the
water project fund for certain
water projects declaring an
emergency. House Bill 206.
House Bill 206 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
house.
Agricultural and say yeah, water
resources Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 207 introduced by
representatives Doo, Lujan,
Jones.
And Vincent, an act relating to
taxation, expanding an income
tax credit for the adoption of a
special needs child to the
adoption of any child,
increasing the amount of credit.
House Bill 207.
House Bill 207 haven't been read
to us by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill
28, introduced by
Representatives Doo, Vincent
Chatfield, Murphy, and Duncan,
an act relating to elections,
allowing a qualified elector
applying for a hunting or
fishing license to register to
vote at the Department of Game
and Fish House Bill 208. House
Bill 208 haven't been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian affairs.
Committee.
Mm
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Senate has released its its hold
on Ms. Rodeo in New Mexico 2025.
She has joined us. Please join
me in congratulating Alisa
Sauder, thank you for being
here. Welcome to the house.
Miss Rodeo in New Mexico 2025.
I'm sorry, the Senate took so
long.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
back to the order of business
introduction of legislation.
House Bill 209 introduced by
Representative Doo, an act
relating to the sunshine Portal
requiring the posting of website
links to the statutory language
that creates state funds in the
sunshine Portal.
House Bill 209.
House Bill 209 have been read
twice by titles or reprinted and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 210 introduced by
Representative Doo, an act
relating to rural economic
development enacting the vacant
rural Building Act, directing
the adoption of a building code
variance procedure applicable to
the occupancy of a vacant
commercial building by a small
business that will reduce
compliance costs, encourage
rural economic development and
protect public safety, providing
powers and duties. House Bill
210. House Bill 210 has been
read twice by titles or
reprinted or referred to the
house rural Development.
languages and cultural affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 211 introduced by
Representatives Ferrari, Kates,
Anaya, and Sarriana and act
relating to taxation, amending
the eligibility and application
requirements of the new solar
market development income tax
credit, increasing the amount of
credit allowed for solar systems
with at least 15 kilowatt hours
of storage capacity, creating
the new solar market development
corporate income tax credit,
House Bill 211 House Bill 2111
twice by titles.
sort of printed and referred to
the house energy environment and
natural resources Committee,
then the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 212 introduced by
representatives Ferrari, Sarana,
and Kates, an act relating to
the environment, enacting the
per and poly.
Plural
All kills yeah substances
Protection Act prohibiting
certain products that contain an
intentionally add her or poly
floral oral substance.
That hurts. Authorizing the
environmental environmental
Improvement Board to adopt rules
prohibiting certain products
that contain an an intentionally
added or poly flo or kill
substance requiring disclosure
and information and testing of
products sold, offered for sale
or distributed for sale by the
state that contain an
intentionally added per polyflu
oral kill substance, providing
penalties, house.
2:12.
House 212 and I'm so glad I
don't have to read that word.
House Bill 212. Haven't been
there twice by title is or
printed it referred to the
house, energy, environment, and
natural resources Committee.
There's the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 213 introduced by
Representatives Ferrari, Kates,
and Sarignon, an act relating to
taxation, creating the school
solar income tax credit and the
school so solar corporate income
tax credit, House Bill 213. 213.
Haven't been read twice by
title. He ordered printed and
referred to the House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee, the the
House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 214 introduced by
Representatives Gallegos, Anya
Nonu, Silva, and Sapansky.
An act relating to health,
enacting the Doula credentialing
and Access Act requiring the
Secretary of Health to
promulgate rules to establish a
voluntary credentialing process
to allow doulas to enroll as
Medicaid providers, appointing a
doula credentialing advisory
council.
Establishing a process for
collaboration among state
agencies, local government
entities, and private entities
for sharing certain information
regarding services provided by
credentialed doulas requiring
annual reporting.
Creating the Doula Fund
requiring hospitals and free
standing birth centers to create
policies to allow doulas to
accompany patients receiving
certain services on their
premises. House Bill 214. How
Bill 214 haven't been written to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the house, Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 215 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero
and Rubio.
An act relating to property and
acting a new section of the
uniform owner resident Relations
Act prohibiting the use of
artificial intelligence to
manipulate renting price. House
Bill 215.
How's Bill 215? Haven't been
here twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House of Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 216 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
making an appropriation to the
crime victims reparation
Commission for community-based
domestic violence programs,
House Bill 216. 216 haven't been
read to us by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
House Judiciary Committee,
there's the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 217 introduced by
Representative Herndon an act
relating to professional
licensure acting the counseling
compact. House Bill 217 1 twice
by title is printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 218 introduced by
Representative Lente.
An act relating to taxation.
Updating and deleting outdated
provisions in certain sections
of chapter 7 NMSA 1978, amending
certain position provisions of
the Metropolitan redevelopment
Code and the tax and increment
for development Act to conform
with destination sourcing,
amending that section of law
that allows the taxation revenue
Department to make adjustments
of distributions and transfers
to political subdivisions
increasing the amount a taxpayer
may owe.
to allow quarterly or
semi-annual filing, allowing the
Secretary of Taxation Revenue to
compromise.
Comprise asserted liability in
the case of a denial or a
refund or credit.
Increasing the amount of
installment agreements,
abatements, refunds, and credits
that shall be made available for
public inspection.
Allowing a completed return to
constitute a filing of a claim
for refund, removing Attorney
General approval of closing
agreements.
And of refunds over $20,000.
Amending certain provisions
regarding a lien for a tax
liability, amending certain
provisions of interest on
deficiencies, providing that
electronic filers file and pay
with the same deadline as all
other files filers removing
contingent rates for the
petroleum.
Products loading fee, providing
that local options, gross
receipts, and compensating tax
rates shall be effective on July
1 following the election or
adopted ordinances ordinance.
Unless an emergency or
unforeseen occurrence occurs,
streamlining advance payments of
the certain oil and gas taxes,
clarifying the application of
certain oil production taxes on
skim oil, allowing tax liens to
be recorded without a notary's
signature.
Aligning a worker's compensation
fee due date to the withholding
tax due date, amending a section
of law 2024, chapter 41,
amending and repealing sections
of the NMSA 1978. House Bill
218.
Is 218 haven't been read to as
by titles or printed and
referred to the House taxation
and revenue Committee.
House Bill 219 introduced by
Representative Small, an act
relating to state parks,
providing for the development
and designation of Slot Canyon
Riverlands State Park as a new
state park, providing
restrictions on the sale, trade,
barter, or exchange of holdings
in certain parcels of the park,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 219. 219 was by title is
printed and referred to the
house, rural development, land
grants and cultural affairs
Committee.
Thence the house appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 220 introduced by
Representatives Lujan and
Sanchez.
An act relating to property,
ensuring fire mitigation by
allowing ignition resistant
construction and property
interests.
And limiting conditions that
post fire hazards, allowing
ignition resistant construction
in homeowner association bylaws
and limiting conditions that
pose fire hazards. House Bill
220.
House Bill 220 haven't been read
to us by tilers or reprinted and
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee plans the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 221 introduced by
Representatives Lujan and
Sanchez, an act relating to
intellectual property, enacting
the voice and visual likeness
rights Act, providing for
private enforcement prescribing
civil remedies. House Bill 221.
221 have been read to us by
titles or printed and referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 222.
Introduced by.
Representative Andrea Romero and
Representative G. Andres Romero
and act relating to the
environment, requiring
disclosures of chemicals used in
hydraulic fracturing operations
and downhole operations
prohibiting the use of hydraulic
fracturing fluids.
Drilling fluids and propens that
contain per or here we go again.
Poly floral.
Alco, I'll kill substances
prohibiting the use of chemicals
and downhole operations that
have not been disclosed
prescribing penalties. House
Bill 222.
House Bill 222. I haven't been
there twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 223 introduced by
Representative Corola Mejia and
Dao, an act relating to public
school finance, increasing the
cost differential factor used to
calculate bilingual
multicultural education program
units increasing the cost
differential factor by 0.1 each
year for 5 years. House Bill
223.
House Bill 223.
I made rew by title is
overprinted and referred to the
House Education Committee, the
the House of Recreations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 224 introduced by
Representative Chandler.
An act relating to financial
institutions enacting the
student loan Bill of Rights Act,
providing for a student loan
services, servicers license
delineating the duties of a
student loan servicer.
Giving administrative
responsibility enforcement power
to the financial institutions
division of the regulations and
licensing licensing department,
providing for discharge of
private education loans upon a
showing of permanent disability,
requiring that alternative
repayment options be offered to
borrowers equally providing
rights for call centers,
including notice and access to
information, providing for
co-signer release prohibiting
certain acceleration of private
education loans.
creating the position of student
loan on but defining certain
violations of the student loan
Bill of Rights Act as unfair and
unconscious unconsciousable
trade practices.
Creating a private right of
action, creating the student
loan Bill of Rights Fund,
providing for judicial
enforcement providing penalties,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 224.
House Bill 224 have been retized
by titles or printed in and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 225 introduced by
Representative Alan Martinez, an
act relating to taxation,
creating the foster parent
income tax credit, House Bill
225. 25 by tilers or reprinted
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
thence the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 226 introduced by
Representative Alan Martinez, an
act relating to taxation,
increasing the rural healthcare
practitioner tax credit hospital
226.
26. How's Bill 226 haven't been
read twice by title.
His order of printed and
referred to the house rural
development land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee, then
the House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 227 introduced by
Representative Serato and act
relating to finance, amending
the local economic Development
Act to include childcare
facilities as qualifying
entities. House Bill 227. 227
have been read to us by title is
or printed and referred to the
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
Committee, then a House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee.
House Memorial 5 introduced by
Representative Lundstrom, a
memorial proclaiming February 6,
2025, Gallant McKinley County
Day in the House of
Representatives. House Memorial
5 by title is or not printed and
placed on the speaker's table.
House Memorial 6 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, a
memorial declaring January 30th,
2025, New Mexico, Mesa Day in
the House of Representatives.
House Memorial 6.
How's Memorial 6? I'm beenized
by title is or not printed and
placed on the speaker's table.
House Memorial 7 introduced by
Representatives Pettigrew, Hall,
Vincent, and Lord, a memorial
declaring February 10, 2025, law
enforcement Appreciation Day in
the House of Representatives.
House Memorial 7.
How's Memorial 7. He was by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Memorial 8 introduced by
Representative Alan Martinez, a
memorial recognizing the Milken
Family Foundation and the Milken
Education Educator Awards for
their contributions to the New
Mexico public education.
House Memorial 8 Memorial. I
haven't been by title, is it not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
How's Joint Memorial One
introduced by Representative
Sanchez, a joint memorial
raising awareness of the
contribution of certified water
and wastewater operators to
public health.
And urging the legislature to
elevate certified water and
wastewater operators to
essential workers and fund a
study on providing certified
water and wastewater operators
with state health insurance and
retirement benefits. House Joint
Memorial One Memorial have been
twice by titles or are printed
and referred to the house,
agriculture asset gas and Water
Resources Committee.
House Joint Memorial 2
introduced by Representatives
Herrera de la Cruz, Johnson,
Sapansy, and Senator Hamblin, a
joint memorial requesting the
New Mexico Legislative Council
to convene a task force to study
combining.
Standing in interim committees
into committees that function
during the legislative session
and the interim. House Joint
Memorial 2 Memorial by titles
that were printed and referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House resolution 1 introduced by
Representative McQueen. A
resolution amending the House
rules to require publication of
certain information on committee
reports, House Resolution one.
How's resolution one have been
my title is printed refer to the
house.
Rules and order of business
committee.
Right.
House joint resolution 9
introduced by Representative
Alan Martinez, a joint
resolution proposing to amend
Article 2 Section 13 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
allow conditions for denial of
bail, and for pretrial
detention, remove the
requirement that bail denial be
made only by a court of record,
remove the limitation of bail
denial to persons charged with a
felony and allow bail denial for
a person who has previously
failed to appear before the
court and
is a flight risk. House joint
resolution 9. How's your
resolution 9? Haven't been twice
by title is it reprinted and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 10
introduced by Representative
Royal Caballero, a joint
resolution proposing to amend
Article 7, Section 1 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
remove a felony conviction as a
disqualifier to vote. House
Joint Resolution 10. How's
resolution 10 have been by title
is order printed and referred to
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
I move we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business, Mr.
Speaker
announcements generated from
Katherine Sierra.
Socorro Valencia, Representative
Armstrong, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I just wanted to remind
everyone that the mining
association, uh, receptionist
tonight from 6 to 8 at the La
Fonda and they would love to see
you there. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker,
gentle lady from
Bernard Lee, Representative
Gurola, thank you Mr. Speaker.
Um, I have a pleasure to
introduce you, uh, Sarah Hussein
who is a student from UNM and is
my shadow today, uh, she's
studying political science she's
very impressed with the work
that we do here and she wants to
become a legislator at one
point.
Fantastic. District 11 is
looking for a good
representative.
District 11.
Welcome to the house.
I'm District 11, by the way. I'm
not putting you all on blast.
Just to clarify, any other
announcements?
Young lady from Berlin
representative of onion Arnu.
Mr. Speaker, your house commerce
and Economic Development
Committee will be meeting in
room 317 at 1:30.
Members take note. Any other
announcements?
School pictures tomorrow and
Friday.
But they're already set up
starting at one until 3 today.
So if you're dressed up today
and you just wanna go get your
picture out of the way. You
could do that today between 1
and 3 in the lounge, otherwise
tomorrow and Friday.
Picture a in the legislature,
uh, financial disclosure
statements due at the end of
business January 31st. That will
be your last day. That's a good
state will be in the house
lounge on the 31st from 10 to 12
to assist any members who may
have difficulty filing a
statement online MBD
transactions, I believe they are
still there today until 5
o'clock.
Uh, simple transactions, etc.
etc.
Uh, and I think.
That is everything on my list,
um, any other announcements
before we leave for the day?
Members a plan for tomorrow will
be to, uh, come on the floor,
um, at 10:30 we've got a couple
of memorials, um, and some
guests to, to, um, to introduce
and then a joint session with
the Senate at noon to hear from
our members uh of our
congressional delegation.
So is there another
announcements, I will go to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe for a
motion.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
The House of Senate recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
