The clerk to call the roll of
those appearing on online.
Representative Alcon.
Good morning I'm here good
morning Representative all
caught up Representative Alcon
is here Representative Anderson.
Because.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
I'm here Representative
Armstrong is here Representative
Gail Armstrong Representative
Gail Armstrong is here
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative black.
Representative black is here
Representative Brown.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder
Representative Crowder is here
Representative Dixon
Representative Dixon is here
Representative Dow.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell is
present.
Representative Garcia.
Representative.
Representative is here
Representative the eagles
Representative Gallegos is here
Representative lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord is here
Representative Madrid.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative Matthews.
Here Representative Matthews is
here Representative McQueen.
Here Representative is here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Your.
Representative Roger Montoya is
here Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdell Culbert.
Representative Culver is here.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Here Representative G. Andrés
Romero is here Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Serrato.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Dow is here.
Roll call we have a quorum.
Morning members of the second
the last day of the legislature
twenty twenty two.
we're gonna go to the invocation
and for that I'm gonna call on
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam speaker.
Let us bring.
All right thank you again for
this opportunity thank you for
the gift of life lord so many
things that we cannot control
order heart beating or longs
breeding we rely upon you for
for for life and all good things
that provision for that.
The report for your wisdom our
to go to do the people's
business or maybe maybe not the
Forgetful of why we're here in
who we represent floor
maintenance for cannot be about
ourselves about our constituents
in the best of our state.
Born as things are winding down
and and tempers tend to the fire
in the last thirty six hours
lorries pre for the gift of
perseverance lower that you've
given us to to finish well to
finish strong.
We pray for for the love that
flows from you only or even as
we deal with each other in
conflict.
And in disagreements or grateful
for the opportunities that you
give us to live in for a free
nation and a beautiful state
court we're just praying for
your your hand be upon this
place it's increasingly per
Heyman.
We're gonna go to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana for the
pledge of allegiance.
Next to go to the gentleman from
Chavis eighty you know terror
county counties Representative
Townsend for the New Mexico
pledge.
Gentleman from Bernalillo good
morning madam speaker good
morning members and we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
seeing no junction.
So ordered.
The lady from McKinley and San
Juan Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you madam speaker I.
Like to make an announcement on
the conference committee for the
general appropriation act that
will happen at ten thirty and I
believe that's going to be in
room three twenty two.
The gentle lady members take no.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker
Really wish that the speaker was
in the room to to hear this
personal point of privilege.
Center point.
Thank you madam speaker.
Yesterday.
We had
not technical breaking of the
rules Madam speaker but that a.
Pretty much a stretching of the
rules
in Judiciary Committee
yesterday.
Speaker of Bill that is that was
meant to protect.
Election workers and county
clerks from threats of violence
that bill was taken over at the
last minute.
As we are just at the end of the
session and that bill was
hijacked for political purposes
Madam speaker.
Speaker that bill which has
which has nothing to do with
elections other than that it was
to protect election workers
Madam speaker.
That bill is hijacked.
The two page bill became a
hundred and sixty eight page
bill Madam speaker.
the minority was given that bill
literally.
Two hours before the committee
was supposed to meet.
Madam speaker the public did not
have that bill in advance
we have rumors of the bill
because actually our staff on
covered what was it that looks
like an initial amendment to
that bill of yesterday but when
we asked for a copy of that bill
Madam speaker that that bill was
not given to us and we were told
that we would get it to you as
soon as it was ready and madam
speaker we got that yesterday
morning.
So that's bigger.
What I'm not sure of is there's
actual election bill that's been
on the side for over a week.
And that's house bill six Madam
speaker that bill house bill six
is a truly bipartisan effort.
That bill.
Actually is the county clerk's
bill.
Twenty eight of the thirty three
county clerk's including
Bernalillo county Dona ana
county Rio Arriba County.
as I said this is that I go down
this list the the county clerk's
on this list the vast majority
or Democrats.
And madam speaker they've been
working on this bill since well
before the session began.
That.
Was work done in the by members
of both chambers in by members
of both parties.
And instead of pushing that bill
forward even if there was
amendments that would have
needed to take place within that
bill.
To to reach maybe a different
conclusion.
Know that bill was not the
vehicle that was not the bill
that we need that that that an
actual elections build that was
not the one that was amended
instead madam speaker.
The bill that was amended was a
bill to protect election
workers.
Madam speaker in that committee
on that plane Senate bill of one
forty four was hijacked.
Members of.
The minority we're not allowed
to even debate that bill one
member.
Madam speaker was allowed to
debate the bill.
One speaker one of our members
was able to try and that that
bill.
Madam speaker at a if this is
one thing if we're going to say
that a tax bill was hijacked at
the last minute something
concerning appropriations maybe
was hijacked taken over and in
the last hour was presented or a
for substitute it was entered on
a different topic that we've
been debating throughout the
session Madam speaker.
Election bill the facts every
voter in the state of New
Mexico.
An election bill deserve to be
handled the way house bill six
was our Senate bill six was
handled.
Senate bill six.
Started well before the session.
Every member and as a matter of
fact as I understand the leaders
in both chambers of aware of
that effort and we're able to
chime in along the way madam
speaker.
But a bipartisan effort.
That is just something that is
impossible to get in this
chamber.
Something that benefits everyone
and budget every member of the
state every voter in the state
we just can't have that.
Madam speaker what one forty
four is is it is a governor
retention Bill.
The way that the the items that
were placed into one forty four.
For all removed out of Senate
bill eight as a matter fact that
bill has been sitting on the
Senate floor for several days
now.
Senate bill eight had several
provisions that the clerk did
not want.
And they were and the majority
of that was pulled out the
majority of those bad provisions
were pulled out of Senate bill
eight and I believe the
agreement madam speaker was for
Senate bill six to go up to the
governor and this is a governor
signed it Senate bill eight
would be released and the
governor's bill would proceed
through Madam speaker.
What happened last night.
And hijacking.
A election workers protection
bill.
That was improper.
And the way that the bill was
right not only rushed but then
there was no real debate allowed
in committee was improper.
And madam speaker I think the
the the public needs to know how
how that's handled.
And I I I stand
In
disappointment.
In great disappointment.
That a truly bipartisan effort.
Senate bill six a truly
bipartisan effort.
Could not be heard by this floor
could not be debated by this
body.
And with that Mr speaker I yield
my time.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you madam speaker will go next
order of business introduction
of legislation.
House memorial fifty seven
introduce representatives
Garrett Martinez speaker egolf
Chasey and her data from a
memorial honoring Representative
Karen C. bash and recognizing
her outstanding service to New
Mexico whereas Representative
Karen C. bash a Democrat was
elected to the house of
representatives in twenty
eighteen to representative
districts Sixtyeight and
Bernalillo county served her
first term in twenty nineteen
and will of service.
In four years by the end of
producing out of services
not being with us for a fifty
seven introduce representatives
Garrett Martinez speaker egolf
Chasey and had a.
House memorial fifty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
Pastora fifty introduced
representatives Thompson
Martinez speaker egolf Chasey
and guide us a memorial honoring
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong and recognizing her
outstanding service New Mexico
house memorial fifty entries for
representatives Thompson
Martinez speaker egolf Chasey
and guy this house memorial
fifty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and placed in the
speakers table.
Also fifty nine introduced
Representative Andrea Romero
Martinez chairman speaker you
often Chasey a memorial honoring
Representative Daymon Ely.
And recognizing his outstanding
service to New Mexico house
memorial fifty nine introduce
representatives Andrea Romero
Martinez Chandler speaker Egolf
and Chasey.
House memorial fifty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the speakers table.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
The main speaker move that we go
to like services committee
reports.
I'm gonna services announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Hi there any nonsense.
Madam chair.
Speaking.
Madam speaker this is
representative of that a group
point of personal privilege.
I just received the message from
the course affiliate.
Thirty three county clerk so
voted in favor of opposing
Senate bill one forty four for
the actions taken.
Thank you madam chair madam
speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson.
Sorry my microphone the staff
give me one second.
Of course madam speaker would be
the last full day things kind of
go Madam speaker I move that
house memorial fifty eight be
removed from the speakers table
and made the next order of
business.
So ordered.
Click to read.
House memorial fifty introduced
by representative Thompson
Martinez speaker egolf Chasey
and guide us I'm a Mario
honoring Representative Deborah
A. Armstrong and recognizing her
outstanding service to New
Mexico whereas Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong a Democrat
was elected to represent
district seventeen and
Bernalillo county in twenty
fourteen Senator first term in
twenty fifteen some of served
eight years and four times by
the end of twenty twenty two and
we're as representative
Armstrong is a member of the
house Judiciary Committee and an
advisory member of the Courts
corrections and Justice
Committee and the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee.
And we're as.
Representative Armstrong served
as the secretary of aging and
long term services from two
thousand four two thousand seven
and was a public member of the
board of acupuncture and
oriental medicine hands.
Whereas Representative Armstrong
received her bachelor of science
degree from university of
Michigan in nineteen seventy
five and her juris doctor degree
from the university of New
Mexico in two thousand one and
was a licensed physical
therapist and whereas
representative Armstrong is the
president of Albuquerque based
delta consulting group
incorporated and we're as
representative Armstrong has
been a physical therapist for
more than thirty years and has
been one of two physical
therapists to serve at the same
time in the legislature making
New Mexico the only state with
this distinction.
And whereas as a physical
therapist Representative
Armstrong developed a passion
for home and community based
services and patient autonomy.
In decision making which
prompted her to increasingly
focus on her work in health care
and later to attend law school
to further interest and health
policy and advocacy and to
eventually accepted an
appointment as secretary of
aging and long term services and
whereas representative Armstrong
brought to the legislature on
match expertise in health care
and whereas representative
Armstrong professional mission
is to provide leadership in the
development and effectuate tion
of public policies that protect
patients rights and promote
affordable access to quality
healthcare for all and we're as
to representative Armstrong as
work she.
Hopes to instill in her three
children a passion for community
service and whereas
representative Armstrong
commitment to this mission led
her to become the executive
director of the New Mexico
medical insurance pool I safety
net program that provides health
insurance for people with
serious medical conditions and
whereas representative Armstrong
not only had professional and
educational experience in
developing a health care safety
net but also had lived
experience with her now adult
daughter being diagnosed with
childhood onset Medicine Hat
fiery cancer and whereas
representative Armstrong is
proudest personal accomplishment
is leading with excellence in
all of the affirmation venues
and for as Representative
Armstrong is a good friend a
dedicated family woman and an
example of exemplar of strength
while facing personal challenges
and extremely calm and strong
under pressure and we're as
representatives are Armstrong's
experience of the council of
state governments western
provided academy and as a toll
fellowship program recipient
contributed to her reputation as
a respected and effective leader
and whereas representative
Armstrong has navigated personal
trials and tribulations yet
never lost sight.
In delivering transformational
change to the people of New
Mexico and whereas
Representative Armstrong's
proudest accomplishments in the
legislature include her work on
the Lynn and Erin compassionate
use act and Elizabeth white
fields end of life
appropriations act and she's
also known for her right
leadership and repealing
outdated abortion ban law now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong be recognized for her
commitment to health care
advocacy and compassion and be
it further resolved that a copy
of this moral be transmitted to
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Allen from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield madam speaker I yield to
the floor leader.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentlelady
it is with great sadness that I
stand today in support of this
memorial
sadness because.
A. Armstrong and I came together
into this legislature and not
only did we come in together we
actually represent districts
that are adjacent to each other
we're very similar districts I'm
a little bit further south of
downtown north valley and and
Representative Armstrong is
north of me in the near north
valley area
White little Representative
Armstrong Madam speaker and
gentle lady prior to our service
together I had heard all of the
legends and stories and myths
that go with Debbie Armstrong
but and actually no until we
served together madam speaker
and gentle lady.
And I have to tell you.
That in representative
Armstrong.
I found not only a friend a
confidante.
But also a mentor and somebody
who I think really went out of
her way Madam speaker and gentle
lady to.
Support my public service to
support my leadership.
To support.
By.
Interest in my work in this
legislature for that madam
speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo all be forever
grateful
I will miss my friend very much
even though the last couple
years we haven't really been
together as much as I would like
to.
But the work that.
Representative Armstrong has
done in this legislature will be
felt for generations to come.
whether it's
cannabis and and the broader
into.
To page it in the nineteen last
year see the bill.
Her knowledge of the subject
area her compassion for
intellect around these very
complicated issues really came
through especially once we.
To work with the other chamber.
Don't always agree on policy
well I think there's probably
one time we really agree on
policy but even that Madam
speaker and gentle lady was very
agreeable and and a very
compassionate difference of
opinion so I will miss my dear
friend Madam speaker gentle lady
as is all of you will
Representative Armstrong I see
on the big screen here so follow
all tell you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
The representative that I'm sure
that we will cross paths again
very soon I'm not sure what your
next adventure will be
but I won't even be you
Representative I haven't really
checked yet is one it's ana
myself for the or or the speaker
so one of the two will be in the
Representative and you can
always refer to call us for
anything that you may need thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentle lady thank you
representative Armstrong we will
miss you we love you and good
luck with the future endeavors.
The gentle lady from grant he
dog go and Luna County
Representative Sweetser thank
you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield madam speaker I will yield
to the gentle lady thank you
gentle lady and madam speaker so
I have a fan crash on
Representative Armstrong when I
was a freshman she said to down
from me and when she would
debate long built into the wee
hours she had so much class and
so much grace she was never
condescending she was never
insulting if people ask
questions over and over she
never pointed that out she just
calmly answered and I went up to
her and I said I wanted to be
like you and I know Madam
speaker gentle lady I never will
be able to because what an
amazing what an amazing
Representative our districts are
polar opposites with our
ideology is is very different I
didn't support a lot of for
legislation but I had so much
respect for the many many things
she's done to change our state I
don't know why I'm tearing up
Debbie.
but I just really loved serving
with you I thought you were just
such a powerful and amazing
provided and I'm so happy that
you set to two seats down from
me when I was a freshman and I
could just put my my chin in my
my hand and just stare at you
while you were debating and and
get so many many great tips from
you so thank you for all you've
done for us best of luck in
everything you do I will miss
you terribly and I'm just so
happy to have served with you
thank you madam speaker thank
the gentle lady.
Mexico to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam speaker will the
lady from Bernalillo yield madam
speaker I gladly yield.
Madam speaker and lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Armstrong I have I have
Thought about your departure as
a huge loss and I have thank you
sorry and everyone in the
committee.
So I had to tell some had to
turn senator Neville off he's
putting the bill is.
House government my apologies.
On I had to re frame my thoughts
and instead of just feeling the
loss I
appreciate the gift of of you
being with us for these years.
I I've known you for a long time
If you were a W. to
dear dear friend Michelle Lujan
Grisham and aging and long term
Services Department.
And then secretary of that
department hi I think of
I think of you when you lifted
up this freshman here behind me
when he was a freshman
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas to carry
the Lynn.
And and and and compassionate
use act seeing up in the gallery
and and giving us all the
courage to bring that over the
finish line I
I actually really got to know.
Debbie Armstrong when she was.
Helping a very dear friend of
mine die.
And that was Peddie Jennings the
late
Patty Jennings wife of Tim
Jennings who was the
Majority Leader and also the
president pro tem in the New
Mexico Senate.
And I I can't tell you how much
I appreciated what you did for
paddy and the family.
I will I will dispense Act
review as an example.
And just as soon the presence
among us thank you for
everything Debbie love you.
We have the gentle lady from
everybody Santa Fe and Taos
county is representative had a.
Thank you madam speaker with the
kindly the yield.
Madam speaker I yield.
First maps.
If they miss Debbie Armstrong
when I had just just one in
office and it was thanksgiving
of two thousand eighteen and
this woman drove four hundred
miles to come to a meeting
a community meeting that I was
having because they were
shutting down the only nursing
home in Rio Arriba county and
it was just excruciating and I
didn't know what to do and
everybody was in the room and
all these families are really
solving I mean it was really a
traumatic event I had no idea
what to do and and she came in.
And to set up okay this is we'll
see what we can do and we're
gonna trying get the governor
but we were in between governors
at the time so you know it just
it was the perfect time for this
nursing home the costs shut down
to shut down their office and if
the.
If we had a governor
that was that could have done it
they would have declared an
emergency order we could have
done it but she helped me
navigate all of those issues and
and just help me and she help
settle down the whole audience
it was quite extraordinary it
was quite extraordinary and so
on I have a happy ending for you
Representative the the county
the people of the county went on
the in the next year to pass a
bond issue and build their own
nursing homes so we're in the
process of building that now and
I think you help set a path for
that and tried to calm people
down and certainly you called me
down I can tell you that for
sure and
And then.
You know when I say she's had a
profound influence I got it but
I think it was and what the date
was the February seventh and I
was walking and Judiciary
Committee and I I knew I had a
tie vote nothing was gonna
happen and again like an angel
she appears and becomes the
swing vote in Judiciary so so
here so when I say and and that
just passed the Senate last
night.
Representative and
So all through my short time
that I've known you you I don't
know you just kind of the pier
and help solve the problem and
you're always on the right side
of things so I I just want to
thank you from I've only known
you for a short time thank you
made a huge difference in my
life and I thank you for that
thank you madam speaker.
Next in the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from that mobile
deals Madam speaker I yield to
the gentle lady.
Thank you.
I'm gonna try my best.
Well I'm already starting.
to say these words for now.
Every time I see Representative
Armstrong in person and it's
been one of the last few years
I've been hiding.
And crying and not wanting to
let go.
and that's exactly how I feel.
Madam speaker I just don't want.
The presence
Representative Armstrong.
The.
Right after my election.
From the moment that she'd going
And others in the contest.
On the house.
There is a powerful.
Homing.
Representative Armstrong has a
tremendous.
character.
Compassion.
Com.
And
We agree we found that we agree
on a lot more than we
anticipated.
we're sisters and so many
different ways.
And
I want to thank Representative
Armstrong publicly.
Being.
That might be.
Needed.
Advocacy.
Bending.
I.
Then the need doing very
difficult Hines said I have to
navigate.
The legislature.
She's been line voice.
Step forward questioning.
No detail no question no
question whatsoever.
She saw my needs.
I heard my pleas.
And he stepped up.
Yes.
All she had to build.
In order to have.
thank you.
My presence.
House of representatives and so
I want to just.
It's been an incredible blessing
I feel.
All of the family.
Knowing that we're there for
each other.
Even if it's just a phone call
or text.
We know that.
And
I just wanted to.
Say that I feel a tremendous
also moving my security blanket.
On the floor where we set I
can't lean over there and see if
that she's there and feel her
presence
but I know that she will be with
me.
With us and I want to just
thanks for from the bottom of my
heart the building with the
rest.
Most compassionate.
Representative and colleagues
that I have.
I will miss him dearly.
Next we have the gentle lady
from granted all gone Sierra
Representative Dow thank you
madam speaker with the
gentlelady yields and speaker I
yield.
I'm thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady Debbie's gone hi
I enjoyed seeing her face it's
been so long since he's joined
is in the chamber
Madam speaker and gentle lady my
freshman year I was there she is
I was on health and Human
Services and
One of the first difficult
committee very hearings we had.
Was right to die.
Death with dignity and you
shared so.
Passionately your concerns for
Aaron and other family members
who would make these difficult
decisions as well and I had just
lost my brother.
And I was sponsoring right to
try
and write to try was
very much we were on opposite
ends but the love and compassion
and the reasoning as to why you
were presenting the bill came
through loud and clear and your
love your compassion for the
citizens of New Mexico and what
you believe are the right health
solutions has been loud and
clear and I remember that that
debate and how what.
How difficult it is.
The vote or yes or no based on
what we believe to be right and
wrong when so many things aren't
simply black and white and so I
remember both of our bills died
that year and.
So I I wanted my brother to be
able to receive treatment that
hadn't been approved by hadn't
gone through the full process of
approval and to be able to see
that treatment and you were
seeking end of life options for
folks and but that was my first.
My first session was the sixty
day session those were very very
passionate bills they lasted
very very they were hours long
we would and and our floor
debates for very long and so
that happened over and over
again in committee we usually
voted offices on bills that that
are are polarizing and and and
lots and lots of green I'm sure
we voted on were built together
the not for those bills that
really controversy all we were
typically on the opposite side
but regardless of how we voted I
could fit your love and your
compassion and your reasoning
was always clear and in in the
at the thing that I think.
Is difficult is we're here sixty
days were here thirty days and
we vote differently we're all
here because we certainly care
about New Mexicans we want to
make it a better place we want
to make that improve the quality
of life for the for the state
that we love in the communities
that we represent and we go home
and we get to do constituent
services.
And that's the fun part and I I
any time I emailed you that I
texture I called you you're
quick to help me find solutions
for the constituents in my
district and people outside of
my district and your diverse
background and your diverse
experiences in government and in
private practice maybe you my
first you're the first person I
called first person I text the
first person I emailed and you
always came back with a solution
you knew the person you knew the
right questions to ask you how
to get the issues resolved so
you taught me how to be a better
advocate for the constituents of
my district and you definitely
are probably the person who
filled my pages when there's an
issue around health and Human
Services behavioral health
aging long term services no
matter it.
Health Medicaid Medicare you're
the first person I called and I
kept those numbers and the
contacts and the
the advice that you gave me on
having and getting those issues
resolved and so you've made me a
better legislator in the area of
constituent services but also I
think
Your.
Demeanor and a quorum.
It was one and wavering despite
how difficult the debates the
public comment.
And the process was and so I
appreciate your leadership as a
chair.
And it's something that we
should all aspire to to model
and I and
It's gonna be different without
you here thank you so much.
Mexico to the gentle lady from
Dona Ana Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you
madam speaker I yield thank you
You will always be my madam
chair.
And having been here the past
six years to serve with you on
the health committee has just
been such an honor an
inspiration for everything that
you have
tambien many bills and and
different things that were
mentioned in the memorial.
Are just so amazing and
inspirational to many of us so
we appreciate all the to gone
through with no helping your
mother your daughter and having
your granddaughter to they've
all on are so blessed to have
you in I just want to say thank
you madam to.
Hi next week go to on the gentle
lady from Bernalillo me
Representative Hochman Vigil.
It's slightly awkward.
It is the gentlelady yields.
Madam speaker I don't think I've
ever yielded to the speaker
before yes.
Thank you gentle lady
Representative Armstrong I'm I'm
I'm not gonna take any time to
echo the sentiments that have
already been expressed by other
members of this body I didn't
get much time with you we had
two sessions I think and then
the pandemic heads and we were
legislating from our homes but I
just wanted to take a moment to
tell you that your leadership in
this body has been
Senator.
And I always looked up to you as
of role model for what could be
done in the state of New Mexico
I was following you before you
even knew existed.
And I wanted to thank you for
allowing me to participate in
and passing the on all those
with white children of point
options act
that was that one is very
personal for me and you will be
absolutely mysterious.
Thank you for all the fun.
Next we'll go to the gentle lady
from Balenciaga Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you madam speaker whether
kind lady please here speaker I
yield thank you hi lady from
Bernalillo I'm just going to
rise up
hi this is me shock the body but
me and representative of
Armstrong don't always agree on
policy and legislation.
and we've had you vote against
each other we've argued built
against each other I've tried to
kill some of her she's killed
some of mine that's just how
things work over here and
I was probably one of the few
members of my side of the aisle
the the process supported the
end of life.
these legislation because of my
experiences with my mother.
What I went through what I saw
what I had to deal with and the
pain when when when when we when
those things are real and we
bring them up to the
legislature.
It changes who we are as a
person and how we vote before my
mother passed away probably
would have never supported the
bill but after seeing what she
went through I felt like I had
no choice and that was it was a
hard vote for me to make.
But it was a very hard vote
going back home.
And having to face my
constituency.
And Representative Armstrong
reached out to me soon after
that and she thanks me and I
didn't need it but I kind of
needed it if you wonder if you
know what I mean madam speaker
Representative and so I just
want to thank you for that I
stand by it but I just want to
thank you for reaching out
afterwards your kind words and
we're you will be missed I
appreciate your leadership and I
know we were we're going to see
around thank you madam speaker
thank you kindly from
Bernalillo.
Going to go to the gentle lady
from catch and score on
Balenciaga Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady yield and speaker I
yield.
All what will I do without the
Armstrong caucus.
there's two gales and there's to
Armstrong's madam speaker and
gentle lady and.
I want I want to thank you.
I agree with so much that's been
said.
Outside of this building inside
of this building we're friends.
And I worry about you often.
For you.
And your family.
And the I just want to say thank
you.
For being madam chair and as was
stated before being so
respectful.
Keeping the quorum.
always listening.
Whether we agreed or disagreed.
You always listen to and I
appreciate you.
And god bless you.
Thank you madam speaker.
Next we go to the gentleman from
Bernalillo and Sandoval
Representative Ely.
Thank you madam figural
gentlelady from Bernalillo yield
madam speaker I yield.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
Frankly came into the building
twice the age of some of the
members.
thinking that I had everything
learned everything I need to
learn.
And I was surprisingly.
I'm I'm searching for the word.
disabused of that notion.
And one of the many things that
I learned.
Was what real leadership looks
like.
I learned it from so many.
But the ticket lady from you
chair Armstrong.
Because leadership is so much
about a balance.
Between kindness.
Respect for people's opinions.
Empathy compassion.
The ability to be patient with
people while at the same time.
Being the task forward in this
case legislation.
And it takes I think real
leadership.
Comes not just from smarts which
clearly.
Armstrong you have.
it comes from having lived.
And I know you.
There isn't a day that goes by
up here the.
I don't think about it.
And worry about what's
happening.
And.
It's reflective of your work up
here.
I just think that you're such a
I think it's such a stupid word
but you're such a neat person.
Because.
Through your example.
You have taught me personally
and I think so many members.
Not just to be a good
legislator.
But to be a good you being.
And I just so value that and
that friendship.
In your example that you gave to
me and what I learned from here.
And it has been a privilege to
serve with you and I thank you
so much for sharing time with me
and with this body.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Next I have the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield seven speaker I yield.
Thank you similar speaker and
gentle lady
You know I I knew Debbie.
before she was a legislator.
And.
Mr speaker on.
And it was real timely.
in terms of that opportunity.
We were engaged in a they're not
the school in the south valley.
In an effort to
Establish the first ever senior
center.
serving the unincorporated area
public the school in the south
of the communities of a fifty
five thousand people.
And
We started the effort in
nineteen ninety six I was just
recently selected in the
primary.
So I was a statement that led
to.
And I met with the core group of
a.
Religious leaders community
leaders there at the school and
we started the ball rolling in
ninety six.
We didn't build the center till
two thousand and ten.
To show you how long.
Some of the speaker takes to.
fold really this very
and significant institutions in
our community.
But
We were having fallen County it.
They were saying that.
Members on
on the internet please note
yourselves.
Speaker sorry for the.
It's much bigger a.
We were having difficulty with
only a County in terms of them
stepping up and
Of the building in the center.
And even when we had accumulated
seven point eight million
dollars for the center.
The county was still living.
Of a constructing that.
Saying that
that they didn't have operating
monies.
To go to.
To
Make the center
four.
Speaker.
And
The secretary of aging long term
care shown on Russian.
Stepped up.
And.
Included a hundred thousand on
operating recurring.
In our budget for our center.
Even though it wasn't built yet.
Still two years away from
construction.
And
since the last speaker.
Michelle Lujan Grisham moved up
the secretary of.
The health department handed me
to call for an aging.
And
Tension committed.
To that initiative and working
with the county in terms of
letting them know that look the
Senators bills the funding will
be there to operated.
And when she came was elected
someone speaker.
I don't know you know Debbie I'm
beholden to.
Your reference and really moving
that center for.
Because even though Michelle
Lujan Grisham made initial
commitment you followed up thank
you were there in on initiating
with the leaders of of these
gonna solve alley.
And the only accounting.
The deputy manager Julie Baca.
The more those Baca who was a
guardian angel.
Because accounting manager at
that time did not want to build
the center.
And now.
You know it's the pride of the
south valley our center is.
And
And I am beholden to Debbie.
When she brought the.
The death with dignity
legislation.
very religious leaders community
leaders thank you my sister my
older sister.
Just that I'm not support this.
And
Senator me not necessarily to
disappoint more provided on my
sister.
When I told her you know three
the.
As the much bigger on.
I have to vote for this piece of
legislation.
Because as Kerry by legislator
that I committed.
To really.
I respect and admire and then
beholden to her because of our
efforts in getting our community
center on our senior center off
the ground.
If if there was would would have
been another sponsor of the
death with dignity legislation I
would not have supported it.
Speaker but.
Because of the respect.
That I have for this lady you
know I voted out of trust for
her on that legislation.
You know some more speaker a.
Debbie has this institutional
knowledge is regarding health.
The medical.
Health and medical that is.
foremost.
In this legislature.
A lot of us have.
Kind of benefited.
From those experiences the
knowledge those initiatives that
she has spearheaded yes my
speaker
that has raised.
The bar.
On medical and health
initiatives in our state in
terms of state of the art
initiatives.
In terms of leading the country
on a lot of the initiatives
because of this lady.
And I think those of us
estimates speaker on the health
committee from the intermountain
Committee that Gail Armstrong
Representative Anderson Nixon
wrote the seeking Senator
sent to the the yes
Representative Ferrary myself.
We've been able to kinda.
Kind of great.
That experience that knowledge
that this US than in the city of
brought to this legislative
body.
And right now.
The stock's.
These experiences this knowledge
in our own debate.
In our own efforts in pushing
legislation regarding health.
And medical services in our
state customize beaker.
You're a
Representative.
Armstrong is my.
Ghost roommate.
As I said in the office with my
goes.
As in the US because she said
that she email is uses again you
can use my space.
What relief what so then I
emailed her back and I said well
baby
what I'm gonna do with your desk
there.
I'm gonna turn it into a wet bar
and have a.
Read the organic juices in my
homemade cherry wine.
Madam chair representative only
dead if that's the case you're
going to have you're going to
have the next day.
All of my office to.
The speaker and the.
The V.
The leading us but I don't think
you'll ever leave us and I think
a lot of us will still be in
touch with you.
And we're connected to on a
daily basis because of your
daughter.
a lot of us in this chamber and
the other chamber our continue
paying.
For her health and well being
and for the lord to give you the
strength to continue being at
our side and being orient our
champion now we're coming.
That horrific disease thank you
so much speaker thank you
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mexico John from Dunya and grant
and Sierra counties
Representative yes.
Thank you madam speaker with
generally please appealed madam
speaker I yield thank you lady.
Thank you Mr chair.
For.
leading the new guy when he came
in the and got.
Of us a lot of questions because
he wants to understand and you
take the time to.
To explain things to me
sometimes were as as we know
we're reading a portion of law
and I'd start asking questions
on and I'm trying to understand
the whole thing trying to play
catch up.
And it's it's I just definitely
want to thank you for your
patience and and and explaining
that with the.
As we've heard all of us come
from different to have things
we're passionate about and we
come from different.
Life experiences that make us
feel and and and advocate for
certain things because of our
experiences and.
Even though the sometimes when
we would send committee because
health gets a lot of fun stuff I
guess and sometimes it gets a
it's it's a little
stressful but you always were
able to the B. always let me
express my my feelings.
And I I I really respected when
you would read express shores.
And you know I just I just want
to tell you thank you so much
for your patience even though
you're my chair I never got to
personally meet you hopefully I
get to me to Sunday and I
understand were uh
representative Garcia says
you're his ghost
Well maybe because here parking
spaces next to mine.
And I always had room for my big
truck to fit in there so I just
want to tell you thank you for
your service I hope to meet you
one day in person and I want to
thank you for from the back and
forth that we had and and and
for you to the information again
and may god bless you and your
struggles and I hope you enjoy
what are you it is that you're
gonna follow after this okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Next I have the gentle lady from
Bernalillo county Representative
Matthews.
China's the invisibility
standing to say something.
Recognize you thank you madam
chairman I will I would like to
speak on this issue and would
ask the gentle lady to yield
madam speaker I gladly yield.
Madam speaker of of.
I.
Rise today with with there is
yes and sadness.
Because we today on our a an
individual who has served this
body with the energy.
Clearer thinking.
Evenhandedness on the even
handed this read on the
beginning of the fifty fifth
legislature I had the
opportunity to join the health
committee Kerr in the house and
in that committee of had the
chance to observe of.
Representative Armstrong is.
Chairmanship of the committee
where the most complex issues
dealing with improving health
care in New Mexico seem to
arrive.
Madam chair Madam speaker gentle
lady.
Those complex issues are sorted
out by a by a group of.
Representatives who who are
there to try to make the best
decision.
And your chairmanship
Representative Armstrong helped.
Guide that committee to
Many decisions that I believe
were the right one I know you do
too and
We we continue to face very
complex issues and health care
madam chair I just want to.
Recognize representative
Armstrong.
As her service.
Has brought services to a broad
honor to New Mexico the
legislative career of dedicated
service.
Services that kept her on a
persistent track to improve New
Mexico Health.
Representative Armstrong service
to this house brings distinction
to New Mexico for the entire
citizen legislature that the
state created in nineteen twelve
and it's been an enormous
privilege to serve with you
madam chair thank you.
We have the gentleman from
Bernalillo sebelum McKinley's
across San Juan Valencia
Representative Harry Garcia.
You madam chair William made a
big deal to me.
Thank you madam speaker yes I
yield to the young man.
Thank you for that of
Representative Armstrong
it's been an inspiration in New
Mexico I'm not much for what to
worry but thank you for do done
for the season New Mexico
especially thank you for you
don't for people with
disabilities in the state of New
Mexico.
That is huge you know guy have a
couple of of to me that are
disabled and better challenged
and for your work I really
appreciate what you've done and
I wish you would stay but you
gotta do what you gotta do what
we're going to miss you the
lady.
I'm gonna miss you in the this
whole how soon mission stating
Mexico the mystery thank you
very much.
Mexico back to the gently from
Bernalillo Representative
Matthews are you on.
Yes.
Hello my screen now as and when
going clean you called on me
before if Mr been assigned of
something
it's and madam chair Madam
speaker and madam chair which is
what I've always called
Representative Armstrong
I was a brand new legislator in
having just been appointed.
Just before the thirty day and
twenty twenty and I was sliding
in to fill the.
The position on the house
committee that my predecessor
had had
and he he was a medical doctor
and I certainly was not a
medical doctor and I was a
little intimidated.
and I remember on the first day
us Representative Armstrong
If we were going to meet that
day
She said no and I said oh really
thank you so we have to wait for
bills to be introduced because
that's what we do we hear bills
we review bills.
She was Senate so nicely and
only later that I think that was
the stupidest question I
probably ever asked.
Probably not one of them.
and I.
I could not have asked for a
better.
Committee chair as a brand new
legislature legislators she
Crystal R. I swear she knows
everything to there is to know
about health care
there is ever anything that she
didn't have some knowledge about
it was unbelievably awesome sh
she was always on collapsible.
And there were a lot of things
that could have made her be
flapped except that she was
always implantable even when we
had a somewhat long winded
committee member.
And I she was always kind thank
you for your support.
Mexico to the gentleman from
Colfax more Rio Arriba and
Sandoval county is
Representative Rod Montoya Roger
Montoya.
Thank you and to our beloved
outgoing.
Legendary leader ice hit the
jackpot when I came into this
body if this incredible leader
was my mentor.
And as a on up start with
virtually no background in
legislative workings.
Guidance was essential to my
success.
She brought Fajardo empathy in
an institutional knowledge of
the subject matter that blew me
away.
I also want to give a nod to the
incredible work you did in
bringing dignity in death I lost
my mother during that are given
time to a twenty year battle
cancer
and it was deeply deeply touched
by your courage to not only
bring this forward year after
year but to pass it during my
time my first session.
It's a deep honor to have worked
with you and I know that because
of your diligence as a public
servant you will always be at
our Beck and call that's just
who you are which is in a sense
you're an angel on the earth
thank you.
Mexico to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady yield better speaker
I yield thank you I just have
two things to stay about
representative Armstrong I will
always know her is Erin some
Because as a teacher you have
sometimes students that have
famous parents see start
thinking of them as one's father
John Heinz you know whatever so
it's such a testimony when your
children can testify to you so I
heard about representative
Armstrong from Erin and what she
told us about her mom and and to
me it's a very special table to
be able to know somebody
somebody's mother so I have to
thank Aaron for introducing me
to our mom and and
Representative for being such a
good month and the other thing I
want to say Representative is
you taught me that sometimes
legislation takes years the
sessions and through the the
death with dignity bill which I
came too many times because I
really really really had to
understand it to decide how to
vote you were patient with me as
you were patient with so many
people but it's a lesson I carry
with me don't somebody said
recently you're not married to
your bills they're they're built
they're powerful ideas and
sometimes they really take time
to take root and he takes so
much patience so thank you for
that living model I really
appreciated thank you.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
You madam speaker
I stand in.
Today to.
A respected and delivered to
yield thank you I'm sorry to
make you feel
sorry I thank you madam because
thank you thank you generally.
That I. since four in full
support of this and and just to
to pay zoom pay full respect and
honor to representative Debbie
Armstrong I've known you for for
many many years have you been a
mentor you for you help me when
I.
be here Representative here
worked on some amazing pieces of
legislation and the Health
Security Act he took into.
under your wing so to speak and
and really
revitalized it and and maybe
some in the very important
changes in input in this the
study in the aspects that were
very much needed.
Aside from that all your work in
understanding and our health
care and public health policy is
been a model for us and you've
got you you've just done some
really amazing things and I.
I will continue to follow your
example and lead in the
compassionate way that you do
and all that you do so thank you
very much.
I yield back my time.
Last but certainly not least we
have the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative demi
Armstrong.
Well thank you.
Thank I'm gonna try and do this
without crying and I apologize
a little embarrassed at how I
Outlook this morning I've
already been out to medical
appointments have more to do.
I love you guys I have loved my
time in the legislature and as
many of you know I I hung around
the legislature for.
Probably almost fifteen years
before I was elected member of
the legislature so you won't get
rid of me easily
I will be around still
championing health care and.
And patient rights.
Thank you for the kind words
I am deeply moved I'm so
appreciative of the support you
all have shown me as I take care
of my family.
I
so much to.
having the courage to have a
voice and stand up for people I
attribute to my daughter she's
my mentor.
And she's doing she's doing well
but
needs a lot to our right now and
so
I I appreciate the support when
I've not been able to be there
I've tried to do my work
regardless behind the scenes and
moving things forward and.
now virtually I'm so glad I
could participate virtually
in the last couple of weeks
I just want to thank you you're
all are in my heart
Do good work I I think about to
pray for all of you and for your
your your wisdom and your
compassion and your dedication
to serving the citizens of New
Mexico
regardless of whether we agree
on an issue.
to be able to listen to each
other and respect are where you
come from it is yeah and have
that civil discourse I think is
of utmost importance.
And
I I hope to see that continue.
And
you know when you feel it kind
of losing control and getting
frustrated take a deep breath.
And remember why is there for
the citizens of New Mexico and I
just thank you so much for
letting me be a part of it
and I'm.
To be on the screen here until
noon tomorrow and I will be
around so
that never hesitate to call me
thank you.
We have one more member the
gentleman from Chavis Eddie and
Tero County Representative
Townsend.
Thank you.
Madam chair with the gentle lady
yield madam speaker I yield.
Thank you gentle lady.
I I rise this morning to.
Also commemorate and thank.
A friend.
As well as an effective the
legislature.
Debbie and I've known each other
longer than we have served.
Together in the house.
And what she just said was
commensurate of I believe her.
service I'm sure over the years
I've stepped on her toes I'm
pretty sure I can still feel
when she stomped on mine but
we're still friends thank you
To I have much to look forward
to god speed thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
madam speaker I just want to do
a few memories
I report back before I got
involved in in being in the
legislature I was on the
legislative committee for the
New Mexico chapter of the
American physical therapy
association and for one of our
conferences we were going to
have a special guest speaker who
I was just thrilled about a PT
who had gone on to law school
and she was like and like the
movie star for me it was like oh
my god look at that to see that
PED it look at what she's doing
I had no idea at that time that
I would be able to join her M.
doing policy work in the
legislature you know you've
you've heard the expression you
want to be like Mike I think
probably most of us in here one
of the like Debbie
She is the co and I've been
fighting tears this whole time
so excuse me that's one thing
that I'm really jealous of her
for is she is calm calm calm
regardless I remember I was
heard vice chair and health and
Human Services and fairly early
on in the session she was
presenting the death with
dignity bill and so I got to
chair.
So I'm sitting there and they
bring me a few tissues that had
to bring the box and I'm sitting
there I'm just crying crying and
she's presenting the bill
knowing what's going on with her
daughter and she's calm she is
and I am so jealous of that
because I'm just the opposite
but we are sister PT's I believe
were the only two only
legislature that's had to PTC's
She's classy Representative
Armstrong is the definition of
classy and calm.
And I will say madam speaker
that her advocacy didn't start
with the legislature and it's
not going to end with the
legislature C. has more
knowledge of health care
Medicine law everything and we
still need her voice and Debbie
I'm gonna be calling on you all
the time and with that madam
chair madam speaker.
I ask unanimous consent that the
house.
Of the house that the record
show that the role has been
called in all those present
voted in the affirmative on
house memorial.
Fifty eight.
a motion to show that all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial fifty eight the vote is
now open.
Is now closed by a vote of seven
in front of affirmative and zero
on the negative house memorial
fifty eight has duly passed this
house.
Mexico to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial fifty seven be removed
from the speakers table and be
made the next order of business.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered madam speaker would you
get me to that point.
House memorial fifty fifty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
To read.
House memorial fifty seven
introduced by Representative
Garrett Martinez speaker egolf
Chasey and how to Morial
honoring Representative Karen C.
bash and recognizing her
outstanding service to New
Mexico whereas Representative
Karen C. bash a Democrat was
elected to the house of
representatives in twenty
eighteen to representative
districts Sixtyeight and
Bernalillo county Sir for first
term in twenty nineteen some of
Sir for years by the end of
twenty twenty two and where as
Representative bash is the vice
chair of the house health and
Human Services Committee and is
a member of the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee and whereas
Representative bash is a member
of the Courts corrections and
Justice Committee and as an
advisory member of the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee during the
interim.
And we're just Representative
bash graduated with a bachelor
of.
Arts degree in sociology and
anthropology from Phillips
university which she attended
from nineteen sixty four to
nineteen seventy and we're as
Representative bash and for
master's degree in education and
teaching of individuals and
secondary special education
programs at Lamar university in
Beaumont Texas which she
attended from nineteen seventy
nine to nineteen eighty one and
whereas Representative bash
learn to lifelong values and
faith from her parents and she
and was called to the ministry
earning a master of divinity
degree from the university of
Dubuque theology theological
seminary and be the Iowa.
Which she attended from nineteen
eighty five to nineteen eighty
eight and whereas after
graduating Representative bash
was called to be a pastor of
several I would congregations.
And whereas Representative bash
taught and early childhood home
visitation program focused on
infants at risk for
developmental delays and those
infants parents and whereas
Representative bash and our
husband Allen moved Albuquerque
in twenty eleven and ran a small
business and whereas
Representative bash served as a
moderator of the congressional
council from twenty fourteen to
twenty fifteen and whereas
Representative bash served the
greater Albuquerque community as
a member of the rotary club of
Stokowski Sandia and she is a
Paul Harris fellow and we're as
Representative fashions
volunteered at the Roadrunner
Food Bank the Rio Grande food
project and several.
Homeless projects in assisted
living homes and we're as
Representative bash also
received an honor.
Administrative award from our
conversation and Shenandoah Iowa
and were as Representative bash
Senator husband have raised two
children cannon and Carey and
whereas Representative bash
credits her family and diverse
career paths for guiding her
policy priorities and the
legislature which include child
well being early childhood
education food insecurity and
the expansion of access to
health care and health education
now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
Representative Karen C. bash be
recognized for living her faith
and her advocacy for the well
being of children and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
Representative Karen C. batch.
Of house memorial fifty seven
introduce representatives
Garrett Martinez speaker egolf
Chasey and had at one.
There is a gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you madam
speaker will the gentleman
earlier please yield yes I yield
to the gentleman thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
another another retirement that
really really hurts
Madam speaker and gentle lady
Representative bash that we've
known each other since your
first run for this for this
office.
you.
For all ways and continue to be
a person of of great character
compassion.
Love.
And a very sophisticated
provided money I would argue one
of the most sophisticated
provided mais I have been able
to work with in this this
institution.
The speaker gentle lady
Representative bash I think it
represents.
What is good about our
legislative process.
And I know that often times we
have disagreements whether it's
on policy or whether it's on
process.
Madam speaker and deleted from
really repository batch I think
really
really captures the essence of
public service
here is an individual who I
think we came out of nowhere on
the northwest side of the city
and put her name.
In that.
To represent her constituents.
Not only was she like did but
she was reelected by wide
margins never wavering from the
convictions that drive for
public service madam speaker and
gentle lady Representative bash.
Was one of the first people when
she came in who jumped on board
with things like health or
solution one which is the early
childhood cancers amendment.
even though technically she's in
the school district Madam
speaker delays.
she knew that those investments
were critical to the well being
of children.
The secretary from Bernalillo I
had a bill a couple years ago
that I was carrying on behalf of
the you medical school and madam
speaker delivered early you'll
the the whole idea was that we
needed to attract more health
care professionals particularly
medical doctors as we all know
we we have a that only a
shortage but many cases we have
a crisis
of and the idea behind the bill
was to provide a free medical
education to folks here at the
UNM medical school.
And you know it's one of those
things where I think it's
happened to all of you to take
on a bill sounds a great idea
than you realize you're caring
way too many bills you've got
way too much on your plate.
The bash madam speaker delete
from Bernalillo finally stepped
in but she stepped in hard and
really took I think
of the baton and and and ran
with it.
much to my relief madam speaker
and gentle lady of I quite
frankly probably much to the
relief of the institution
because now they had a committed
fighter on an issue and I just
another sponsor who was going to
take the bill only as far as he
could.
Madam speaker the lady.
Really when I found out that
this would be Representative
bash is last.
Session
I was overwhelmed with sadness.
because I knew that we were
losing one of the good ones.
Even though it was short madam
speaker gentle lady
Representative bash your impact
will be felt for many many years
to come.
Particularly.
With me.
He always treated me with
respect he always treated me
with.
with.
With the sense of of of
compassion you never look down
on me you know me being younger
or or whatnot you always.
Of.
I always feel that you gave me
the space to grow as a leader.
and I'll never forget your.
Text messages your calls of
encouragement when times were
rough you always stood with me
and and I will miss you madam
speaker Jennifer grygiel.
whatever the future holds for
you I know that it will be good
I know that your community up in
the northwest part of the city
I was very lucky is very lucky
to have you Representative them.
and I know that whatever face
your public service takes going
forward will be just as
impactful.
So madam speaker gentle lady by
I will cherish our moments
together very much and even
though he was only a short
period of time Madam speaker and
gentle lady it was a time that I
will hold the year for many many
years to come.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gently from
Bernalillo.
As for the debate next we have
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam speaker of the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please yield yes madam speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
Dona Ana thank you
Representative gas you have been
such a blast.
And working is sitting next to
you when we were both back up
there and
also next to the chair Armstrong
we we're always you know
communicating and cutting up and
having a good time but
especially when we were on
health committee and going to
interim committees it was always
such a pleasure looking forward
to seeing you and the things
that we would do afterwards
with Allen your husband and I'm
I has been read we would
always plan something special
fund to do and with the group of
us and so those memories are
gonna always be with me and also
we look forward to having more
but also hear great work on our
food insecurity when we were you
know concentrating on you know
Katie how do we make sure the
food banks that you were always
a volunteer for two we get the
needed funding you would always
remind us to that we needed to
make sure that people are
getting nutritious food and I
know that was something that on.
Can you really cared about and
working on the food hunger and
farm bill you were always there
to make sure that we talked to a
lot of people that we were able
to start the hunger caucus
within the legislature and to
help spread the information that
people needed to know how it was
impacting their own communities
and to Rev up that support and I
in this year we did it so it's
always been such a pleasure and
look forward to seeing you in
the future to you done such
great work and on the health
committee and the other
committees you served on I'm
sure you were justices in spite
inspiring to the other committee
members to
and I just want to know I have
your teddy bear to bring.
Thank you so much.
There's further debate next we
have the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam speaker does the
delay to yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you I'm when I think about
Representative bash we were at a
dinner together at the rate drop
foundation I didn't know her we
sat at the table my son grandson
Zachary was probably about three
and he fell in love with Allen's
hacked and it was a very nice
hat and he looked Alan let
Zachary wear his hat and we had
a nice time and I expected not
to see her real soon if ever
again and the next thing you
know we were doing a photo shoot
for their care for our campaigns
and I see Allen and I said what
are you doing here and he said
Karen has decided to run for the
house and I was just so excited
I ran and found her getting her
makeup done had said well you
know I hope you win and one
thing that always strikes me
Madam speaker and gentle lady
with Representative bash is she
comes across as a mild mannered
and sweetness and you would
never think about what's going
on behind that sweet smile C.
has a wet.
And that just is will not come
dead and C. C. comes up with
these little quips and it's like
oh my god she is she's a
different person sometimes than
than we all think she is she's
been a wonderful addition to our
health and Human Services
Committee and to the legislature
and we're going to miss her
terribly but we know that she
too has become one of us and she
will continue to be one of us
thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Next I have the gentle lady
from all those counties of
residency Sir.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please shield yes madam speaker
I yield to the gentle lady from
the southwest corner of state.
Thank you gentle lady and madam
speaker I just want to rise and
support of your memorial I think
Representative bash is amazing
that still waters run deep
really applies to hers she is
yes home wonderful presents
she's somebody that has brought
such dignity and class to the
institution and I'll have to say
I have a red headed daughter and
I love to pick on Representative
Ezzell but then I would always
think about Representative dat
bass because I would have these
jokes that probably you know
redheads get tired of hearing
but I would always want to say
them on the house floor I knew I
could pick up Representative
Ezzell but I thought
Representative bash I don't know
well turns out she has a
wonderful sense of humor as all
red head should and do and so I
was able to bring her into my
jokes about red heads along with
them my fellow Candie caucus
Representative so you will be
missed we thank you for being
here for all that you have
brought to the house and that we
we should just the very very
best thank you madam chair
rather Madam speaker thank you
Representative.
Next we go to the gym lady from
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady eagles.
Yes speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you will our.
As I was looking down the row
Quite obvious we're missing
we're gonna miss
Two very significant faces in
that back row in the chamber.
And I will particularly miss
leaning over and looking on a
daily basis waiting hello.
Smiling sending kisses hugs.
Representative Karen fashion and
having for always going over.
Making sure that everything was
okay on my end and
I want to thank her for being
attentive.
The building carrying.
And always wanted to make sure
that I was okay.
And I also one I think for now
and because that'll sound the
real.
Companion in the lounge are
waiting for us and
We discovered that we were can
do all four of us with kindred
spirits from a time long ago.
is it a new found so many things
we had in common and we enjoyed
those conversations and he has
enjoyed those conversations with
Alan and we will surely miss
them.
Mrs presence of
As they wait for us in the
lounge and I want to also thank
Representative bash for all.
File full.
Well informed
And us.
Question and vice chair of the.
Labor veterans and military
affairs it's been a pleasure and
an honor to have Representative
Karen bash with us on that
committee.
It always count on for being.
And.
Thorough and thoughtful.
All that she on.
And I think that I will I want
to also be very thankful.
Chair then few years staff
our young immigrants.
Ways for being healthy again
Tension on.
Also the immigration detention
center and
caravan was
Why.
Various individuals.
Church groups and others that
we're concerned about the well
being of those young men being
detained on in on thirty off.
Texas which is just east of on
Passover and within just a few
hours Senator are provided for
all.
Legislative
We were all at the time running
for office and they left
everything dropped everything
they join the call loaded up
elective items
Whatever they can collect.
Going on the call and we went to
have them on enough to just so
to deliver.
Those items in the all station
house was doing outstanding
things to do outstanding work
and I just want to say thank
you.
Those now fall the fall three
We're one their election and are
serving in the house of
representatives bashes is one of
those representatives and I want
to personally thank for.
For care for compassion.
Her smiles of welcoming the
every every day and
Chamber and seven are will.
She.
Looking after me I appreciate it
very much thank you thank you
Representative bash thank you.
Someone from Colfax more Rio
Arriba San Miguel Representative
Roger Montoya.
Madam chair thank you and with
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
please yield yes madam speaker I
yield to the gentleman.
Thank you so much.
I'm sure Representative thank
you for honoring Karen on the
use her first name because I had
the pleasure of serving in my
first term on health and Human
Services and your kindness.
It just is so clear at one point
I remember being utterly
flustered madam chair gentle
lady by my new role like how do
I do this how do we move through
the city reached out and and
just a touch of your hand.
Home to me for it is evident
that your devotion to your
respective faith.
It's part of who you are and
what you bring and brought to
this body as you move forward in
your next steps I know you're
going to take the time deserves
to care for your family for
yourself to bring needs to find
a place of services as you
always have so far so good us
yes it's an honor to know you
and your dear friend.
Good luck.
The printer lady from Bernalillo
Representative Marian Matthews.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield.
I need to.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
To
In a room full of speech makers
Representative bash is a quiet
person.
And but that should not serve to
think that she's not really on
top of what's happening
We I served on the health
committee with her and she would
as a newcomer I was a newcomer
and she would quietly.
And she said next to me she
would quietly whisper advice to
me about how the process worked
and what I should do and not do
and help me not make a fool of
myself too often.
she
I I wrote once we switch to
a virtual
Attendance she has sent in this
black chair much like he is
right now when I first saw her
and then in that virtual mood I
thought that she was wearing the
biggest care phones I'd ever
seen and then I realized it was
the back of the chair.
Anyway I she's smart she's come
she's generous thank you so much
for helping with north to mingle
Baca you get to come so increase
your.
Finally is still.
Caring very witty and so to my
friend Karen bash keep rocking
girlfriend.
Thanks for the debate next we
have the gentle lady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe inTaos
Representative had a.
Thank you madam speaker will the
kind lady yield yes madam
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Rio Arriba.
Madam speaker.
Representative bash I must admit
a lot of people when they run in
this house are looking for an
open cedar there you know kind
of gauging where they're gonna
go but I think there aren't very
many people that really take on
a strong incumbent.
And you did so when you threw
your hat into the ring and I I
must admit I've watched you from
afar
it was a it was a tough race
you came in you laid out your
story the people elected to and
continued to elect to with great
margins and
And I always kind of admired to
other people would think that
you require that I think when I
think of you I think of a line
from a song.
The to to run where the brave
they're not go.
you always you always did that I
remember a group as a group of
us as freshmen legislators group
of women sitting in the lounge
we're talking about it was some
criminal justice reform I can't
really remember it and we're
talking about it and I'll forget
you saying well when I went to
jail and visited visited the
boys who were kept behind bars
for this reason and boy all of
this kind of step back and we
said well I guess I didn't go
visit the jail and talk to the
kids who would be impacted by
this legislation so I think it I
don't know if it's your
background and in special ed or
your job is to minister when you
have to.
Help people in their deepest
times of sorrow that gave you
the strength to come to this
body and and be I think a deep
thinker and a real player in
what this web this body
representative and for that I
would like to thank you for your
leadership.
For your friendship for your
knowledge for your sense of
humor for everything you brought
to this body I thank you very
much.
The gentleman from Cibola
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from that part of the
state.
The madam speaker gentle lady
you know as a chair of the
committee I was one of the lucky
ones to.
This young lady assigned to my
committee FY adverse said.
She sat there she listened.
And you know that she was on top
of everything nothing student by
her to hold that ended C. staff
there by ed Leahy I know ninety
percent of the time she was
thinking of lenders that chair
going to shut up but just
basically quietly said there
would be worked out it is my
honor to have served as chair
chair
you madam speaker gentle lady I
don't have much more to add
thank you Representative bash
for building fire my life thank
you.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield yes madam speaker I yield
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
You know I was a.
kind of having a lunch.
in the car.
For campaigning door to door.
And for primary election.
And I got a call from a lady
that I had and
Never spoken with before this
much bigger but I knew of
and it was Karen.
And she called.
And I heard some background
noise like.
Again she was like and on
outside dollars.
And she asked me for campaign
contributions.
The state care bass can you help
me.
Senator.
That's pretty pretty aggressive
lady I mean I I don't even know
you and it's examining and and
such and such a seat in the
Senate the
you know the is and tell me
about your background I am
willing to help in whatever way
so she went to kind of express
the
sure background come with the
tell me about the position she
was running for
and what really amaze me miss my
speaker and gently from
Bernalillo.
Is that here's this lady
asking for campaign
contributions.
In a it doesn't have a primary
opponent.
She's going on a door.
In season Sentinel current
because of that I'm gonna give
you half of what I have in my in
my campaign account and that
that that I wasn't more than
like fifteen hundred dollars or
something or close to two
thousand so I guess.
So I have the money can be
camping the account that and
You ever since then I've gone
ahead Liz.
This kind of connection to care
and.
you know in terms of our
dedication and commitment to.
Working families.
You know she has she went to
school estimates speaker Johnny
from Bernalillo.
in in Colorado in the Denver
area.
And she was exposed to the
Chicano movement.
Steinborn other classmates were
in the Chicano movement at that
time funding for.
Summarize Human Rights the end
the of these kind of people
throughout the country.
And so she was very kind of.
To the fact whenever I address
those social justice civil
rights issues regarding a
Chicana community on this
chamber on this floor in
committee.
And she just kind of really
related to those experiences.
Many because she kind of move
that estimates speaker.
Ten million from.
You know.
The can bash for first year.
I think broke Mimi Stewart
record for
The most bills introduced by a
by a rookie.
I think you have like thirty six
thirty eight bills.
That first yes so well and she
broke Mimi Stewart trigger big.
The the and the minister was
like that she introduced bills
that that that had no bearing
we're going to go anywhere which
is that I have to introduce
these bills that I what I need
to get reelected administering
seed and I'm
gonna get these issues out of a
the the the the.
That kind of a maybe help me
give me like that but that.
But you know as the more speaker
agility.
Just introduce the significant
and passed into law.
In twenty twenty the case of
other senior dignity Fund.
That so important so significant
I think is start off twenty five
million dollars.
In order to address in a high
priority.
Services for senior citizens and
adults with disabilities.
And that was such a great.
In our
Point a great turning point in
the in the
in the history of Karen bash in
terms of bringing forth this
piece of legislation that.
is so significant to our elders
and to individuals with
disabilities in that they're not
going to be left behind
estimates speaker only from
Bernalillo when it comes to
addressing their needs
on a recurring basis.
So we're grateful for Karen and
bring that build that
legislation for.
And and we're going to miss you
Darling.
You know you're my ally on
labor.
When it comes to moving that so
security income tax exemption
bill.
And upon the lone Democrat and
the.
That you know I hope that
whoever replaces the on labor
pandemic has.
That same approach same attitude
that you did to that particular
piece of legislation Karen.
because without your vote in the
committee we would enter that
and that the so scared the
income tax exemption bill out of
labor.
And I know that the I'm grateful
for that but as a lot of elders
and you have a bunch of them in
your district that the strive to
one day see that income tax
exemption eliminated.
Threats that income tax and so
scared eliminated and so madam
chair estimates speaker.
Gently from Bernalillo
I'm really going to miss care
and she was my.
My body my next door neighbor
there on the labor committee
when we were meeting in person
and
And we had a lot of side chance
you know and the and care and
isn't the kind of quiet.
com type of lady she can she can
be a little dog at times and I
kind of saw that firsthand you
know some Karen we're gonna miss
you god bless you.
And
hang in there.
In of because I think you still
have a lot to contribute to this
chamber and to this legislative
body in terms of those with
important and and significant
pieces of legislation that the
that the that you have brought
forth in that maybe we'll
continue to bring forth and
share with this body and moving
our state forward in real
positive ways thank you so much
speaker gentle lady from.
Only.
Thanks to have the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam speaker will the
lady LA.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett we you
yield.
Yes madam speaker and gentle
lady I yield to you.
Thank you madam speaker I rise
also to pay tribute to a very.
Courageous and extremely witty.
Colleague whom I will miss
dearly I was just amazed that
she took on the rates that she
did and in the course of that
she was bitten by a dog in her
abdomen and she was receiving
therapy so I knew she just kept
on going and I didn't know her
well I knew she was a person of
faith who actually was employed
as a person of faith and when I
was asked to by the office of
the medical investigator to help
them reestablish their grief
counseling services that had
been.
It did not but are trained and
trained and trained during our
very difficult times I thought I
know an incoming freshman would
be perfect for this particular
legislation so I asked
Representative bash to meet with
all of us
the folks who were working on
this and she took it up in
championed it.
To the finish line and she as as
I wasn't sure aware of how many
bills she had but I do know that
I was just so grateful for her
work on that particular issue at
the same time I can appreciate
the gentleman from Cibola
praising her work on the labor
committee when I had the
pregnant worker accommodation
act in front of that committee.
I expert witness was asked if
people were actually
discriminating against women who
are pregnant and
Actually was representing a
client who had been fired by
hobby lobby because she was
pregnant and they didn't want
her working and Representative
bass said and would this be the
same hobby lobby that opposes
birth control so she just lays
it all out.
And it shouldn't make a big
issue of it but extremely
extremely observant extremely
witty I.
I will truly miss you thank you
so much for your presence among
us for these two terms and
kind of miss being in person as
have we all and I look forward
to.
Knowing that you're having a
wonderful life without us thank
you again Representative bash.
Next we have the gentleman from
Chavis lan Roosevelt's
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chairman madam
chairman I rise to support this
memorial.
to a well deserving recipient
Representative bash.
Representative bash and I had
the.
The common start we were both
freshmen.
in freshman class four years ago
rather large one for her it was
her first one for me it was my
second one but none the less I
got to know her and then went on
to work in the health committee
with Representative bash got to
serve her.
Quiet thoughtful.
A real knack for listening and
watching and she served of that
committee well as well as she
did this body.
Representative bash all I can
say is I've enjoyed working with
you you to distinguish yourself
as a member of a citizen
legislature and the importance
of that long standing tradition
in New Mexico and your tenure is
marked with the first.
House of representatives should
statehood within which women had
over half the membership so you
could take of that history home
and rest assured that from
someone who knows there is such
a thing as live after the
legislature thank you madam
chair.
Thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo civil
McKinley secara San Juan
Valencia Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
visuals.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from all of those
counties.
Thank you madam speaker in the.
Meeting of.
You're listening to what they've
been talking about our
Representative bash why is she
is and so forth well.
Right dice a little bit.
Representative **** up in the
left corner of the house next to
me
if you want to go I mean she
would threaten to hit new
numbers because I will not move
and this went on for a couple
years and she is a good lady
she's not as quite as you're
breathing she is but she's a
good person.
Representative bash from me to
you thanks for the service New
Mexico and thanks for your
friendship that was the most
important to me is people need
to realize in this house.
Brands are not you'll get free
your own friendships.
Nobody wants to lose a friend.
As long as I'm here for the rest
of my life I will always
remember you as my friend.
They're very near and dear to me
thank you Representative best
with that argument impacts.
Thanks for the debate the gentle
lady from conference occurring
Balenciaga Representative Gail
Armstrong thank you madam
speaker will the gentle lady
yield yes madam speaker I yield
to the gentle lady thank you
madam speaker gentle lady
Representative bash and I served
on the health committee for
several years together and very
still with.
Quiet demeanor and till she had
something to say and then we all
listened so I appreciate two of
Representative bash your hair
looks amazing I think you know
that we have the same
hairdresser Senator.
maybe I'll run into some time
there and praying for your
health and your family and the
loved serving with two and we
you will be missed thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady.
Thanks for the debate the gentle
lady from grant T. Dogo and I
Sierra Representative Dow thank
you madam speaker role is with
the gentle lady please yes madam
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady thank you madam speaker and
I just rise in support of this
memorial and to join in folks
that are praying for I will be
praying for your complete total
healing and that's a it's as if
you had no sickness no disease
but I I I just there's a certain
amount of admiration that we've
got to have for members of this
body to choose to serve in this
volunteer capacity and to leave
their communities ahead up here
and and do this work and and
there's there's always something
behind something driving us to
come and I know your face as
part of that for you and but but
I just I I would you you would
thank you we had a brief
introduction and you told me
that you were an ordained
minister and I'm a preacher's
kid as I can be interesting to
sort of pay attention to the
bills you're introducing and I
love the the wild friends the
student group in my district
that always brings up an issue
and they are really been
involved in pollination and
supporting the life of bees and
so what is it you know you love
to vote for their bills they
always passed unanimously and so
we have a little I don't know if
people know but we have a little
garden outside the state capitol
that they had pushed initiative
for so we planted.
Lance that help pollinate and
and they they're they're always
bring a bill forward and so it
was your freshman term by
sophomore term and I notice that
the polity that this group was
asking for a license plate for
the for the bees and it was a
pollinator license plate who is
carrying the pollinator license
plate because there has been
this discussion on the house
floor that we have like five
hundred million different
license plates we can have one
more license plate and one of
our representatives from Santa
Fe has been saying no more
license plates and so you were
the freshmen who carry the
license plate for our favorites
to one of our favorite student
groups and here's this license
plate bill and all my gosh I
never ever want to vote no on
this little student group or
they're engaging in civic policy
they're engaging in the process
of passing a bill and it was
that dad gum license plate bill.
Very worried because I mean you
know where the of a license
plate but it was it was
I chuckled a little bit because
I find on a license plate built
my freshman year and we all of
that group anyway so your heart
you can look at your bills that
you sponsored and you can see
where your heart is at their for
nurses there for midwives is for
women it's for children and and
you can see where your heart is
at and I just wanna thank you
for choosing to service
volunteer capacity wish you the
best of luck and and will be
praying for for ceiling for you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you.
Madam speaker I just want to add
a couple of remarks of my own
before I do the facial closing
in invocation today
Representative Lane mentioned
that it's not about ourselves
but about our constituents Karen
is always been about her
constituents and I called some
of them over the last few days
and over and over again they
said you know Karen showed up
she showed up at all of our
community meetings and numerous
times she would go to people's
living rooms and they would
invite their friends and
neighbors over she would explain
the legislative process she
would explain what she could do
it just really used her office
as a way to educate people about
how to get involved in a
grassroots level I first met
Karen she's my neighbor just to
the north of my district but we
were roommates at the
orientation for new legislators
he stated Garrett's desert inn
and concluded that that was not
a place that we need to stay out
for sixty days and another thing
about care and she always is
fresh and allied I'm one of
those people that slaps of water
on my face the lipstick and go
but she's more careful and I
realize that that's important
because as you meet your
colleagues in the public if you
can look fresh and open it helps
you helps them so Karen grateful
for that
we're both share something very
deep for both adoptive parents
parenting through love and her
profound stories of those
stories is if you haven't heard
us for some time there deeply
deeply moving on she realizes
that small acts of kindness add
up that no act whether it's
driving someone without a card
at church
or helping someone she realizes
that all those things are really
important on a personal note she
and her husband continue.
To minister the the widow of my
late uncle found someone to
spend her life with it was Karen
and her husband that conducted a
special ring ceremony so she
realizes that they're these big
issues but small issues are
important also so in closing.
Madam speaker I now move that
house memorial fifty seven do
now pass and I ask unanimous
consent of the house of the
record show that the rules
recalled and all members present
voted in the affirmative.
There's an emotional show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial fifty seven the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seven in the affirmative and
zero on the negative house
memorial fifty seven has duly
passed house.
Mexico to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Romero
thank you madam speaker I move
that house memorial number fifty
nine be put on its final passage
of it to debate amendment
substitution.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
To read the memorial.
While fifty nine introduced by
Representative Romero Martinez
Chandler speaker Egolf and
Chasey a memorial honoring
Representative Daymon Ely and
recognizing his outstanding
service to New Mexico whereas
Representative Daymon Ely a
Democrat represents district
twenty three which covers
Bernalillo and Santa Fe counties
and whereas this is
representative Ely is third term
in office having been first
elected in twenty seventeen and
where as Representative Eli is a
member of the house Judiciary
Committee house rules in order
of business committee and has
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee and were as
Representative Eli is the co
chair of the interim legislative
ethics committee and a member of
the New Mexico Legislative
Council and where as
Representative Eli also served
as the house.
Clemente tarian from twenty
seventeen to twenty twenty one.
And where as Representative Eli
is a former Sandoval county
commissioners serving from two
thousand to two thousand four
and where as Representative Eli
was born in Philadelphia
Pennsylvania on October eleventh
nineteen fifty seven but soon
after moved to Phoenix Arizona
where he grew up and where as
Representative Eli was raised by
his parents for a former
chairman of the Arizona
Democratic Party and a
practicing civil rights attorney
Andy lane a homemaker who
dedicated her life to provide
for the family and we're as
Representative Eli is
progressive roots stem from his
parents who taught him at an
early age that every person has
a voice and that no one person
deserves more than another.
And we're as Representative Eli
received his bachelor of arts
degree in history from Arizona
State University in nineteen
seventy nine where he graduated
with honors followed by his
juris doctorate from the same
institution in nineteen eighty
two and we're as Representative
Eli chose to follow his father's
footsteps in practicing law
because he saw how important a
lot can be and the lives of
those who most need help and
we're as having been a lawyer
for thirty four years and so
practicing today.
Representative Ely has focuses
career on holding negligent
attorneys accountable for their
actions.
And whereas as a trial attorney
representative Ely has worked on
cases to ensure justice for
those who need a voice and we're
whereas Representative you as
parliamentary which is evident
from his adoption of the phrase
often wrong never in doubt and
he loves being in the midst of
legislative action and we're as
Representative Eli can always be
relied on to bring laughter to
challenging situations enjoyed
otherwise dark moments.
And we're as Representative Eli
enjoys unraveling complex
problems and in doing so
learning from those around him
and we're as Representative Eli
believes deeply and developing
policy to improve the lives of
New Mexicans.
And because of that believe
always stands resolutely on his
principles.
And we're as Representative Eli
is proud to leave legislating in
the hands of trusted colleagues
and looks forward to focusing on
his highest priority being a
husband and father and whereas
Representative you as fondest
memories of his legislative
career are working with his
legislative colleagues now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state in New Mexico
Representative Daymon Ely be
recognized for his outstanding
public service to the residents
of New Mexico and a strong
advocacy for the law and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
Representative Daymon Ely house
memorial fifty nine introduced
by representatives Andrea Romero
Martinez Chandler speaker Egolf
and Chasey.
The memorial the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker will the
delay yield I'll yield thank you
madam speaker
The memorial.
Second I think we'll do that
from the floor.
Which of the motion madam
speaker.
John you're out of order.
Thank you madam speaker policies
Madam speaker at you know this
is another one that really
hurts.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Representative Eli.
Members to amaze me with these
energy.
Intellect.
Can literally pick up.
Any issue any bill on any given
day.
And run with it.
It could do three hours on the
floor eight hours in committee.
Having heard of the issue.
Maybe an hour before.
And that I think really speaks
to what representative Ely madam
speaker and delayed from the
fate brings to this institution.
Somebody was quick on his feet.
Somebody who is the ultimate
team player find somebody who.
At the end of the day.
Doesn't need to be here.
He's very successful in his
private life has a beautiful
family madam speaker gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
I think has accomplished
what you know we would take many
of us two three lifetime school
completion.
And yet he is here.
In the.
In the arena that is the
legislature.
Fighting the good fight madam
speaker and gentle lady.
For those who have the least.
Fighting the good fight.
For the little guy and little
gal out there.
In only because she cares.
Because the give the darn Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
For the least among us.
I will forever cherish the fact
Madam speaker gentle lady.
But I am.
Representative the lies senior.
I will forever cherish the fact
that on the seniority list.
I'm on the left side initiated
he's on the right side of the
sheet.
I will I will I will forever
cherish madam speaker and gentle
lady the fact that
Representative Representative
Ely has become one of my closest
friends.
And somebody with a whole
absolutely I will go and smoke a
cigar.
At a place and time of his
choosing and and hopefully it
will not just be one hopefully
I'll be part of his little
creating that he runs around
with
which by the way madam speaker I
salute all those folks are
hopefully there of a good
reputation
but needless to say madam
speaker and gentle lady I'm
gonna miss my Lil buddy very
very very much.
but will not been able to point
the these young south twenty
four hours to go and I know he's
got a lot of this plate so I'm
gonna stop there is still more
real.
So thinking about moving to
table and everybody speaks and
as for unanimous consent to
table this memorial.
Just as a parting gift to
Representative Eli thank you
madam speaker thank you leader.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from grant have all
gone Luna Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
higher yields thank you thank
you madam speaker I recently
read that Representative Eliza
wife and I had the opportunity
to tell him I'd like her so much
better than I like you.
And we we laughed and he said
you just articulated what
everybody thinks that we laughed
at but of course it's not true
and I could only tease him about
that because he's just such a
wonderful person we bonded out
in the annex as freshmen we came
in together as freshmen and our
love of political gossip just
drew us together unfortunately
every time I thought I had a do
CPC already knew it so he
definitely out classed me on
that.
I'll also never forget sitting
my radio station in Deming more
than once when he would call and
say I'm thinking about this how
does it affect people in Deming
how does it affect people in
Hidalgo county and I thought
well not very many Albuquerque
people think in terms of that
and I just appreciated that so
much he would include me and
whatever Avenue he was going
down I want to make sure how
it's going to impact all around
the state and I just to order
what it what it really
impressive approach that is so I
could go on and on madam speaker
and I know a lot of people want
to talk but I just really have
such fun this for of
Representative Eli I have such a
love for him and his approach to
everything and and while I do
totally love is why I love him
too and will miss him greatly
thank you Representative thank
you madam speaker.
Thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Monday.
Thank you madam speaker will be
generally you'll.
The gentle lady yield I'll
yield.
Thank you thank you gentle lady
and and and meal currently I
just want to also stand and and
rise and thank you thank you
thank you Representative you are
gentleman from.
Santa Fe County the community
that you live in that is simply
separated by a river from my
home.
And I stand to just appreciate
the work that you've done here
when I came into this house
together.
And I can still recall our
conversations how excited we
both were when we were touring
this is great capital and we saw
our needs on that board our
first day during orientation and
how much pride I felt when I I
need you to come to my home and
send the approval for one of our
feces and you came with your
wife and how ecstatic I was to
break bread with you in our
family village home and how much
you appreciated that and how
much I wanted you to come back
and I look forward to having you
back once COVID is over but I
also want to thank you for.
Your courage in standing up for
their most recent fight which
was the redistricting that you
stood for and I hope to within I
thank you and I know a lot of
other people thank you as well
so with that being said
gentleman thank you
congratulations enjoy your time
off and we'll see you around
thank you madam speaker.
Thanks for the debate the lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentle lady in the old for you.
W. thank thank you madam speaker
so everything that's been said
is so true he he is a true as he
puts it an old Jewish lawyer who
likes to smoke cigars
I wish you would stop before the
cigar part being on the tobacco
committee but all all let him
I'll let him have that
and his his sense of humor is
wicked and cutting and hilarious
I can think of two times madam
speaker and gentle lady on the
floor where he was getting ready
to present a bill and he was
panicked that he couldn't find
his glasses once they were on
his head once they were in his
hand.
My class of my classes he he's a
great friend all of us and he is
so smart we are going to truly
miss him he does have a lovely
wife who wants to have more time
with them and with what will
give her that but you will be
miss you are well loved and
don't be a stranger thank you
madam speaker.
We have the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam speaker will the
lady yield yield.
Madam speaker and lady I met
first met Representative Ely
when I was running for office
and I think he was running for
county commissioner intended to
and we talked politics in the
kitchen of a mutual friend and
he told me that his dad had been
chair of the Democratic Party in
Arizona and I said well why
uncle was also chair of the
Democratic Party of Arizona and
it turns out they were few
decades apart but they didn't
know each other
his father still living at my
uncle's gone and so we kind of
bonded over that and over the
years I know we kept trying to
get him to run and we.
Our view was if we could just
get him to run I think we have a
chance to win that seat turned
out to be true and I he came in.
And I think we had more fun than
anyone I have ever seen up here.
Until the last day and he didn't
have fun but
He has had more energy more
enthusiasm
most dedicated individuals his
work ethic is unparalleled and
his creativity and humor are
greatly valued he was the vice
chair of judiciary when he was a
freshman and I was the chair and
at first the speaker told me he
doesn't want to be on judiciary
he just thinks you know he does
that all the time he doesn't
need it nice that's what we
really need to have because the.
Our Majority Leader wanted to
move to the tax committee and so
I lost that I share so I got to
have on the web that's fine he
did great over there
Gentleman who wanted to table
this memorial
so.
We had a very good run and then
he became the rules chair and I
have got to have the lady from
Diana as my vice chair which she
currently serves so we we've had
a close relationship all the
time I am I really appreciate
the remarks of our leader in
talking about how.
the gentleman from Santa is
focused on people who really
don't have a voice and his his
recent.
Highly.
Protects moved to provide a
protect consumers his his work
his voice on on behalf of
consumers who really don't have
a voice speaks volumes he he he
cares for the union members who
cares for people who don't.
Have.
Who are not among us every day
and who are not able to have the
power that that others with
privilege to.
And just very quickly I I
besides the fact that I will
really miss hand I am a little
bit of news that
I'm getting a lot of emails
accusing us of having done
something in the dead of night
last night in House Judiciary
and we're working on on
Representative analyze
amendments and I I think the
dead of night has a new
definition because it was
probably about seven thirty PM
so the I will always think of
seven thirty PM is the dead of
night and it will be because of
Representative Eli I will really
really miss you thanks for
serving.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Los Alamos Rio Arriba
Sandoval Santa Fe Representative
Chandler.
thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield
I'll yield.
Well I've been dreading this day
really.
Because Daymon spend like a a
stalwart supporter throughout
apply a very short career here.
And I I just like to bring need
myself back to when I first met
him which was I think it's her
first term and I was an analyst
for Senate Judiciary.
And Daymon was working very hard
on the guardianship the first
guardianship provisions that
were very important because at
about that time it was coming to
light madam speaker that
there are a lot of problems and
there were a lot of abuses of
the process and so on and Daymon
took that on in his first year
which is a tremendous job
incredible there are a lot of
advocates involved many special
interests it was stressful I was
working on the bill and he would
come over and consult with me
and I thought it was so cool
because I you know I think maybe
it was maybe my first year madam
speaker second year as an
analyst and I thought you know
he treats me like an equal here
we have Madam speaker of we had
a collaborative respectful
professional relationship where
there is no difference in status
or anything like that it was
really clear to me that Damon
was a person who looked at you
every person as an individual
and that meant a lot to me.
So when I came to the house and
they said.
You get a mentor.
Damon was
And what he's done for me and
the number of us is called stir
us.
Encourage us and share our
victories with us and our
defeats and just celebrate us
Madam speaker and I can't tell
you how much that's meant to me
and I now I'm going to miss this
is the other thing I'm gonna Mrs
Goss.
I think I probably speak to a
daily I don't several times a
week I think there.
It's more or less and he'll call
me so what are you hearing what
do you hearing it will have a
long conversation animated
conversation that's about so
many things madam speaker you
know got soap and and policy and
then battles and you know all
these different things and I'll
get off the phone a half an hour
forty five minutes later Madam
speaker myself husbands will say
please speaking with Daymon.
Because I'm animated I'm
shouting I'm sure my husband can
hear some shouting coming back
at me on the phone and it's a
lot of fun and so I'm gonna miss
that Madam speaker gentle lady
because it is.
And he's never derelict in his
duty madam speaker because as we
speak he's running to take a
vote of important vote and state
governments so I just can't tell
you how important.
Daymon sends me in my early part
of my career I am sorely gonna
miss him but I'm certainly going
to call in every once in awhile
and continue with the costs of
the strategy the haranguing the
reigning of our hands about
what's going on in the world
there in the state for in the
round house or in the Senate
that gives us great
opportunities to talk about
things but sorry I got a little
emotional there but it really is
going to be a void for me and
and this body thank you madam
speaker.
Thanks for the debate next we go
to the gym lady from Bernalillo
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and with
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
you thank you madam speaker
before a yields.
He begged us to not do this well
he's not in the room because he
is so humble and I just want to
say that in front of the body
while he is voting the this is
who we're talking about today
madam speaker I yield.
Thank you gentle lady and madam
speaker.
I came into the house during the
special session and it felt very
much like trial by fire and it's
sitting behind deem them and
sitting behind the gentleman
from Bernalillo and Sandoval was
quite a treat because it and
with all the details of what is
going on how things are moving
but you are also at hand me some
two budget of what is just as
process what should I expect and
what are the things that I could
learn through the process that
was incredibly impactful for
media and being so new to the
chamber of of of knowing that
somebody so intelligent and so
quick witted was willing to also
explain include things down for
people who are in need of the
chamber I think that mentorship
for me helps quite a bit in
getting me through that that
first stab at the special
session I also say that
determined from Bernalillo Santa
Fe New.
One of the first things he told
me and he continues to Tommy is
stand up and speak I'm Friday
one of them is in the buy it now
and it's it's not natural for me
to jump up on something and say
something if I don't feel like I
could add anything meaningful
but what mattered to me was that
he he saw in need that I could
give something meaningful so I
just have so much appreciation
to him and I'll and with he he
also told me to find some fun
and and doing this process and I
looked around and I how could
this be funding.
We're in but how is that also
fund and watching him to be ice
I saw how fun it was and it was
fun for me to live in even
though I've been here funds for
such a short amount of time and
most of it has been virtual I
will absolutely miss the
gentleman and it was so fun to
watch him and I can't imagine
this place without without and
so thank you madam speaker.
There's further debate next to
go to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo me seem so awkward
and wrong from a procedural
standpoint this is gentlelady
from Santa Santa Fe yield yes
Madam speaker.
Thank you gentle lady you know.
Representative Eli and I have
not known each other that long
but we have a lot in common for
a long time
in his day to day life
Representative Ely is one of the
few plaintiffs attorneys it
takes legal malpractice cases
and he so happens to litigate
against one of the another
attorney who usually only
defends these legal malpractice
cases and that happens to be my
husband and so when we first met
each other I thought that Damon
and I were kindred spirits
because we both knew what it was
like to be on opposing sides of
issues to my husband and I
we immediately clicked.
The neatly clipped we've been
important that the day caucus
caucus of two.
And he immediately became a
mentor to me he took me under
his wing and he explained
everything to me and I see now I
Representative Eli so many other
people have said in this body
but you lift others up.
you are supremely important to
the work that we do here in this
body on a daily basis you were
born for this work it's so very
clear but at the same time you
lift others up and give them
opportunities to shine you've
done that for me we've done that
for other members of this body
in is it'll never be forgotten
really important issues that
matter to you and so I wanted to
take this opportunity to thank
you for giving me that
opportunity thank you for
recognizing that lifting others
up is is a good thing to do when
you see when you are so
supremely talented yourself.
you've also done other personal
favors I'm I consider myself
your best office me because on
the one that's never there.
This is a tough loss this is a
tough loss for all of us and I
cannot imagine being here
without you here so please don't
be a stranger please continue to
cross up with all of us please
continue to do the work in
whatever way you can and tell
your dear wife Cynthia that she
raised she finally won the
battle but we're not better.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Rio Arriba Santa Fe and
Taos Representative Hadda.
The gentleman yield I will
yield.
Don't know.
I
just don't know.
You can change your mind this
whole body will help you.
Because you've helped all of us
so much.
Really I I can remember you
know.
I don't know getting something
tough and I didn't know it is
can do an olive said Damon would
be behind the state taking on.
This is not fun and he'd just go
just go do it have fun you're
doing good you're doing good and
then you know I do not it was
always a party you know yeah I
knew we could be in the worst of
times and we go in the lounge
and a minute have you know six
people around them holding
court.
And everybody laughing you know
and then we get up and run for
votes I mean he was such a part
of my experience in this body I
came in four years ago
and I remember him talking when
we're just building on we we had
that I'm that seminar for
freshman.
And he came up to me afterwards
and gave me some advice and told
me some stuff some good gossip
of course.
And then he was he was like
everybody's mentor here I don't
know if everybody feels like
that but certainly the people
who came in my class felt like
that because he's always helping
everybody we used to laugh we
said he was the
You know he didn't have the
title but he was always the
informal with you know because
no matter what bill was up he
was in the thick of it he was
he's in the thick of everything
all the time and the it's.
There are people who work you
know they do a good job we're
they do a good job in their part
of the team but then there are
people who make every day fund.
Sorry.
And and that's what I'm going to
miss that's fine going to miss
again he's so smart has
knowledge of the depths he
brings to any conversation.
The skill level he brings to to
just making this legislature
work.
Is extraordinary self I would
just like to say one more time
don't go.
Further debate the gentle lady
from Dona Ana Representative
Sonney.
Thank you madam speaker or
speaker with the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield all you'll
to the chairman.
Thank you
well
I like the theme of don't go
we have of.
Representative the lies of two
campaign managers up in the
audience right now and so
they're they're ready to go
don't go.
but I remember my first
Office state was represented the
lie and we had a great time out
at the
north capitol complex and.
We I have a we he had
I think it was the
Microwave and I had the coffee
maker and he could never get how
to use the coffee maker it was a
little bit different than usual
curry that I was trying to show
him the different ways that
you're sure to be able to get
coffee and never could we get
that to work for him so who I
think we finally went and got a
new coffee maker.
But it was always a pleasure to
share an office and then all
these other years with you
Representative Daymon Ely in you
as everyone has said you've
always been so fun and make
things that literally
hard to do you gave us
encouragements and we really
appreciate it and.
I wish you the best I know you
said you're going to have a
great time traveling and on
doing the things that you really
in July so thank you for sharing
the past six years with on us
and it's been great so good luck
with everything.
The debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Thank you minister you will
generally from Santa Fe yield I
yield my friend thank you madam
speaker gently from Santa Fe his
rise in support of the table
motion for the gentleman from
Santa.
just want to take a moment to
thank you and and thank you for
allowing us to.
Is to say a few words but I mean
I I was
But just because a young lawyer
activist way back in the day and
some folks that Hey this.
His lawyers running for court of
appeals is going to party let's
go let's go supporter you know
so we went and of course it was
not able to do if I was running
back and I think those are
husband and Daymon Ely on.
Because when you're a lot
younger lawyers you know Karen
here W. I. files to court you
know couple years out of law
school they many lies like and
like big time you know.
It is I will so I think as big
time lawyer and then
As time goes on we're looking
for candidates to run in certain
districts and it's like well
this guy run we have mutual
friends that that truly
respective interactions like non
that is.
Is what's gonna retire here
pretty soon they're going to
enjoy life so being the you know
the second greatest lawyer in
his household the enjoy the
retirement of the animals and
get I think in December of
fifteen and lo and behold.
The representative from Santa
but it just starts running for
the house right then and there
so that when the second
honeymoon.
As you in a tough race in one
and that the agreement.
Madam speaker gently from Santa
Fe was six years wanted to six
years.
All that after two years after
four years the pressures on.
And I think the the gentleman
from Santa really kind of
flipped the script and Senator
no I I'm committed up to six
years I got to do my six years
we flipped it to flip the script
and and state as long as he
could.
and is still working his tail
off a bit to the last moment and
when will up until December.
But we we wish you well on your
second third honeymoon.
But my point is madam speaker
delivers of that is that.
When when the representative
came in.
It came as one of the more
accomplished lawyers to arrive.
And and I knew do everything but
yet.
Was willing to learn and listen
and be a part of the team and
and seek guidance and counsel
and I was.
Wonderfully refreshing the
humility and the wonderment and
the and the the embrace that the
gentleman had as as being as
being and not be you know being
a rookie being a freshman and
and
I just enhanced enhanced his
legend here on this house floor
and just lastly madam speaker
gently from Santa Fe that.
The debate with regards to right
to work.
Was one of the strongest debates
I've ever seen in my tenure and
and the moment with the
honorable basa kill on the house
floor was one of the more
beautiful moments.
There's a couple dozen others
but I know you're tuning out of
administrative your gentleman of
delayed because of the very but
you're gonna you're gonna have
to grab some good stuff grab a
cigar and watch this on the
replay couple years down the
road because we love you we're
gonna miss you when you're
required to grab a bill every
year and championing so we'll
see once a year championing the
bill and we'll see you back home
and we love and we thank you
we're gonna miss you thank you
madam speaker.
The debate the gentleman from
Cibola McKinley Representative
Alcon.
But one award thank you madam
speaker will gentle lady from
Santa Fe yield control yield.
The lady from Santa Fe I think
I'm want to rise to be about the
third version to seconded the
motion by the Majority Leader
however I know I can do it but
that I do wanted to be on a
record.
I am seconded that motion over
and over again.
I.
My.
Thank you Representative Daymon
Ely that utilize the gentleman
from send a lot of that is that
I have never received and then
sold fast on his feet and so
fast the move and so fast to
leave
my head spinning some budget
numbers they're introduced to
very and the good life of like.
How did he do now.
And you did that throughout the
whole six years that you would
process served and he still
gives the militants are posed as
fast as you get.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
said that there is good luck to
you I know if you've got a lot
of stuff planned ahead even
deleted whatever you're going to
do thank you for.
Be part of my life again thank
you Sir.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Sariñana.
Thank you madam chairman of
madam speaker that.
Kind lady from Santa Fe to yield
are you my friend thank you
I too was in Damond's class we
came in and.
I sent it back at him for five
years so I knew everything that
was going on is always cool
he would leave his glasses on my
desk just about every day and if
I would've kept all of them I
probably would have a classroom
full of kids who could see
He.
When I get back or when I get
home from school from here I get
texts for my students and
they were always saying we saw
you on TV and then one one young
man said does that kind of you
always talk.
And I.
Yes but he has great things to
say
You made coming Daymon maybe
coming to this house so much
easier and.
Is talking to you and then
finding out was going on was
always a pleasure
I will miss you I think you
added so much to this body and
you have to come back and see
us.
We'll be agency you will be
missed thank you.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Valencia Representative
Fajardo.
Madam speaker with a kind lady
please yield you thank you I'm
glad that the Representative is
back in the room.
So.
My own I've never served on a
committee with the
representative I have the
privilege of debating on the
floor.
And one of the things that this
body for the newbies who don't
know that those have been around
I don't debate unless I really
have something to say and think
I'm passionate about something.
And it's really hard in this
body to have a really good
debate based on policies and
issues because sometimes you
have a lot of talking and if you
guys realize this and there's a
lot of Loblaw going on.
But I will tell you that the
times that I've had the
opportunity to debate the the
kind representative from
Santa cracked the burden.
Is about.
Yes my name is been intriguing
it's been challenging.
And I just want to rise up and I
wanted to say how much I
appreciate that I appreciate
good conversation I appreciate
talking about policy and I
appreciate really really less
name and did defeat dealing
digging into into those things
so Madam speaker kind lady I
just want to say thank you for
bringing this body of a temp up
another notch in the
intellectual level so thank you.
Next I have the delay from
Bernalillo Santa and Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady please yep I will
yield thank you.
Self.
Representative I know.
I'll just be really honest when
it came up here I I know that
I'm very passionate about for
being activist and I know that
you're very passionate about
your positions to.
You were kind of one of the
people I was worried about I
thought how many still let me
have it when I get up here.
And actually was opposite you
were very fair with me and even
very pleasant with me and I
really appreciate that and you
actually brought forth some
really good bills that I agreed
with you on and it was nice to
see that the two people on on
the opposite sides and believes
on certain things could find
this really cool middle ground
and I so appreciated that about
you because you presented your
arguments very logically and
methodically and with the
passion and I appreciate that
because I'm very passionate
about certain things to.
So I agree to your bills and had
some discussions with you in a
Mexican of Saturday get to have
more discussions about X. I
think there's some things that
you and I agree upon that we
could have had some really good
discussions about and maybe
brought some legislation forward
on on that those things we
agreed upon so thank you for
being very kind and being very
fair with me and I truly
appreciate that and and I said
to see it go thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman Dona Ana
Representative small.
Thank you madam speaker is the
gentle lady from Santa Fe you I
will yield great Madam speaker
gentle lady I just want to rise
to to say a very big thank you
to the gentleman from Santa and
burn a Leo Madam speaker gentle
lady I've seen the gentleman
near where he is now is he
presents a chart on the house
floor about the right sorts of
tax policy Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Along with everybody else in
this building I've seen the
boundless energy the the laugh
the smile the kindness that
everyone has spoken to Madam
speaker gentle lady I know that
doesn't all just come from is
incredible spouse of the press a
great deal of it does Madam
speaker gentle lady so you know
I need to share deep
I guess sadness at your
departure madam speaker gentle
lady but to know that.
Your happiness joy and my gets
to be.
There was heard.
Is that more than compensates
for the massive loss that this
chamber cities with your
departure so enjoy see you back
here and see on vacation thank
you madam speaker.
Representative Representative
gentle lady from house
Representative Ortez thank you
madam speaker will the gentle
lady from Santa Fe please yield
I will yield.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentle lady and gentleman.
When I came in last year.
On on soon.
I don't think I even met you in
person and the gentleman
took me under his wing.
The help me are navigate the
government committee.
He would often.
Answers phone when I texted him
the big texter.
And it was I didn't really know
the to the decorum and so we're
are you debating a bill in
committee and he just called me
up and and I would have to my
camera because I was so afraid
that I would get in trouble from
someone that you.
Gentleman helped me through so
many
So many bills just helping me to
understand what was happening
what was going on and and I
think I I mean I just I'm super
emotional about you leaving you.
Through second speaker.
Thank you.
Madam comes on the violin
Bernalillo thank you for your
guidance for your kindness for
making you laugh way too much
and for being just like us you
know we we all seek approval and
you would often turn to me and
say Hey did I do that right and
I would say you were awesome and
the and I would ask you did I do
that right you would say you are
awesome so thank you thank you
body thank you gentlemen for for
everything that you've done for
us and for me especially.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia Miguel.
Thank you madam speaker of the
June meeting from all.
Many of these.
Yes so you.
Thank you madam speaker of
Representative Eli all just two
words thank you for to help me
on thank you for the day of the
state of New Mexico.
Do you really want to get.
The debate the gentleman from
Chavis we in Roosevelt
Representative Anderson thank
you thank you madam speaker
madam speaker I I noticed that
Representative Eli has returned
to the floor.
Word is reached the D. T. S..
Allegations that he had some
concerns about them taking the
for on this memorial yes I will
yield.
And that's another good point.
It reminds me Madam speaker of
of parliamentarian where were
representative Ely has made a
long contribution.
And I noticed parliamentarian is
one of the few.
Offices that that.
The the various.
Parties what they have a
parliamentarian I notice it's
not a job you run for it's sort
of a job you get talked into I
believe.
And since I've not been asked
and and that office goes on
filled in the DTS of that's.
Madam speaker my opinion on
that.
Representative Eli brings a
wonderful talent energy and
experience to this citizen
legislature now in its fifty
fifth session it has been an
honor to serve with you Sir and
I wish you best in your next
endeavor thank you.
Thanks for the debate the gentle
lady from captions the current
balance here Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Not here okay next we're gonna
go to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam speaker
I just have to thank you demand
for your generosity of spirit
this front row is just rocks
sometimes people ignore as they
don't see us but we have so much
fun and frankly if you don't
have a little bit of fun here
it's really hard but I just want
to thank Representative Ely
because in my very first session
I found it to be so generous
with us new freshman sharing
bills sharing issues and not not
claiming them as just his you
really shared with us Senator
generosity of spirit it's just
what thank you so remarkable
what I'm so grateful for for
that simple thank you and I hope
you have a party at your house
because it's a great party house
thank you madam speaker I'm glad
to yield to the gentle lady.
Thanks for the debate next we
have the gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane over eating
your own ice cream
Representative land.
Thank you madam speaker first
order of business Madam speaker
gentle lady from Santa Fe will
you yield I will yield.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generally.
From Santa Fe.
Madam speaker so.
I think we could fill part of
our time maybe exchanging
Attorney jokes.
I seems like when your lord it
told all of what those jokes are
from the public.
But I'd like to talk a little
bit more instead about of.
But I think it was one of one of
my favorite parts of being in
this chamber Representative Ely
which is the the floor debates.
I think that obviously you you
are well respected in terms of
being able to debate and debate
well.
And I know anytime that I rose
on a bill that you were the
sponsor.
I can assure you I made sure I
did my homework major I was well
prepared.
You know there's an old saying
it's a better to keep your mouth
closed and people think you're
full and open your mouth and
conferment so I tried to avoid
that from happening because I
knew that you could handle
debate well you can handle
arguments well you handle the
content well and so those are
some of my favorite moments with
representative of you live even
though it's only been well I
guess four sessions in two years
but
is centers around those type of
moments so wish you all the best
as you leave the legislature I
hope professionally I'm never on
the other side.
As a lawyer I hope the member
name to one of your lawsuits and
just wish you all the best
wherever life takes you from
here on after.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Representative
Montoya.
Madam speaker I think there's
something wrong with my.
box here I meant to press nay.
Madam speaker does the gentle
lady from Santa Fe of fifty
eight.
Thank you madam speaker
Administrative in a couple of
things have been mentioned here
about Representative Eli and I
would like to concur.
and Madam speaker and I think
representative Representative
Eli I would probably say that's
one of very few times I've had a
conversation with him or I've
said I'd like to come for.
madam speaker
I'd like to say that one of the
things that I did appreciate a
lot about
that I appreciate a lot about
Representative Eli was debate
debate was lively debate with
the representative Ely there was
new subject matter always plowed
it made engaging madam speaker
and gentleman and gentle lady
being able to
Keep the the room engaged it's
it's tough for during long
debates to keep the room engage
in and and then speaker I
believe
Representative Eli did that a
lot.
And there were.
Seem like they were
opportunities for us to to spend
a lot of time together.
MSP and and and a lady of in
particular.
When the ethics bill came
through.
And there was a back and forth
that lasted days with
I know that uh representative
ERP lie was having to deal with
Senator Ivey Soto and the other
chamber and and with myself on
this side and I remember at one
point Representative Eli
talking to Senator night
Representative Nibert and saying
man this is tough I'm stuck
between two Bulldogs and madam
speaker and and gentle lady
Alice not kid yourself that
gentleman over there has been a
bulldog on his issues and
unlike others I am not going to
plead that you state I hope you
understand that to gentleman of
a madam speaker and and and
gentle lady I understand why
he's going.
one of the things that Senator
Representative Eli and I share.
Very much.
Is family discussions we had
about family how important our
family was to us and I know that
a lot of this I know some of
this is professional but madam
madam speaker I know that a lot
of this is a one of the one of
the people who has been here and
from the beginning of his tenure
here in the house.
the idea of how much time is
spending away from family has
been a great concern and I and I
think we appreciate that and I
and I I share that with you
Representative and I and I
appreciate that.
That
You're making this decision for
other considerations outside of
politics and that a lot of folks
in here that that doesn't happen
Madam speaker and and and
gentleman I I enjoyed.
Barbs with you some off off the
floor so I I just kind of want
to share this one with the
membership is the nickname that
I gave you and your time is up
parliamentarian is a partisan
tarian.
And
Madam speaker and and and and
gentle lady if you might to tell
Representative Ely that there
may be a plaque or something
coming with his ten years of
being in this body as partisan
tarian self and health thank you
madam chair.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Speaker will the gentle lady
from Santa Fe you know how you.
Thank you.
System on speaker and gentle
lady.
And.
You know as the last speaker and
gentle lady
When I
Think of odd Daymon Ely.
I think of three things.
One.
Senator discrimination lawyer.
To.
Anti racism warrior.
And.
And I hate crime four year.
And
That's what I.
Most of Representative Eli.
That is all those things.
Anne's manifested that
commitment to fighting.
These horrendous.
initiatives in our country and
our state.
With.
In the termination.
As the more speaker.
There is a lot of the facing
graffiti going up.
In some of our synagogues
throughout the state.
We saw some of the the facings.
within the.
From American Community as well.
Representative Eli for the.
Regrouping with Jewish that from
our computers.
In terms of.
How to put a halt.
This type of business.
And and it's good to kind of
see.
A white person.
Being a leader.
Infighting back these
atrocities.
Validates estimates speaker.
The struggles that us people of
color.
Have engaged done historically
since infants.
Since you since adolescence
since adults.
And
Speaker a lighter note.
Representative Ely is.
And speaker can you have the
gavel there's a lot of on.
Side conversations going on the
floor.
Thank you so much bigger.
Just last week
All right no that are lighter
note.
Representative the lies.
First built on.
Listen up.
Listen up folks president
analyze.
First bill song.
Was an opera song.
And and just like a live opera
it went on forever.
But what is the last week
it was so beautiful.
Thank it was it was a beautiful
opera song you know we should
the record at that we should
have you know send out
throughout the internet social
media in terms of you know we've
got an opera singer in this
chamber.
In of the those are some of the
highlights some of the things
that really.
Come to my mind and my heart in
terms of this gentleman.
And it's going to be a I
realize.
To kind of see his character.
It's not within our.
Always in our chamber.
By
He's not gone forever in terms
of.
My relationship with them
because his office is now in my
in my district I picked up that
country I area for the need is
to do and I used to represent
the country but then when I
first got elected.
So when I told them senator you
lied at his office now is in my
district the same again well
expecting a sign so.
So we're not going to be the tax
for shares the speaker from.
So that in a connect in this
with this outstanding gentleman.
And I value everything that is
brought to this chamber.
And the milestones that he's
accomplished as a state
Representative.
Q. as them speaker thank you
gentle lady of Santa Fe god
bless you brother.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from captain secara
influencia Representative Gail
Armstrong thank you madam
speaker will the gentle lady
yield fell yield thank you madam
speaker just wanted to give a
shout out to my friend
we maybe we can have coffee
sometime to figure out just
where we run into each other
every once in a while flying
star and the issue well and I
appreciate all your commitment
especially on the committee that
we served together on in the
ethics.
And of appreciate you as a human
being
and wish you and your wife many
many years of complete and utter
happiness thank you madam
speaker.
Thanks for the debate the gentle
lady from Eddie Representative
Brown.
Thank you so much Madam speaker
will the gentle lady from Santa
Fe please yield I will yield.
Thank you so much for.
like everybody else I I have
some misgivings about
Representative Ely leaving us I
I fully understand the.
Of the desire to do some other
things to enjoy his retirement
to spend more time with his
family Madam speaker gentle lady
and Representative Eli I think I
really got to know you and value
your your legal talent when you
were working on the guardianship
law revision and I had a deep
interest in that legislation and
really really admired the job
that you did it without.
Speaker gentle lady I also got
to know Representative Eli in
the work that he did and we all
did with the state ethics
commission those are two really.
Monumental pieces of legislation
and what I observed was that the
Representative was willing to
listen and accommodate other
ideas and I think it just ended
up being two very successful
pieces of work.
Madam speaker gentle lady so I
just rise to say that I I find
it and Representative to have a
very fine legal mind he's he's
really quite exceptional that
way and he's also a person of
good will and I enjoyed his
light heartedness and joviality
and just really enjoyed being
around him.
And then I can say also
Madam speaker gentle lady that
he is indeed a person who works
hard and enjoys life at the same
time.
And then finally Madam speaker
gentle lady I will always
remember Representative Ely for
the prayers he gave in the
chamber in Hebrew.
I've always enjoyed that and so
thank you gentleman god bless
you wish you well thank you
madam speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker road
gentle gentle lady from Santa Fe
County yield I will yield.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady.
FireEye's to
Say some things about a person
that I came in with.
I would say it's quite evident
that were on.
Opposite ends of the political
spectrum.
But through that and through
working in this body.
And sitting next to him and
Judiciary our first term.
I would say that the.
We developed a good working
relationship.
One that has.
Really been one of of joy at
times frustration at times and
the I'd say looking back it's
probably a time the I will say
that the.
would would be the some of the
highlights of
my tenure in this body.
And I hope that the gentleman
might think that the.
Some of our interactions would
likewise be maybe the highlights
of his tenure in this body.
Working on bills together from
opposite ends of the spectrum
ones itself to substantial
debate substantial compromise.
And hopefully at the end of the
day.
Substantial agreement that they
do good work product resulted.
Time will tell.
But I think that that this
working relationship.
And allowing.
Our political differences to
stay on the sideline.
Allowed us to do for ge some
common interest.
Mutual respect.
And frankly admiration for.
The intellect and the ability
that we see and representative
of the line.
Of the things that I will
certainly miss.
That interactions that ability
to go to him with what I see is
some significant problems and
see that the of those problems
may get addressed behind the
scenes.
Of.
It will be a different place for
me personally.
in this body without him.
Madam speaker gentle lady of I
think.
We all will will miss his
energy.
His dedication.
Is articulation of ideas even
when I propose those ideas.
He was capable of articulating
those ideas and singly.
And with strings and with
passion.
And I think that that's what the
people the Mexico expect of each
and everyone of us.
I thank the people that Senator
want us to be their voice.
They want us to articulate those
ideas.
And they want us to bring.
Their voices to this body and
and for that I think the the
gentleman has distinguished
himself among says body.
In his ability to excel in that
regard.
And so that madam speaker and
gentle lady I certainly
appreciate the time that I've
spent with them in and outside
of this body.
I certainly appreciate the time
that he is in.
Bringing ideas to me working
through those.
And hopefully for gene some good
policy for the state of New
Mexico.
I know that he leaves us because
he has other goals and ambitions
in life.
And I wish him many years of
happiness with his wife Cynthia
the Cynthia and as a travel and
do some things that
he richly deserves so with that
Madam speaker and gentle lady
and most of all gentleman I
thank you.
Thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Santa Fe speaker
Egolf.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentlelady yields I yield thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentle lady I've been listening
intently to most of if not all
of the debate on this memorial.
I am confident when I say that I
it is very definitely more
likely than not.
A year from now.
Representative Ely is absence
will be occasionally noted
best of luck to you Sir and may
god have mercy on your soul
thank you madam speaker.
Seeing now further debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you speaker I think we're
entertaining the tabling motion
at this time
you know madam speaker I have
the distinct honor of being able
to close out this memorial is.
Challenging as it is because it
means something with with this
session and what comes what's to
come.
Representative Ely for me has
been just incredible I
immediately became any lie ally
when I came into this chamber
figuring out that he was the guy
to know and not just that.
That he was on the right side of
every issue that I wanted to be
part of an one of the first big
pieces of legislation that I was
part of was telling right to
work no offense to our other
side of the chamber that was so
fun.
And because he immediately was
like you get in the driver's
seat we need you in there we
need you we need everybody would
get him in there and and he's
just been a champion for so many
lifting them up and so many have
said that
but he is he is the guy to go to
and while I've been able to
share this time with him sitting
under his wing as is
parliamentarian learning every
single day so many things about
what the right thing to do is
how to think on your feet even
now while we've been you know
this is hearing all of this
incredible testimony from
everybody I think in in this
chamber it is love him we love
this guy has the best stories is
the best gossip and he's the guy
to do it and and the truth is
I've been getting text messages
from from advocate saying remind
them remind everyone that he's a
champion to women he's a he he
lifts us all up and and it's
true he's he's there for every
single person whether you got
here yes.
Whether you got here yesterday.
Or you'll be here tomorrow he's
the guy to call and so
with that madam speaker one of
the big things to is is
parliamentarian as he's told me
is that you get the best gossip
and I'm sorry that the
Republicans and learn this but
he'll talk to you about
literally anything that's going
on and I'm glad he only has
twenty four hours or less to to
get that but he really does know
everything that's going on here
and so I hope I can be the new
gossip girl for you all it
should be fun
but that said madam speaker on a
on a true we humbling the notes
to know Daymon Ely and have
served with him.
Is really about following the
man in the arena.
And I think it's a long quote
but I'll read the end of it as
teddy Roosevelt had said.
And this is the end of the quote
and I'll close with this.
What best knows in the end of
triumph of high achievement and
who at the worst if he fails at
least fails while daring greatly
so that his place shall never be
with those cold and timid souls
who neither know victory nor
defeat.
Representative Eli you are a
massive figure here can you will
continue to be and I'm so
grateful to know you friend and
I'm really grateful that I'll be
able to continue to know you
thank you madam speaker and with
that I move that house memorial
fifty nine.
I ask unanimous consent of the
house that the record show that
the rule has been called in all
those present voted in the form
affirmative on house memorial
number fifty nine.
There's a motion to show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered.
We are on final passage of house
memorial fifty nine the vote is
now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seventy in the affirmative.
There in the negative well now.
I stand corrected.
By a vote of sixty nine in the
affirmative one in the negative
house memorial fifty nine is yes
this has been.
It is be gravely wrong for the
record.
Yesterday I just state agency
budget a representative of the
life.
In the morning.
Well that's okay.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move to
go to the next order of business
concurrence.
Hearing objections sort.
Members all ask you to please
turn your attention to the
current calendar.
I will take them up in the order
they are listed.
Yes yes in your hand German.
the first is the gentleman from
Rio Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Lente.
To make a motion on these
whether the house should concur
to Senate amendments on house
bill sixty as amended.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with the Senate
amendments to house bill sixty
gentleman to explain the Senate
amendments the amendments
provide clarifications to the
memorandum of agreement
framework for the public not
tribes and nations retaining the
authority of those problems
tribes and nations to develop
criteria and standards to
certify native American teachers
and adds in.
Special languages in
collaborations with the public
education department it also
establishes native American
language teachers base salary at
a level one but does not
prohibit native American
language teachers from moving
and ascending to level twos or
threes at some point in time
those are the changes Mr speaker
and I ask again the body can
Kerr with the changes in the
minutes there is debate the
gentleman for San Juan.
Investigators gentleman yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentleman thank you Mr speaker I
I just wanted to rise and
support of the changes that have
been made and I all sorts the
body to concur.
The motion before the bodies of
the house speaker the Senate
amendments to house bill sixty
as amended and the gentleman is
urged the body to vote yes all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was named the eyes have
it.
The house's concurred in the
Senate amendments to house bill
sixty as amended thank you Mr
speaker.
they were all excuse for a
government the fact.
Members just a sense of folks
know up on the board we excuse
the members of the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee
I have taken them off is there
anyone that needs to be re
excuse.
Representative.
Representative Brown is excuse
she's presenting a bill in the
Senate.
Okay next we'll go to item to
the gentleman from Santa Fe you
presenting this the gentleman to
make a motion.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house concur with the Senate
amendments to house bill sixty
seven down to explain it the
sentiments thank you Mr speaker
we had extended the sun set for
this tech right is gross
receipts tax by eight years the
Senate struck that and extended
by five years and Mr speaker I
urge the body to vote yes okay I
see no debate the motion for the
body is to concur in the Senate
amendments to house bill sixty
seven as amended the Germans
urged the body to vote yes all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was a.
The eyes have it the house's
concurred in the Senate
amendments to house bill sixty
seven as amended generally from
Rio Arriba to make a motion.
Mr speaker I move that the house
concur with these sentiments to
house one thirty two gentlelady
to explain the sentiments.
Mr speaker and members of this
body there are three small
amendments to this legislation
one wants to take at the credit
union amendment that we added on
in the house and that was
because we wouldn't get rid
three liable data the second was
a technical amendment to align
the dates of the financial
institutions division study and
the third one was to extend the
act enactment date to a by six
months and that that those are
the three amendments Mr speaker
is vintage San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
does the gentle lady from
everybody's Santa Fe Intel's
yield Mister speaker yes I yield
to the kind gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated for merry about.
the credit union data can you
speak a little bit more what
what was the the data that's
being struck.
Certainly Mr speaker kind
gentleman what what the
amendment called for and it
really was really a last minute
amendment in this house so I
really didn't we didn't have
time to vet it properly after I
thought it was a great concept
to you know have the credit
unions a report of the same kind
of credit that the small loan
industry would creek the point
out the problem is only twenty
five percent of our credit
unions in the state our state
chartered credit unions the rest
are federally chartered so we
were going to get our data from
the US from twenty five percent
of the credit unions in this
state which are Representative
kind of the the smaller local
more private credit union so
what I'm telling you is is you
know I used to work for the
laugh and Asian my board of
directors for all scientists our
model was in god we trust all
others bring data the problem
was this data would have been
wrong and and the body really
wouldn't have had much to go on
it with that's why we pulled it
out.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
everybody thanks for the next
explanation is why was struck
but as far as the data itself
that that was required one this
bill one of the house and now
it's been stripped what what
kind of data was at school where
we seeking to obtain it would be
the same that we got from our
the small loan industry the
number of borrowers how much
anticipated what we're the fees
the link the term of the loan
the
if you're over sixty five if
you're on public benefits it was
all the loans that all the date
data that I had laid out for you
in that and then handout that I
gave you when the when the
Bill was on the floor of the
house.
Mr speaker gentle lady from your
vote bank you that that's
helpful the state do credit
unions reporting this data under
any other statutes or as the
sword with this been the first
time I've been implemented for
credit unions.
Mr speaker I'm sorry I'm sorry
kind gentleman I didn't hear
you.
Mr speaker gentle lady from for
everyone if I hold the Mike a
little closer that might help
so.
You're recommending concurring
confirming stripping out the
reporting requirements for the
credit unions is there any
record reporting requirements on
this type of info in any other
statutes or any other way that
the legislature can obtain this
data.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
they they report to the the ones
that are charted by the federal
government report to the the
they have a whole they have
examiners that come in every
year they have to report on date
and that's the same with the
state chartered they report to
F. I do and they they have to go
through all both all credit
unions depository credit unions
have to go through a rig
rigorous examination period
every year and I that's pretty
much open to the public.
Mr speaker delivery Reba.
And I think you also reference
in your comments some new dates
I believe can you explain to me
where the where that's at the
bill and and what the
implications are removing those
dates.
The we change the enactment date
from July of twenty twenty two
to January first of twenty
twenty three Mr speaker gentle
lady from rebel okay so that the
I guess the the caps that that
really that this bill
accomplishes will go into effect
on Jan one of twenty twenty
three is that right Mr speaker
and gentleman you're correct and
Mr speaker generated from around
I'm sorry in your remarks you
mentioned three things and I I
did not catch what the last one
was the other one Mr speaker
kind gentleman remember in this
house we we voted on a five
percent C. four four loans five
hundred and below
when we did that.
You know who's all these
technical issues it changed to
it change the reporting
requirements and the financial
institutions division study that
we get every year so it just
alligned those days so that we
would get the same information
in the same amount of time.
Mr speaker generally for merry
so that that change doesn't
alter the fee itself is that
right.
Mr speaker and gentleman nodded
off.
Mr speaker gentle lady from here
but sounds like the.
It's so we can have that what is
on the committee can have sort
of a what I would call a unified
compiled report instead of a
piecemeal approach of data
reporting is that fair Mr
speaker kind gentleman you're
absolutely right.
Mr speaker generally thank you
for answering questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman doing in a grant in
Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
only please field Mr speaker
kind gentleman I gladly of thank
you.
Mr speaker the only so I did.
I heard that you kept the five
percent still in there.
And my other question did remain
flat at thirty six Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
we've lowered the of the APR
from a hundred and seventy five
percent to thirty six percent
okay and so I just want to know
because I I you and I have had
some conversations about them Mr
speaker gentle lady about the
touring and that I just didn't
know if it had.
Under a thousand dollar loan
with the short term if there was
any adjustments on that that I
was concerned about Mr speaker
kind gentleman now okay thank
you those are all my questions
Mr speaker gently pushing to
renew much the motion before the
body is to concur in the Senate
amendments to house bill one
thirty two as amended and the
gentle lady's urged the body to
vote yes all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
Well this was named.
The eyes have it house has
concurred in the Senate
amendments to house bill No
shows of emotion Act chamber
please.
The house has concurred in the
Senate amendments to house bill
one thirty two as amended.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move into
the next order of business third
reading of legislation.
Junction it is so ordered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
And members of the for the third
reading we're gonna do the
housekeeping work we didn't do
last evening so we can.
Do the businesses of Mylan
counters of the rest so
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I will go to the
next order of business committee
reports no objection it is so
ordered.
Cllr to read.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
team has been referred Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill seven has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that a do pass as
amended respectfully submitted
the sale we upon chair.
The report.
We are adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate health of public affairs
the seventy percent of bill
seven all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was a three point adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill one forty as amended
has had it under consideration
reports as recommendation that a
do pass respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair them
specifically referred together
act on single vote referred to
the journals of their act on
individually in objections order
click to read.
Senate bill two forty three to
pass respectfully submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair.
The speaker move adoption of the
committee report we are adoption
favorable committee point on
Senate finance committee up to
percent of the one forty is
amended and Senate bill two four
three all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was may twenty point
reductive.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill thirty four as
amended has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendations that a do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair
members consider the creepers
reverie gather on active on the
single vote reflected the
journals of erected on
individually here at about us
support us to speaker we'd like
to have the the bill separated
that committed.
Production is a gentlelady from
Bernalillo to move adoption
committee report.
Mr speaker move adoption the
committee report production
stable twenty four instead of a
thirty four as amended all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was a three point adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred Senate bill
one forty four as amended has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation that a do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair Mr
speaker move adoption for
production Fe role committee for
the Senate bill one forty four
as amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was nay.
Committee point enough to.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
Senate bill one fifty eight as
amended has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that the pastors
Buckley's Miguel Chasey chair Mr
speaker move adoption we aren't
option of a favorable committee
board and Senate bill one fifty
eight is amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Both was nay.
Representative.
Mr speaker rolling and grossing
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill eight as amended
house bill fifty two house bill
eighty two is as amended has had
them under consider
consideration point that same
have been duly rules rules and
girls prefer to signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Christine
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are on adoption of a
favorable committee reports
house bill eight as amended
house bill fifty two it has a
eighty two is omitted all those
in favor please signify by
saying you Begay.
Hey on this first day.
Three point are adopted let the
record reflect that all that
they do rules and gross copies
of hospitals eight is amended
fifty two and eighty two
submitted have been signed by
the officers of the house in
open session.
Mr speaker you're rolling and
grossing Committee Tim is been
referred house memorial forty
one house memorial fifty four
have had them under
consideration report same.
Have been duly enrolled in gross
preparatory of signing by the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Christina
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are adoption
favorable committee report on
house memorial forty one fifty
for all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All those of those names.
Report is adopted.
For the record reflect the doing
rolled into gross copies of
house memorial forty one to
fifty four have been signed by
the officers of the house in
open session.
Okay members we're gonna start
with item twelve.
And we're going to go item
twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen
sixteen in that order.
Serena twelve through sixteen.
German chair representative of
all and Bernalillo
Representative Eli are you
within the sound of my voice.
Void has the guys Morial and he
just the gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
and we'll go to the next order
of business third reading of
legislation no objections were
very we will await the return of
representative Ely he's on the
first leg of his press tour
celebrating the passage of his
memorial.
item thirteen Senator thirty
eight as amended who has that
item.
Senate bill thirty eight looking
for house sponsor.
Item I was thirteen I am
thirteen Senate bill thirty
early childhood education
apartment authorizations I can
do that.
Who has that I can do it again
okay the gentle lady for granted
all go and Sierra thank you
record reflect election
necessary for the Senate bill
thirty eight is amended on final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain it all Mr
speaker and members of the body
this bill makes changes to the
early care and education agency
that we set up there is some
things that were left in CYFD
that need to be moved moved over
to ECECD and this is just
correcting the language that
they can fully do the job that
we task them with them with that
I stand for questions there's a
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you the speaker gentle
lady from Hidalgo is here county
yield.
Yes thank you Mr speaker I yield
to the gentleman.
So madam speaker Mr speaker and
gentle lady what what was move
toward what was task that has
been moved to a different
apartment thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentlemen if I
could have a second to turn to
that page I'd be happy to tell
you.
What is the Senate bill thirty.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen it's it's language
corrections beginning on page
two online three other underline
the word instead of there is
created has been struck and it's
been replaced with the word is
created.
Then if you go down on page two
to line eleven the DUP
developmental disabilities
planning council the word
planning was struck.
On line twelve on instructional
support and vocational
rehabilitation the word
rehabilitation has been struck
and the word education has
replaced it.
If you go to page.
Members already that answer
there's been a request for
members remove their jackets
that is perfectly fine.
Mr speaker and gentleman on page
eight of a consistent access to
appropriate early childhood care
and education services we this
used to be occurring education
now it's early care and
education is really language
clean up we moved the HSD part
of CYFD agency over to ECECD and
that was childcare the nutrition
program the background check be
part.
Parts of the things
family infant toddler program is
being clarified in here as well
and so it's it's it's a lot of
cleanup language instead of the
word childcare center it's child
care facility and so it's that
this is much of the it is not a
substantive change it's it's
language cleanup.
Madam speaker and gentle lady at
the
the area of of work that was
being done that's been moved to
ECDC what was the purpose of
moving that.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
early care and education is a is
a.
Study of its own and it it is it
involves children prenatal till
the age of thirty and so CYFD is
tasked with preventing child
abuse and neglect and their
agency was big it was cumbersome
and I mean I I can't speak for
the sponsor of the bill but I
can tell you that I supported
the move because in New Mexico
discussions that I have with the
sponsor were about how big and
how inefficient CYFD had become
and so we brought we took out
the early care and education
aspect of it which is considered
early an immediate intervention
and those things that are tasked
with making sure the children
enter kindergarten ready to
succeed and are able to keep
that advantage to third grade
when early childhood ins so
madam speaker and and generating
so how's the CDC better prepared
to or better a better set fire
they a better fit I understand
why CYFD and inefficiencies and
that you know.
Headlines a receive what wise
ECDC a better fit Mr speaker and
gentleman and again I can only
speak for myself the sponsor
isn't here there's many of us
who signed on in support of this
I feel that they're better
equipped to because it is the
focus on prevention and early
intervention and immediate
interventions is what the intent
should be so it's the focus of
CYFD is to prevent abuse and
neglect and so they have a
different task that puts them
more at aligned with courts
corrections more interactions
with law enforcement officers
more interaction with vulnerable
populations whereas ECECD the
early care and education
department is focused on
strengthening the outcomes are
pre K. programs or in
strengthening our family of a
toddler programs making sure
that their marketing to families
all families regardless of their
risk factors and and I have to
say that.
The secretary is probably one of
my favorite appointments that
the governor has made and she
has built a strong team of
expertise in that understand how
to help families from the time
they find out they're pregnant
until their child is born
through the early years and
through third grade to be
healthy and strong and reaching
their full potential and so
seeing those those check those
points in a child's growth and
development and making sure that
they're that all there's growth
and development cognitive social
emotional their language
creativity how they see and
perceive the world that those
things are happening in as they
should be and what research says
allows them to be ready for
kindergarten on the first day
succeed in their K. twelve
experience graduate on time with
the post high school goal line
and that's what ECECD focuses
on.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so
there appears to be a cost
associated with this
it doesn't appear to be a new
cost issues we have been borne
by CYFD previously but it are
there any dollars that transfer
will along with workload the
speaker generating.
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
not know the answer that
question this bill does not have
an appropriation of we have been
transferring the dollars as
activities and duties and
responsibilities of.
Madam speaker and gently so how
how will funded it is easy the
city.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
tell you I for the past twenty
two years I've been doing early
childhood education and things
related early childhood in the
state of New Mexico and I
remember when we start when we
we paid more.
The state paid more
reimbursement to a county for
holding an animal at an animal
shelter stray dog than we
reimbursed for infant care in a
day of infant care and we this
is one of the things we should
celebrate usually we're at the
bottom of the good list of the
top of the bad list we are in
the in the last I checked we
were rate of fourteen the nation
for the quality of our early
care and education services and
our child outcomes with the
measure child outcomes there is
a fallout effect when they go
into a system that is not able
to keep that benefit there but
the we're we're close to half a
billion dollars maybe seven I'm
sure I'm sure chairman of
appropriations would know better
but I think if you count zero
through third grade the
investments that we're making in
higher ed to build that
workforce where we're spending a
very very significant amount of
money on early care and
education and leveraging federal
dollars as well.
Thank you speaker gently so it
is there is there capacity there
of sellers have not transferred
with the workload that's going
from CYFD are there is there
enough dollars there to cover
this work I would imagine the
Senator FTEs full time employees
would be needed to take a to to
be able to handle this the
workload Mr speaker and and
gentlemen I think this is just
language clarification and that
the transition of the duties and
responsibilities with what
happened in the prior year and
this is just clean up language
that they can actually implement
what we intended for them to do
and so there's not the new
dollars necessarily associated
with this bill but they have
been going there capacity yes so
thank you miss Baker in July so
has the the work.
Already been born by this
department prior to this bill if
you're saying cleanup languages
so as a as a workload already
shifted or just need to catch up
with where the work is that Mr
speaker and gentleman that is my
understanding there is some
clarification on who does the
criminal history information and
some of those sorts of things
and that that is necessary for
the agency to do what we task
them within their asked so in
their act so it's to my
knowledge they have staffed up
every time there's a caller
anytime they have they need with
us as legislators are always
introducing us to new staff so I
don't think funding has been an
issue there.
I think we speaker generally
that that's helpful every time I
I read a bill and it looks like
a department is picking up new
tasks and then I don't see a
dollar trail associated with
them picking up a new task I'm
always concerned but it appears
that the work is already being
done there.
And this is clean up to reflect
that the work is being done
there and so no real dollars
need to be transferred because
that the money is already there
for this work that is that that
is my understanding of your
comments that correct Mr speaker
and gentleman that is my
understanding and and I'm
speaking what I understand to be
true.
Thank you Mr thanks to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield thank
you Mr speaker I into the yield
to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady so I I do
some questions because
It always.
Works my interest when I see
something that comes through
making sure that our that we're
getting correct can criminal
history record checks on people
that we around children can you
just briefly explain to me why
The New Mexico early childhood
education and care department
would be a a better choice for
why would be doing the
background checks in that
department Mr speaker don't miss
Mr speaker and gentle lady I was
not prepped for this so if
anybody is listening that can be
provided as an expert witness to
answer these questions that
would be grateful so if someone
from ECECD would come down and
help me that would be great but
I can tell you what the exit how
it works with that under CYFD so
about every time there is a new
employee or a new hire in fact
this employee cannot become a
child care worker and work on
their own until the background
check comes back so the employer
feels out of background check
forms and send a check thank
they sent to the police
department their fingerprints
that is put in a package and it
sent to CYFD CYFD background
checks bureau does the
background check and in a timely
manner typically in less than
six weeks they sent back the
results of the federal
background check that they
conducted on behalf of the
employer the letter that's
received is very simple one page
eligible for higher not eligible
for higher that is done by CYFD
and it's a requirement of a
hundred percent of all staff and
all volunteers and so what I
believe is happening here is
that since the licensure and the
oversight of licensed early care
and educational facilities has
changed from CYFD to ECECD that
ECECD is going to take over
those duties.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I have another question
for clarification I apologize
and I I don't know this answer
and I'm hoping clarify this for
me so is this only for programs
that are state funded or
federally funded or is this for
every private business that they
all have to go through CYFD so
they don't do their own personal
background check is that my
understanding Mr speaker dealing
Mr speaker and gentle lady
nothing prohibit you from doing
an additional background check
but you must did one with C. ID
if you are a licensed child care
and education facility in the
state of New Mexico public
private for profit not for
profit parochial secular it
doesn't matter who you are if
you are licensed in the state of
New Mexico you must go through
this background check process
for every employee and volunteer
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
and I appreciate you clarifying
that because it's so important
that on every level I would love
to see that both sides to it so
that nobody slips through the
cracks of that there is a
background check on every single
person especially anybody that
is working with children so Mr
speaker and gentle lady
Can you okay you went through
and you tell me how the
background checks do look I did
have another question.
When I was looking at this
analysis that was just handed to
us on the second page S. as in
section fourteen B. and C. as
replace with new B. and C. it's
unclear why so much language was
changed what the legal
implications are continue I know
this is it your bill and
can you explain to me what.
The language that was changed
are there any legal implications
in the changing of the wording
Mr speaker internally can you
tell me the page again.
Yes it was on the amendments
that were just handed to us I'm
sorry the
Madam Alice's thank you.
One second Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
The.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
can't I I really can't answer
that question but I hope
someone's coming to help me.
Thank you Mr speaker to us I can
imagine would be like to be on
the spot and to take someone's
bill without any appropriation
not Mr speaker and gentle lady I
am getting a text message.
From the general counsel.
Generally regarded I mean this
in all sincerity would you like
to roll over the bill no Mr
speaker we do not want to roll
over the bill I'm not and I'm
not making a joke I just
received the volunteer to do it
and if we want to give an
opportunity for an expert to
Epping come back today I don't
want to.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm now
communicating with the secretary
and general counsel I don't know
if they were where the bill is
being heard Mr speaker and
gentle lady the early care and
education department
authorization bill ensures that
ECECD has full and clear
authority to conduct the
departments essential functions
in the background check
authority explicitly transfers
background check authority of
child care and education of
workers friends CYFD to ECECD
stating that a thirty to stay in
compliance with the federal
Karen development block grant.
They worked with the PS to
ensure the language contained
the important and essential
sections that comports with DOJ
and FBI requirements.
Thank you Mr speaker and and and
the lady that was what it was
like over there just a few
questions that I had I think
this is a great bill I saw that
it passed through with no
opposition and everywhere that
it went and I can see why so
thank you for stepping up to do
this are greatly appreciated and
I yield my time thank you.
Exit gentlelady from Chavis.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
please thank you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much right now does early
childhood education department
working the with costs of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady not
directly but through.
The next through the nature of
the agencies at the ground level
yes but the state agency level
now.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
whenever you said that this CYFD
did it used to have the criminal
background checks done those
checks that were done prior to
this are they going to be
carried forward into
was acronym here ECECD.
Mr Stewart will there have to be
new background checks completed
on these people that are working
for them now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if it
works the way it does with with
other agencies if you're looking
if you are if you're oversight
at CYFD you'll have to do a
background check there.
And if you have additional
oversight from ECECD you'll have
to do an additional and
duplicate background check
process there.
And if your casa plies for risky
reduction initiative the
department of health.
You would have to do with third
and separate background check
there.
To my knowledge state agencies
do not sure background checks so
you could theoretically be
working you could be a casa
volunteer teaching a program to
reduce risky behavior in the
public school and we have to
complete a PED background check
as well so this is an additional
background check not instead of
but but it would depend on the
the circumstances what that
employee or volunteer was doing.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
sounds like it's totally
redundant Mr speaker gentle lady
who pays for these background
checks Mr speaker and and gentle
lady of at this time the
employer for the person
accepting the volunteer seeking
the assistance pays for the
background check.
So Mister speaker.
In related what is the work
force right now or that will be
fully in place for the early
childhood education and care
department.
Mr speaker and gentle lady do
you mean the that that the state
agency lever or in our community
level.
All throughout the state
appearance Santa Fe and
throughout the state thank you
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady in the in the
early care and education agency
the types of people who would be
doing these background Texas
every single person who works in
a child care and education
facility anyone who is doing
head start type program that
that would include head start
that please they may have public
dollars they may not it might be
a parochial it might be secular
everybody who is caring for our
young children in a license care
and education facility must have
a background check and their
volunteers in addition to that
we have the family and the
toddler program and the family
of a toddler program is early
intervention and those folks go
into homes and provide speech
therapy occupational therapy for
they go into centers and do
those things and so they will
have to have a background check
in addition to pre K. workers
anyone who is and this is
typically occurs in a in a child
care and education facilities so
it's not a second background
check but if you are doing in
New Mexico pre K. requests or
implementing that that could
include our regional educational
cooperative centers who have
contracts to do mentoring of
those that would that would
include our higher education
agencies that are doing coaching
and consulting and so anyone who
is working with anyone in a
licensed early care and
education facility or if it
program would go through this
background check process.
Thank you for the response here
I guess my concern is Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
When is this madness comes start
I understand the Mississippi
Mississippi for.
List Liz.
Attacked our children first and
foremost but to have it repeated
time and time and time and time
and time again that's that's out
of control whenever that money
could be spent or spent.
I have actual application by
these agencies.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Whenever you're saying day care
centers licensed by the state.
Whether we're talking about
those that are out in our rural
areas lots of mothers to work
out in our rural areas.
There we including those for
they take their kids to spend
the day so we're going to have
to have those folks that are
trying to earn a living.
But taking care of somebody
else's children while they are
at work they're going to have to
have all these background checks
done as well is that correct Mr
speaker and gentle lady and and
and I didn't use the word day
care we use the word early care
and education as the correct
term but yes many people do say
babysitter even if they don't
sit on babies and some people
say day care that many people
use all different types of terms
that but to your point yes and I
should have said they're all if
you are caring for a child and
you are receiving state
assistance if you are accepting
food to feed a child even a USDA
mail in your home your relative
care giver anything those folks
must go through a background
check and this is good because
people have and and if it's
happening in a home the people
who live in that house will also
have to have a background check
it's not just the care giver
it's the people in the home who
have a background because Mr
speaker Madam speaker and gentle
lady we don't know if there's
someone there who has a crime
against a child who has a
background of violent acts
against others and so the this
is one thing that I think that
that that is necessary is that
we do these background checks to
make sure that there's no one
with the criminal history with a
crime against children or any
sort of violent crime three goes
much further than that it's it's
a pretty lofty background check
to pass.
Madam speaker I think we're
getting out of control here I
really do I understand the
necessity to protect our
children I am all in favor that
I don't want anybody to
misconstrue that but also.
We had a facility I'm going to
say down in my district I'm not
going to vote area many years
ago and they were turned down
because three houses down was a
registered pet a file I get that
I get that.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
never you're talking about these
facilities and evidently a day
care center is going to come
into play in somebody's home
what you said was early
childhood education in the home.
Are the is this half of this is
private dwelling going to have
to be inspected.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes if they want to to provide
the service on behalf of the
state and what if that
registered sex offender was a
family member in the home I mean
this is something that you're
choosing to do you do not have
to do this type of care you
don't have to take state
assistance you don't have to
serve a and F. a neighbor or
relative in this way but if you
choose to do so I certainly
believe that these background
checks to be done what was
difficult as a someone who's
conducting background checks is
you only get a clear to poor
denied you have no idea what was
in that record and so but they
were for the liability falls on
the provider if something
happens so you don't know what
their background check is just
that they're clear tonight okay
Mister Madam speaker Madam
speaker gentle lady.
The changing of the wording
background checks to criminal
history records check is there
going to be specifics in there
that they're going to be
checking for is it just going to
be any sort of crimes against
children or can it be any sort
of felony that they're checking
for.
Madam speaker and gentle lady to
my knowledge and and this time
I'm two years rusty on this and
I haven't seen any proposed
regulations that would change
what I know to be true at the
last time they revise those
background checks it's pretty
extensive if there's any violent
crime if there is any sort of
domestic violence if there's any
sort of even an assaulted an
aggravated assault anywhere that
they serve any type of
aggression.
Even even had someone denied had
a DWI and so the they got it
they were denied for employment
and they didn't understand why
so they wrote permission to
fight to see the record and they
had had a D. W. I. when they
were younger and they were able
to peel and get that clear but
it's it's a pretty lofty.
Background check that CYFD
conducts because they're trying
to prevent abuse neglect almost
on a population.
Well that's all I can say
because we are taking employees
and volunteers at this we have
lots of programs madam chair
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that to read do have volunteers
working for.
Madam speaker hand gentle lady
we have obviously the girl
scouts the Boy Scouts four H.
club FFA it of parents that do
help with that so it seems like
the trend we are sitting right
here.
May go forward and I really have
a problem with that volunteers
volunteers Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Of is the track the is the step
that is already been trying for
CYFD will they just
automatically be able to move
into the role with.
The C. ECT to cut down on cost
ways physical fiscal and
administrative costs I mean it.
it's it's with all these
criminal background checks that
these individuals individual
agencies are going to have to do
it seems like we're getting way
over the top here so is that
going to be able to move forward
Madam speaker and gentle lady
these are not new background
checks it's just changing from
CYFD to ECECD's responsibility
the time when you have to do
duplicate background checks as
when you're working on behalf
for volunteering through
programs with multiple agencies
so this is this is moving the
CYFD background checks for
certain types of folks like fits
family even tighter into mental
health the people who are moving
from the CYFD agency to the
early care and education agency
will now have their background
checks done in the department
that oversees them it's not a
duplicate background check in
less they're working and it is
duplicate trust me I've had I've
had people working in four
different programs they had to
do PED CYFD D. O. H. and they
were americorps members so they
had for background checks that
he didn't either neither
acknowledges the others and so
they're duplicate but that's
that's not what's happening here
this is simply transferring the
responsibility of the some
background checks to ECECD.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
whenever these background checks
are completed and.
Okay would you like to introduce
your expert witness please thank
you madam speaker and thank you
gentle lady we have the primary
sponsors Senator side Hemphill
and senator.
Gonzalez and then we have our
secretary of early care and
education secretary Groginsky
and there should be no questions
that I cannot answer anymore
thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady is
seems to me like we are putting
the burden on the backs of these
people that do want to open up
the facility and if they want to
get started it seems like they
have to have every person that
comes in to make application
have a check done on that so
they're already in the hole
before the check is even done is
that the way this works madam
speaker and gentle lady I was
just informed by the secretary
in this is new since the member
I said it's been two years for
me they are using relief dollars
to pay for the background checks
at this point I don't know if
that's permanent it's not in the
rigs that is permanent but right
now we're using relief dollars.
And madam speaker gentle lady I
just have to inform the
secretary there are the head of
the at the C. D. C. ECT that
that money's not going to last
forever what's going to happen
then and there's a concern right
there.
Why are we working within
agencies to make sure that those
background checks are still
current still up to date and
that they can move right over to
the other agency that's where
they're going to go to work
thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady she will
continue to use the federal
child care development block
grant dollars when the really
funds and.
I would madam speaker gentle
lady my opinion I would rather
see those.
Dollars be used as far as the
applet as far as the applicants
go to help them get the
facilities up and running Madam
speaker gentle lady on section
let me see where it is I wrote
it down somewhere.
I believe it's in section
fourteen yes it is there's a lot
of changing their.
And I'm gonna have to scroll and
you know how in it that can be
sometimes on the computer I can
be read in something and it I
wipe it all out so if I do make
that mistake again bear with me.
Madam speaker gentle lady in
section fourteen of the bill the
new language that's in there
there's been a quite quite a bit
of it changed so now of of the
state and national criminal
history records conducted on all
prospective foster adoptive
parents and goes on to say the
same things will be done
And I understand the safety and
welfare of the children that are
receiving the help from these
facilities is starting on I have
to fund the page number now page
twenty seven of that
Starting on line to going all
the way down all this language
has been stricken can you give
me an explanation as to why all
of that likely to stricken and
then it starts up again on page
twenty seven line twenty two.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady the
language is being struck is a
language that holds that
responsibilities CYFD the
language that's being replaced
is the language that transfers
responsibility to ECECD.
Madam.
Speaker and gentle lady.
This is going to be totally
separate them from CYFD I want
to make sure that the language
that governed CYFD is still in
place.
Okay so this is strictly for
this ECECD.
Madam okay originally yes for
the duties that have been
delegated and transferred ECECD
so CYFD will keep their
responsibility over the
activities and duties they
oversee and ECECD will take on
this responsibility for the
activities entities that they
oversee.
Okay I just want to make sure
that everything is still in
place okay Madam speaker gentle
lady.
I guess my last question that I
have here.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Those who actually does the
background checks.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady that's the
the fingerprints are done at the
local law enforcement local law
enforcement than their male to
the background check bureau and
then the staff that the
background check bureau conduct
the state and federal national
background check.
In a and they also check with
multiple states they have to
they don't just do in New Mexico
inspection of records they check
every state with that that where
the person has left okay madam
speaker gentle lady so it is
it's a national organization
that does the completed that
okay FBI of madam speaker my
next question is she's he said
the fingerprinting has is that
going to be digital or eighteen
and I'm assuming that the
applicant is the one that does
have to pay for that for the
fingerprinting process Mr Madam
speaker and gentle lady it is
digital and and sometimes very
rarely is there a fee and when
there is I've seen it be four to
six dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady I beg
to differ with the.
As far as the digital
fingerprinting goes because I
had to renew a license last year
and it was.
About ten times that amount so.
That apple could has to has to
go through that process first
and then waited out to make sure
that they're clear.
Madam speaker gentle lady dancer
lata claim my questions I just
wish that there was more inter
agency.
Collaboration there we're it's
going to be a seamless type
product project going forward
that's my concern Madam speaker
gentle lady thank you very much.
The gentle lady from Valencia
County Representative Fajardo
thank you madam speaker will my.
Partner on the floor and my
colleagues please yield thank
you madam speaker and thank you
lady I yield thank you a quick
question I you said something
really briefly they wanted you
to expand on it because we you
you first of all before we ask
the question you've done a great
job when you weren't even
supposed to do B. B. carry this
bill on the floor Mr speaker
madam waiting time many and
you've just really shown here
your knowledge and understanding
of what is going on so thank you
for that you've been able to
just answer so many questions
before we had to experts of just
one applaud you are muted your
ability to step a step up and
step into this you said
something earlier use basically
said the reason this was being
done because of its the
efficiency of CYFD can you
explain that further madam
speaker kind thank.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think that what research is
telling us is that the
informative years of a child's
life the first four years of a
child's life learn eighty
percent of what they learn in
our lifetime and we know from
the adverse childhood
experiences study that those are
critical years into that growth
and development of a child and
disruptions in that can create
lifelong changes and health in
the way they perceive and they
the way the world around them
working their ability to be
ready to learn when they get to
school and CYFD was such a big
agency tasked with so many
things and their primary purpose
was to prevent it is to prevent
child abuse and neglect this
agency has been tasked with
making sure that our young
children have access to
everything they need to survive
to thrive as a whole person and
that is something that CYFD I'm
speaking from and again my the
the sponsor of the bill to
create the agency is not the one
speaking today I'm saying that I
believe that this is necessary
because CYFD is so bogged down
and abuse and neglect in what
they need to do to help
grandparents raising
grandchildren what they need to
run guardianship kinship care
what they need to do around
foster care and what they need
to do to prevent child abuse and
neglect that this move is
something that this body
supported in order to help
children thrive and to get to
that early and immediate
intervention and to help every
child access high quality early
care and education services as
they as their family sees that
thank you madam speaker and
thank you kind lady and remind
me when we have first enacted
this.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
two thousand nineteen.
Madam speaker kind lady what it
has six six successes and the
challenges been since we've been
acted this.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you know I I the secretaries
reminding because I've had a lot
of great accomplishments and but
I think one of the biggest
things that this agencies be
applauded for is there rapid
response to comment in the fact
that there were seven hundred
and some child care centres
across the state plus home
providers and people who needed
to care for our essential
workers in the middle of a
pandemic and the way that they
held it up I would have to
commend this agency is maybe one
of the only agencies that had
weekly calls in English and in
Spanish everybody to get on this
call and ask questions of the
secretary was generally the
person receiving the call the
the questions during Q. NA
giving updates they would bring
on other agencies to talk about
what was going on and to have a
rapid response to what was
happening in the world of COVID
and so many people stepped up I
think that's what they could be
it should be commended for even
the early care and education
facilities were allowed to do
food services so they were
delivering you could drive by
and pick up food for children
zero to five and even made
exceptions for delivery of food
for families with disabilities
or elderly family members taking
care of young children who were
indigent or could not travel or
had no ability these meals are
being delivered as well as
learning kits and books and I
mean what what ECECD did in the
middle of COVID is to be
commended and their response to
making sure that that essential
workers had access to care is
definitely probably something
that'll go down and record and
record books thank you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
thank you kind lady I appreciate
that I never knew any of that I
just I didn't know any of that I
wasn't aware of that and that
information is probably life
changing for me I wish that we
could take all of CYFD and make
efficient and then do something
like that because we all know
that CYFD isn't out of other
failure but it's nice to know
that you that we have an agency
here is actually taking care of
their children actually doing
the work that that that they've
been
provided to do so thank you and
thank you for stand up and and
carry this thank you madam
speaker thank you kind of.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady and if I could
wave a wand I would move into
mental health and character
ECECD as well.
Seeing no further debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker I now
move that Senate bill thirty
eight as amended do pass.
We are now on final passage of
the Senate bill thirty eight the
vote is now open.
Twenty seconds.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash road yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
This Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Maestas.
Yes Representative my S. as both
yes Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
vote yes Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Matthews.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of six.
Sixty nine in the affirmative
and zero in the negative.
Senate bill thirty eight has
duly passed as amended has
passed.
We're now going back to item
twelve Senate bill forty.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker so the
body may remember that we were
in the middle of this bill
we and our we were interrupted
and so Representative the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
Representative Harper had the
floor and madam speaker I yield
to him and I I will say that
this time I am joined by
secretary Scrase who I was not
joined by the last time for the
body and for the gentleman's
knowledge thank you madam
speaker thank you gentlemen are
you guilty of.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman from San Juan
Bernalillo I appreciate you
Recalling that this is where we
left off and Mr chairman
percent of all and early I.
We just a I'm fascinated by this
legislation how it came about
and how successful it's been and
so I just really wanted to talk
for a few minutes about that so
we're aware.
And perhaps we can even use this
as a model for other things in
the future but Senator John my
first question is.
Just talk to us a little bit
about House even started.
So.
The idea really generated in two
thousand fifteen but in two
thousand nineteen the program
started in earnest to reward the
nursing homes that were doing
quality care and to financially
reward them and so this program
started.
Senator John affirm Senator yes
thank you for that answer and
and I was just fascinated
because what this really is and
please correct me if I'm wrong
with this really is who's the
nursing homes asked to be taxed.
This rigorous unless you nodding
your head yes benefit gentleman
as ironic as that sounds that is
correct Mr and gentleman that is
fascinating to me.
How often does an industry come
and say.
Please tax us.
Mr agility.
Perhaps explained why.
It was beneficial for us to tax
them.
Madam speaker and gentleman it's
because the Medicaid match.
Chairman John and that's exactly
right and I think in this case
we we have depending on which
program we have a different kind
of dollar to dollar match but Mr
Chairman what's the match that
we get from this particular
program.
So.
Madam speaker gentleman's
typically it is three one but
during the pandemic it's than
for one.
Senator and gentleman of.
That's a big return.
Right and and we have several
opportunities I will go into
them here in detail but we're
actually losing out on that
match Mr Chairman just one
example madam is our winter
excise tax a lot of that is.
A diverted from its intended
purpose to the general fund.
If we put it back to its
intended purpose being treatment
and prevention programs and drug
courts some of those programs
would qualify for Medicaid match
Mr gentleman I refined correct
and perhaps Dr Scrase correct me
if we passed a bill that was
before this body and I realize
we're out of time.
It would remove twenty three
million from the general fund
but generate about eighty
million in match speaker John is
is.
This Madam speaker gentleman
that is correct.
Yes so Mister John I really
think this body.
Should be a little bit more cell
phone deliberative when it comes
to these kinds of things because
we only have limited dollars I
mean we have several programs
that were funded in our budget
even though we had a forty
percent increase in our budget
right but if we were more
focused on getting matching
dollars.
I'm just a sensor dollars ago
further speaker and gentleman.
Madam speaker gentleman.
Much of this directly response
your question but to give you an
overview since that time that
we've had this current
administration through these
types of programs we're looking
at bringing in about a half a
billion dollars in funds outside
of the state to the state.
Mr Chairman thank you that was
not even on my questions but
it's a brilliant.
piece of information add to this
discussion so much for your time
and thank you to you and and Dr
Scrase for for sharing that.
Okay so Mister John we talked
about the Mr coming and asking
to be taxed as a federal match
in this case three to one or
four to one.
As chairman how does the
industries that benefit from
this because they are in a
really affecting the tax.
So it's two things it's
increasing their rates and
payments for quality performance
they get rewarded for good
behavior.
Ambassador and gentleman yes
that's exactly my understanding
as well right so it's it's a net
came to them because we're able
to increase their Medicaid
reimbursement rates Messier and
Angelman and so I just want to.
Make just two points along this
line first.
This tax is not to passed on to.
Those end users who are
receiving the service speaker
John because this is Medicaid.
Which means and those
individuals are not being
charged the service is that
correct.
Madam madam speaker gentleman's
yes minsiter and gentleman
that's that's exactly right it's
Medicaid because our gross
receipts tax the onus is on the
provider of the service.
Right Walmart is the one who is
required to pay gross receipts
tax not not myself on a going
rate they can pass it on to me
and R. C. will sales tax but in
this case Senator John Medicaid
actually cannot pass any taxes
on to that and
recipient of that service you
madam speaker John and that is
correct Mr chairman and I was
also a reason why will sometimes
see legislation for this
committee by folks like durable
or or oxygen delivery services
saying that we need a deduction
from gross receipts tax.
Because we only have the
Medicaid reimbursement and we
can't pass that on to our
customers.
I'm I'm certain figure German
would you repeat the question
minister John and I was just
stating that you know in this
case it's beneficial because we
can increase Medicaid match to a
nursing home facility.
But for the bodies information
there are several other health
care.
yes several other health care
businesses that provide services
and I was mentioning like
oxygen.
Where they only get reimbursed
the Medicaid right but we still
charge gross receipts tax and
they can't pass it on so often
see bills that asked for a
deduction from gross receipts
tax in that case.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
correct.
Mister John thank you okay so
we've we've mentioned that the
industry has to be taxed they
can pass on to the consumers
love to them and that's a
benefit because of increased
Medicaid rates are a
reimbursement rates.
The other thing I wanted to just
mention is.
we did this
also a few years ago with
regards to just a hospital taxes
in in general we we try to find
some parity.
I believe this was an House
Bill.
Actually I.
I think was house bill six Mr
John and we try to find some
parity amongst the different
types of hospitals and non for
profit hospitals government
hospitals for profit hospitals
and they're all being sure
different gross receipts tax
rates which didn't make any
sense in the providing
essentially the same service
centers on the hospital
supported this with the promise
that they would receive
increase Medicaid reimbursement
rates.
And I see Dr Scrase not in Mr
Chairman but I believe we had a.
It was actually about a year or
two delay before those rates
were in fact increased and that
was honored and I remember that
correctly.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
would be correct except that
they give emergency rates during
the pandemic.
Senator John yes and and I
believe now that now those rates
have been increased and they're
benefiting from this but Mr
chairman I just bring this up
because I really felt when I
heard this.
That we as a body and the
executive had gone back on
really a critical.
When we made to those hospitals
in that industry.
And and we could have easily
done that in this case to where
nursing homes could have said
yes please tax us and we did not
increase their reimbursement
rate.
And so.
Do that here this is why this is
wonderful we want to keep this
going and and remove this repeal
or.
But in very recent past we've
seen where we did not keep that
commitment Mr chairman I just
want to encouraging our body.
To keep these commitments.
Because in the end who are
hurting most are.
Those who are providing this
essential services and also
hurting that relationship we
have with them makes it that
much harder next time we say
trust us.
For that actually happened so
just a lesson learned
Mr chairman
Last.
Last question I have because of
this program is wonderful I
really think we should do our
best to replicate this
elsewhere.
Mr Chairman why did we have a
sunset or delayed repeal this
legislation in the first place.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
was it was done in committee it
wasn't necessarily something
that was supported by the
administration but it actually
gonna make sense because you're
trying an innovative program you
want to see our work she but a
sunset on it comes back we can
have this discussion is a how's
it working and it's working well
so that's why we want to repeal
the repeal.
Mr Angelman yes the I think
there's good reasons for this
and I just mention this again
you know to help us understand
as a body the first was.
When we had a sunset to a
provision like this it gives us
an opportunity to come back as a
body and evaluate.
and fully forces to evaluate and
that's why the tax committee
ever since I was chair is been
continued by everyone up to the
the current chair or madam
speaker if we add sunsets to any
credits that we left out of the
tax committee for this very
reason.
The second Mr Chairman is I
believe there was some
trepidation as to whether how
this would be received by the
federal government.
Mr chairman there was I think
under the Obama administration
they were more favorable relax
to this kind of approach and
then the trump administration
was perhaps not so favorable
and.
And and then the prior
administration here
you know so I think.
If I'm wrong I think that was
one of the other reasons was
just to make sure that we would
run afoul of of the Feds.
Madam speaker gentleman I I I I
think I can honestly tell you we
don't remember.
Mr chairman that's that's fine
but to
so anyway at this point in
really all this bill does is
remove that delayed repeal or is
that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman's yes
and if we don't.
We stand to lose tens of
millions of dollars I think I
pulled the body was just under
eighty seven or eighty eight
million dollars
Senator John and gas so we need
to do this this is important
even if we didn't think this was
a great program.
Using eighteen eighties million
dollars a big is a big problem
but it is a wonderful program
and I appreciate speaker and
gentleman let me explain why
owners and industry would come
and has to be taxed how it
doesn't hurt the end user and
how it actually allows us to do
more
at the state level so thank you
madam speaker thank you
gentlemen.
The gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott
thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval you madam speaker I
will gladly yield to the
gentleman.
This tax committee.
Madam chair of the thank.
The similar to those I'm going
to make your day but to be clear
with the process.
We're charging Tax.
The
or just for the issue.
Comes back.
With a three to one match for
own.
Medicaid is that accurate.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
with the one slight exception
the during the pandemic it's
actually for one.
But I other times the gentleman
is correct.
I think a major accidents said
will punch policies came to go
with it in a good spot question
is because.
And approved by the federal
government.
Other states.
Common practice.
Madam speaker gentleman's first.
Everything that this department
does with respect to this
program another study involve
the federal government are going
to be approved by CMS the
federal agency in charge and
there is a very common practice.
If this works.
In this circumstance.
**** traditional or affect madam
speaker gentleman's is that the
yes that was what I was
referring to the gentleman from
Santa who is to the tune of
about a half a billion dollars
in these similar types of funds
that have been matching that the
that this department is taken
advantage of in this
administration.
Gentleman
is over programs.
closes.
That will eventually dropped.
Madam speaker gentleman's I know
the short answer is this is the
only one the others are done
through non legislative process
to the regulatory process
through waivers this was the
only legislative process we're
talking about repeal all right
we have to repeal the repeal.
Gentleman.
Legislative processes could or
just for showing them.
Madam speaker gentleman the only
program where there was actually
a statute in place on these kind
of on these kinds of programs
that said it's going to sunset
is certain date in law is this
program others are done through
the regulatory process or they
don't have to come back to the
legislative body.
Thanks for the question.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Rod Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from Bernalillo guild
madam speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker
to follow up on the.
previous line of questioning by
Representative Scott.
as I believe as I understand it
other other states may be doing
this now but I understand this
is not something that
that the New Mexico that we that
we.
For the first to do this.
Speaker gentleman we were not
sure but we were certainly
within the top three how's that.
Madam speaker and gentleman this
very few lists that were in the
top three
Madam speaker and gentleman
The I. A. we I think it's my
understanding I have served for
awhile now and I and I it's my
understanding and I think
secretary of taxed Rav
did discuss that we were the the
first.
Or maybe maybe was among the
first I thought it was the first
Mr speaker and and mastic and
gentleman I understand that
there are there are a couple of
other states that are doing this
do we know how many other states
are doing this.
madam speaker gentleman's I I
mean I think we both try to be
accurate on the floor we can get
to a last we know there are
other states but in terms the
names the states and how many I
could not answer that question.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I think the the list actually is
is still relatively small if I
think the the statement I I I
think maybe were among the first
three because there may be three
or three to five I think that
are doing so madam speaker and
gentleman I I do remember the
debate on this.
previously and that was a are we
going to.
At some point is the federal
government going to.
Of wise up to what we're doing
that the industry themselves
maybe I should wait looks like
you're looking at your expert.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
You madam speaker and gentleman
couple of things one this is all
pre approved so we're never
going to be at risk so I need
the body to understand the
second is
with the department feels that
the federal government Lexus
for.
Because what it does is it
toward in quality behavior it is
better for patient delivery it
is better for the nursing homes
in the long run when you're
looking at a long running if you
do that for you all to leave and
reduce costs that's the whole
idea and so I do think these
kind of innovative programs the
cost more in the short term long
term result in better practices
and better quality of care.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I I do believe they're
probably more
States coming on board with this
I think they're waiting to make
sure that we're not challenged
and the other states are
involved are not challenged a if
if if if what you're telling me
is that that we're.
Being very clear with the
federal government as to what
we're doing that that that that
is happening and so.
The mass speaker and gentleman.
what could there be others that
could challenge this is they're
not is there not any other
people just standing here any
other groups that have expanding
that may think that we're
getting
As I believe in committee yeah
and I don't believe you are
committee when this was
presented
Representative Scott said this
appears to be a glorified.
The scheme but maybe that the
federal government is it is
ignoring it and I think the
concern is what what day at some
point stop to ignore how how
this is happening at the very
very few industries say.
Coming tax us more so that we
can leverage it for more of
federal money so.
Madam speaker and gentleman so
actually the word Ponzi scheme
was mentioned by the gentleman
previously this is really not a
Ponzi scheme this is something
that is transparent laid out
it's not a mystery to anybody
people know what's going on
there real long term goals that
are good goals and that's why
this program will continue.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so are we aware and
and and the probably answers.
Likely you're not but are are we
aware at all
with this increase taxed that
tax to to these nursing homes is
there a charge.
That goes back to the individual
who is in that that is there is
there a charge to them and then
so they're making extra money on
the front end and then on the
back and getting this tax relief
Madam speaker gentleman no
there's not.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
well as I as well have concerns
and and I've and we from we've
heard this before I've had
concerns.
about whether or not the federal
government some point would come
back to us and ask us to repay.
money's so that appears not to
be
a problem so I'm I'm gonna move
on to some kind of a different
line of questioning and that is
Madam speaker and gentleman
and I didn't hear it in your
opening so maybe I may have
missed it.
But madam speaker and gentleman
since we are what we're doing is
essentially removing a sunset.
those of us who served in
a tax committee that for any
period of time understands how
the tax committee looks at
sunsets to be able to get the
report back we're we're looking
at it as oversight and we're
doing something and is it
receiving
Are we is it doing the job that
it's intended to do I think the
simple answer would be yes but I
mean could you is there any any
data or how numbers that we can
look at to to show maybe dollars
that did spend what's to come
in.
Madam speaker gentleman I'm
happy to share the charge for
the I think actually I don't
know they've been handed down to
the body but I'm happy to share
these with you and these do show
that the performance measures
are being that with data
provided to the legislature
through us and so the short
answer is yes the sunset work
innovative program you're trying
to see if it works it does work
that's why we're trying to
repeal the sunset clause now and
it was no I now understand why
the committee did it the
gentleman from Santa explained
that it was to look at this
program and now that it's
working the son said should be
repealed so that there is this
program continues reliably and
people can count on it.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yeah you're correct
that was not handed out so
rather than going through the
whole whole list could you maybe
give me a couple of high level
points to show how this is how
this is work.
Yes I'm looking at a couple of
charts we've got depression and
fall rates are down
significantly this is all good
influence in.
other vaccines have been going
up that's all so good we're not
talking about COVID retirement
other vaccines so I'm all of
those resulting improvement of
the quality of care the people
in these nursing homes and
there's other date of course but
I'm just trying to give you a
couple of examples madam speaker
gentleman's.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
do we know.
Maybe the just from a positive
the fiscal standpoint over the
last year do we know above what
they've paid what maybe federal
dollars have come in the state
on this program last year.
Madam speaker and gentleman it's
ninety one point seven five
million dollars.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
was the number I was looking for
that's what I'm looking for so
and and once again so this is a
four to one match is that
correct I'm trying to go by
memory madam speaker gentleman's
the only during the pandemic
at all other times it's a three
one thank you madam speaker and
gentle and so
so
Speaker egolf actually chimed in
on this and committee one of the
arguments and I I think I agree
with this
Generally when we.
By the way I had a clear I had
to make sure so I think I agree
with this I don't want anybody
said be with the speaker.
but I I think in this instance.
Generally of what we're what
we're doing is tax policy that
we're instituting this is really
at the maybe a little different
this is a tax increase.
The that that we have put on
the.
At the request of the nursing
homes so that they could.
Qualify for for the federal
dollars so this is a this is us
self implemented self.
inflicted.
Tax policy and so could you
could you discuss that briefly
yeah it's real simple Madam
speaker John and they're saying
please tax us.
Madam speaker that's hard to
argue with and if it's limited
just to that one industry and
they see the benefit to it
that thank you for sharing the
numbers even if it was just for
for one year instead of for the
full time at the.
That the
Sunset is been on but that
seeing that not that number
gives gives me a little less a
concern still a medic speaker
and and gentle and gentleman I
still some concern that
That.
As more states decide to do this
that maybe these dollars could
dry up but in the meantime if
we've got the green light from
the from the federal government
there's no reason to turn away
dollars
had said that to kind of get
used to living on the federal
government large Jeez.
Thank you madam speaker.
No further debate gentleman to
close thank you madam speaker I
now move that Senate bill forty
do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill forty the vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote
Representative Oaklawn.
Yes Representative Akan votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Dow.
Sorry.
Representative Dow.
Sorry to hear you Representative
Dow votes yes Representative
Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative lane.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid both yes
Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
both yes Representative Andrea
Romero Representative Andrea
Romero votes yes Representative
G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero both yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Trujillo yes Representative
Trujillo votes yes
Representative lane
Representative Lane votes yes.
By a vote of sixty nine in the
affirmative zero in the negative
Senate bill forty has duly
passed.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
The next order of business
committee reports.
Okay members this will be the
first.
First of these and quite awhile.
We have a committee report for
a conference committee.
The gentle lady from McKinley we
are on.
I think this is how I said.
Generally.
Only when we do this all right
is generally from can the San
Juan to explain.
what took place in the
conference committee on house
bill on house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill is to end.
Three and then we will consider
adoption of the committee
reports are generally from
McKinley and San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
afternoon members we had there
are conference committee house
bill to conference committee
this morning and.
I would like to explain some
changes that we had adopted Mr
speaker and members and I would
like to thank the members of the
conference committee that
participated Representative nice
and small and Representative
Gail Armstrong we held our own
Mr speaker.
And we basically got what we
needed to have I'd like to start
first Mr speaker.
For the change to section five
which is agency code of four
twenty regulation and licensing
department out of other state
funds there is a change of a
million dollars that goes for
the cannabis control program
operations and to purchase
vehicles and equipment.
The other state funds
appropriations from the mortgage
regulatory fund you find that as
the bills being passed out on
page one eighty nine.
Secondly Mr speaker and members
he is code seven seventy crime
victim reparations Commission.
That was for five hundred
thousand dollars of the general
fund and that is for law
enforcement based advocates for
victims of gun violence and
violent crime statewide that
would be on page one ninety six.
Mr speaker and members under
section eight the changes were.
Executive agencies FY twenty
three compensation and that
would be an additional five
million dollars and that is a
that is a fund amount that would
be spread across pages to
seventeen and to eighteen.
And when that bill comes down Mr
speaker and members of the
Senate bill seven I believe
we're gonna obstructive
appropriation here on the floor
since it would be in this
conference report.
Next under section ten changes
code three forty one the
department of finance and
administration.
That is taking the reduction of
the appropriation for the
hydrogen hub of packed and
replace that contingent bill
with house bill fifty five.
Which creates a public private
partnership program that's on
page two to four and that would
be in the amount of fifty
million dollars so we have
seventy five that's going back
in to reserve a recall it was a
hundred twenty five million.
Mr speaker on the the final
action is on Mexico three forty
one department of finance and
administration.
And we are striking the
contingent requirement for
Senate bill two thirty one
on one item seven criminal
justice reform appropriation
page two to two and two to
three.
And with that Mr speaker the
overall changes to the general
fund the sixty nine million five
hundred and of other state funds
we added a million dollars and
that is what happened today Mr
speaker and members the
gentleman for San Juan.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I'm seeing the
minutes that were approved for
public rejected.
Mad Mr speaker and gently do you
yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
yield I'm sorry I didn't hear
the question thank you madam
speaker Mr speaker gently I'll
restate so I I see what what was
approved specifically what what
were the amendments that were
struck.
And maybe maybe I wasn't paying
close enough attention I was
reading what was approved to
gentleman let me disagree slated
but I I anticipate we may have
some questions on this line the
way conference committee report
works is there are no amendments
in the Senate that are stricken
or and there's no amendments
added to the bill.
So the answer to your question
is none the way these things
work is the Senate finance
amendments to house bill's two
and three are an amendment that
stripped out the entirety of the
bill and put a new bill in in
the form of an amendment.
And the conference committee
report is the same so we can see
there being passed out the
conference committee report is a
stick is the budget.
So that's how these that's how
these works you don't go through
in line out the of strike line
so once so intertwined here you
can't do that because all the
columns have data to be total
for the amounts as they flow
through the budget to the
conference committee report that
we're considering is the entire
budget so right so this it will
be possible to point to you know
a Senate amendment that was
taken out we we have to make
reference to the entirety.
Thank you Mr speaker changes are
initiated in Mr Mays hand right
behind you.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
you made a statement that to you
accomplished what you were
hoping to get out of this I I I
understand those change what
specifically were hoping to get
out of this Mr speaker gently.
You Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen one issue of
particular note for for our
community Mr speaker and
gentleman where the both of the
particularly the items of for
DFA if you'll see there at the
bottom of the sheet the one that
ties to of a new use for the
hydrogen hub Fund for a
different page three and then
certainly striking the language
regarding Senate bill two thirty
one we also Mr speaker and
gentleman we had a couple of
other things there that we could
not concur on.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
I believe there's gonna be some
probably Senator better and
better questions that I'm asking
here but speaker and gentle lady
with those items that were that
you talk about those were the
specifically the reasons that we
that that you asked us not to
concur when you were when you
were on the floor yesterday the
speaker gently.
Mr speaker gentleman the
specific reason I asked to the
this body not concur ties to
item number five specifically
and as I mentioned Mr speaker
gentlemen I also had mentioned
as I was is I was going through
the documents there could be
some other things but I wasn't
prepared Mr speaker gentleman
yesterday to get into the
nafta I've grown some of these
things but these are the other
things I was talking about thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
so
the difference between the the
bill as it came over from the
Senate with their changes to
what we have before us what is
the difference in dollars madam
speaker Mr speaker plus or minus
Mr speaker gentlemen if you look
at the bottom of the column for
general fund changes we actually
save sixty nine million five
hundred and if you look at the
other state funds we increased
up by one million but it comes
out of the mortgage regulatory
fund.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
There's more to raise our San
Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley County yield Mister
speaker I yield Mister speaker
gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley just I just want to ask
a few questions I think it's
this high levels really for for
the body to kind of know what
the changes are Mr speaker
gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley County the way I read
this is that the body adopt this
committee report our.
Total recurring appropriations
for FY twenty three V. eight
point four nine one billion is
that right.
Mr speaker a gentleman that is
correct and I believe Mr speaker
gentle gentleman there should be
a general fund financial Maria I
hope that was passed out also.
Okay they're saying yes I so
everyone should have the.
Mr speaker generated from San
Juan McKinley County and and the
total appropriations for FY
twenty three including both
recurring and non recurring is
state point seven two six
billion is that right Mr speaker
gentleman that's correct.
Mr speaker generated from San
Juan McKinley and what I see now
is our ending balances would be
two point four nine billion is
that right.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
ending balances is two billion
four hundred and ninety million.
Mr speaker generated from San
Juan McKinley County that that
equates to a twenty nine point
three percent reserves
percentage of recurring
appropriation is that right Mr
speaker gentleman that's
correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley county in San Juan
in spite of what may have seemed
like a large number in terms of
of total appropriations there's
actually still even in spite of
that they're still money left
over that's going into reserves
that correct Mr speaker
gentleman that is correct there
is money into reserves it goes
into the tax stabilization
reserve fund and of if you split
the page Mr speaker and
gentleman we'll see exactly what
that number is.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley county in San Juan
thank you for questions and
answers.
There's further debate the
gentleman Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Will the gentle lady yield.
Mr speaker gentleman I will
yield.
The lady
On the yellow summary sheet of
the highlighting the I
adopted changes I was going to
ask you a question on on the
fourth change.
And it was to clarify my
understanding of.
The remaining fifty million
dollars after this seventy five
million dollar reduction.
And it will it obviously reduces
the appropriation.
And replace contention bill with
HB fifty five which creates a
public private partnership.
Gentle lady Mr speaker is H. B.
fifty five current law and plus
I under trying to understand
where is fifty five.
Question.
Mr speaker gentleman of house
bill fifty five primary sponsors
Representative joy Garrett is
reported to me that it is moving
understand in Senate Judiciary
and then we'll go down to the
Senate floor.
Thank you very much and.
Mr speaker right is is that
remaining fifty million goes for
what purpose Mr speaker and
gentleman that purpose would be
to service in the fund that is
in that's identified in house
bill fifty five tied to the New
Mexico finance authority.
I see and
Mr speaker gentle lady is there
a purpose to that finance
authority fund Mr speaker
gentlemen it is the match the
the public match for the
private.
Public partnership agreement
regarding either a
transportation for broadband
related project that's outlined
in house bill fifty five thank
you very much of Mr speaker lady
for that clarification and
secondly I and I congratulate
you in the conference committee
on the good work and most
especially the sixty nine point
sixty nine million five hundred
thousand dollar reduction in
general fund spending thank you
thank you madam chair.
Thank you John next to the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative
Miguel Garcia are you online I
don't see the chamber.
Yes speaker I'm online can you
hear me now.
We can hear you.
Thank you Mr speaker
And
Thank you gentle lady.
I'm again the for
For bringing hope.
The struggling families dealing.
Thank you of their loved ones.
That justice will prevail.
I funding the law enforcement
based but the metaphysical
violence.
Some of the speaker gentle lady
from McKinley.
You made our day rescue.
Thank you gentlemen this further
debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Santa and Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please enter your
key please yield be happy to
yield Mister speaker thank you
are doing I just have a few of
them the main question I would
like to ask Mr speaker gentle
lady so this bill came through
before it was approximate
billion dollars more than we
spent before is that still the
same.
Mr speaker gentle lady I my
understanding and clues of
people the parliamentarian
people can help us understand
this are we Mr speaker supposed
to focus just on these changes
or do we get into the bill
itself generally it's your
questions timely I was just
looking at the joint rule on
this and we as with debates on
Simmons we keep the debate
focused on the amendments that
were made in the Senate in this
case where a committee before so
with the debate would be on the
contents of the committee
report.
That's correct and I would just
like to say though to the gentle
lady we provided a framework to
the Senate finance committee a
certain amount of recurring and
non recurring and I can say that
generally speaking they did not
overspend in that portion which
is how they rearrange the deck
chairs so to speak gentle lady
thank you Mr speaker and delayed
and I just have a question on
the the paperwork that was
handed out.
So we explains because I'm I'm
I'm familiar with this process
so it looks like thirty million
dollars appropriation in the
general fund for the rural
health initiative was not
included in this is that correct
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
for asking that that is
something that
this chamber brought forth to
the conference committee.
And it was a deadlock vote so we
could not included in to the
conference committee report Mr
speaker gentle lady of the house
members wanted the rural health
care piece the Senate members
did not.
Thank you Mr speaker dealing
just one more question this part
so it also says that five
million dollars to the soil and
water conservation district that
was also not included in this Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady we it
also brought that forth from our
side the house members of very
much wanted to have the
additional five million dollars
go to those school districts
conservation districts and
choose Mr speaker and gentle
lady are for and Representative
small did a good job of trying
to explain out of how important
it is statewide however it was
another three to three vote so
did not get into the final
report thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it's all the questions
I have on this next to the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I would yield.
The first one forty one.
This
has been a fifty four of us.
Originally passed.
This helps contained no funding
is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct soon.
John let is a consequence of
those changes the public
project revolving fund would
have.
Would have fifty million dollars
to work with.
Raul
mentioned.
Mr speaker gentleman you hit the
nail on the head that's exactly
how it works.
Projects currently general fund
for the.
The trash the table if you will
Mr speaker gentleman because
they are limited to broadband
and transportation projects
inside of house bill fifty five
in the rules of four P. threes
hasn't been developed yet by the
New Mexico finance authority we
don't have projects identified
yet to want to gets opened up Mr
speaker and gentleman we
anticipate we will be receiving
requests.
Much for fifty five does not
make it through the Senate the
consequences please Mr speaker
gentleman if it doesn't make it
through the Senate an additional
fifty million dollars we're
going to the reserve.
Thank you for.
One last question.
Venture into this conversation.
At some point but rules for
beside you with a total of the
state of New Mexico is.
Mr speaker gentleman let me ask
one other expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman before
we give you of of direct answer
can we check we'll we'll check
on and I'll come back to.
Speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for your responses.
Thanks to the gentleman from
curry.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from madam chair from McKinley
please you how you.
Thank you Mr chairman the only
have one question it's on item
five on the cover of our sheet
where we struck the contingent
requirement.
For the good of the body if you
go to page two twenty two and
twenty three of sixty seven
million dollars in by striking
the contingent language this
language that's in the bill is
what will apply and how the
monies that sixty seven will be
spent is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker gentleman
that's correct by striking
contingent on enactment of
Senate bill two thirty one.
The language that we have in
there now for the distribution
to local law enforcement
agencies will remain.
Thank you the madam chair Mister
speaker that's just what I
thought and then the big piece
of that is the fifty million
dollars distributed to local law
enforcement agencies that use or
intend to use community oriented
policing in recruitment
retention and all that so this
is a a really good thing I
appreciate you leaving that in
there thank you Mr speaker madam
chair.
Okay.
We are on adoption of the
conference committee report for
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three as amended
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All those of those names.
Really.
Okay the eyes have it the
committee report is adopted.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and we go
to the next order of business
third reading of legislation no
objection it is so ordered.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative need
their.
If you have item fifteen.
Senate bill one two three.
Mr speaker I do.
The record reflect on to
necessary for the Senate bill
one two three on final passage
has been taken the gentleman to
explain it all.
Mr speaker Senate bill one
twenty three is the extension of
the New Mexico racing Commission
at seven cents apparently every
five years and so this body has
to extend each and every five
years and so this legislation
extends it to
the year until July one of
twenty twenty and it says the
current term expires
Later this year.
With that Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
there's the gentle lady from
Chavis.
The.
Racing Mr.
The general Representative
Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln yield please Mr
speaker certainly yield to the
gentle lady from Travis county.
Mr speaker.
I know that the commission has
lots of things that they have to
take care of in regards to the
racing industry Mr speaker
gentleman how many people do
serve on this commission.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think you probably are much more
familiar with the body that
night so you might want to tell
the body how many do in fact
serve on that commission Mr
speaker the commission is made
up of ten members that are
selected by the governor to
fulfill the duties of the racing
commission there should be at
least three of them that are
in state horse breeders directly
related with the industry two of
them are supposed to be from one
party to of them from another
party one of them is intended Mr
speaker and gentle lady or
gentleman of.
The horse racing industry does
pay into the state through taxes
directly and indirectly.
In excess of five hundred
million dollars annually Mr
speaker and gentleman this is
buried in this Mrs very
necessary that we do get the
sense that extended.
Jobs that are created here in
the.
In direct businesses that are
affected by people coming in the
tourism industry is.
Very impacted I thought this is
what this industry does that
Mr speaker gentleman one of the
thing that does take place the
chairman of the racing
commission also serves as a
member of the state gaming
control board under the state
racing commission we have the
New Mexico horsemen's
association which is in the.
The nepheline Association that
does help the horsemen and the
our New Mexico horse breeders
association.
Mr chairman and representative I
fully intend to support this
thank you very much.
Thank you gentlelady galloping
on to the next member.
Is the gentleman from Lee.
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln please Mr speaker and
gentleman from way I certainly
yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman went on
trial.
And the Representative Ferrary
present through some fairly
severe consequences for the
racinos in the event.
This authorization was more.
Could you describe those
consequences.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe those consequences are
that the receiving those would
not be allowed to operate
without this extension because
the ability to operate the
receipt is tied to the Racine of
horses during their terms and so
without the without this
extension I think the whole
industry will be shut down.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
thought that was cool.
We're going to turn me
racinos all I.
Operation could no longer not to
conduct our Russian operations
laying corporations so.
Seem to be pretty important
this extension passed.
The speaker thank you Jim.
Senior further debate the
gentleman to race to the finish
line.
Thank you Mr speaker
at this time I'd now.
I move that we pass Senate bill
one twenty three.
We're in the final stretch on
Senate bill one two three the
vote is now open.
We have the speed Mr speaker.
This portion of the vote is
about to close.
The clerk to call the members
that are recorded.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Akan both yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative give them.
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative and on
this yes Representative
Hernandez both yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Wendi both
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
both yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Representative close.
Wire and the wire.
Senate bill one two three.
I am nose has passed the house.
Sorry we had to witness our
money the chief clerks desperate
attempts to find as many times
as we could for that one harder
than it looked we'll go back to
item fourteen the gentleman from
Santa but the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
Senate judiciary says two
for Senate bill eighty four on
final passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and ladies
and gentleman of the house.
This legislation would allow the
secretary of the department
transportation teams and
alternative qualifications
based.
Construction manager general
contractor delivery method
that's the CM G. C. for short.
And what this does is that which
is a two phase process I'm happy
to answer questions about that
process.
but essentially is another tool.
In the purpose tool chest to get
good road projects on all say
that
this committee so this has been
supported by the transportation
and industry has had no public
opposition and more than twenty
other states have already
adopted this.
And the speaker my Mrs expert
witnesses with me today are Mr
David can Tana the chief
engineer of MDOT and Mr Justin
hurries the W. secretary.
And with that Mr speaker I stand
for questions.
Seeing the gentleman for those.
First we have the gentleman from
curry Representative Crowder
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from central please
you.
Speaker I yield to the Jennifer
curry thank you gentlemen
general to have a few questions
are gonna be off page two and
your bill Jennifer current with
your indulgence may I briefly
pause the debate so that you and
our colleagues to join us in
welcoming former representative
George Dodge to the house.
Thank you for indulging
interruption gentleman please
proceed thank you Mr speaker on
the budget that the
thank you know I'm gonna I I'm
gonna pause just a minute before
I get into my question to tell
you I'm compelled to vote for
this bill before I get there.
Because is the Senate bill
eighty four highway eighty four
runs right through my community
it's a sign so I have to vote
for it.
But my question is when it talks
about the definition on page two
line I item a the construction
general manner.
General contractor means it goes
on and is his
Qualifications and what and what
is to provide the pre
construction services
construction management
construction services required
for project so don't on my first
question is can the prevailing
contractor that is awarded the
bid on a on a construction
project also be the construction
manager general contractor can
he be the guy that advises can
can a play both roles.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
a great question.
This goes into the two phases of
how this works so Jennifer curry
the first phase is essentially
the selection of the contractor
and this can be this contractor
talking about here working with
project designers
on a control cost and value
engineering right so there's are
the working together to make
sure that we meet the
requirements of the project but
we're doing things to keep the
costs down that's that's kind of
design phase right now the
second phase I think just this
once your question directly
Senator the space can occur
before construction starts you
can still occur during design
but the same individual can
submit to be.
The initial does the concerns
the the construction.
and they can at that point put
in a maximum cost to guarantee
for this project.
Now that does not guarantee that
we'll get this project.
there's a negotiations that take
place and if they're successful
when yes this individual can be
aware that project but if they
fail
the department can go to
competitive bid for the
construction phase that anyone
in the project.
For the project.
Okay thank you so that the CM G.
C..
Can be awarded the contract to
to advise and at a later date he
can also bid on the project
under guarantee is that correct
yeah I'm not I'm not Mr speaker
and gentleman that's exactly
right and it is not a guarantee
that they will be awarded.
Thank you gentlemen John my
second question kind of goes
down to item easy online
nineteen page two on the pre
construction services.
Or talks about consulting
services related to the
management construction provided
during the transportation
project design stage.
And so gentleman Mike my
curiosity is is the new C. M. D.
C. responsible for overseeing
all the testing on a on a
project on a paving project for
is the general contractor that's
awarded the bid responsible for
the testing and when I say
testing you tester concrete you
test your asphalt the tester
densities on your base course to
make sure you've got good
compaction so I'm curious
exactly where is that
responsibility fall when you add
another component into this.
Mr speaker John Kerry another
great question and directly to
answer it it remains with the
general contractor and our
contracted within the specs has
to still perform those tasks and
meet the requirements per those
tests.
Okay and then because our use of
the term general contractor in
both of these general contractor
could be the award winning
paving contractor and this is
the construction manager general
contractor.
Which one of those two general
contractors are you saying is
responsible for all the testing.
So Mr speaker and gentleman I
understand your confusion I I
kind of wish we had a different
terminology here so as a little
more clear but it is the general
contractor not the C. M. G. C..
Okay so and and in my mind that
would be the paving contractor
wins the award for the actual
paving projects of the.
Mr speaker gentleman I thank you
for that I I
I thought I knew all of this as
I waited a day or two from
transportation so now that a
couple more questions arise and
I appreciate you taking on and I
really appreciate your expert
witnesses thank you Mr speaker
that's all my questions thank
you John and.
Next to the gentleman San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker the gentleman from
Bernalillo yield speaker I
yield.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Senate my my apologies I don't.
So if that's an insult or not
for you live in Rio Rancho but.
Send of all Mr speaker John from
Santa
the these construction manager
general contractors the sort of
my.
My informal way reading this is
these are essentially.
Contract.
Project managers is that a fair
way to describe what they do.
So.
Speaker and gentleman from from
San Juan that's generally
correct it really is a
partnership this see I see XCMG
C. works in tandem with the
general contractor and develops
you know anything from in order
to the development hurdles in
these kinds of things it's it's
really a collaborative
arrangement.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa can you maybe even
otherwise ask is can you flush
out for me what is what's the
current problem agencies facing
that this can help address.
So Mister chairman
thank you for the again for the
great question so the department
has several tools in his tool
chest right now that I can use
for deploying projects one that
we as a body adopted a minute
maybe state or nine years ago as
design build.
And that is a great tool
depending on the project this
bigger and Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan sure
we're instituting another tool
that will not be used on all
projects in fact this
legislation limited to just
twenty five percent of projects
it'll probably actually be much
less than that but in this case
how it helps.
Is of a general contractors
planning designing working on a
project
they can often run into
obstacles.
Similar to slow things down.
And having a CM G. C. around to
help with the consulting to help
with the designing.
Wall considering the actual
building itself second help
xcelerated the problem solving
process of things moving faster
so I guess overall legislative
boil it down to additional done
what it is speaker John.
If you are able to and I and I
can speak to us because I work
in you know in the are in the
world if you could design your
for your project in a way that
is forward sitting towards
production here to save a ton of
time and so having these folks
involved in the design phase is
gonna help us overcome a lot of
the obstacles that might show up
if you're only focused on the
design versus actually
construction face.
Mr speaker John from Santa Fe
almost appears as though you're
describing that private
enterprise might be more
efficient than a government work
but you're setting up for
agencies so I won't I won't I
won't go there but which are
doing their genommen.
Mr speaker gentleman from Santa
at and I will say I think DOT is
probably if not the best there
certainly want the best for ages
we have and we we see that an
agency in particular because we
get all these agency budget from
the presentations and not just
because our experts restore me
down right now but they
generally are of a well run
agency.
but as we've seen agencies
across the board have vacancies
in their FTEs.
and so I think this might also
and you didn't mention this but
the the way that my mind looks
at it is if you have you know
you've got of important
contractor support project
coming up.
Can you have somebody with an
agency that can typically do
this work if they leave the
agency was set to retire they
take a job elsewhere.
What I see this type of
legislation also helping is that
now they're not scrambling to
put somebody who's an
experienced into this role to
try to cover this project but Mr
speaker John percent of all they
could then go out for an RFP to
handle one specific project for
some of the houses kind of
expertise is that a fair reading
of this legislation.
Speaker and gentleman that is
exactly right.
And Mr speaker gentleman from
Santa just so the public
understands this does have to go
through the RFP process can just
kind of describe what that looks
like these are just specially
contracts being handed out these
do have to go through our free
process yes Mr speaker and
gentleman San Juan that's
exactly right and and I think
the RFP process is great in that
it protects us from you know the
perception that we're passing
these on to you know folks who
maybe are not as qualified but
maybe our friends or relatives
or that kind of thing but this
has to go through the R. P.
process essentially following
the procurement code.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan that.
This next issue that I think is
one of probably the most help
with.
Because typically if you're a
project manager chair of the
general contractor there's lots
of calls that you have to make
that involved discretion whether
to prevention shorter's
you know agreeing to overruns
whatever it is.
And so I'm curious normally if
you have somebody within the
agency that you have agency
approval to make those kind of
discretionary decisions now.
under this model you would have
a third party who is awarded the
R. F. P. to be the construction
manager general contractor.
So help me understand when it
comes to these kind of
discretionary decisions.
How what's the interplay between
the agency this this new
position and the actual general
contractor.
So Mr speaker and gentleman San
Juan thank you for the question
this really pertains to the
second phase of of this process
and what happens during the
second phase is this authority
thank you discussed the to
actually make the decisions is
retained by the agency and if
you Representative under the
authority of the secretary not
to the the CM G. C. so that I
guess old agency this is really
kind of a collaborative process
for the CBC can give
instruction
options
and and and and help guide the
decision but in the end it is
still within the agency's
perfume purview to make that
decision Mr speaker
Representative why I will say I
I like this model
one of the other things we've
seen in state government is is
those high level positions were
you need people have a lot of
experience in a particular
industry.
Those can be difficult to
fulfill because the you know the
foundation on in the private
sector to make a lot more money.
and and I don't fault anyone for
doing that.
But it also leaves are agencies
in in great need and so the way
I see this model is again it's
another bridge to where you can
have the state bill take
advantage of someone's serious
expertise over many years and
that person still stay in
private enterprise.
But the state still be able to
take advantage of that person
services without being hamstring
like we currently are under the
procurement code Mr speaker
gentleman from Santa are there
any other states that are
currently doing this.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes there are more than
twenty other states that do this
I don't have that list in front
of me but you know roughly half
the states in the US have
already gone this direction.
Mr speaker gentleman from Santa
and and you in your intro you
had spoke about a the two phase
process can you describe what
that is speaker and gentleman
yes certainly so so again this
two phase process starts.
With the planning design
phase and the C. M. G. C. would
work together as a consultant
was a project designers.
On a cost control.
And value engineering so really
just again without the thought
in mind of the construction.
Making sure that the
requirements are met but we're
doing in a way that saves costs
and time.
In the second phase.
and this begins just prior to
design completion.
the C. M. G. C. has an
opportunity to submit.
A bid for this construction
project and have been bid
includes a maximum guaranteed
maximum price for that
construction.
And as part of this amendment
Association can begin between
this C. M. D. C. in the
department and if things look
well if if the that I've got the
teaser crossed they can proceed
with that and if not if the
negotiations fail Senator can go
out you know there was no
guarantee the C. M. D. C. will
get this project they can still
go out and and
competitively build this
project.
Mr speaker gentleman from Santa
read read we talk about go out
the second phase for Jim out go
out to bid to actually do the
work itself for a bid for
someone to be the construction
manager general contractor for
the actual building phase that
Mr and gentleman from San Juan
good clarifying question the
first the construction.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Senate also these.
These may not know so just be
consultants in these might be
people that actually own and
operate the construction company
for example Mr Chairman that's
correct so those who have that
agreed experience you've been
mentioning.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
central appreciate the the
questions I I'm always intrigued
whenever we can make government
more efficient and this seems
like one of those type of
finishes I think it's good for
for both government and private
enterprise so I support this
bill thank you Mr speaker thank
you John.
We have a gentlelady from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa you.
Speaker I yield.
Santa we've been trying to get
this piece of legislation
through probably now about nine
years eight or nine years to get
this this done and so
One of the things that they keep
changing and I want clarified is
the fact that
This construction is new
construction manager this
position is a position that will
be vetted out each time we have
a project and my correct.
Mr speaker Julie from Santa
great question and you're
exactly right this will be a
bidding process that is done
through the R. F. P. and it's
gonna be qualifications based so
it's not just gonna be.
We know this person and we want
them to be our GM G. C. R. C. M.
D. C. so this is the Mr speaker
and and gentleman from Santa.
Each job will be bid
individually this person is not.
A employee of.
The transportation department of
man's bigger enjoy that's
exactly right we're not trying
to establish the news are of
delay okay I my other question
is how is this going to.
Impact.
The time that it takes.
To begin.
And in a project and how is it
going to affect the cost.
Of a project.
That must be originally another
great question and the answer
the short answer is it should
reduce the cost.
And reduce the time Mr joy this
is why this is been adopted by
so many other states and we see
that in in the data when you
compare
you know how these projects have
gone by involving someone like I
said early on during the design
phase involving someone with
experience in construction you
can often.
Of several your Rico moments and
and sharing of information that
allows one to meets requirements
set by the department but in a
way.
That has the production the
construction authority and
money.
And so you're able to forward
saying can that allows you to go
faster.
And save money.
Okay then Mr speaker and.
Our our experts that work with
them a long time.
And one of the things that that
that the big issues that has
been a constant I just work with
them on a project completely out
of my district and I was I did a
twenty five and the seas are
Chavis and that that redesign
and and
Completely reconstruction just
about of that entire
intersection.
And I work very closely with
them on the interchange at five
fifty.
And I twenty five.
And.
I bring both of them up because.
And especially I fifty nine
twenty five after the project
was completed there were some
problems.
So my question is this new
construction manager general
contractor.
Is he or she them are going to
be around to make sure that
those issues.
Our address.
Efficiently.
in the future because I'm not
the the five fifteen I twenty
five it took us almost five
years to get that whole
intersection.
address because he under bid it
the the contract on the bid and
get it address and cleaned up
for lack of a better word
properly and there's still some
movement and compaction issues
in that area that are you know
you guys are constantly going
back to look after and that
increases the cost and so I'm
just wondering if this person
within that contract in the
state is going to take us a
year.
It built in that is that care of
their.
After that contract is
completed.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady from Santa yes this
contractor remains retained in
under contract not just for
design and construction but also
for subsequently to address
those problems of the department
you know as well aware of these
issues and is working to make
sure that we don't repeat those
mistakes okay well Mr speaker
and gentleman I am.
Big support of the department of
transportation because I'm
always out of my district in
somebody else's and they take
care of it and I like I said we
work hard together to try to get
this position.
develop the lack of a better
term so I would hope that
everyone will support.
this piece of legislation and I
enjoy working with two guys
thanks.
Thank you gentle lady.
Next we have the gentle lady
from grant Hidalgo and Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally be with the gentleman
yield please Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen how many have this
past before so I I I did have my
list of questions having I
remember this being presented
over and over again and so I'm
just wondering how many of the
past projects would've been able
to take advantage of this design
build invest it sooner.
Mr speaker generally from our
ongoing all those counties
that's a great question and kind
of a opportunity lost but we we
really don't know how many
projects if we we would have
this tool available to us would
have gone through Mr speaker and
gentleman and just between last
year and this year what's the
increased cost of implementing
these projects.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm actually surprised by this
answer it's about fifty five
zero percent for bridges and
about thirty percent for roads
Mr speaker and gentleman so had
we taken action sooner would
save the taxpayers and in any of
these projects were in
implemented sooner we'd say the
pact taxpayers a significant out
of money and and Mr speaker and
gentleman do you believe that
the cost of inflation the cost
of informing us projects as the
done climbing
miss bigger and generally thank
you for that question and of
course the answer to that is no
we're seeing great increases I
mean I'm not just over the last
couple decades has been great
increases materials costs but
especially the last couple years
we've seen a sharp increase.
Miss Mister speaker how Mr
speaker Montoya Mr speaker and
gentleman how many projects does
DOT planned to use this method
on with the new funding for new
roads.
So Mister internally
the the the current direct
answers no more than twenty five
percent is actually specified in
the legislation so it's no
longer use this approach now for
everything it'll be at the most
a quarter but probably less than
that Mr speaker and gentleman
and if I was out of the ring
when you answered this by.
Speaker and gentle lady great
question and and really the
answer is this is not the
preferred preferred approach the
preferred approaches design
build.
Your available times are build
which we.
We and others maybe roughly a
decade ago that we
allow that tool to be used in
their tool chest but there are
cases where this would be very
useful thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen and do you
have a list of the projects that
could have you to have a list of
the projects that are going to
that we think are gonna use this
new method.
Yes Miss Mister speaker
generally they don't have a list
at this time they're actually
waiting for this to be signed by
the governor but they do have
several projects in mind.
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
last year it was a.
I think there is complete
agreement that one time money
whether it was funds from the
federal government or whether it
was a surplus we experience
thank you oil and gas and all
extracted industry thank you
again that we wanted to make
sure that we had projects and
all the department
transportation districts.
Is that the case again is that
the plan with this as well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
that's exactly thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentlemen
and
Do we have the work force how
many openings are there right
now at DSA waiting to be filled
for the department
transportation.
Miss bigger and gentle lady from
her dog going all those counties
another great question so right
now like most departments across
the state there are vacancy
issues and the current vacancy
rate right now is about fifteen
percent which is around four
hundred five hundred positions
yes hi but I've just been told
that they are making great
progress on that number is
coming down thank you Mr speaker
and thank you John is that
because there's no applications
is that because why is there
such a high vacancy.
Mr speaker and gentle lady pry
the same reason that you see
help wanted signs everywhere in
New Mexico is that there's labor
shortages we talk about why that
is whether it's.
People protesting or comment
related or people being paid not
to work but there's the.
The reason we don't talk about
but the the end problem is
there's whatever shortages right
now Mr speaker and and gentleman
but these are high paying jobs
with benefits with retirements
and and arguments that we hear
over and over again is you're
not paying a fair wage with a
you're not paying a living wage
I mean the definition of a
living wages climbing every day
but Mr speaker and gentleman
these are
high paying jobs with good
benefits retirement and and
traditional hours is that not
the case.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady yes that is the case I
thank the gentleman would agree
that to.
M. D. which is a great place to
work thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen and so then
are they still able to implement
this with so many vacancies with
the but this put an extra burden
on the existing staff so Mr of
Mr speaker generally this
actually addresses that very
problem.
So it it helps because now you
can have someone with the
outside experience com and help
consult.
and help drive a projects that
perhaps if there was a shortage
of folks available or perhaps
some of those less experienced.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so they're able to
find contract labor to fill the
vacancies that haven't been
until the DFA.
Mr chair that's not exactly
right we're not talking about
things are not employees of of
and DOT.
These are these are.
Positions that go out for bid
soon RFP process the order the
qualifications and these
individuals will then become
consultants that work in
partnership with the department
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen and do we have any
projects that have expired
because this method was in place
that will have to go back
through the planning and and
there's not Act and expiration
have that okay thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentleman
thank you gentle lady.
Further debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Speaker.
John from sent for you Mr
speaker I yield.
Speaker.
Chair of the group on this one.
C..
To see the process.
Well
developed.
Includes the concern.
The
cost of construction.
And the maximum.
For a.
For the actual implementation of
the project is that correct so
what purpose is served.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
that's not exactly right it's a
two phase process then they're
independent of each other so
Mister John the first phase is
that they go out for RFP.
For this particular C. M. G. C.
to help with the project right
so they already have an existing
project going right and that I
mention also goes through an RFP
process our internal at that
point would be to the district.
Yes so Mister speaker German so
this will be the first
procurement to kick off a
project people that are of P.
asking for an individual with a
certain qualifications set to
help in this can consulting type
role.
And so they would look to the
applications they would select
an individual I'm sure do some
interviews and that doesn't need
this person has for this
particular project the CM a G.
C. and then time would pass as
this consultant works with the
the department to develop the
plans for the project do you
know do all the testing you know
to not do all the testing would
help with evaluation of the
testing of the general
contractor does.
And then towards the end of the
design phase we're gonna close
the design phase we're ready to
start the construction phase.
That stays true for there to be
another.
opportunity.
So first assumes C. CM G. C.
would have the option to say
okay
I am able to do this project and
I
and the maximum guarantee for
the cost would be this and the
department had to go she was an
individual.
And if that we've those
association were successful.
that individual what we awarded
that project but if they're not
successful the department can
decide to go forward with
another RFP and in the kitchen
invitation for bid I stand
corrected invitation for bid and
would be a competitive bid
process for that construction
job.
Mr chairman John.
Just the preferred circumstance
warns Warren.
The technician.
Which would be the designer.
With central with a maximum.
List price.
For the project and incentives
successful.
Additional other invitation to.
Correct.
So Mister John and that's
that's correct I'm gonna add a
little detail to that so C. C.
M. D. C..
Provides a maximum.
Projects costs guarantee.
And we're for the departments to
you know determine the the fine
detail of how this would be
accomplished the pharmacy to
have their own internal.
Estimate of the project the deal
to compare this to and and based
off of their internal estimate
comparison to the CMG sees
estimate the may say this is a
good deal were to go forward.
and I would be there for all get
if this legislation passed but
they could also say is not again
it's not a guarantee they can
also say this is not a good deal
for the state and we're going to
go ahead and do a competitive
bid and and rejects the proposal
of the C. NG C. for the country
construction work.
Gentleman answered Elefante.
Of time and material such that
if the if the contractor is.
Is unable to complete the
project for less than that
estimated maximum does is
participate in that.
So Mr Angelman
the the two different answers to
this question first if the bid
from the C. am G. C. comes in
lower than their
estimated internal amount or or
similar to it you know the
likely were the contractor that
individual
and then perhaps the second
answer if if I understand your
question right.
if the construction project is
completed.
And it is actually done for less
than that maximum four or faster
than the time in that project
series they don't receive any
particular incentive for that.
The contractor would not
participate in those savings it
would all accrued to the state.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman that's exactly right.
This provision one of the
procurement model is designed.
In the other professional models
to
choose sent out to.
Proposal requests to the design
and in New Mexico paid for
additional eight four Chester
construction phase of the
project is that accurate
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee that's exactly right.
And I can certainly see
all the folks involved in the
actual design.
The experience.
Opportunity to participate in
the construction phase.
Able to save some money yes
problems the.
Could not or might not have
considered during the design
changing the design bid build
model.
Just so much bigger and our
family you're you're exactly
seeing the vision of why this
can often be a useful tool.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
the long story short these.
This model which.
I was bigger and and Jim German
from Lee a fascinating question
and I'll just say because there
is such a wide diversity of
projects scope and scale and
cost
the question was asked in for
impact over the last several
years
and different versions of this
bill did include cost limits but
I think how it's presented here
is the wisest approaches that
part of the most flexibility by
not limiting dollar wise those
projects.
Gentleman there is.
Which one of these mortgage
providers Mr chairman that's
exactly right so limited that
exist in this legislation is the
number of projects not the
dollars of projects and the food
here is twenty five percent of
projects or less.
Gentleman is a dentist provided
by title to.
The smaller projects will.
Senator.
Or vice versa.
Speaker and gentleman from Lee
I'm I'm hearing from the experts
here that really could be any
there are a lot of the
dissipating large or small or
medium being the prevailing that
it's just a could be all of the
above.
Thank you for your interest.
Thank you John.
Seeing further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Santa yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you.
I'm gonna start off saying the.
There's.
At the end of this I'm going to
ask be excused from this boat
because this does affect the
business that I'm in.
But I do want to Mr speaker and
gentleman that to ask questions
and hopefully bring some clarity
to some things
Mr speaker and gentleman on our
first one start off with a
discussion with respect to a
question from the gentleman from
sure curry county.
We there was an with respect to
the testing then how how this
process works and Mr speaker and
gentleman can we talk a little
bit about how do you she
overseas and we we require.
seventy testing with respect
from the DOT standpoint and who
would be thanks to a on with
respect to making sure that this
is done in accordance with the
good policies procedures and.
Once.
So Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee thank you for the question
the direct answer is there's no
change NMDOT will remain the US
authorizing agent will be
responsible for all quality
assurance.
Okay so with respect to the
stand the contractor is.
Responsible for multiple tasks
and.
The state DOT is for responsible
for the one in ten and posed
together the the.
The N. T. yes report to verify
this quality assurance and
quality control.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee again had no change.
The other D. O. T. will be
responsible for providing these
reports.
And
Analyzing
and ensuring that they're
meeting the the requirements of
the project.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John several states where we do
the work.
Do you she hires a separate
quality assurance firm.
They go in and they verify the
capacity capability of the the
company doing the work.
The.
Testing.
The quality control side.
The verified commitment date
verified tests the verify the
whole process and every months.
Reporter put together in such a
way that to a potentially
validates to see.
The way that the DOT will work
this is what.
Mr speaker and gentleman look
from Lee thank you again for the
question and yes we will they
will continue to use the same
process but he was he experts
here they have and I'm sure
you're aware of this gentleman
they have their own labs that
they do testing
work at and they'll continue to
do
that testing and and really no
change in that process based off
of this legislation.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
talk to the.
Capability.
With respect to DOT is able to
do with respect to this
Compared to the for to the old
design bid build massive.
Yes Mr German thank you for the
question.
And if we at this legislation
their capabilities will not
change the still have the same
capabilities the same processes
they use right now what this
legislation is really doing is
allowing for
external expertise to help
shepherd.
this process through and perhaps
share of lessons learned
eccentric part of the design
diverse development phase of
these projects so that if speed
bumps occur which they often do
Mr John I'm I'm I know that you
are aware of that that there are
folks there who are experienced
in directing and help navigate
those speed bumps.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman I do have several
other questions for the and
Preserving time allowing other
people to speak.
many of my questions have been
answered and I hope to learn a
little bit more about this
process as the conversation
continues I yield back.
Thank you John and.
Seen further debate the
gentleman from Cibola McKinley
County Representative and thank
I'll point.
Speaker of the gentleman from us
on the line to yield Mister
speaker I yield to the judge
from Cibola.
Thank you gentleman from Santa
Ana I just want you to know that
I'm not running for governor so
there for my questions will be
solely automobile.
Okay number one is following the
procurement code by going into
this G. M. C. G..
Does allow in the way that the
chairman go does not have to be
followed.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
from single great question and
then I understand why anyone
would ask the questions you want
to share about setting up some
new sweetheart deal process so I
I I really understand one of the
questions asked Mr John and this
is not
interfere with any of those
procurement code existing
process sees to be
crystal clear this does in fact
manage the procurement cold so
there will be some changes to
the code of mass speaker Mr
speaker and gentleman from
single
all of the existing procurement
code processes must still be
followed.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
what do you mean Madam some of
the procurement COVID.
The the the well allowing the
transportation construction
manager general contractor at
that what it is.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
single you have the nail on the
head this is adding a new tool
in the procurement code seven M.
D. O. T. can use.
Thank you thank you and a lot
of.
My last question is
there is a change order of
problem comes up.
What percentage of the project
can be
that if you want to move through
I think I'm gonna say this what
amount of money or what
percentage of the money a lot in
in the project and the this R.
G. M. C. G.
award to somebody to continue
the project without having to go
to bed.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Cibola a great question so the
current processes and and Mr
Chairman you may be aware of
this which is why you would ask
this question occasionally there
are omissions that come up that
are not anticipated as part of
the original contract this could
be conditions at the site or or
changes in materials.
And and so when these
come to light signals currently
they go through a process of
change order and that is
negotiated with the department
to see if they will then
increase the order contract
amount of the speaker and
gentleman from single that's
that's existing law an existing
procedure and this legislation
would not change that process so
if the if the the C. M. D. C.
was the one that was awarded the
construction project this change
order process would also be
available to that individual
should this should an instance
like this occur.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
therefore if a change order has
to happen this is the M. G. C.
good award himself or herself.
This is extra broad day for the
extension of the project no.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Cibola if if that was true that
is very concerning Mr Chairman
no see can bring this
change to the attention of the
department.
And then they can negotiate with
the department and in the end is
the department has the
authorization to make the
determination that is not within
the authority awarded to the CMG
C..
Okay thank thank you gentlemen
thank you of.
The highway department the enjoy
working with you forever again
like I said I'm not running for
governor so all of my questions
are ended.
Thank you gentlemen.
Si no further debate the
gentleman to close thank you Mr
speaker ladies and gentleman of
the house I now move that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill.
Thank you for do now pass.
We are on final passage of
legislation Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four.
The vote is now open.
Is.
Representative that was Vigil
well if you've been thinking
about.
If you zoom.
Forgettable.
It did not make.
The vote is about to close on
the electronic board.
Is now closed.
To call the members without a
recorded vote Representative
upon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong yes Representative
Deborah A. Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative.
Of the speaker Egolf I.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes.
This is yes.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yeah yes Representative Matthews
both yes Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
By a vote of sixty six in the
affirmative and zoom in the
negative.
I move that.
Senator is the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four has duly passed
the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker and we'll
go to the next order of business
committee reports.
There's no objection it is so
ordered.
To read.
Mr speaker your government
elections anything Affairs
Committee to him is been
referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
tax business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen as amended has had
it under consideration point I
was recognition that a do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson vice
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We're on a favorable come
committee report of the Senate
taxation.
I'm sorry Senate finance Senate
finance committee substitute one
for Senate tax.
Business transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen as amended.
Please signify by saying on.
All those opposed.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred Senate bill one
ninety eight as amended has had
it under consideration reports
as recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson vice chair.
Is that option.
Favorable committee reported
option of Senate bill one ninety
eight as amended.
All those proposed new.
Is adopted.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty seven as amended has had
it under consideration reports
that with recommendation of do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption.
We are unfavorable committee
report option.
Adoption of Senator education
business transportation
committee for Senate bill one
thirty seven as amended.
All of those in favor.
All those opposing.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
twelve has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
reported option of Senate
finance committees Senate bill
two twelve.
All those.
This.
Senate finance committee
substitute Senator for Senate
bill two twelve all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All those opposed to me.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
thirteen has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
We're on a mission of the
favorable report Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill two thirteen.
All those in favor please
signify by saying on.
All opposed to.
In a the committee report is
adopted.
Oops.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I move to go to
next order of business messages.
Seeing no objection is ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill seven as
amended by the house House for
substitute for House consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill forty
six House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninety one as
amended by the house house joint
resolution one as amended by the
house and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
The message will be entered.
Representative from Bernalillo.
The next order of business third
reading of legislation.
No objection it is so ordered.
We'll go to item number sixteen
Representative Harry Garcia
Representative Harry Garcia
right.
ET on that item.
The thank you Mr speaker can you
give me to a point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill one seventy four as
amended.
Is a is on final passage and has
been.
On final passage has been taken
is the final passes passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment for
substitution thank gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker related to
motor vehicle requirement club
tractors attach we free trader
to be driven on the right hand
lane on interstate I was in New
Mexico variety penalty a new
material tractors right hand
names travel required the truck
tractor attached to free trader
being operated on an interstate
highway systems outside the
boundaries and municipalities
all right on the right hand lane
except in over within the
gentleman nor taking another
vehicle approaching a
stationary altered.
Authorized emergency vehicle or
recovery or repair from the
eagles fame fashion emergen
lives.
For hazard lies with that Mr
speaker several questions.
There is debate the
representative from some on
Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sikora San Juan amendments to
yield.
The show will yield my friend.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John Cibola I have to confess Mr
speaker I'm a little
disappointed to get a care this
bill on the floor talk about the
right lane.
I guess maybe on the wrong lane
for the bill I'm not sure.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Can you explain what the problem
is that this bill is trying to
tackle.
Thank you Mr speaker and friend
will Representative what we're
trying to do here.
Is eliminate.
Active traders and this is not
included of Google stock stock
to Jody treated this destructive
traders will render Division
here Sir is from Arizona
Albuquerque about every day we
get about twenty thousand people
going to the state and then on
the twenty dollars a month
thirty thousand I mean these
thirty percent of semis will
Grindal reduce here is
a deli for number one because of
what's happening in our state.
very noble high we slowing
traffic down and we have been
having a lot of a lot of
fidelity's an lot of fashion do
this back of the destruction
causing the soul by doing this
Mr speaker and my friend well.
One we're trying to eliminate
the the model making or the
backup from interstate highways
if I may Mister speaker.
According to data compliance The
New Mexico DOT traffic division
in a five year period those
sixteen blonde twenty six there
were thirteen thousand crashes
involving heavy trucks and two
hundred eighty eight of those in
with the dalit he's.
Over seventeen hundred these
questions were involved in
vehicles traveling in the same
in the same direction.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Siebel of
thank you for the clarification
I I have heard about some some
issues of drug convoys as of
late but I think that might be a
little further north of us Mr
speaker gentleman from see below
what I've experienced on driving
interstate I think part of I I I
guess let me ask it as a
question as to the issue of the
fatalities is.
If you have a truck a tractor
trailer and there in the left
lane and they're not executing a
pass what I've seen is Motors
especially on a high speed
interstate they get extremely
impatient and so they will then
go around the semi to the right
hand lane and then I at some
point I think there's probably a
blind spot in there for the
trucker.
And here she then starts
immersion and that's I I would
assume is a source of those
collisions Mister speaker
gentleman from Cibola are these
is this the kind of problem this
bills trying to address.
Mr speaker my friend from San
Juan that is exactly what we're
trying to prevent like you said
Mr speaker with symptoms on one
people get anxious there or to
go somewhere and these folks are
very not been you do notice the
pair up sometimes and there's a
gap between the two trucks in
front of the next vehicle up in
vitamins either half mile a mile
away from each other so people
do try to go around the the
shoulder part of the highway and
use of trim the lead drug
doesn't she M. or the run off
the road they do closures
actions would Jobs sold communal
most of the time or because by
the drugs in these become the
television our state.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Cibola and.
I know just as a.
As a motor sometimes I find
myself getting a bit frustrated
to whenever trucks don't get to
left and so
can you talk about the sort of
the the penalties if you will of
of driving the left lane for one
of the structure trailers.
Mr speaker bundled from
San Juan it'll do assessments on
this.
Two hundred dollars on the first
offense.
There are.
It'll be just a two hundred
dollar fine for all.
It because.
No.
Mr speaker gentleman from single
I'm I'm starting quite here that
I heard the two hundred dollars
to did you say four hundred if I
do it twice serve ourselves
conferences.
I know sure no Mr speaker Mr
inform us so one of the two
hundred dollar fine.
Thank you for that clarification
Mr speaker gentleman from Cibola
I do notice in the bill
You don't have to drive in the
right lane all the time right so
if if I'm a trucker I'm out on
the interstate and I come upon a
slower vehicle or may were going
up the hill this statute still
allows me to execute a pass in
the left lane is that correct.
Yes Sir and no not on page one
on.
Wanted to come online twenty two
twenty three it states if you
approach it.
A goal.
In the budget the person is
going to school on the on the
right name.
Mr speaker gentle from C. well
than I I take that to mean that
the aim of this bill is really
to keep truckers from just
staying in the left lane and
staying and never getting back
into the right hand lane.
Mr speaker provide gentleman
from all of those one correct.
Mr speaker John C. but I noticed
that there is
also another exception that you
don't have to be in the right
hand lane.
When otherwise required by law
what is what is that support
vision mean.
Division did you need to all
stay on the right hand lane on
this you see a stationary
authorized emergency vehicle for
recovery or repair the eagles
fleeing flashing lights then you
have the more prudent thing
sure.
Mr speaker gentle from C. will
serve their let's say a state
trooper had someone pulled over
on the right hand shoulder than
this would still allow the
trucker to go to the left lane
is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman from song
one yes that is correct.
Mr speaker general principle I
noticed that the this this this
statue would not apply within
municipal boundaries is that
correct.
That is correct Mr speaker fund
and gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman from Cibola can you
explain the rationale for not
requiring this within a
municipality.
Mr speaker gentleman the Russian
lobby behind that would be in
order to city limits you know
there are there is the.
I would say
If you ever merchandise whatever
agency and statements then you
would have to be in either in
the middle of the highway for
the wage but but by the content
of just to the right lane that
would be a danger to the public.
If you're the right and you have
to make a left hander with the
semi that it's awful hard to do
I think that is a rational
behind them.
Mr speaker and gentleman from C.
eight I think that makes sense
is typically we see a lot lot
more cars move in and out of
lanes specially if there's three
or more lanes you have to merge
I think that makes sense to me.
Mr speaker John from Cibola does
this.
This bill only applies to
interstate highways is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
someone is that just an
interstate highways in the state
of New Mexico Mr speaker John
from CBOE so it doesn't matter
if it's a four lane highway for
example on highway five fifty
from Bernalillo to to Bloomfield
is a four lane highway speed
limit of.
Seventy seventy five of forget
but it is this bill would not
apply in the the contacts of so
you just five fifty even though
it's a four lane sort of high
speed highway.
Of the issue can we ride survey
will not apply to those I would
like to have a roll of of.
Nine of the four lanes but that
will not apply the rules.
Mr speaker John from single I
appreciate you answer my
questions I think the court
helps with the bill thank you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Katrin support
role Valencia counties
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker where the
gentleman and my friend please
yield.
I will yield to my friend from
old town is general meeting.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I wondered is this not
already a law in New Mexico the
the passing lane is the left
lane and the driving lane is the
right lane.
This is for use of Mr speaker my
friend for rural counties it is
it yes it is law what we're
trying to do here is eliminate
for accidents have been in the
state but districts in the right
lane but there is law already.
That is six.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I would almost love
to ask for a show of hands but I
won't Mr speaker to implement of
the people in this body that
know that so Mister speaker and
gentleman I drive all the time
between Santa Fe and.
Sapporo on the on the interstate
and Mr speaker gentleman.
I think that I appreciate what
you're trying to do but I I
think that.
It's not just semis that have
this issue.
And so Mister speaker gentleman
what do you think about you know
we have driven between Santa Fe
and Albuquerque New both lanes
are just packed driving so what
good do you think that this
would do in that area Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker in lady.
The problem we're having is with
the same idea are so big and
they are so heavy.
It is awful hard to maneuver
around them in in vehicle
valuation come from this Senate
bill of time on how much traffic
there is but in regards to that
level Blanchard right.
What we're trying to prevent is
major actions for these big
state my dad or or it's
catastrophic when we do have an
accident that program to
prevent.
Thank you Mr speaker thank thank
you kind gentleman so if it's
already the law why why don't we
just try to do something to the
effect of making sure it's
enforced Mr speaker gentleman.
Madam speaker or Mr speaker No
eliminated
we don't want the law but we're
trying to address these issues
this is Pacific Hey on
interstates specifically for big
trucks
on our instance.
Mr speaker kind gentleman my my
good friend I feel
The problem isn't that you need
a new law the problem is that
the law needs to be enforced.
Mr speaker kind gentleman hi I
understand immensely where
you're coming from because I
know where you live I know the
made for the main sponsor lives
in the end the issues that
you're having.
For sure in that area Mr speaker
kind gentleman I understand that
it won't be and the fact in
other I can't even think of
anywhere else in my district
that I have four lanes I don't
they're mostly two lanes Mr
speaker kind gentleman hi
I'm concerned.
About restricting.
Business in New Mexico Mr
speaker kind gentleman we I know
over in the Los Angeles area we
have several semis with trailers
that travel that corridor.
And I'm just afraid of him doing
business with one more thing
that they're going to have to
he I hate to so one of the
things that I would suggest is
putting signage up.
Some other things not creating a
whole new law.
When it's already the law it's
already against the law.
And and make sure that people
understand even if you're not in
the semi with a trailer you're
supposed to drive in the right
hand lane unless to pass.
And so I.
Want to tell you whole heartedly
that I appreciate your your bill
and understand.
But I don't feel it necessary
to put more restrictions than
already are on business in New
Mexico thank you Mr speaker
thank you my friend.
Further debate the gentleman
from occurring Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker with my
good friend from.
Cibola County please help.
Mr speaker of my friend from
very County I will yield.
Thank you gentleman the
gentleman
as I read your bill Anderson and
your bill is applies only to
three interstates I. ten down in
the south I twenty five north
and south of I. forty going
across the state east and west
is that correct John.
Mr speaker row of my friend from
curry county is here correct.
In general I understand just
those three interstates is four
thousand four hundred and thirty
seven lane miles of New Mexico
interstate is that correct.
Yes yes that is correct.
Thank you German German one when
I looked at the very last
sentence in the bill it says
that this is affected.
As of July first twenty two so
it's about four months from now
that this bill will become
effective.
And as a our colleague just
mentioned the need for signage
in that areas up and down those
interstates right lane only will
the DOT have adequate time
between now and July first to
put up the signage needed to
keep the truckers into the right
line.
Mr speaker my friend from out of
we go from not only I have no
it's for was miss with me of
trying to see if a deal do and
you said they have ample time to
get the sun is up.
I'm not sure if there is time.
Thank you my good friend.
General would you mind asking
your experts do they have an
estimate on what the cost of
building in directing all the
signage is going to be to the
DOT for this four thousand four
hundred lane miles that we're
going to have to put signage of.
Yes my extra windows give me a
second please.
Mr speaker my friend from curry
county.
for witnesses and it'll cost
around five hundred thousand
dollars to the signage and that
is a within their budget right
now.
Thank you gentlemen I appreciate
that very much and then I
noticed someone of money Alice's
it says that there's a cost from
taxed we have is estimating it
would cost about sixteen
thousand five hundred to
implement the changes I don't
know that I understand what that
means a gentleman can you ask
your expert what the cost to the
tax revenue department is going
to be to they have to.
Set up a new
set of fines for this is that
what's causing the cost.
Mr leader gentleman gentleman
let me ask a question thank.
Thank you John take your time.
Mr speaker fine gentleman yes my
ex for and he said that will
probably be one of our knowledge
to be to update their equipment
just what we need to do with
that Mr of speaker and provide
element I do not know all of the
nonessential of sure.
That's a very good answer
honesty is always the best
reference thank you for that and
don't my last question has to do
with the.
The the signs as well will the
need NMDOT need to update their
current signing and striping
manual I understand there are
some signs that are out on the
interstates that.
In times of heavy traffic it
says use both lanes will we'll
or signs have to be taken down
or can you ask your expert to
address that question do they
need to update their manuals Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker of.
And from Perry County The New
Mexico D. a de isn't.
May be required to amend.
is I need inscribing manual
which describes all requirements
the regulatory sign is posted in
New Mexico I was.
Thank you gentlemen and Mister
speaker I appreciate it I know
they have the money's in their
budget I know they have the
willingness of the right
attitude I know they have the
manpower to get it done and so
gentleman I appreciate you
taking time to to answer the
questions and and consult with
their experts and I believe that
concludes on my question.
Mr speaker kind gentleman thank
you for your time.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from violence zero
Representative Fajardo thank you
Mr speaker with a kind gentleman
please see yield.
I will yield to the finally the
from gentlelady from all
religions thank you thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen and
this is going to be horrible
because the questions I'm about
to ask.
R. seven I even my understanding
of this so please bear with me
as I ask these questions Mr
speaker kind gentleman a tractor
trailer
semis is that correct Mr speaker
gentleman.
The you are correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman and so
I'm learning today for the first
time would SMI's actually called
the tractor trailer so Mister
speaker
this includes I guess is it fair
for me to call them I guess
they're called eighteen wheelers
as well Mr speaker okay at kind
gentleman.
The gentle lady door correct
there is there's a break down on
on what is considered there of
different groups of of semis.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
yeah I can run a dollar if you
will need more information I can
run it on for you Mr speaker
that's fine I'm just very naive
in this bill and so I have
driven and that road between
Valencia County and
your your neck of the woods and
it is a and I ate more driving
Mr speaker kind gentleman
why do support the truckers
without them we wouldn't have
the supplies that we need their
very much needed in our state
and our communities so I have
deep deep deep respect for it
for the truckers in our
communities but it is very
difficult when you're driving
those roads and do you have to
truckers one the right lane when
the left lane and you can't pass
because the speed Mr speaker
came down is that what is that
the problem you're trying to
alleviate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
what does that is exactly what
we're trying to do and we have
too much drug traffic in the New
Bear of and that just compares
everybody else's driving people
get too excited and nervous and
that we have a problem industry
but that is what we're going to.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind of my my last question is I
thought I heard we did we were
having our conversations with
one of the other representatives
that DOT is going to be creating
signs to educate the truckers
about this new law is that
correct Mr speaker kind
gentleman.
Mr speaker a gentle lady from
Alicia J. that is correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and thank you also for
the education that I received
today did not know that they
were called and but I have dealt
with that benevolence accounting
the struggles and so thank you
very much Sir.
See further debate the gentle
lady from Chavis Representative
Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
well the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley said
course and one of the land to
yield please.
More W. yield my friend.
From.
Calling you from Chavis Chavis
county Jarvis Jarvis county I'm
sorry.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
very much Mr speaker
gentleman's.
In my prior life.
We are part of my job was to
drive the truck a semi truck
hauling cotton or poly go fill
the the to look a level in Texas
over but the high was needed
throughout the state of New
Mexico and I guess the most
aggravate dating thing I have
seen while driving the truck.
An eighteen Wheeler.
In excess of the trailer being
forty feet in length.
Was a car passing had truck and
get right in front of the state
money and slowing down to at
least fifteen to twenty miles
per hour lower than the speed
limit trucks cannot stop on a
dime Mr speaker and gentleman.
The state statute applied to
anything that is in growth of a
certain length greater than a
certain links do you think it's
applicable to those vehicles as
well.
Blink twice if the answer is no.
Eight Mr speaker madam lives
live friend from Travis county
will decisions you need.
I'm sorry but there was no is
here on the house floor could St
Peter answered please.
Would you please be to question.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
think that this of.
Definition should apply to any
certain totaling the vehicle
over say thirty five feet in
length.
Mr speaker and Raul.
Gentlelady from Travis county
this applies to accomplish the
vehicle we goals combination.
Wait rating.
Wait of twenty six thousand
pound or more.
Why did a gross vehicle weight
during of the vehicle being
older is nexus above it and
thousand pounds of.
Gentlelady from Chavez well
mostly struggling if you prefer
long tractor value of seventy
four.
The that that.
Mr speaker you're exactly right
there is a weight restriction on
these vehicles that do have to
maintain the right hand of but
we also do have signs up in
parts of the state for the
slower traffic is supposed to
keep right.
Unfortunately we have way too
many people that think that it
does not apply to them and I
know that I get very aggravated
whenever there is a rolling
roadblock.
And that means to do two
vehicles going down the road at
the same speed nobody moves over
nobody will give in it.
And Mr speaker of.
We also have a problem whenever
there are convoys of RV's go
away.
And they do drive in the left
hand lane and I'm very concerned
about that two buses the same
thing there they go.
Member to bumper and it's very
aggravating that Mr speaker
gentleman fall I appreciate what
you're doing there if the laws
already on the books do we
really need to spend that much
and sinuses signs are already up
do we just need to mark certain
areas of our roadways especially
the interstates to remind the
semis that are trying to get the
goods to our places of
distribution whether it's within
the town a city whatever the
case may be that they do have to
hit a deer to these rules.
Mr chairman finally gentle lady
from Chavez.
There there is issues with a lot
of things going on in our
industry will more on the so
forth we're we're targeting is
big trucks.
Because right now Mr speaker
runs fine gentle lady from
Travis from
well we'll need every day about
twenty thousand vehicle a gold
from there in the fund thirty
percent or more products sh and
what we're having is twenty
problem with bottle necking.
Accidents and municipalities are
terrible and what we're trying
to do is
deviate these problems and I
think the signage is necessary.
madam Mr speaker No it'll lady
from Travis if you go to
California.
There is the right link
completing they have the same
problem as we're having a we're
trying to do we had a problem
and trying to make our our high
was a little bit safer for our
residents and people are not
even our resident people are
growing our highways you want to
make a safety from.
Mr speaker gentleman I do
appreciate that comment you know
there we were trying to make him
safer and everything that Mr
speaker.
I I really feel like additional
signage is needed not only to
remind the truckers which do on
our interstates do have to
travel at five miles five miles
per hour slower than the rest of
the traffic which is cars and
pick ups and those that are
pulled in light weight trailers
Mr speaker is clickable also in
my opinion to those particular
drivers that are driving the
less than the posted speed limit
even though a couple of us here
in the house do you like to
travel a few miles over the
posted speed limit so I do you
know I tried to enter these
myself to everyone and state
place that don't think it's done
any good because we always end
up meeting on the side of the
road.
Mr speaker.
I think it's important that
people do realize that these
truckers are doing unnecessary
job we have trucks that are
going east coast to west coast
on iTunes five forty.
Of some of a role in improving
some of a role of fully loaded
and therefore there is a
difference in the in the speeds
if their problems to DO hill for
example those loaded up trucks
are going to be here and down
there correct and gears trying
to you know get their load to
the top of the hill of those
trucks that are Haaland empty
did heading back to wherever
they came from.
They will be able to pass faster
but they just need to realize
that until they are passing they
do have to maintain the right
hand lane Mr speaker gentleman
thank you very much for your
comments appreciated.
Si no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Mr speaker I move the Senate
bill one seventy four as amended
do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one seventy four as
amended the vote is now open.
What is about to close.
Is now closed the clerk.
To call those with the.
The electronic portion is closed
the clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong is yes Representative
bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative Benham.
Yes Representative is yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Dow out.
Representative Dow votes no
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Is Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthew votes
yes Representative queen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm both yes
Representative Andrea Romero.
Yes Representative Andrea Romero
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
looking at.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
is yes Representative Pettigrew
votes no.
By a vote of fifty to the
affirmative and fourteen in the
the negative Senate bill one
seventy four as amended.
Has duly passed the house.
We now move to the supplemental
calendar number one.
Which has been passed out.
The first item is the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill two twelve.
With the emergency clause
Representative Chandler are you
ready.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
Senate bill two twelve with the
sorry the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill two twelve with the
emergency clause.
Has been on for one final on
final passage has been taken.
And that it is now subject to
debate amendment for
substitution generally.
The gentle lady to explain the
bill.
Madams Mr speaker.
Senate bill on the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill two twelve.
Is.
Our capital outlay bills.
Mr speaker if you give me a
moment the expert my expert is
on her way.
We'll give you a minute for your
expert to arrive.
Thank you gentle lady.
We're still on a brief pause
awaiting the expert witness.
Gentlelady from McKinley in San
Juan.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business your injections order
members of the Senate bill
twelve in the appropriations and
finance committee of conferred
with leader Townsend about
dropping that referral he does
not object.
By a unanimous consent I remove
the H. AFC referral from Senate
Bill twelve.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
The respects families business
messages.
No objections so ordered
surgery.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
adopted the conference committee
report on house appropriations
and finance committees of chew
for House Bills two and three as
amended respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is really
under.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the duly enrolled
in gross copies of house bill
eight as amended house bill
fifty two house bill eighty two
as amended have been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate vote session
return same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
classical entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill twenty two as
amended by the house of return
same here with respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk message
reentered.
Thank members while we're
waiting for the gentle lady from
Los Alamos we have here's the
plan for the next little bit.
We will take up I was wanted to
on the supplemental calendar
that's a capital outlay bill and
the re authorization bill.
Then we'll go to the a memorial
for the very recently
Representative Baldonado.
Then we will consider on the
floor Senate bills twelve and
one forty.
Twelve and one forty.
And then we'll make more
decisions.
After that okay.
The.
The certificate that.
Capital Riyadh.
The bad Baldonado.
Senate bill twelve Senate bill
one forty.
And then we will confer with
folks on the floor.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you madam speaker when we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation to honor.
Generating from Los Alamos and
all those counties are you ready
yes madam speaker will you get
me to that point.
Conflict and all action
necessary for placing probably
Senate finance committees of
four Senate bill two one two
with an emergency clause on
final passage of and taking it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
general Jones and the bill thank
you madam speaker Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill two twelve with with an
emergency clause is the capital
outlay bill for projects
statewide the bill authorizes or
appropriates eight hundred and
twenty seven point seven million
dollars from the following funds
six hundred and eighty one point
million dollars in severance tax
bonds.
Thirty million dollars from the
general fund and five hundred
and sixteen point six million
dollars from other state funds.
Funding the bill includes
approximately funding in the
bill includes approximately four
hundred and seven point three
million dollars for state
agencies schools and judicial
projects three hundred and
ninety point four million for
projects identified by the
governor and house and Senate
members to address local and
regional projects statewide and
Sir the million dollars for
tribal projects statewide.
I stand for questions Madam
speaker there's debate on the
bill the gentleman from some of
all Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair gruel
gentle lady from Los Alamos
please yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from.
Thank you delighted gentlelady
the they passed out several
packets of data for us there's
one she is three pages
to ever printed from back so the
total printed pages as I.
But it it just says capital
outlay projects it doesn't say
if it's re authorization it I
don't know if it goes with the
two twelve or was to thirteen.
But the unique part about is
under the amount it's all zeros.
And under the fund it's R. A. T.
and I I have not seen that can
you tell me which one of the two
bills that goes with and and let
us know what that she is all
about.
Madam speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker gentleman if I
understand your question there's
a five pager the top title says
capital outlay projects is that
correct.
Speaker speaker gentle lady yes.
Madam speaker gentleman that
goes with this Senate Bill to
twelve.
The gentle lady can you tell me
why the amount is all zeros can
you tell me what the function of
what is this trying to
communicate are these projects.
I I don't understand the sheet
the gentle lady.
Madam speaker.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
Correction the five pager goes
with re authorizations so
perhaps we could put that aside
until we get to that bill that's
built to do two thirteen.
Thank you jollity thank you
madam speaker I will wait my
time thank you.
Gentleman from Santa.
Thank you madam speaker grateful
for my mic turned up does the
kind gentle lady from lost
almost some of the counties
yield.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa yes I yield.
Thank you madam speaker and
generally from Los Alamos I had
the privilege many moons ago to
carry these two things of
legislation so I want to thank
you for committees and and of
course the secure amazing expert
witness Miskito there.
It's a it's a ton of work
massacre gentility of course you
can just look at the size of
this bill.
I think it's a.
Two hundred and forty three
pages and to get it all right.
almost all the different members
putting their projects and there
is a substantial fee to.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
want to first thank Legislative
Council staff is key hole and
everyone that makes this
possible there's a ton of work
that goes on behind the scenes
Michelle in the cap while in
office really just want to thank
all those folks who helped make
this possible.
Mr surely I I did have some
questions in committee I'm not
going to repeat all those here
but I just want sex understand
Mr generally.
This Capitole bill is the only
thing in this the Senate and
house members.
For the projects.
Madam speaker gentleman I'm
sorry I didn't hear your
question message early doors.
Does this bill only represents
third proc happily projects that
this body and the other body
selected.
What does it contain other
things.
Madam speaker gentleman it
includes.
Both legislative bodies as well
as the governor's.
K..
Yes Mr speaker and generally
that's exactly right and Mr
generally.
so this bill.
If I'm reading it properly.
you know we'll talk about we're
all the severance tax bonding
dollars going here in just a
minute but if we're just looking
at just this bill.
what is the total amount of
dollars that it is
appropriating.
Gentleman I'm I apologize fund
doing multiple things at once
could you repeat the question
minister Jerry I don't
understand no worries.
I just asked me just this bill
what dollars are this is how
much many dollars with this bill
appropriating Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa eight
hundred and twenty seven point
seven million dollars.
So.
Senator only.
I guess than.
how we understand because I
thought that we had a three
hundred ninety point four
million dollars that was the
executive house and Senate.
Legislative appropriations but
understood this bill is a.
A little more than twice that
amount.
Madam speaker gentleman's that
amount represents a number of
different
I guess you could say funds are
issues one is six hundred and
eighty one million in severance
tax bonds Madam speaker and
gentleman thirty million and the
general fund and a hundred and
sixteen point six million from
other state funds our capital
outlay monies are on the rise
from the seventh severance tax
bonds
The the mouth and before those
monies are
Provided to us there are funds
that are funded first so there's
there's a priority of about
three or four funds like the
colonias Fund the tribal funds
think there's a water water
projects fund.
That comes out of the six
hundred and eighty one point one
million on the cost of it comes
off the top and then we get down
to the amount of money that is
available to us for capital
outlays madam speaker
gentleman's.
Originally yes thank you so I'm
I'm I'm just trying to make sure
we all understand the scope here
of what this bill is doing so.
So Mister generally if if I'm
understanding this right.
This bill does contain all of
our individual member
appropriations but it does also
then.
Say that for example the true
the water trust board is
appropriated seventy six point
three million dollars but we
don't dictate here with the
projects are is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman the six
hundred and eighty one point
million dollars representative
the total after those multiple
funds have been funded they are
taken off the top ten states
insisted also included in.
And madam speaker and gentleman
my expert advises me that state
agencies are also included
within this.
Six
within the six hundred and
eighty one point two million
there are much bigger and
gentility thank you and
let me try to come at this from
just a slightly different
direction here is I think I
think I understand now.
and I was.
I just want to read this right
so this is brutal.
Doesn't just authorized
executive legislative projects
because of it did this bill
would only authorize three
hundred ninety point four
million dollars.
Because this bill authorizes
eight hundred twenty seven point
seven million dollars that means
you're doing much more in this
bill suggested the executive and
legislative projects Madam
speaker gentleman's that's
correct and it also includes
statewide projects.
Okay that's really thank you
that's that's what I was trying
to get to it is when we push the
test button here we're not just
saying.
We also as our capital outlay
projects we're doing much more.
Absolutely Madam speaker and
gentleman that is very correct.
So Mister generally
what I think is interesting here
to
And once you just come in a
little bit on this.
So we've talked about the
severance taxes in prior debate
and how we look at that revenue
stream and we bond against it
and that bonding capacity this
year was determined to be six
hundred and eighty one million
dollars.
But
as speaker and gentle lady this
bill is a hundred twenty seven
million dollars someone current
seems besides just the severance
tax dollars I believe you said
there's just thirty million from
general fund and a hundred
sixteen million from other state
funds that are all encompassed
in this bill is that correct
Madam speaker gentleman from San
Santa that's correct yes a
message early this is.
Right a substantial than piece
of legislation right now I mean
this is almost a billion dollars
Mr generally can you just talk a
little bit about the medicine
was thirty million from the
general fund means we'll talk
about for that's going here just
a second but what is this
hundred sixteen from other state
funds are we are we
Clawing money back from from
other agencies or what you know
what are we doing here.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa they are a date that
amount Representative the
hundred and sixteen point six
million representative monies
that specific state agencies
have that they respect have
requested funding from for
example.
The habitat Management fund the
fire protection fund the
educational retirement fund
public school capital outlay
fund those sorts of funds Madam
speaker and gentleman from Santa
that must be rigidly thank you
and and I remember when we as
part of this process about eight
years ago.
there was actually a little bit
of conflict between executive in
these different agencies about
how much they're taking and what
they were taking what they're
taking for this really committee
misty how can answer.
What kind of work went into
negotiating with all these
agencies that run these funds
are are they where are they
supportive or they reluctantly
supportive I mean how does this
process work when we take money.
Madam speaker General gentleman
from Santa my understanding
based on my consultation with my
expert is that each agency.
Maybe over specific request and
that the state LFC staff
verified they had sufficient
funding and each spectacular
Fund and and and and and then
come you know complied or or
with the requests madam speaker
John.
Related thank you for that
answer and I'm sorry to hear
that that means that these
agencies were involved in this
process they're not just being
blind sided that we're taking
money from you know some fire
protection fund in demand to
somewhere else that they're part
of this process that and may
have actually requested this
sister Julie that makes me feel
better when I see they were
taking a hundred sixteen million
dollars from other state funds
and and doing something else
with them.
Twenty one other big item of
this bill speaker gentle lady
that I think is a wise move but
I just want to briefly talk
about it.
I talked about this pie.
Of where is this bonding goes in
the biggest part of that pie I
think it's fifty five percent
goes to capital outlay for
public schools public school
capital outlay
must be regionally how much this
year is going into that fund.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa we do not understand your
question so if you could clarify
administrative relief the gentle
lady certainly so for example we
know that seventy six point
three million is going to the
water trust fund that ten
percent of that goes to the
state engineer we know that
certain point one is going to
tribal answer even one when is
gonna colonus how much is going
to public school capital outlay.
Madam speaker if you give us a
moment.
Madam speaker German two hundred
and forty three point two
million.
Yeah so masterfully thank you
for that and that's a
substantial amount right I'm
using about all the schools
across the state K. through
twelve it doesn't matter whether
at there's.
Twelve forty three million going
into that fund to help those
schools.
We've been doing this for many
many years.
Since the the city of lawsuit
and our schools are getting
better.
And
we can tell from the good work
of the public school capital
outlay.
Committee your.
Sorry I generate their special
name is
I bring this up because there's
something interesting is
happening this year that hasn't
happened another years.
And I think it's a good idea
but.
This is different this is why
I'm bringing to the attention of
body.
this year one of those other
state funds that makes up that a
hundred sixteen million you're
talking about just a moment ago.
Is actually.
The public school capital outlay
dollars going somewhere else
could you talk about that and
why we're doing that.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think you're referring to the
following paragraph in the FIR
the bill authorizes seventy five
million transfer from balances
of the P. S. C. O. F. to the
public school facilities
authority.
Madam speaker German that
answers your question
demonstrators really that's
that's exactly right so this is
a list for the first time in the
ten years I've been here.
We have a really good balance in
the public school capital outlay
fund I think it's almost four
hundred million balance right
now it is projected in the next
couple years to get close to a
hundred million.
And so what we're doing here is
we're transferring seventy five
million dollars of that balance.
From the capital outlay fund
into this maintenance fund so we
can use these dollars to help
with maintenance of all these
wonderful buildings that we've
just built.
that's bigger gentle lady did I
characterize that correctly.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa Santa yes you did.
Mansard originally from Los
Alamos thank you and I think
that's a great idea because when
again when we get accused of
having you know a billion a
billion and a half dollars just
sitting out there you know not
not being used
That's not just our capital
outlay that's all the capital
outlay so a big portion of that
I mean obviously right here four
hundred million of that is the
public school capital outlay
than any other balances for the
water trust board and balances
for tribal in colonias and then
we had ours.
you can see how it is to a very
large amount but Mr usually.
Were not the sole cause of this
actually the biggest balance is
the public school capital outlay
and so I think this is why is
that especially now that we're
looking at a much better
position the state as an to move
that money to maintenance so
that we don't have issues
balances especially so I just
wanna commend you on that I
think that's a great a great
move my.
I just wanted my last question
Madam gentility and I'm not sure
you or your external this
answer.
But I've talked a lot about the
severance tax permanent fund.
The the challenging position
it's in.
And how there are often times
with are no inflows to renewal
this year what's a projected in
flow to the severance tax
permanent fund will be.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Santa our expert doesn't have
that information whether at the
moment.
Yeah that's a good idea and I
understand
I think you might even have to
actually issue the bonds before
you find out what the and
balances the transfers and so
might be close to the June or
July when we actually know for
sure what that number is.
The Mr gently I sure hope that
it is a.
A good healthy infusion
Senator really every year we
take out I think it's four point
six percent of that fund which
is hundreds of millions of
dollars into our general fund
which is wonderful as a stable
source of revenue
and I just really.
I have high regard for the
legislature in the past that
have the discipline not to spend
every cent that they received
but to put it away some real
money away in a in a down Fund
so that we can reap the
benefits.
Comments here generated you
looks like you have something
there.
Madam speaker gentleman's
We found a document that
indicates the severance tax
permanent fund transfer balances
are seven hundred and sixty six
point six million in FY twenty
two hundred and eighteen point
nine million in FY twenty three
those are nice to transfer of
yes these are monies that are
being transferred into the
severance tax permanent fund.
So Mister gentle lady from Los
Alamos thank you that's great to
hear they're actually making
transfers
That's better than zero but I
think I heard seventy six
million this year and.
Our goal is that seven hundred
million all Matt madam madam
speaker gentleman's the number
here is seven hundred and sixty
six point six million so Mr
really I sure hope that that is
correct because of the wonderful
because every year like I said
we're moving I think three
hundred four hundred million
dollars from this fund.
And reporting little Pengelly
injections in and that's just
not sustainable so if if that's
correct I'm really pleased to
hear that Mr gently and I'm just
gonna finish by saying that
between this fund and the land
grant permanent fund.
Receive
roughly a billion dollars a year
in just it's almost free right
we just receive it and it's
super study.
And insurgent leader for years
ago when we had the oil and gas
crisis we actually crossed a
milestone for for the very first
time in the state we received
more to have more revenue into
our general fund from these
funds to meet deferred taxes of
the oil and gas industry.
I'm in.
Also I don't know why they
didn't give way more press and
public circumstance but you just
think about that how incredible
that is that decades ago people
sitting in our chairs and you
know let's not spend every
single dollar.
It's printed down the funds that
later.
people can benefit from this
stable revenue stream thank you
fast forward to today and it's
actually a time generating more
money.
In the oil and gas tax industry
is our state of sister Julie we
just really need to hi I hope
those those years there's in
high regard we are so blessed
because of of what they did.
I encourage everybody to be
careful not to kill this goose
that lays golden eggs
it's really possible to you know
does by a thousand cuts is is a
real thing this really thank you
so much for bringing this bill
forward for the great work
you've done helping us
understand how broad and how
important is bill is and again
thank you all the staff I really
appreciate the time
gentlelady and madam speaker.
Thank you gentlemen gentle lady
from Bernalillo Santa Santa Fe
County Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos Rio
Arriba Sandoval.
Santa Fe.
Yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Sierra.
No resignation Bernalillo Santa
Santa Fe for now okay great.
Thank you madam speaker and.
gentle lady is so I have a
question to the government the
governor proposed a fifteen
million dollar bond initiative
for conservation is that in this
somewhere I did see that.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
is not included in this package
of materials.
Thank you thank oxygen.
Madam speaker and gentle lady is
Act I just heard there was five
million dollars in there for
conservation is that correct.
Madam speaker.
Gentle lady.
The fifty million dollars that
you're referring to was a
proposal on by the executive to
include fifty nine million
dollars in the DO bond package
which is a different
bill and and that did not occur
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
women concerns as well the
governor then if that fifty
million of on initiative for
conservation is in here is she
going to sign off on this.
Madam speaker phone generate I
think we're talking about two
separate things.
The fifty million dollars that
there was discussion of at
certain points in time between
the executive and legislative
branches have been proposed for
the G. O. bond package that's
the package of
bonds that are put on the ballot
and are typically relating to
libraries and schools and so on
that that was not appropriated
that was not.
Enacted and we actually pass
that bill out of committee
already Madam speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady things that I is there
money in this to purchase New
Mexico private ranch land by
state agencies in this speaker
and the lady.
Madam speaker to.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
understand that there is five
million dollars appropriated
from I the big game and hands.
Enhancement account is that
right if.
But we do not know what
properties involved.
Okay so me make sure I
understand the Kirk I'm very
hard of hearing to madam speaker
and gentle lady so there's five
million dollars that is included
in there to buy private ranch
land is that correct where I and
I don't even probably don't but
do you know where it's at in
this bill by any chance.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
told that it's at the end of the
bill under other state funds.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady this so I I know
that there is there's fifteen
million dollars in here for the
building that executive building
that's going to be building and
it looks like there's a match
funds of seventy million for
eighty five million dollars do
you know anything about this
building one is being built and
who's going to be using it I
know it's somewhere close to
where we're at but you know what
that building is for generating
then.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
building is an executive office
building that will house other
elected officials other
department staff it's intended
to move
staff and and and
managers who are in leased
facilities into a state phone
facility
thank you and sticker in New
Delhi that's what it was when
you move the my care closer with
the mask I could hear you at the
end so it was okay can you hold
on one second.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady that was all the
questions that I had on this
thank you.
Thank you the gentle lady from
patrons Senator in seconds
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady yield please.
Madam speaker gentle lady I will
yield to the lady from Catherine
thank you madam speaker thank
you kind lady one thing that
wasn't mentioned in the seventy
five million from the public
school capital outlay fund is
that a distribution provided to
a school district pursuant to
the appropriation maybe in this
section is not subject to any
local match or offset otherwise
required pursuant to the public
school capital outlay act so
before all of our schools panic
madam chair Madam speaker and
gentle lady I just wanted to
make sure that our schools knew
that
because a you know for come
Quemado New Mexico for instance
has a ninety four percent match
and so I don't want anyone to
panic and the appreciate.
Of.
Director David Abbey and Linda
key hole for
Getting all that in there so
appreciate it thank you madam
speaker that's all.
Seeing of for the debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker.
I move that.
Senate finance committees of the
two.
Excuse me for Senate bill.
Two twelve.
With an emergency clause do now
pass we are on final passage of
Senate finance committee sub
for.
Senate Bill two one two with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Is.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative Blue Cross.
Yes Representative will go both
yes Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Is.
Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis yes
Representative Lewis votes yes
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews yes
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
votes yes Representative Andrea
Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero both yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Trujillo.
For the affirmative and zero in
the negative.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
one two with an emergency clause
has duly passed the house.
Gentlelady don't sit down and
are you ready for the next item.
Thank you madam speaker will you
get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
one three with an emergency
clause has been taken.
For placing that on final
passage and has been taken that
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill two thirteen
authorizes a hundred and forty
seven capital projects
authorized in previous years re
authorizes a hundred and forty
seven capital projects authorize
in previous years from various
funds re authorizations of
capital outlay projects range
from changing the administering
agency for the original purpose
of the project extending the
reversion date or expanding the
purpose of the original project
the bill has an emergency
clause.
The re authorization of funds
contained in this bill does not
require new capacity and are
working our nonrecurring
expenses to the general fund
severance tax bond fund or other
state funds any unexpended
balances remaining at the end of
the fiscal year as designated in
the bill shall revert to the
originating Fund source three
months after the reversion date.
With that madam speaker I stand
for questions thank you gentle
lady there is debate the
gentleman from curry county
Representative Crowder thank you
madam speaker legislative Los
Alamos please you.
Madam speaker gentleman from
curry county I yield thank you
gentle lady I want to go back to
the I page document on three
pieces of paper I I think I know
what this is.
But I want to be I want to have
some confirmation I guess and
under the dollar amounts on this
capital outlay projects chart by
county it's all zeros and under
the fund.
It's all R. A. T..
But I would just what are these
projects for the dollar amounts
all zero can you help me
understand what this documents
purposes.
What madam speaker gentleman's
you want to know what the
purpose of this this document
is.
Yes Madam speaker gentle lady.
Okay not the zeros you dispute
want madam speaker just to
clarify John you want to know
what the purpose of the document
is.
Yes what what is this trying to
communicate to us Madam speaker
and gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman it's
providing us with a list of the
projects that are be being off
re authorized but we I am told
that the creator of the document
does not have access to the
balances that's lifeless that
amount is zero.
Madam speaker gentle lady I I'm
encouraged by your comment I I
was concerned that it might be
that the R. E. T. stood for
these projects are retired or
they were zeroed out but I
understand that that is not
accurate these projects are re
authorized by the in addition to
the sheet that we have with all
the explanations for.
Are they are those projects on
the small sheet contained within
the written language.
Madam speaker gentleman from
curry the sixteen page document
which I think you're referring
to.
Yes generally revise greater
explanation to the document that
is five pages that you were
previously for referring to
Madam speaker and gentleman okay
so madam speaker gentle lady
these are the same one of I'm
just list the project the other
one is the explanation of of the
projects so that I can see
expert shaking her head yes so
I'm comforted by that I was
concerned that the zero meant
that someone had remove those
projects off the roll and and
the they were no longer
considered so very encouraged by
your answers gentle lady Madam
speaker thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does the
generally the chair of the best
committee in the house you'll.
Madam speaker of gentleman from
Santa Fe thank you for the
compliment and yes I yield.
Thank you Mr jelly I can see
that because I want to chair
that committee to miss more
generally cut another
transportation of the zeros on
the should be that way this
legislation does not appropriate
extra dollars to these projects.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
correct and I believe I
mentioned that in my opening
remarks Mr really thank you for
that and I was looking for as
well as others to I thought oh
no they're retiring these
projects and during about but
what's really going on is that
are you to stand for re
authorization and the zero
stands for we're not adding more
money to these projects Madam
speaker gentleman from Santa
that's correct thank you Mr
usually perhaps just a friendly
suggestion that we change that
abbreviation to maybe like R. EA
instead of R. eighty.
Madam speaker gentleman
Fairpointe.
Thank you Mr jelly okay I will I
wanted to share a little bit of
information to the body here
because I think this is really
important I talked about this in
the committee today.
Hello I happen to be in the
Senate finance committee when
they were discussing this this
bill and there were several no
votes and there are several
comments regarding.
Our our big balances right this
one twenty billion dollar
balance I mentioned earlier and
how we as a legislature of
dropped the ball and we're tired
of these big balances and
forward we're not gonna do a
reauthorization bill next year.
Thanks for joining Committee
share your thoughts uh.
On that task.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa I think that criticism is
overblown
there are a lot of reasons why
there may be balances available
for capital outlay projects.
It could be that well especially
now madam speaker gentleman with
the COVID crisis it's been very
hard for for some many projects
to get off the ground in a
timely fashion.
there may be a need for some
redesign so that could slow the
project down I mean there are a
number of reasons and I think we
some of us over criticize
ourselves for the balances that
are
available in through these
projects madam speaker
gentleman's Management
originally from Los Alamos I
completely agree with you.
I think there are some items in
this reauthorization bill that
probably should be in here I
think we heard and.
Committees that there are some
items in here that are meeting
from two thousand fourteen or
two thousand fifteen.
And residentially I think you
and I can both agree that's too
long.
That
those dollars should have been
sent somewhere else and not just
being you know wings that in for
eight years but Mr generally
there's a lot of other things in
this legislation that completely
fall outside of that and to
characterize this whole bill is
those kinds of items I think is
incorrect and
Mr generally owners mention a
few that are inherent are money
as bigger gentle lady at the
very top of the sheet you'll see
for the Santa con construction
reauthorization.
Senator Senator Khan is a huge
important project in my district
and the entire west of
Albuquerque it is a loop road
that will eventually connect I.
forty all the way to five fifty
and if you compare this role to
someone roads and other places
like Arizona is a huge a boon
for economic development on that
side of the river and you know
an opportunity to remove
pressure on our bridges and
those kinds of things.
Institutionally I've been
working on this project for ten
years and was the central
delegation and help from some
other members.
What about twenty two million
dollars into this project which
is a big deal right.
And and that's of sexually what
we need to start to finish the
right of way acquisitions.
Instructional.
Speaker gentle lady it takes
time to go through this right of
way acquisition purchases.
And and so we have here a
handful that were started you
know for four five six years ago
but we're right in the process
of actually completing these
right of way acquisitions and
probably take another year
because there's rural locations
and we all know when there's a
relocation I take some real
time.
Generally.
I think right of ways purchases
is something that we should
expect to see on this list
and and why would not we
authorize that that doesn't make
sense to say we're not gonna
have this bill next year.
For that reason alone another
item of mine
I actually.
Total pages on here so it's a
it's notes on page one I think
we last year we had about
I think was a hundred fifty
thousand dollars that are Santa
Rio Rancho delegation got
together to help this amazing
nonprofit groups such as
robotics
for kids all across and within
the schools in the two summer
classes for folks in the tribes
in the problems they actually go
out there and it's that's
amazing group.
And we had asked Roger public
schools to the fiscal agent.
And we thought they said yes but
it was a misunderstanding and as
we are generating so
you know trying to keep a
relationship mines with the
school district and and this
group we have to find another
fiscal agent and so this is not
a project this was last year.
Mr gentle lady and we will
provide three fiscal years they
were very accommodating and
welcoming we selected one and
we've changed that the fiscal
agent in this legislation so
Mister generally that's another
reason why I think this
legislation should happen every
year.
Mr generators.
maybe one other example I would
share.
and then of course any other
comments you'd like to add on
early on my early in my time
here as a legislator
there was a lady in my district
she has a severely handicapped
daughter and she came to us and
said you know once she graduates
from high school there's no
options for us to what can we do
and she wanted she has this
nonprofit organization butterfly
and I sent actually are part of
of still for her butterfly
concept and all that ambition
wonderfully wonderful
organization insurance service
facility were.
Adults are creating child could
go and have a rich and
experiences.
And and her husband's a
contractor has essentially gonna
donate most labor budgeted
construction materials and so I
got together with several of the
legislature's pushes idea and we
called up a little more than two
hundred thousand dollars for
this building.
This is really that was before I
learned.
How challenging it is to get a
fiscal agent especially for
nonprofit and to get like
Santa Fe County or the service
the reaction to agree to just
actually lease a building that
they would own to this group Mr
gently it was sad but in the end
it just didn't work.
And so madam speaker and gentle
lady a couple years later we use
the re authorization bill.
To take that money and put it
towards a different project
because it just wasn't gonna
work.
Senator I'm sure there projects
in this list essentially I was
in that same vein where it was
best intentions are great
project but it just didn't work
out and so we don't want to
coming off of those monies go
stagnant the revert to the
service that's kind of fun
that's great.
But.
Would like to perhaps use those
dollars for another project in
district.
Institutional and those are
those are three reasons why sink
this bill should happen every
year messenger we do have any
other thoughts I had to make
this one sided conversation.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa Fe I agree with everything
you say I have nothing to add.
Senator and and secretary
gentlelady.
And I'll just conclude by saying
I really appreciate again
Michelle and left the
Legislative Council Service I'm
I think all the members this
year got a document that showed
what projects of there's need to
be re authorized.
I think that's the first time
I've seen that since I've been
here what I usually do when this
bill comes up I remind the body
to please every year before the
session call and ask for your
list so you know what needs to
be reauthorized by and so
grateful that to show the cap
wildly office staff did that for
us so that we could be aware.
And Mr generally I this is the
this was the project is a little
bit bigger than usual but I
think I can I agree with you
that is because of COVID the law
is projects were not able to
start right away so Mister Lee I
just want to thank you for that
and I hope the body now
understands that although my son
my great rhetoric to see what I
can do this anymore because it's
we've got one point five billion
dollar balance that's really
short sighted and that's there
are several other purposes for
this legislation and I hope that
we
continue the practices we've had
to have a yearly re
authorization bill thank you
madam speaker thank you very
much gentle lady thank you.
Thank you gentlemen gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert thank you
madam speaker will the gentle
lady from Los Alamos County you.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln counties thank you madam
speaker and the gentle lady I
just like to point out
particularly to the the new
members of the body we get these
re authorization schedules each
and every year and.
I would encourage all the
members of this house to look at
those and maybe remind some of
those entities that they have a
certain time period to start.
Moving these projects forward
because I think you'll find in
some cases that they drag their
feet and sometimes they forget
about on and then they come up
and and ask for re authorization
when they haven't done anything
for three years and so you know
it's I feel it's part of our
responsibility to shepherd these
things and to remind those
institutions that have received
the benefit of these dollars to
try to put those dollars to work
because after all that's the
only way that our citizens get
the benefit of those capital
outlay dollars of just a
reminder to the members of the
body Madam speaker gentle lady
if you have any comments
regarding that
Feel free to to speak up but
that was my only of.
Thought on this matter madam
speaker gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln counties I agree and
madam speaker and gentleman I do
something similar I request
report are we receive it and I
look at it and if I see some
things that are dumped out on me
I called the officials involved
in encouraging them or get an
explanation as to what's
happening madam speaker John.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
Thank you for the debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker I now
move that Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill to thirteen with an
emergency clause do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill two
one three with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
Those about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Bogo.
Yes Representative been gobbled
yes Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Cook yes
Representative provides yes
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative and they both
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews yes.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative Andrea
Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Rubio.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Representative Andrea Romero is
yes.
I'm sorry this is Representative
Rubio votes yes Representative
Rubio votes yes is that
Representative Andrea Romero.
Yes it is Representative Andrea
Romero votes yes.
Going once.
What.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty five in the affirmative
and zero in the negative Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill two one three with
an emergency clause has duly
passed the house.
Unanimous consent to have house
memorial sixty one removed from
the speakers table and made the
next order of business.
Thank you madam speaker very
good introduction of
legislation.
No objections so ordered.
To read.
House memorial sixty introduced
Representative Fajardo Baca
Townsend Rod Montoya and lord a
memorial honoring Representative
Alonzo bond they're not of and
recognizing his outstanding
service to New Mexico House
memorial sixty and use for
Representative Fajardo Baca
Townsend.
Rod Montoya and lord.
You.
The having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the speakers table.
House memorial sixty one
introduced by Representative
Gail Armstrong for heart of lane
Sweetser and Terrazas Mario
honoring representative Rebecca
Dow and her and recognizing her
outstanding service to New
Mexico Asmara sixty one entities
by Representative Gail Armstrong
for heart of lane Sweetser and
todos us.
House memorial.
Sixty one have you ever having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
is ordered not printed.
And placed on the speakers
table.
Sixty two introduced
Representative Ortez by a ghost
Johnson Thompson and Gail
Armstrong memorial honoring
Representative ready but at us
and recognizing her outstanding
service in New Mexico House
memorial sixty two introduced by
representatives or cascade goes
Johnson Thompson and Gail
Armstrong.
House memorial sixty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana.
Thank you madam speaker we gonna
third reading.
Seeing no objection is so
ordered.
Unanimous consent to move house
memorial sixty one removed from
the speakers table and made the
next order of business seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady.
Are you ready for that.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker you
already got me to that point so
I will X. can you read the
memorial.
to read.
House memorial sixty one
introduced Representative Gail
Armstrong Fajardo lane Sweetser
and todos OS memorial honoring
representative Rebecca Dow and
recognizing her outstanding
service to New Mexico whereas
Representative Rebecca Dow
Republican is a strong voice
representing her constituents
and district thirty eight
covering grant held up Hidalgo
and Sierra counties and whereas
Representative Dow a resident of
truth or consequences is in her
third term of office and was
first elected in twenty
seventeen.
And we're as Representative Dow
currently serves as a member of
the house commerce and economic
development committee and the
house Education Committee and
whereas our back it down
Representative Dow also serves
as a member of the New Mexico
Legislative Council and as an
advisor and as a knee on
numerous interim committees.
And whereas Representative Dow
currently holds leadership holds
a leadership position of women's
caucus secretary and was the
house Republican caucus chair
from twenty twenty to twenty
twenty two and the women's
caucus treasurer from twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty one
and whereas the welfare of
children and education have
always been at the forefront of
Representative Dow is advocacy
and whereas Representative Dow
was the policy chair of the New
Mexico child care and education
association the founder of the
boys and girls club of Sierra
County and the founding chair of
Sierra County juvenile justice
Advisory Council and served on
governor Susanna Martinez is
business friendly task force and
the children youth and families
and health and Human Services
transition teams.
As well as on the early learning
Advisory Council and whereas for
Representative Dow received the
two thousand eight governor's
award for outstanding New Mexico
woman.
The leadership award from the
national child care association
the pioneers in New Mexico
prekindergarten awards and then
Rio Grande award for excellence
in use services from the
community foundation of Southern
New Mexico and whereas
Representative Dow received an
associate's degree in early
childhood education from total
Tulsa community college and a
bachelor of arts degree in
business management from oral
Roberts university and we're as
Representative Dow is a former
early child care.
Professional and lifelong
advocate for early childhood
programs and child care services
and whereas in her legislative
positions Representative Dow
addresses the state's high
unemployment rate low education
ranking and chronic child
welfare issues and for as
Representative Dow support
spaceport America located in
Sierra County and strengthening
border enforcement policies and
whereas Representative Dow is
seeking the Republican
nomination for governor in
twenty twenty two.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico the
recognition be extended to
representative Rebecca Dow for
her service and leadership to
New Mexico and be it further
resolved that a copy this
memorial be transmitted to
representative Rebecca Dow.
There is debate on the memorial
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martinez thank
you madam speaker with the
gentle lady from all those
counties please yield.
Yes I yield thank you madam
speaker and gentle lady I rise
in support of this memorial.
our our colleague the gym
lady from Sierra and all those
counties has been a steadfast
champion hotel will being in
this legislature.
and even though the two of us
have often times clashed on the
approach on the policy.
Sometimes a long war most of the
time along partisan lines.
Speaker and gentle lady I think
that one thing that has
connected us the last several
years we've served together has
been that vision The New Mexico
can in fact be a much better
place to be for for young
children particularly children
most in need.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
Representative Dow would someone
who have hello I have enjoyed
working with very much over the
last few years in fact we have a
bill together that I think my
pass the legislature and and go
up to the governor for for
signature
And it has been one of the more
because honors as a member of
this of this chamber being able
to debate to argue.
To a green.
Sometimes disagree on the policy
approaches to what the needs of
New Mexico and New Mexicans are.
I know Madam speaker your lady
that Representative Dow is on to
definitely bigger better things
maybe or or or or little pond
here is a little too small and
so she's making a jump as we all
know into into a statewide
campaign and madam speaker and
gentle lady I I wish
Representative out only the very
best not only that and everybody
in any future endeavor the on
that thank you madam speaker
thank you ladies thank you for
subscribing a champion for
children being a champion for
rural New Mexico and you'll
always have a friend in the
thank you.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baca.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady please you.
Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen thank you
madam speaker.
You know I I never said this you
guys I'm so honored to be among
you guys to be here you know for
myself that really wasn't the
size and be here to about four
days before the session started
so I'm honored to be here at the
mall you guys the leaders I've
seen you know it's kind like a
like a little kid to get to see
the big the big leagues get to
see some people that you hear
about some of the leaders of the
state of New Mexico one of the
leaders at the I also got to
hear about was Rebecca Dow.
So tonight that I actually was
named a nominated.
And was selected by the policy
county commission as I was
Senator missing something the
position my phone is which is
blowing up on my side and I'm
cycle my gosh it is with the
line up.
The names there was Rebecca Dow
is like I got it like a little
kid like I showed my wife just
like my god Rebekah bill has
just called and congratulated me
I was like I was so honored so.
well to do that by the
outpouring of support.
And so it was when I when I
first got here to the capital
and again I I will say this I
did try to leave the people's
like without going to quit
because like I did I tried to
but I come from a way out of
here right if the committee loss
but one of the first appointment
was actually Rebecca Dow admit
her.
Person.
And what I I but I just noticed
right away about her because her
passion was our drive.
Those are in the oven for being
here.
You know the championed from you
know New Mexico.
Got to go out of their way to
taking and holding and explain
things to me.
You know is considering from a
fire hose.
This can be overwhelming she
goes in a minute mission started
to talk to me about all these
kinds of things that she started
to say.
What I want to get involved in
to try to very early on and
encouraging me to try to help me
with legislation to help to get
myself out here.
And I just want to say just how
humble and held on improvements
I am to actually have had that
opportunity even though you'll
see many times during the
session perfect we'll come over
notion kind of nail down my
table major financial tell me
should be saying we're doing
ourselves going on here.
The same with this is about
these are these are the types of
things are doing and that's only
just a mark of a good leader
that's a mark of a good person.
So someone who's basically.
Taking an interest.
Making a personal investment.
This to me as a young provided.
I think that speaks volumes of
their character and I I need to
get a sense of that you know I
want from her I still think
she's rockstar does think she's
fabulous but now most very
honored to call my friend.
And the fact that you know I
know that.
You know the short time that
we've had together it's been so
Inspiring it's been so very
helpful.
And so I want to thank you.
Senate bill Polian done I want
to thank you for the support
they have shown me a church's
time together and again just
like I said before I wish you
all the best thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant
and Sierra Representative todos
OS.
Thank you madam speaker with the
generally please yield.
I yield to the kind gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker.
So I share an office with the
record now.
You can hear in the chamber
imagine being in the office
see see her night when we're
doing when we're doing zooms at
the same time
it's a little out and and I
usually have to vacate also
usual save someone as soon.
Analysts say okay Rebecca but we
know what we get along super
good she's been wonderful with
me she's been a good leader
she has been inspiring to me
she's really really taken me
under just like Brian said on
Representative Baca said wind
solar city she even though I
know everybody see.
Try to introduce me to people
already knew.
Indian on and and make your way
through town she's very well
loved and in those counties
issue serves
she is she's a wonderful
wonderful person she's a proud
grandmother I think I'm going to
go see her so happy and I think
she just when it comes to
children her heart is whole
hearted soul heartedly there for
them.
And she's I very hard for for
life.
And
tries to be you know a big voice
for us there and in southwestern
Mexico so
I'm taking over now that they've
re district us madam speaker
I'll be you know taking over her
side of the of Grant County and
it'll be a lot of work but
because she's just done so much
in Grant County
that I know that I'll be having
to fill some big shoes.
I also just want to thank her
for just I mean just being a
good kind friend and and I was
teasing her about the the that
we always tease about being
office mates.
because we're just too loud
people in that room.
But
you know she's she's always to
the only person that I know of
except for a hi doctor that I
had that can type and talk at
the same time and listen to
somebody else so with that I'm
gonna miss you I am going to
miss you you've been a wonderful
friend and I am going to miss
you bill could be also in the on
your next venture.
That's all thank you.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Sapporo county
yield.
I feel and gentleman thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady.
You know I got to thinking today
about our class.
And you you do have a special
bond as everybody knows with the
people that they came into this
body.
With and.
About twenty percent of our
class after this session will no
longer be with our class they
will have moved on.
And the that in and of itself is
is kind of surprising because
our class.
It's only been here for three
terms.
I think that's a testament to to
really help difficult the work
is in and the commitment that we
all may to serve the people that
we
serve and the people that
elected us but I can tell you
madam speaker that.
From day one.
Meeting Rebecca.
It energizes everyone around her
there is so much energy that it
is contagious and the C. put
that into the Azam and zeal and
that true commitment.
Not only to constituents that
brought her up here.
It was infectious and and
because the rest of us.
To do from day one in this body
to to be excited to be here
and to do the very best job that
we can to serve the people that
have elected us and put us in
the seats.
And so for that Rebecca.
I'm very honored to have served
with you I'm very honored to
have been in your class and.
Frankly this place won't be the
same without the energy that you
bring to to this body.
And the passion with which to
speak and I will never forget.
What I consider to be copper
night.
That I don't know how this young
lady walked in here with about
sixty pounds of copper wrapped
around her neck but she pulled
it off and you know she was
representing not only her
district.
She was representing the those
people work very hard to extract
that mineral from the earth.
And to provide those jobs that
are represented in the beautiful
jewelry that she had on and so
the point was made literally as
well as figuratively how well
she supported.
Our constituents how well she
supported her district and
frankly how well she supported
the entire state of New Mexico
and so has she moves on to a new
chapter in her life.
I certainly wish for the best.
Extend the best to our and the.
I hope that our paths continue
to cross so with that madam
speaker and gentle lady and most
of all.
Miss Rebecca Dow thank you very
much.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from granted all the
and although no Representative
Sweetser thank you madam speaker
will the gentle lady from
captions a coral and the Lynsey
appli shield.
All the old from my friend.
Thank you I am I rise to support
your memorial and gentle lady
because of course of Rebecca Dow
is my neighbor and we share to
counties and unfortunately
representative Nibert still my
copper night of illustration
because that was such an
incredible night here on the
house floor.
Not long after that I was
shopping downtown and I went in
the store that had some copper
jewelry and they said.
No Rebecca Dow.
And I said I do actually that we
loaned her so much stuff and
then all of her friends came in
and bought stuff for her.
She has a lot of friends it was
an impressive night and
certainly one to remember but as
I was sitting here thinking
about you gentle lady I was
thinking about when I first met
you so like Representative
Nibert and Representative
Armstrong we came in together
and after we were elected the
beginning of November we both
went to the farm and livestock
bureau convention in Albuquerque
later that month and people said
if you met them the new
Representative from tier C. no
okay so I'm gonna do with my
husband then you were just so
energetic and so confident and
so sure of yourself when you run
what are your issues what are
you going to do both of of of
you know what what is your
passion and I'm all.
I thought oh my gosh I do my
husband I am out of my league
because you came up here with
such passion and such advocacy
for the area that you knew so
well and and you know I'm small
business on agriculture but
nothing compared to the passion
and the advocacy that you
brought and when I talk about
you to my friends I always say
no one works harder than
Representative Dow I've just
never seen that kind of passion
and
and just absolutely absolute
unbridled love for the things
that you care about so I am
going to miss you terribly I
always say you have part of my
district because you have to
drive through Deming when you're
going let's go to the mountain
you know when you're going from
tier C. to to Silver City so you
always kind of click my district
and with and I welcome you any
time and I'm so proud and happy
to have served with you and I
wish you nothing but the best so
thank you gentle lady thank you
madam speaker there is further
debate the gentle lady from the
neon Representative Davis.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentle lady please yield I yield
to my friend.
and I appreciate that I I just
wanted to stand is a few words
to my friend Rebecca Dow I
appreciate your heart in your
passion especially when it comes
to children's issues you and I
have always gotten along when it
comes to those issues and we've
had many conversations we've
also been able to join forces
when it comes to those issues in
my I appreciate the work that
we've been able to do together
on behalf of children so for
that I will always thank you for
that and have a very special
place for you in my heart for
that because of it takes a
special person to to keep
driving those issues I think
you're articulate and smart and
I I look to you for for guidance
to continue that work and so I
wish you the very best of luck
and I I wish you a bright future
so thank you for what the gift
that you've given us here thank
you madam speaker.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker.
The gentle lady please yield.
I yield to my friend.
It's harder than I thought.
So.
One of the things that has been
the most excited about use your
incredible energy I mean I don't
know how you do it.
It is always energetic positive
and we've spoken so many times
on the phone as you're going
through this different series in
your life and do and I've spoken
and I've learned so much just
from listening to you even
before you start on this
different path.
Because you showed me.
The good the bad and the ugly of
everything that happens which
gives me a ring around the
picture of what happens appear
the roundhouse never appreciated
that very very much.
And I've spoken to you while
you're doing these different
adventures and it's just amazing
how you literally I've never
seen anybody with as much energy
as you you could just be here
and there I'm here I can't even
keep track of you of where you
are you to seven credible
Energy.
Passion you have an incredible
passion for what you're.
What's in your heart and it
shows.
I think one of things appreciate
use you've never been thank a
phony about who you are what you
see is what you get and I really
love that and people especially
politicians.
Because unfortunately we don't
always get that you don't have a
hidden agenda you just very
straightforward about what is
where you're going and sometimes
it's fun like some sort of had a
conversation with you if you
just take off the look where she
going now I don't know if we're
just talking about something
important she's gone.
But it's going to be weird.
Without having you here because
it's like we've all kind of
become one big dysfunctional
family and it works.
It's true it works and everybody
is I look at all of us like
we're this we'll in their spokes
and everybody brings something
different to the table and I
appreciate that that we have the
liberties of bringing different
things to the table.
And being able to voice opinions
for really and.
I appreciate everything you've
done of yours then we feel very
welcome here so I appreciate
that and it's going to be
interesting some so would be
talking to is you go in your
adventures at pastor my
community so I do I wish you the
best of luck and where you're
going and and thank you for your
service.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you madam speaker then
figure the gentle lady from get
thrown the current balance of
yield yes I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentle lady.
The first elected official madam
speaker when I was elected.
The called me to congratulate me
or push me condolences maybe is
more proper was Representative
Rebecca Dow and we had a
connection from the beginning
Senator connection that's
remains strong to this day.
And the.
She's been one of my biggest
Champions one of the biggest
allies.
And the.
I always appreciate her hard for
New Mexico.
There's politicians to get into
this rat race their own name.
For their own benefit.
Those people exist of course
but.
That person's never been Rebecca
Dow.
One of the things that are more
about her is she will charge
full steam ahead.
Regardless of the personal
consequences if she knows it's
the right thing for New Mexico.
My predecessor industry three.
Representative Paul bandy is
served district three for
fourteen years.
And he said I believe or
Representative Matthews status
if not their real close.
And I can remember coming in
Twenty nineteen I believe it was
the the general.
And.
Shadowing Representative bandy
and you know meeting all these
fancy lawmakers and.
And I was taken by the debate
from Representative Dow just her
passion.
the fierceness that she was
approaching the topic the
fearlessness.
And I thought to myself.
If I ever get into this game
that's the kind of debate I want
to be on the house floor.
There are people that become
your quinces and people are
becoming friends and.
Representative Dow certainly
those for me but she's also
become actually of what I would
call sister.
And
To the kind of person that I
know will stay in contact.
Even after she won the fourth
floor and try to darken our
doorstep.
And even after long after that
after but we footnote in history
and.
So I I will my heart breaks
because I know that we're losing
a special soldier.
Not because she's a Republican
budget because of our hard for
New Mexico but I am.
Also encouraged by the fact that
I know that she's not going to.
Go way.
In a good sense whether she wins
loses she's going to keep on
fighting and I I definitely
appreciate that about her I will
say that if you seen the movie
up.
the dog is famous for saying
squirrel and being easily
distracted I'm pretty sure they
modelled that character off
after Representative Dow if you
know her at all.
One of my recommendations to her
would be to hire full time
person who does nothing but take
away your cell phone to keep you
on track.
But you have tremendous ability
tremendous talent.
And but most.
Integrity.
And I love you like my sister.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Valencia
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam speaker with a
kinda.
Lady from Texans coralline CFCs
yield I yield to the gentle lady
from Valencia thank you thank
you madam and thank you Mr madam
speaker
I think I've heard the passion
and energy.
And scroll.
And they all that for Bedford
perfectly.
But I will tell you a story.
So.
This is really busy and people
are going around back and forth
everywhere deals are being maybe
people are tired you get to a
point where you're where you
start getting angry and
frustrated with people and I
remember was one the late nights
and we walked into the lounge
and one of the members have
broadened their to their young
children into the lounge.
And Rebecca gets on the floor
and her skirts and just start
playing with the children.
And I remember coming out of the
restroom and I remember seeing
and everybody center I'm talking
because we're legislators
everything like that and those
affected out on the floor plane.
And I knew at that moment that
when she says that she loves
children and she talks about her
passion.
It's real with Rebecca it's real
with her because she was willing
to stop everything and just take
a few minutes and play with a
bunch of young children on the
floor I've seen it in her she
fights like hell of here and so
we're budget we've we've shared
roar up here for years.
We have the snacks.
Rebecca is the one that started
being go.
We've had a lot of a lot of
great memories and so Rebecca
even spared me over the years
and I just want to thank you so
much and are going to be so
messed thank you.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
I'm Representative Miguel Garcia
are you with us online.
We can go to the next speaker
there's further debate the
representative from Bernalillo
Representative the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Thank you madam speaker will the
generated from captions a
quarter of an NCAA yield I yield
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you madam speaker gentle
lady from cut Jessica Valencia
thank you for bringing this
memorial forward given as a
chance to reminisce
about our dear sister the gentle
lady from granted out of the
Senate which we may see in
January who knows because when
you when you run for higher
office from the house to run
harder you gotta burn the ships
there's no you know you windy
when or or or not so we're just
so brave Prodi gently for
running for taking ideas from
this on a house all the way to
the the statewide stage.
And we wish you the very best
the
Just want to say we're gonna
miss you were gonna miss you and
commerce you know I got was
proud enough to be named the
chair commerce for years back
and kind of reshaping the
culture that committee and you
were just instrumental in that
just diving into the built in
the policy and the regardless of
who's in the room we're going to
try to do everything we could to
to build this economy so I thank
you for your friendship your
wisdom the thank the gentleman
from earlier was mentioning we.
We argued funding for early
childhood Nazim and maybe a kind
of a lazy but when you went up
on the board we knew we had to
know what we're talking about
how should we knew that was
gonna be some questions that we
don't know the answer to so we
just thank you for enhancing
that debate and
Making as better at what we did
so I go on and on the the hours
short but.
Enjoy the next twenty four hours
enjoy the next eight months as a
rap and let me know let me know
thank you for the tour do you
gave a a delegation of years
back into your C. can be a
really good opportunity to learn
about that town the beauty area
and the beautiful the amenities
that can happen along the Rio
Grande this so thank you for
that won't forget it we'll see
you soon we'll see when tier C.
and then and then we'll see also
on the west side thank you
gentle lady
Best wishes generally from
granted out of state.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Free Google the chin lady from
control.
To see you.
Yes I believe I yield to my
friend family.
Can talk faster than I can
listen.
One.
The location we don't from.
We're not misunderstanding.
They were my brain trying to
catch a.
Thanks.
There is nobody is for.
The state.
With the greater passion for the
people of your district.
And the children of New Mexico.
It is my honor to serve with
you.
And I wish you nothing but the
best with your endeavors going
forward.
Good luck.
And god speed.
There is.
I apologize there's further
debate the gentle lady from
petty Representative Brown.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from CVS Katrin
Valencia.
And those the coral please you I
yield to my office mate from
teddy.
The check those counties over a
little tired right now Madam
speaker and gentle lady so I.
I just stand up with actually a
lot of sadness.
To see leading us here in the
house.
you know I.
Work here now for almost twelve
years and I've seen a lot of
people service come and go and
you're really going to be missed
Representative Dow.
I have really marveled at your
a depth of knowledge on not just
issues involving children but
all kinds of issues and so you
are clearly a student and
someone who thinks things
through and yes like the
Representative from Lee
sometimes if you talk too fast
for me as well for it
I always gain something from
listening to you speak.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
Representative
We've heard a lot of common
words used to describe you
tonight clearly passion is one
of them it's just so apparent
that you really care.
And many times you have raised
warning flags about issues here
in New Mexico and
Pointed to the need for
solutions and I I really really
appreciate that we needed we
needed you educating us.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
Representative so I have not
been in the committee with you
that I can recall.
but I certainly.
I work for to hear in the
chamber and
we've been the Bible study
together in prayer times and
things like that and so I know
that you draw your strength from
god.
And there's.
And better than to do that
because it studies you.
And god gives wisdom when we ask
for it and I know that he that's
where you are god is giving you
much wisdom and he will always
guide you so then speaker gentle
lady.
I just want to
Just let you know how much I
value your honesty and your
forthrightness.
I seen diplomacy many times as
well.
And just your energy level just
astounds me so
I hope that you will in the
future but that all to work for
everyone in the state of New
Mexico.
So if I were to Madam speaker
gentle lady and Representative.
As some you up in three words it
would be heart and soul into
mass of the.
Much love.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Chavez
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Katrin
Secor and Lynsey yield.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to my friend.
Speaker members of this body the
first time at the Representative
representative from grant have
dog goes to court of it was like
a steamroller coming in.
Just like Representative Scott
stated I had put my mind in fast
forward gear to be able to
understand what she was
studying.
This girl was passionate about
everything she brought up and
it's should be a lesson to us
that if we believe in some we
should be as passionate as she
is and following through and
making sure that it works.
Madam speaker.
The Energy this girl does
business is overwhelming to me I
mean it is she she rolls with
the punches she said absolutely
fearless sometimes you can be a
little bit intimidating I think
sometimes I think that's the
best way to be whenever you're
female legislator.
Because often times we are all
rolled over by you all hairy
legged boys out there but that's
another story.
I wish you the best of luck I'm
not going to say goodbye I don't
say goodbye to my friends I say
see you later.
There is further debate the
gentleman from curry to Baca
Guadalupe Roosevelt and San
Miguel Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady healed I yield to my
neighbor.
Thank you.
And I rise today to honor
Rebecca Dow.
And to say thank you for being a
friend.
I've seen Rebecca Dow in Clovis
she comes by the house she plays
with my grand kids.
It just fills my heart to see
them.
But she's also that fearless
leader and fighter.
We have high expectations of
you.
We will do everything we can for
you and in your future in your
endeavors and thank you for
heading up the ladder to that
next step and setting those
goals high.
I believe in you you have a
bright future ahead.
Thank you Rebecca Dow.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Colfax want to
Rio Arriba and San Miguel
Representative Montoya.
Madam speaker thank you with the
gentle lady from patron and
balance in support of please
yield I yield to my dear friend.
I rise with would love in my
heart in gratitude for this
Memorial which which honors our
our friend and colleague go to
make a dial for.
Only been in the body here.
But it was remarkable for the
first time I heard you speak I
just like I would and I was like
who is that woman.
You had such conviction.
Intellect and knowledge of the
material.
Whether I'm.
Aligned with the content or not
didn't matter.
I noticed to.
The next thing I want to thank
you for is that you invited me
across this invisible line
between our parties which for me
is troubling.
As a human public service we
have serious issues to conquer
together.
You have exemplified such a
beautiful residents of just
convictions to your work I
learned a great deal.
And I wish you the very best in
the future.
I to don't see this as a good
bye I think we're going to be
lifelong friends.
Your.
Exemplified today jumping into
that bill just like you just.
Managed it so lovingly I thank
you for that.
Madam chair.
Gentle lady thank you I yield
back.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you Representative
Chatfield thank you madam
speaker the gentle lady LA I
yield to my friend.
Madam speaker move most folks
don't know it but Rebecca is
from where I'm from for the
first time I met her I went down
to see my dad.
And I went we went to church and
and he said the that is my
representative and I just
remember how billing kind and
down to earth she was and this
was so very impressed with her
and her family and had leading
no idea that I would ever be
appear serving with our and it
was kind of cool in so when I
came here the thing that I've
noticed about Rebecca's it.
Many folks can look at a bill
the study that bill they learn
it forward and backwards
But it's it's really different
to to debate something that you
know because you do that for a
living.
And that's where your heart is.
And that's where your passion is
I will miss you on the Education
Committee home issue on the
floor.
We support you run for governor.
All the way.
And I will see you on the fourth
floor.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Matthews.
Chair
and the lady from cancer and
sickle and dementia County.
I yield to.
Thank you
Representative down I.
I don't know if you members with
their leading toward math.
Across the aisle I wish we were
debating a bill involving
children who have been sexually
abused and.
As we talked as we.
The bill it became obvious that
we were essentially in
agreement.
And
from that
we have more conversations back
kids and what needed to be
happening for them to save just
to keep them safe and well.
He is a true and passionate
advocate for children as many
others have direct noted.
And I think looking forward that
there's still a lot of work to
do on behalf of our children and
I'm sure that and I.
Sure that one and I have no
doubt that what ever happens
in the future that she will be
out there and she will be
fighting for all of our children
had as she has done in this.
Body and it's been arching over
and I'd like to call her my
friend thank you.
There is for the debate
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
No thank you so much because.
Well the gentle lady
A protection you.
I yield to the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Speaker and leading from Katrin
You know I had the distinct
honor is the most figure.
Of the meeting the.
Representative Dow.
there on her home turf.
And it was quite a quite an
event.
The.
Health and Human Services
interim committee was meeting
their into your seeing.
And
We visited her early childhood
center.
And
I was so taken by the philosophy
of the centers to my speaker and
And and the programming of the
center.
And
And Representative Dow.
Is the new issue that was kind
of a urgent and that.
so the US provided titled and
And so this is pretty important
so we can we can have a
secretaries.
In there that can help resolve
the matter and but if it had
been for the leadership of a.
Of the thirty to have a
development center.
Rebecca Dow.
it we it would come to that and
you know as the last speaker I
was so amazed with the the staff
of that early childhood center.
That represented down used to
run.
I was so impressed with the the
teachers.
The educators of the childhood
center and just the overall
eagerness in Victor of the kids.
You know that was that's what
was in nineteen.
And
and from then on you came to see
the as the must be presented
down as a true champion.
Of early childhood education our
state.
In fact.
I can see her as a meeting.
Champion of running to the town
education in our state.
And that was my first
impression.
And it still is.
In our
And the million about severe us
speaker.
we were running the minimum wage
bill.
Representative Dow raise the
really important issue than it
had to do with pay according.
Regarding state contractors in
regards to minimum wage.
And
I.
Incorporated.
That concept in.
The legislation that Iran from
nineteen forty raise the state
minimum wage from seven fifty to
twelve Bucks.
And and we tried our darnedest
to make that happen but it was a
perseverance and persistence of
Representative Dow to see the
value of that inequity.
And bring it to light and doing
something about it.
And
and ever since then I signed
onto a bill to bring about that
the committee regarding that
issue.
And unfortunately we still have
been able to get it through.
But the that's the Rebecca Dow
that I know.
You know and that's the Rebecca
Dow that'll always be in my
heart and my conscience you know
throughout my life and
And we're going to miss you.
And and I I appreciate you.
And and good luck.
Thank you so much speaker thank
you gently from caption.
Thank you Representative for
your service.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentle lady from scroll Valencia
and captured please yield I
yield to my friend from San Juan
thank you thank you gentle lady
I have a.
Cool story about Rebecca was
clearing a home school bill and
and she was real and involved
them at about ten years ago and
I thought it was a pretty good
job during that bill and but
apparently it wasn't so Rebecca
kind of god the god of the and
I'm pretty energetic guy
individually she's even more
energetic than I am.
And so we got that bill through
it we do we help the home school
kids to
bash Baker and gentle lady and
To allow the some school kids to
participate in public school
sports.
And and that was such a good
idea we got that bill through
and then we did another bill
to allow those same all school
kids to participate in
extracurricular activities such
as band in speech and debate and
for for H. and
orchestra you know what what
have you so great great the
meeting her ten years ago and
all the whole she's here and and
she still pushes pushes us all
very hard and I'm so thankful
for that and and we are and I'm
I to
can identify with the
Representative Miguel the
Representative from Bernalillo
we we had a.
Committee meeting and to add to
your state and she showed me
Miss madam speaker in and of.
In and gentle lady
facility that she was remodeling
and and is there in the middle
of a the project and how she had
to raise money from from many
many sources to get that
facility in in tip top shape it
just look great and all all the
little establishments there and
fellow Catholic Church there so
it was a it was a really fill in
like home and and love Rebecca
Dow and and and all of you.
Of the developer shared her work
and and
god bless.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe and Taos Representative
at a.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from the kitchen
Alliance aeons ago to yield I
yield to my friend from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe and Taos.
I to rise to say
I do but not good by to Mr
depicted Dow and I I have to say
when I first came to the
legislature for whatever reason
we went to one of those big
dinners and and my husband and I
found ourselves across the table
from Rebecca and her husband and
with I we started talking about
what we do and then we had all
these things in common and I I
had no idea and she's just in on
this burst of energy like
everybody says you know I think
the issue said yeah I got up
this morning I swam five miles
around it I'm writing I just
kind of going on my god but
she is like that she's genuine
she's a happy person you know I
I really enjoy that people who
see huge problems and bring kind
of a gift of promise.
And it's an important quality
and you have their back and I I
thank you for that and
throughout the years we've
worked on so many things
together really consider it
guardianships a we worked on the
establishing the department of
early childhood education
together we worked on the.
Constitutional amendment
together so if we it was it was
always a joy and a pleasure to
have someone so deeply involved
in in the in the.
In the industry of early
childhood because unless you
understand the problems deeply
you don't know how to solve them
so I always appreciated the
expectation but to this body
certainly the expertise you
brought to me I came in from the
foundation background where I
was funding the programs we
started the first home visiting
program but you were in the
process of implementing those
programs and doing it so it it's
a totally different perspective
and you need all of those things
to create.
great programs for for babies
and our our little kids in the
state so I I genuinely I
genuinely have appreciated
working with you and knowing you
and I to like everybody else
here we see the best of luck and
I know he will be working and
early childhood at the state or
the national level of for all
the years to come so I thank you
very much.
There is for the debate over
actually I'm sorry one quick
announcement there is dinner and
the members lounge for all
members just FYI.
There is for the debate the
representative from I'm sorry
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett.
The gentle lady from the three
counties sealed I yield to my
friend from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker and the
Representative Rebecca
Representative thank the just
the current to me.
I just want to thank you for
your enthusiasm it's been a
pleasure to work in education I
think that Committee shows that
people who are committed to our
kids and our families can really
accomplish a lot and I just
appreciate the enthusiasm and
I'm sorry I can't see through
Representative Anderson.
Representative.
Hi there.
I'm trying to see Rebecca Dow.
If
there's a reason for that rule
anyway.
Madam speaker Representative I
just really appreciate your
enthusiasm the support of
attitude on he'll dash in with
an idea you're not afraid to you
know tools you're not afraid to
Russian and do something and and
figure it out that problem
solving thing I don't know your
husband but I think he's
probably headed for sainthood.
just you know I don't live with
you but he does so just want to
thank him.
and just wish you well and
whatever you do and I I look
forward to working with you in
various capacities thank you for
your service there's further
debate the gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Katrin Sikora
Melissa please you.
I yield to my friend from curry
thank you gentle lady I I don't
know what the edge device to use
that have been used you're an
amazing lady there's no doubt
about it.
It's a blessing for me to get to
know you to what you debate the
what you interact with children
to hear the passion in your
voice when you talk to us about
issues
Never met anybody quite like you
so that your special god made
you special.
And I believe that.
Again a good working.
To bring it to completion.
I had the honor and the
privilege of standing in terms
with you.
Other shows a wonderful voice
she sings very well hold out but
good.
I had the opportunity to have
heard and and the friend come by
and and stay with my wife and I
in Clovis and you're right she's
up at dawn and have gone out to
the gym before I think.
The chickens or even up yet so
but you are your special and and
it is an honor and a privilege
to get to know you so can you
will do well I have no doubt you
will do well thank you madam
speaker.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from San Miguel Santa
Fe and Torrance Representative
Castellano.
Madam speaker will the lady from
veterans circle individual I
yield to my friend thank you the
lady hi just want to say about
Representative Dow coming in the
legislature as a freshman
this wonderful lady with a smile
always being so helpful and
genuine I really thank you for
taking your side and showing me
how your book for prepared and
how I can get that done and then
just you know make you feel at
home and I think you're here
Jenny wind you have a great
heart and I'm likely you'll
always be a sister and god bless
you and I wish you the best in
your endeavors.
There is further debate the
gentleman from manana and Terrel
Representative Madrid.
Thank you madam speaker.
Well the provide gentle lady
please feel.
I yield to my friend from Dona
Ana I just one of.
I just want to say to members of
the body four years ago when I
came in.
Rebecca Dow made a harder
question on the.
To
provide page together.
And then one day on a Saturday.
She brought.
And we bonded we melted
together.
Yes.
We.
Representative Dow if I may
already you and Terry on their
tradition.
Your foster parents and foster
kids.
For I am to from foster care as
I said that day.
But more so I say to the body.
Even though we may be on
different sides of the line.
We're still human beings they
it's and I love for one another
and we can grow together and we
can work together for our state.
Once.
I move the wrong we're
everlasting in our bond.
So Representative Dow.
I wish you the best in the next
eight months.
In a minute.
Open anyway I may be able to
help god bless you and thank you
for the great members.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you.
Mr speaker will the generator
utility hills I yield to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
The end to a to Z. price today
in support of this memorial and
I just want to say.
A very special thank you to
Representative Dow.
And how the kindness and all the
support you've shown and given
me and I just want to say when I
first heard you debating.
When I started it was a through
zoom and I was on my phone and I
was like who is this it is like
on fire and she's defending
Education and defending our
students and and then when I.
Attention to.
It was it was it was
Representative down I said of
course it's it's you and that's
your voice and it was a very
powerful voice very strong voice
and I just want to thank you for
your service and.
So much respect to you
blessings to you and all your
all the two
Are going to do and and have to
do and all the services you will
continue to have for our state
and I just recognize you and I
see you and respective thank
you.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentle lady from from the once a
year and so court you.
Yield to the gentleman from Lee.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Representative I I thank you
for.
Your consists of.
Costs are persistent.
Desire to.
me continue to grow.
Madam chair and and gentle lady
Representative you too.
As I have this one though the
heart of my wife which is not
the easy thing to do it's a gift
for early given and
It shows the true personality
inside of you.
To be able to do that there.
Speaker gentle lady
I think in and you know our our
relationship has been very short
but.
There are very few people that
that have the work hours that I
have and madam speaker and
gentle lady and Representative
I appreciate our men I
conversations I appreciate our
I any of our relations.
Just to talk and work through.
Problems in New Mexico and how
how we deal with the same system
and.
Speaker gentle lady
Representative.
Your.
Desire to continually reach out
and be accessible to everybody.
Has been an inspiration for me.
And I truly look forward to.
Your next step and.
For two.
Having you in the fourth floor.
As our next governor.
Thank you.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady.
From the coral Katrin and let's
hear you I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I rise because
quite frankly leader Townsend
said you better get up and say
something nice about Rebecca.
No actually that's not the case
that Rebekah of literally
as she was being recruited to
run for office and the the.
folks who had reached out to me
said you have got to meet this
lady she's got more energy than
five people combined she has
more passion and more commitment
and.
It was mentioned earlier about
another person in this body who
was a.
Very passionate about of
specific because and madam
speaker and and and gentle lady
of thing that Rebecca she's
passionate about a bunch of
things most people don't have
that kind of capacity to be
passionate about that many
things at once so
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think of one of the things that
issues that everybody is saying
she's passionate about
relationships you have seen
Rebecca in this body reach out
to senators house members
Republicans Democrats it doesn't
matter Rebecca built
relationships.
And that the problem with that
is if you have a relationship
with Rebecca where she needs to
be asking questions you better
make sure that when you go to
bed at night here if your phone
is not on because you will be
getting text messages or emails
or whatever they can be at two
o'clock in the morning three
o'clock in the morning it's it
it appears sometimes is for
Becca does not sleep.
I think folks have seen that
but for me I am into things that
that Rebecca's passion about
we've heard a couple of them
talked about madam speaker and
gentle lady and that is everyone
knows Rebecca's passion for
early childhood development
force for little children.
Rebecca was one of the very
first people to jump out there
and say we have to get this
right we have to get the raising
of our children in the taking
care of our children and taking
care of the providers who take
care of our children we have to
get this right
Education the idea that New
Mexico has to improve on
education has been a theme a
sense a sense.
When I was walking with her and
her district go not doors when
she's running for office the
first time.
The madam speaker and and gentle
lady I I would I would another
area for Rebecca hi have bonded.
Has been I'm I'm looking right
now at her her name placard and
she has her first grandchild the
picture of her first grandchild
there.
This commitment to the unborn.
I appreciate the hard.
Rebecca.
Early on we spoke about.
Very similar very similar
beginnings to marriage and
parenthood.
And.
Out of that.
The commitments.
That.
Rebecca had is the same resolve
that my wife and I had which
was.
Children to be love.
I I just appreciate that.
I would like to say.
Rebecca's commitment to anything
that she takes on I remember
when she.
Was talking to me earlier this
year for earlier last year about
running for governor.
Gonna be brutally honest Rebecca
I suggested that then this is a
big deal can you do this and I
laid out of some of the
questions that.
Rebecca answer that years ago
when I was being recruited to
run for higher office that I
went out and asked what does
this take what kind of
commitment does this take are
you willing to sleep in a bed
other than here your own.
Five out of seven days a week
are you are you able to be away
from your family and do what it
takes to run are you willing to
go into.
A gathering and not just stand
there.
and stay with your group but are
you willing to to to step away
from your group and talk to
everyone else of the of the
people the residents in New
Mexico and I ask this question
and Rebecca said absolutely.
and so initially Rebecca one I.
Ask you about this and and you
told me and I.
Once again the I was not
convinced you're you're gonna
have a grand child and and madam
speaker and and gentle lady but
I just what I've seen so far is
the commitment of Rebecca that
she puts to add anything else
and even
As a matter what the odds are
what I seen in Rebecca this is a
good lesson for every anybody in
this body is.
most people a couple of of
victories really bolster but the
deceits can really deflate them
and I have seen with prior
biggest character of.
you positive character
characteristic is that the
harder the resistance.
the more resolve you have and I
think that's a great
characteristic of I'd as others
have stated I don't expect that
when you leave this body that
you're in any way not going to
be here whether it's here in the
same building
and future in future office four
of in some other capacity but
the the at the one thing madam
speaker and gentle lady that I
do not see is in a year or two
from now or ten years from now
Rebecca not being involved in
trying to make a difference in
our state or in our nation so
with that
madam speaker and gentle lady I
do support this memorial and I.
I'm very proud to have had a
chance and to some degree to
even help
Did this help prevent gonna
direction probably the best
thing I can say that I've done
is you think that Rebecca talks
fast now.
Those of you who are not here in
the beginning of the season
helped.
This is Rebecca became slowing
down the toxic people can
understand or so thank you madam
speaker and I think you gentle
lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Chavez Eddy and
Otero Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from South Korea
Palencia.
And Kevin County please feel.
I yield to my leader.
Tonight Rebecca you've heard.
Many accolades.
Well wishes.
And
In cheers.
With those.
A.
Burden.
A responsibility.
And a goal.
Is the.
It the way it.
That you should carry and you
should carry with pride.
I don't know that anybody that's
ever talked to me as fast at six
o'clock in the morning if you
have.
Of.
But what I want to remember is.
Where you're trying to go.
And I believe you will be
successful.
You have.
The luxury of these accolades.
But that's okay.
You will.
The.
Fortified.
I believe knowing that.
There.
Are you the.
That support to.
There are many.
The believe in New.
And you damn well better not go
up on the fourth floor in the
state.
When you have the.
The ability to.
Communicate like you do.
And to to bond like you have
heard half.
Many say that you have.
You're required to continue that
so I'm not worried at all about
not seeing you again.
Maybe worry a little bit about
seeing you too much.
But I say that with the.
With a smile on my face I I know
you're gonna be the.
Hi I hope the issue.
You all ladies.
Remember your time here.
But you always cherish the
experience.
And that it helps to do bigger
and better things.
You do a.
You have much.
Hello
On
the that much to do.
And and you have a lot of
friends that'll help you get the
so I appreciate your service the
leadership as a representative I
know you're constituents think
highly of you and.
I have no doubt at all.
The children did.
In anything to to the thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker
everybody knows I'm a big baby.
just wanted to say a few words
about my classmate my friend.
It's right she has more energy
than anyone.
That I know.
And I decided to share a room
one time Intel's to Mexico
for health and Human Services
Committee.
She does not sleep.
This grandmother needs for sleep
that grandmother does not.
Madam speaker.
Every time I'm surrounded by
Rebecca.
She is the first one up.
She is the first one working
out.
And she's the first one to shake
every hand in the room.
Of.
I secretly want to be Rebecca
Dow when I grow up.
Madam speaker and no one works
harder than that woman right
there.
She loves New Mexico.
She's an advocate for all
people.
And all children.
Full of love.
Hope and faith.
And the.
She's going to go out and save
the Republic.
Someone called me I'm gonna make
a quote in closing Madam speaker
a strong woman stands up for
herself.
A strong woman stands up for
everybody else.
In the future there will not be
female leaders.
There will just be leaders.
Thank you madam speaker.
And with that madam speaker I
ask unanimous consent of the
house that the record show that
the rule is been called and that
all those present vote in the
affirmative fund House memorial
sixty one.
There's been a motion to show
that all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objections
it is ordered.
We're on final passage passage
of age them sixty one the vote
is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of seventy an affirmative that
is here in the negative HM sixty
one has duly passed the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker.
I move that we go to the next
order of business third reading
of legislation.
Is the gentle lady ready on item
number two on the supplemental
calendar she's not here.
In one.
This is the gentle lady from us
Bernalillo already an item
number one to build a committee
madam speaker.
Madam speaker would you get to
that point.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for the Senate
bill twelve on final passage has
been taken gentlelady to explain
it all.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
twelve Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bid to build twelve with an
emergency clause was drafted in
response to existing problems
can be effective investigation
and prosecution of missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives.
Bill closes jurisdictional
jurisdictional loopholes between
federal tribal and state law
enforcement and prosecution of
M. M. I. W. R. cases by ensuring
effective case management with
specialists law enforcement
reporting a missing persons case
work and in accordance with the
work done by the missing and
murdered indigenous women's
relatives task force.
The work of this bill is also a
direct outcome of work that was
initiated through congresswoman
deb Haaland now secretary of the
interior.
Mr.
Mr speaker.
This bill was unanimously passed
in the Senate here in New
Mexico.
Okay there is debate the
gentleman from grant Hidalgo and
Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentlelady yields.
The lady thank you thank you Mr
speaker and thank you to the
lady and what a what a wonderful
bill to be presenting and and
bringing passed its finish line.
hi I just have some questions
about the happy to support the
bill I just have some questions
about logistically what is
happening here and so are in the
partnership with the native
American communities and network
grant program in the need of the
meeting the native American to
use the network grant Fund is
that something that exists or is
it being created here.
The lady Mr speaker gentle lady
that fund is being created as
part of this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady on on page two.
At the very bottom on page
twenty five.
It it starts talking about
collaborate with other state and
international missing persons
programs and the national center
for missing and exploited
children to aid in locating
indigenous children her on
unlawfully taken out.
Of the or unlawfully brought
into New Mexico Madam Mr speaker
and gentle lady with this
include children that are in
CYFD custody.
Mr speaker gentle lady no.
Mr speaker and gentle lady can
you explain why it wouldn't
include children that are in
CYFD custody.
CYFD has its own process for
dealing with these items Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady I was
afraid you're going to say that.
CYFD chooses not to report
missing children to the
department of public safety and
they choose not to request amber
alerts for children who are
missing in or out of our states
that are in the custody and I
was just hoping.
That this might bring that that
change about.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page three.
you're going to start tracking
data which I think is really
important on the clearance rate
of these investigations and of
the analyzing your your the
characteristics and and looking
for trends have other states
been doing this and how has that
gone.
Mr speaker gentle lady other
states have not been doing this.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you gentle lady and I I
again on page three and sections
of six I was going to ask
assisting with that alerts and
advisories at the request of the
department of public safety to
assist in locating missing
indigenous persons and and I
thought about the amber alert in
the silver alert would apply to
the silver alert.
I'm sorry Mr speaker gentle lady
would you repeat the question
one more time and madam Mr
speaker and gentle lady on page
three in section aligned eight
which is section I'm sorry line
fourteen which is section six it
talks about the coordination
collaboration that we're going
to Assistant alerts and
advisories at the request of the
department of public safety to
assist in locating indigenous
and missing persons and and and
I'm assuming that includes all
ages and all incidents other
than a child in CYFD custody and
so amber alert that the there
Lambert amber alert would go out
of a child not CYFD custody as
well as a silver alert or any
other way that you could partner
with them is that correct Mr
speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady that is
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady I just I mean it's it's
pretty heartbreaking that are
most vulnerable population those
that are exposed to abuse and
neglect that are often in in a.
S. custody of CYFD will be
excluded from this very.
Very important activity the end
this endeavor that we're taking
on I hope.
That this can be amended and
changed in the future Mr speaker
and gentle lady on page three
online seventeen this is an
seven you're talking that
there's going to be some
training for law enforcement
officers the to help them
understand what could you tell
me what that training includes.
Mr speaker gentle lady one of
the things that we look at
closely is we want to look at
tribal affiliation want to look
at that at at Mississippi want
to make sure that tribal the
people who are involved in law
enforcement understand the
individuals and the native
American Community when they are
being and gates and involved in
helping in this incident so
that's what's really important
for the census misconceptions
misconstrued ideas about what
things are going on and this is
going to help alleviate some of
those areas and incidences thank
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and do you know
about do you have estimated time
of what this training will
include how many hours.
So Mister speaker gentle lady we
don't know that yet all of these
things will be coordinated with
the AG's office thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady on on page four at the top
of page four it talks about the
purpose of the program is to
create a network to support the
the affects the efforts sorry by
the state's attorney Indian
nations tribes and pueblos to
identify report and provide
native Americans were missing
typically the Senate judiciary
doesn't include purpose clauses
about though they want those
they won't want those clauses
that define a purpose included
in them and I'm assuming there's
a good reason why they left this
here could you please explain
the reason that it's and it's
included and not removed here.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's all
about sovereignty thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
and and I I assume that that was
the case and so the Indian
nations tribes and pueblos
wanted to keep the purpose in
here and and there for the
purpose state.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady and I
actually think that's really
lives and often times over the
past six years when we're making
amendments or changes to
existing law and we strike the
purpose I think we lose some
cell history or the this the
reason why and the story behind
what our predecessors did and I
think it brings a lot of value
that this the the purpose is to
provide and what the intent is
here and I'm I'm glad that it's
there and I think as a body we
can still we should consider
that because I've I've been here
long before I was an office
advocating for things I'm sure
you have to and when you look at
the implementation it's so far
from what the intent was and so
when we remove the purpose
because sometimes that happens
we lose we lose sight of what
the purpose was and we get far
away because we do have quite a
bit of turnover in the chamber
and so I I think it's good that
that state
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
this reoccurring money will this
money be recurring.
So.
Mr speaker gentle lady the way
the funding has been initially
set up.
It is absolutely it is a.
It is not really occurring at
the moment though in that with
that missile appropriation Mr
speaker and gentle lady and how
many years do you think of
million dollars will.
So this is going to revert to
the general fund at the end of
twenty twenty three do you
believe you'll be able to expend
the million dollars in that time
Mr speaker gentle lady gentle
lady so we don't know but we
wanted to make sure that there
was enough money in to get this
program moving and started for
us is long overdue.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I I
I agree and I would love to hear
I I see that you have your
Senate sponsor with you what
barriers is this removing that
exist if we do not pass this
legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady you know
the biggest thing that it's
going to happen is that that
would that it would moves the
lack of resources that are
available and to help with these
with the missing and murdered
indigenous women resources with
relatives and with girls thank
you thank you Mr speaker thank
you generally do so is there
already collaboration between
all of these different
governmental entities that
already exist without this so
Mister speaker gentle lady you
know that's part of the problem
there is not that collaboration
and that working together and
this bill and bringing together
through the AG's office we're
hoping to make that happen thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentle lady because I I thought
that thank each case was handled
separately and what I saw as the
greatest benefit of this actual
one I mean the funding is great
too that was the opportunity to
bring in the AG's office and to
give that authority to
collaborate on an ongoing basis
seems like that can happen in
real time where before there
might have been barriers.
Speaker gentle lady that is
correct and having things happen
in real time is incredibly
important thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady and I
hope that you'll hear my heart
in us that as this progresses
and you hear these stories and
you gather the data that when
CYFD chooses not to report
missing children to go to the
bar and public safety and allow
that amber alert to come out
that you will fight for that
change that those children that
are in state custody have the
same opportunity to be found as
those who are not thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Of ideal to the gentleman Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
Do the.
Tribal entities that participate
in this program do they have to
enter into a.
Mutual agreement regarding law
enforcement jurisdictional
issues to participate in this.
So Mister speaker the gentleman
who knows the program is
beginning to exist under the
AG's office so there is no
existing program right now so
it's up to each one of the
tribes how they will
participate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
You mention the word sovereignty
and and with that comes a
jurisdictional boundaries.
And so it seems to me that if
If these requests are going to
be issued the one of the key
components to further the
purposes of this legislation.
Is to ensure that those
jurisdictional issues are
addressed and that.
Each agency understands.
The jurisdictional limitations
of the jurisdictional
issues that would allow that law
enforcement activity to occur
particularly on tribal lands so
would you agree.
Mr speaker gentle lady so Mister
speaker gentleman.
The one of the things that will
happen as a result of this
program being through the AG's
office is to sit down to make
sure that we have those meetings
and those collaborations and to
make sure that that
understanding is absolutely
explicit because we do know that
that's important for purposes of
making sure that this program is
successful.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
there may be some existing of
president were maybe some of the
tribal entities have entered
into M. O. use with law
enforcement agencies to address
those jurisdictional issues of
it seems to me that that would
be a one component the the
should be addressed and and this
effort as well because I think
what.
What I gather from the purpose
clause and from the other things
that veteran here is that you
want.
Coordination between the various
law enforcement agencies to
address this is a critical issue
and so without
without those jurisdictional
issues being addressed up front
we will continue to see of some
confusion.
And possibly some inability to
really fulfill the purposes of
this legislation so Mister
speaker gentle lady
of have any influence on that I
would be encouraging you to.
Make sure that as a sign moves
forward but those issues are
getting addressed out for us and
be part of the process and and
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
agree with my assessment that
regard so Mr speaker and
gentleman you know one of the
things is making sure that we
all are working together and
that is what is going to happen
coming together in that
partnership and also it's
important to understand the
importance of entering into
those emoji use so you are very
insightful and thank you for
that and so we do want this
program to be successful so that
understanding we do think will
be very broad and applicable.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What was force of the funds the
existing the consumer settlement
fund that is administered by the
attorney general's office Mr
speaker the gentleman they've
been a number of cases that have
been brought by the attorney
general's office on behalf of
consumers and in those cases
the brought in the attorney
general's office is entitled to
damages that have been incurred
because of the harm that has
been brought to consumers within
our state and so that that money
is part of that Fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
the.
It seemed odd to me that that
would be the source of this
appropriation and not general
fund dollars for the
appropriation
but I always thought that the
consumer settlement fund was
More to assist them
Dealing with the consumer
protection.
Portion of the attorney
general's office maybe the fund
that offers some also find
Outreach to provide information
to the citizens of New Mexico so
that they don't give the
swindled for lack of a better
word and to to assist in those
efforts
so I I just thought that was a
kind of a.
Reach of the consumer settlement
fund would be the source of the
funds for this frankly wholly
unrelated activity and it may
just be the best place so we had
some money that wasn't being
spent.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
have any insight on that.
Mr speaker the month ago members
of the native American Community
that consumers to and so
consumers is broadly defined and
as we look at the concept here
that fund is absolutely
appropriate for this problem for
this process and for this
program that will be going on
under the attorney general's
office.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
The.
The purpose of this bill has
nothing to do with consumer
protection in the it's it's not
because our consumers are facing
the the situation is because.
Likely criminal activity has
occurred and these people are
kidnapped murdered
maybe exploited.
Otherwise and so I don't see a
connection to the consumer
protection here I would agree
that that also the sins of New
Mexico are consumers and that
office was established to
protect consumers or or that a
fund was there to help protect
all consumers it does seem that
that was an odd place for us to
be of funding what I would say
is a completely unrelated
Exercise and that the.
General fund dollars would have
been where I would have expected
monies to come from a.
They are just as long as it gets
funded
that's fine Mr speaker and
gentle lady will this
appropriation out of that fund
jeopardize in any way the
consumer protection.
Program at the attorney
general's office.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe I am in relation to a
prior question it said that the
money reverts to the general
fund I think the reversion in
this case with any monies left
over revert back to the consumer
perfect protection fund is that
correct.
So Mister speaker
Gentleman the of the rivers and
was specifically referring to
the appropriation for the
formation of the specialists if
you as you look at the bill
itself doesn't talk about the
consumer protection fund re
version that's one way for
utilizing of the process that
will be carried out as part of
the partnership but the if you
look at the bill the.
Rivers in park ridge.
First directly to the general
fund appropriation that is
included as part of this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would point you to the sentence
right above section six.
Would you read that sentence to
us because I think it addresses
the situation.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln are you sure that you're
reading the bill with the proper
equipment and contacts this is
it appropriation from the
general fund Sir New River I'm
sorry Senate appropriations from
the consumer.
Settlement fund and it's
reversion to the same fund.
That's exactly the point Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman other
state funds did not revert and
so those in terms of the
partnership itself is what is
being funded by the consumer
protection fund still go back to
the creation of the position
itself that is discussed and
talked about in terms of the
missing indigenous person
specialist and those duties and
the one million dollars that is
appropriated from the general
fund their.
may be lost but it looked to me
like the bill calls for the
reversion to occur to the
consumer protection fund and.
That was a point of of the
question maybe any monies
remaining.
Revert back to the consumer
protection fund that that was
the the whole point I don't see
the general fund and I may be
looking at the wrong version but
I don't think so.
Mr chair gently having racked up
I'm not sure what the point is
but you're right in the what
you're stating is correct and it
is in the bill.
From the point Mr speaker is a
the.
My my concern was the funding
mechanism that it the same dog
that we would fund this out of
the consumer protection fund but
any money for reverting from
this program go back into that
fund maybe not make a whole but
it will supplement what's in
there so that the office of the
Attorney General can continue to
to do the work of the consumer
protection arm of that office
and that this legislation.
Would not be of may be fully
impacting or drawing down that
fund the reversion may occur so
that that was my concern with
the legislation is that we
didn't fund this out of general
fund dollars serve that
gentleman that and again I see
the Gennifer McKinley San Juan
rising somewhere between forty
and sixty percent I think of the
budget of the attorney general's
office has been funded out of
the consumer settlement fund for
the better part of a decade so a
lot of operations at the twenty
general's office are funded out
of this and has been for quite
awhile.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I was
not aware of that the amount of
money but it sounds like it's a
pretty healthy budget amendment
or pretty healthy amount of
money so I appreciate that Mr
speaker and gentle lady thank
you for
answering my questions and I
appreciate the the opportunity
look at the legislation the
gentleman is further debate the
gentleman from curry.
Thank you Mr speaker will
gentlelady from Bernalillo
please yield Mister speaker
development I yield.
Thank you Julie Julie I I'm kind
of looking on page two line six
section a at the position of the
missing indigenous person
specialist this created within
the office of the Attorney
General is it contemplated
gentle lady that this person or
persons will be attorneys
because they're housed in the
attorney general's office.
Mr speaker and gentleman hello
all of them there may be an
attorney but not necessarily all
people and that in this in this
creation will be attorneys.
Thank you John I appreciate the.
What will the.
Persons that fill this role of
the missing indigenous person
specialist
gentle lady Mr speaker I just
want to refer to visit a
specialist difficult that's okay
you.
Is the specialist to they have
to be trained to work with the
legal system and court system
with the tribe's.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
what we have this partnership
that will be going on between
the attorney general's office
the people who will be filling
this position and carrying out
the duties and responsibilities
of the position within the
missing indigenous person
specialist creation.
Generally and Mr speaker thank
you.
Or should that are just trying
to understand.
What is.
Hi you're gonna train the
specials for the train to do are
they trained to be investigators
to find missing indigenous
people are they trained to help
or or counselors to help the
people of the training
counseling or what how are they
trained the Mr speaker gentle
lady.
So Mr speaker and gentleman the
you know you've raised some a
wonderful points because what
you have brought up is that each
tribal nation is different and
so that's why we bring them all
together so that we can work
together some of them will be
working as as investigators some
may be working as attorneys some
may be working within the tribal
court system itself but but most
importantly what we gonna be
doing this putting together data
and information to make sure
that we can find and reduce the
number of missing and murdered
indigenous women and relatives
so the fact that this
collaborative aspect of this
work is going to cover is
something that has never been
done and so we're looking
forward to seeing how it's going
to work and it's important that
it is carried out under the
biggest law enforcement agency
within the state of New Mexico
which is the attorney general's
office.
Thank you generated in a use the
term we're going to we're gonna
go out and find we're gonna
treat someone help find and and
so I in my mind when I hear that
I think okay their investigators
are going to have to go looking
for clues to find these people
and and I.
I think I'm trying to get a feel
for what they're doing they're
not necessarily attorneys but
they are going to have to have
some investigative skills I
believe that based on your
conversation the initial stage
of development I think it's
really important for me to make
sure that I point out to you
exactly what the specialist will
be doing and if you look on page
two of the bill starting on line
sixteen those outlines the
duties and responsibilities that
will be carried out by the
specialist.
Thank you gentle lady I I had
read through those and and.
Still found my thoughts to be a
little bit cloudy gentle lady Mr
speaker so
was hoping to get a little more
clarity generated carriers also
Mr speaker.
Why this program was created
under the attorney general's
office instead of ran by.
The missing and murdered
indigenous women the task force
that has already been created.
Mr speaker gentleman so let's
look at the concept of what's
happening here we have missing
and murdered indigenous women.
Girl's relatives we're talking
about our legal system and one
of the things that it needs to
be under is under law
enforcement agency not
necessarily a task force.
And I appreciate that and and
that that's kind of why I was
asking you when you said it
needs to be created under legal
system I wonder if they had to
be attorneys a.
Mr speaker internally
it it just seems to me like the
logical place to put.
Someone looking for indigenous
and missing people would be in
the Indian Affairs Department is
to the attorney general's
office.
Mr speaker and gentleman after
many conversations that the task
force and among tribal
governments.
The AG's office is the correct
place.
Thank you gently thank you Mr
speaker someone questions.
We have the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady eagles Mr speaker to
gentleman that I yield.
Gentle lady Mr speaker I stand
to support this Senate bill
twelve the reason why the
system to support it is because
almost five years ago.
On may the second of twenty
sixteen.
There was a little girl.
That had just gotten off the bus
in our district.
In.
Another person SO two kids
playing by the road and we went
an anti state level your old
girl and her I believe it was a
five year old brother is but.
Welcome to the rural area of
them while they're kicked out
the little boy and just kept.
The eleven year old girl with
him.
And.
Senator million stories that the
little girl was.
Of kids they didn't find her
body until almost forty eight
hours later.
For the delay in finding her was
no existence of the amber alert.
In the.
Hello.
Ticket number a letter to the
rural areas and she was
so successful.
And in twenty.
President trump New Orleans.
Of some activity to.
This.
Reasons of amber alert into the
rural communities.
Three.
The reserve.
Army veteran.
That was abducted from her home
in nearby areas on again.
District and in my district as
well.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
This body was not located until
almost two years later in the
desert of Nevada.
There was another lady that was
in her home in nearby areas
border towns and.
Madam is still can still listen
to the state in.
This legislation will bring
attention to what the indigenous
nation goes through.
In this room remember the name
cabbie potato.
Probably one of you have heard
that name.
You have heard the moon Asalem
my.
View.
There is a big difference one.
Thanks move never came up.
It was because.
The remoteness of the indigenous
nations.
But that was with a special it
will attention.
More reporting systems from the
phone.
Attorney general's office.
There was a question about
jurisdiction.
Senator where I met.
The.
Growth of.
I called the sheriff's
department.
The services I'm sorry I cannot
help you seven nation I can I
will call center reservations
line Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Question Senator flows.
The distinction not stepping.
For your office.
Are still in San Juan County the
San Juan County voters all both
together there is no
jurisdictional lines even within
the same county.
I'm hoping that this Senate bill
twelve.
Opens a lot of highs in
hopefully a lot of hearts and
for those.
I call her my granddaughter
Senator Shannon Pinto I hope to
have success in this house
tonight from my fellow
colleagues thank you Mr speaker
considering.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield Mister speaker to
the lady I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I first met you
Representative Herndon several
years ago and Gallup in my
community working very hard on
this very initiative and I just
wanted to remind you that that's
where I met you and I remember
your work and I appreciate it
and I want to thank you and I
want to thank my sister Senator
Pinto and everyone who's listed
as a sponsor and who worked on
this initiative.
I also want to say that our
sisters
they are sisters their wives
their mothers their daughters.
And they're gone they're gone
from our families and our
communities.
And we need answers.
And now we can have those
answers by taking the steps that
you've developed in this bill.
And I think this is a
comprehensive bill.
And
I look forward to supporting you
and working with you on this
bill and once again I just want
to thank you thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentle lady next the gentle
lady from Santa.
Thank you to speak with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you
if the speaker gentle lady I
yield thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I just have one
question I've been following
this and also the the women that
are missing from the west the.
They keep finding remains on the
west Mason and Albuquerque.
Could you do you all have any
idea the numbers of of women
that have the indigenous women
that are still missing.
Mr speaker gentle lady what we
do know is that as of today
there are nine hundred and
twenty six open cases involving
missing individuals.
That are maybe background.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo when did you all
start.
Kind of.
Tabs or date and as far back as
you can go as far as a when
women started to disappear.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
part of the biggest problem now
there's been no central data
collecting that has been going
on so two years ago the native
American the indigenous women's
task force was formed and the
purpose of that formation was to
create a mechanism to make sure
that there was a way to gather
data so right now it's been do
you for people to come and
report maybe to another relative
maybe to a a a tribal of law
enforcement but there has been
no central collection and so
what we've been doing this is
called trying to piecemeal this
data together but with the
formation of this bill there
will be a central and mechanized
and focus way to keep the data
I'm sure that those numbers that
I recited to you our local but
right now there is no central
data collection.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you.
Thanks to the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Socorro San Juan and once you
have Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Moberly appreciate all
Mr speaker and gentleman I
yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady of these
you mentioned a number of one
nine hundred are missing all
these men are on many of these
are women you know.
Mr speaker determine I don't
have the breakdown on the of
all.
Economic at the men women and
our children.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from all the real deal.
Of this piece of legislation how
important is this the families
of these people madam.
Mr speaker gentleman it is
incredibly important I just want
to present to you what would
happen if you had a daughter or
son thank you never found that
you didn't know where they were
and you needed some help this
just think of these families
these native American families
who are experiencing this pain
and so it's incredibly important
for this to be in existence.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo that that was exactly
my point well is going to this
is very very important to a lot
of the.
There's nothing worse than not
knowing where your daughter or
your son read center adds you
know nice for the support of
this station all look forward
to.
But he also boards because you
know they got to keep in mind
all recorded is to have closing
to what's happening in your life
thank you madam the generated Mr
speaker thank you.
Senior for the debate gentle
lady to close.
Speaker.
Just now.
For.
Unanimous consent.
Mr speaker just that the.
Everyone in the house understand
the importance of having house
bill twelve the committee
substitute with an emergency
calls and acted it's incredibly
important for the number of for
the families and for moving
forward with the work that we've
done and I move Mr speaker that
it passes the committee
substitute for Senate bill
twelve with an emergency clause
do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate judiciary to substitute
for Senate bill twelve as
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative Buka.
Yes Representative will go both
yes representative Cadena.
Yes.
Representative Cadena votes yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Miguel.
Representative Ezzell votes yes
Representative part of.
Yes Representative part of a yes
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Harper.
Representative Harper votes yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
nobody from the gallery Sir yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes representative Lente.
This Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative Matthews.
Yes Representative Matthews
votes yes Representative
McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative off of.
Yes Representative also votes
yes representative Thompson.
Representative Thomson votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Trujillo both yes
and representative Gallegos
votes yes those are closed by a
vote of sixty the affirmative
zero negative Senate.
Sherri.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twelve as amended has
passed the house with an
emergency clause.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the house thank you generating
next with that item to on
supplemental calendar number
two.
Let the record reflect election
necessary for by the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill one forty as amended
on final passage has been taken
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker.
Mr Sajan provided all yes Mr
speaker the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill one forty is the
opportunity scholarship act and
with me just to introduce I have
two expert witnesses secretary
Stephanie Rodriguez of the
higher education department and
Senate finance lead analysts
agree on of the love.
I am really excited to present
this bill it's the third year
that I've been working on it I
am an adult learner who actually
graduated from college by taking
six credits per semester so this
bill is very personally
important to me as you know
governor Lujan Grisham has been
working on this bill for several
years and I think we've laid a
strong foundation and early
childhood education K. twelve
education and now we're working
to do it in higher education
Senate bill one forty as amended
the opportunity scholarship act
gives New Mexicans chance to
retire whether there are
returning adult learner a
working parent or someone who
started college but did not
finish the average age of
college students in our state is
twenty six years old this bill
simplifies state financial aid
and expands eligibility to a
multitude of New Mexicans
including those who lost the
lottery scholarship how does it
work the opportunity scholarship
covers all tuition and fees for
any New Mexican resident
enrolled in a public or tribal
college or university in our
state they can work towards
training certificates would have
to be credit bearing an
associate degree or bachelor's
degree a degree additionally
both part time and full time
students are eligible and this
is a vital part of the bill
because so many of our deals are
juggling full time jobs and
child care and doing six credits
a semester is a challenge to do
well I speak from personal
experience Senate bill one forty
mins that's amended combines the
opportunity scholarship the
Legislative endowment
scholarship and the college
affordability granted to one
single fund which makes it much
easier for.
Financial aid officers to work
with.
And together with secretary
Rodriguez said our Senate
finance committee.
Analysts the committee
substitute allow students to
enroll in fall spring and summer
semesters that includes lottery
scholarship holders being able
to catch up during the summer.
The language allows students
receive credit bearing
certificates but I want to
stress that the credit bearing
certificates and degrees need to
be in high need workforce areas
as determined by the agency
using data from the department
of workforce solutions and
examples of that are wind solar
energy technicians health care
professionals information
technology cyber security
computer science people.
Majored training Luna college
hosted.
Hundreds of people training for
example for manufacturing Texas
Intel construction and trades
high paying jobs and welding
education social workers
therapists and interpreters and
translators.
A few more points.
The lottery scholarship remains
intact that is a separate
scholarship for high school
students this focuses on our
adult students this version of
the bill received bipartisan
support in the Senate during the
formative six in the negative
Senator Pirtle added a floor
amendment to make students
eligible for more than one
certificate we made history in
our state through the lottery
scholarship and I think this
game changer for our adult
students the idea.
Time has come financial barriers
are the main barriers to getting
those kind of workforce
certificates this will do that
with that I stand for questions
Mr speaker debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
lane.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
does the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield to the.
Phil gentleman from San Juan
County.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you for that
Mr speaker this is creating a
brand new scholarship is that
correct.
It is putting into statute
something that's been done by
rural but yes it's a a new
program targeting adult learners
meeting learners who are no
longer eligible for the lottery
scholarship.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo and I I appreciate
your hard in.
being attuned to the fact that
we do have nontraditional.
Of students you know we we'd say
people that are in eighteen to
twenty two age range maybe
they've for where they want to
school life happens so I
appreciate the the opulence.
In trying to bridge this gap
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you explain
though for the public that's
following.
How is this scholarship
different than the lottery
scholarship because I think most
Mexicans we think of sort of
state based college scholarships
we we we generally go to the
water scholarship.
Great question Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I happen to have the answer
right here.
the opportunity scholarship
differs because the opportunity
scholarship covers both tuition
and required fees.
By an option for lottery in
eligible students people who
didn't go right into college it
includes pursuing college be on
the sixteen month window since
high school graduation that the
lottery scholarship requires
those attending part time.
You can't attend part time with
the lottery scholarship.
Fifty.
You need fifteen and then the
four years with the lottery
people pursuing credit bearing
certificates and those who lost
the lottery scholarship because
they dropped out or they
discontinued.
Mr speaker delete from
Bernalillo thanks for the
explanation appears the the
name.
Opportunity culture doctors that
you're doing how did that name
come about.
You know.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Actually team Mr speaker and
gentleman from the governor
because it provides it creates
opportunities for New Mexicans
to really pursue their dreams
great accomplishments high
paying jobs and satisfying lives
and it feeds the Economic an
impact into our state.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you explained to
the body flush out what what is
it take to be an eligible
student under this bill.
An eligible student has to
reside in New Mexico for twelve
consecutive months although the
you know somebody gets married
or most you for a job that would
make them eligible they have to
either be financially
independent or prove dependency
upon resident parents or
guardians they have to provide
more than one piece of
supporting evidence to determine
residency such as the New Mexico
driver's license utility
payments or rental agreements
and then to stay in the program
they have to enroll in a minimum
of six credit hours up to a
maximum of eighteen and maintain
a cumulative grade point average
of two point five four point
scale although they tend if they
have mitigating circumstances
apply for semester break for
example would have been COVID.
Mr speaker tonight from
Bernalillo the dimension and
after the financial independent
or dependent on their parents
I'd I don't remember seeing that
in the bill word words that
language come from.
In statute Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker deliver Leo
can you help I'm maybe a little
confused when you say it's a
statute that says was creating a
new scholarship so what you mean
when you say it's in statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman The New
Mexico resident definition is.
Defined in our code and then
developed it's excuse me is
defined in statute developed in
code.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I I guess I hadn't
really paid attention that
nuance of when I thought of when
I think of and residents think
of this is your domicile the
amount of time you spent here
in you intend to reside here and
I guess maybe one of the factors
would be that you live with your
parents are financially
independent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo in order to be
eligible as well I think one of
the creditors you cannot have a
bachelor's degree is that
correct that's correct Mr
speaker and a kind gentleman
this does not cover
scholarships for a second
bachelor's degree.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo but if I have Saint
associates degree or maybe a
trade
am I eligible to go on to get a
bachelor's degree and and have
that paid for by the
scholarship.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and I was I was
paying attention upper marks and
I I did appreciate how you said
you for student who took six
hours of credits per semester at
least some portion of your your
schooling and so I I I know and
I know there's been some
discussion I think maybe in
committee or some other stops
along the way about whether
that's too low and I I don't
have any heartburn about that
because I understand the state
needs people have to work you
have a family you have a
business whatever it is so that
that that piece doesn't bother
me I'm little surprised though
that you can't have more than
eighteen credit hours Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo
would you please speak to that.
Yes Mr speaker and kind
gentlemen if you have more than
eighteen hours which is a super
heavy load you have to pay for
the credits addition of be on
the eighteen units.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I guess I'm just
driving at so what's the
rationale for putting a cap
because it let me just explain
to you what my experience was as
a college student so out of high
school I went to I went to
junior college in southern
California one other deployed
baseball transfer to a four year
of.
Many of my credits did not
transfer from the junior college
in California to the four here
in Iowa and so what that left me
with was two choices I could
then do five years to get a
batch of the Recca buckle down
and and take a couple have have
had excuse me have you lips and
so I had one semester I took
nineteen credit hours I had
another semester of the twenty
one credit hours.
I would recommend it but it's
doable and so many Mr speaker
gently from Bernalillo I'm just
wondering what's the rationale
why why would we put a cap on a
student where do have a GPA
requirement so they have to
maintain a two point five so
what's rationale with having a
cap.
Mr speaker and Gwen John and I
salute your incredible ability
to do that I never was able to
it's the average load of a
student is usually twelve to
fifteen units eighteen is
already extending beyond the
average and that's why we chose
eighteen it's it's it's a robust
program
and very few people in the adult
remember we're dealing with
adults who are going back to
college going to college for the
first time it's suits The New
Mexicans who we're targeting
with this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if I if I have a
sense of what you're talking
about is maybe there's some
language in here to try to.
Encourage students not to extend
themselves beyond maybe what's
what's smart and so if the
average I know to graduate you
know quote unquote on time it's
an average of fifteen credit
hours per semester.
Eighteen would be with one
additional class typically if
it's a three credit class.
And so to go beyond that maybe
it what you're saying is that
it's probably not a good idea
for most students is that fair.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that's a fair assessment.
In Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I have a question on
page three in the bill.
can you just explain to the
public.
You do have to maintain a
certain GPA.
and that's.
Stress when bill can you speak
to what that GPA is in order to
remain eligible for the
scholarship.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman on
of point three under section
three of to maintain a
cumulative grade point average
of two point five.
On a four point scale so four
point would be at eighty two
point five would be a C. plus.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so we talk about
cumulative that support because
if I have a semester were.
You know life happens I made bad
choices all of the above and I
end up with a two point no.
But the last three semesters
I've shared a three point five
and so average out to one of the
comes to maybe three two or
something like that that two
point oh does not disqualify me
from this
scholarships that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker generally from
Bernalillo I'd I have another
question up paragraphs the on
page three and it's just a
language questions so.
you can receive this scholarship
for credit bearing certificate
is that right.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
that is correct Mr speaker
gently from Bernalillo want to
associate degree is that right
that is correct Mr speaker and
kind gentleman Mr speaker delay
from Bernalillo and one
bachelor's degree is that
correct Mr speaker Madam speaker
and kind gentleman that is
correct Madam speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo so I guess
the language question that I
would as I read through this I
thought my mind is
Assuming that there's funding
for this scholarship moving
forward
could I receive one of each of
those credit bring certificate
and associate degree and a
bachelor's degree or do I have
to pick one of those three and
make my decision.
Speaker kind gentleman they
would staff so your credit
bearing the certificate or
certificates would feed into
your associate degree credits
feeding into your bachelor's
degree credits.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo serve I could in
theory you know get a transfer
ticket associate's and
bachelor's I just can't get more
than one of those and still be
eligible for this scholarship
Madam speaker and Mr gentlemen
according to the Senate floor
amendment two which passed it
remove the limitation that the
scholarship is for only one
certificate but it is remains to
be for only one associate and
one bachelor's.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I guess the.
The version that was on our
table and if everybody got that
I'm looking at the Senate
finance committee subs two
percent about one forty is that
right.
I'm sorry madam speaker Mr can
you repeat what you just said.
Madam speaker generated from
Bernalillo odds from extra
looking at the latest version of
bill so that Senate finance
committee since two percent
about one forty.
As far as amended Madam speaker
and gentleman.
Mr digitally from Bernalillo
I've I don't think I have the
twice a minute so you may have
to curriculum the way but it but
I understand saying is now the
amendment say that you could
have more than one trade
certificate is that correct that
is correct as long as it's a
credit bearing of madam speaker
and kind gentleman.
Mr gently from Bernalillo I
think that approach makes sense
you know the trades although
they are related they are
separate trades and so if you
you know if you want to get
insurance if you maybe in
welding and and and and you know
I figures and and all that I
think that that makes sense.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you speak to the
amount of the tuition that this
scholarship is designed to pay
for.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
it would be the tuition
appropriate to the number of
credits at the educational
institution that the student was
enrolled in.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and
it's not just tuition but fees
as well is that right.
Madam chairwoman and kind
gentleman yes.
Mr gentle lady from Bernalillo
and and we talk about fees what
it what does that mean I think
tuitions is a printer for water
water fees in this context Madam
chairman and kind gentlemen it's
usually there's like an
associate student body athletic
fees of the very according to
the program here in.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo so then I I I think
the costs that would be left to
the student read you know books
maybe and then room board is are
there any other.
I'm other than living expenses
better than others actual costs
or fees to get into the school
other than these two items.
Madam speaker and Mr of excuse
me kind gentleman not that I'm
aware of.
Minister digitally from
Bernalillo I have a question
also in section five of the
bill.
There is we talked about the cap
of the number of credits per
semester.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo but there's also a
cap on the total number of
credits you can earn is that
correct.
Madam speaker and kind gentle
lady yes.
Senator gentlelady from
Bernalillo can you explain to
the the body what what that cap
is.
Yes I can on page six Madam
speaker in kind gentleman the.
In section D. scholarships may
be provided to student up to one
hundred and sixty credit hours
for the completion of a
bachelor's degree and.
And two ninety four associates
degree taking in mind what you
previously said about people
having to meet requirements
adding to a trade certificate.
Senator generally firmer Leo
During the math what what's a
typical credit requirement to to
achieve an associate's degree.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
a traditional and typical
associates degree sixty credits.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo than doing the math
double that so as soon to book
about series about a hundred
twenty credit hours that right.
Yes madam speaker and kind
gentleman yes for a traditional.
That's first degree it's one
hundred twenty credits.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and similar to the
per semester requirement I'm
curious about the rationale of
of of the capture so can you
speak to.
Why do we have why we chose
ninety credit hours for
associates at a hundred sixty
for a bachelor's degree.
Madam chair excuse me madam
speaker and kind gentleman
because of returning or first
time college student may have
to.
Take courses for example
somebody going into nursing or
medical field might have to take
a series of science classes in
addition to the program so we
wanted to make sure
that they had the eligibility to
finish all their course credits.
And madam speaker and gentleman
it also allows a student in this
category to stack of for example
a prepaid credit bearing
certificate might be thirty
eight credits but then when they
go to get their associate's in
nursing they might have to take
additional courses and it would
be over sixty credits.
Bannister digitally formerly I
appreciate the response and I'm
I'm curious specifically about
the bachelor's degree.
I could see you know some over
on of.
Maybe ten twelve credits
because.
The reality of the world we live
in is it we we do this the silly
thing in my mind where we we ask
an eighteen year old what is
that you want to be when you
grow up.
I'm thirty nine I still trying
to to wrestle with that
question.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so it's not
uncommon for students to change
majors one to probably multiple
times and so when that happens
once you get past sort of the
basic courses when you get and
the more the third four year
credit courses here you end up
taking courses that should that
don't really count towards your
bachelor's degree so I can
understand.
Having some.
Rural to massage should be on
one twenty.
but the one sixty number as I do
the math it's it's too much two
and a half after semesters
essentially of schooling so
would you mind just because
speaking specifically the the
idea of the one sixty for a
bachelor's degree.
Madam speaker and gentleman
great question an example would
be someone who got.
A a degree and then decided that
they wanted to get their BSN
nursing and because of their
previous course of study did not
have what might be thirty
credits of science classes so
they would have to take
additional classes because they
found that focus.
Madam speaker gentle in from
Bernalillo appreciate.
I appreciate the.
The example my mind often works
in in specific so that's helpful
to have some contacts there and
and again I'd I'd I don't have
any heartburn about that idea
because I know that.
Things come up in life but I was
curious about the the one sixty
I know it's not your intent to
create for students and I don't
think the one sixteen
necessarily does that
But at some point I think
probably it becomes a little too
high now I I have a question
Madam speaker Jan
Ginnelly from Bernalillo about
the funding for the scholarship
is this money in house bill two.
Madam chair and gentleman from
San Juan yes there's ninety nine
point five million and house
bill two to fund this.
Minister General zari.
Sorry.
Madam speaker Mr chair.
Representative from San Juan.
There's seventy five million and
house bill two.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
And I guess I'm I'm curious.
The way that this scholarship is
being funded Senator M. S. the
question this way fencer gently
from Bernalillo is house bill
two the only source of funding
for the scholarship currently.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
it is.
Massacre Ginnelly from
Bernalillo the reason why I
asked that question is.
As I read the language in house
bill two.
It to me there seems to be some
conflict so
Maez figured gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
The way this is the way that the
language in the bill that you
wrote or that you sponsored.
Is trade schools.
Community colleges are or
associate type degrees and for
your purpose is that correct
that is correct madam speaker
and kind gentleman minister
gentlelady from Bernalillo the
way I read the funding language
in house bill two though it
seems to to narrow that down and
to make it to where the this
opportunity scholarship is only
available for trade certificates
and associates degrees semi
reading that correctly.
Madam speaker and gentleman
you're reading it correctly
which is why we need this bill.
Speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you just speak to
that can you flush out that last
point because I think that's
important when we talk about a
substantive bill.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
that's a great question for
students to be eligible to
continue into A. B. A. R. B. S.
program we need to pass this
bill since the language is not
and HB two.
Massacre gentlelady from
Bernalillo so I guess.
That begs the question though if
if the languages and and house
bill two how how is it going to
be funded for the bachelor's
degree tracks.
Madam speaker and kind gentlemen
if you turn to page eight
section nine part B. E. it says
upon the effective date of the
opportunity scholarship act be
any appropriation to the
opportunity scholarship program
within the general approach
appropriation act twenty twenty
two shall be transferred to the
opportunity scholarship fund.
Madam speaker delayed from
earlier I I appreciate you draw
my attention that so I guess
maybe.
For my mind goes is the seems
like there's kind of a a war of
words so to speak there's some
battling language
master generated from Bernalillo
so in your opinion and it sounds
like what you're saying is that
this provision.
Would trump the limiting
language in house bill two is
that what you're saying.
Madam speaker and gentleman this
would provide the problem
solving language so there's no
battle.
The minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
I guess I'm and I don't I'm not
sure that you can answer this
maybe you can but.
This money when it flows through
the higher ed department.
I have questions about whether
they're able to fully implement.
This bill based on the bill the
language in house bill two and I
I'm curious to see how they
reconcile the two bills maybe
you can shed some light on that.
Kind gentleman we're learning a
lot about the fact that there's
order of operations so if the
governor signs H. B. two and
then signs of this bill this was
superseded.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I.
As someone who earned a
bachelor's degree in master
speaking my love language in to
talk about orders of operations
with that says how much of a
dork I am.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
regarding.
The qualifications and this is
the last section that I kind of
want to.
Man's because it with the raised
eyebrows good thing there's a
mask that hides their face
though so I can see the scale
but then figured gently from
Bernalillo.
The.
The requirements of of
qualifying for this scholarship
there's nothing regard to
your income is that correct.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
you are correct.
Speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so you know and
in a hypothetical if I.
Let's say I buy earn a hundred
fifty thousand dollars a year.
if I am a New Mexico residents
have a roll and roll at least
six credit hours.
I go to a post public secondary
educational institution.
After high school
I would qualify for the
scholarship is that right.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is correct and that's aligned
with the same policies for the
lottery scholarship.
Minister gentlelady from
Bernalillo with with the lottery
though it's typically people
that are in the eighteen to
twenty two range that right.
That is correct madam speaker
And Gwen John and I'm I'm
referring to the fact that it's
not a financial qualification.
Yes Representative formerly I I
only raise that because I you
know when you're eighteen twenty
two most we so when I was an
eighteen to twenty general you
don't really have any
independent wealth earning any
money in the bank so to speak so
I don't see as much as much as
an issue
Hi I like the concept of.
Providing for scholarship monies
for nontraditional students
those who you know what for
whatever reason chose to do
school later in life I support
that I even support the use of
taxpayer dollars to help fund
those that are or poor who
aren't able to afford college I
have no problem with using
taxpayer dollars to give those
folks
scholarship opportunities and
advantages and I I expresses
briefly in the house Education
Committee.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo but but my partner
and with this bill penalty why I
think I probably have to vote
against it is hi struggle with
the idea of taking taxpayer
dollars.
That we collect taxes are
severance taxes or whatever it
is whatever source they are.
And then we pay for the college
of of wealthy.
Families I I struggle with that
that there's no income.
Threshold in this bill and I
don't think it's right.
When you are perfectly capable
of paying for your own college
because of the amount of income
you have a number of assets that
you have that you've been expect
the taxpayers to pay for that
for you that's that's not that's
my heartburn not not the design
of the bill itself
And I'm hopeful that we have
enough resources moving forward
or we can fully pay for these
scholarships vote as we saw with
the lottery scholarship that
wasn't the case historically and
so my fear is is if we continue
to subsidize.
Wealthy families to be able to
to achieve free college that
that Bolton is going to take
away from those who actually
need the most and could benefit
from it the most and so that's
my concern with with this bill
the way it's currently written.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo
I always appreciate our dialogue
you're you're always very
prepared very particular and and
truly a gentleman so thank you
madam speaker.
Thank you and there's further
debate the gentleman from the
NCAA County Representative Baca.
Thank you madam speaker will the
kind and gentle lady from
Bernalillo please yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
kind gentleman from Valencia
County thank you madam thank you
madam speaker thank you kind of
the finale of I want to first by
saying that I spent on a
pleasure to serve with you on
this occasion committee
your your insight your passion
for for education for all
students has definitely it's
clear to me as a fellow educator
I definitely appreciate your
commitment to the students of
New Mexico.
I was fortunate budgeted this
bill this morning it seems like
a lifetime ago right at about
twelve and a half hours ago we
actually had this bill before us
right.
at the time there was a lot of
there was a lot of folks have
spoken in support of that okay
so madam speaker
gentle lady.
There was a number of colleges
can you tell me what colleges in
New Mexico have committed to be
part of this or are eligible for
this kind of program for the
opportunity scholarship.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
I understand that there are
twenty nine higher education New
Mexico and tribal colleges.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
But the of this twenty nine it
is my is it my understanding is
are correct that these have to
be actually New Mexico colleges
Madam speaker and gentle lady we
do know that there are other
online colleges or virtual
colleges that provide
opportunities for our students
in New Mexico as well to them a
few the G. C. two of some of the
other.
I'm sure universities Madam
speaker gentle lady is it that
these colleges have to be
associate are combined within
the borders of New Mexico.
Madam speaker and kind gentlemen
only public New Mexico.
Post secondary institutions
would qualify.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you dental later went on.
One of the questions that I
have.
Or as far as being
Before with the.
To talk about that students
would be eligible to have lost
the lottery scholarship.
For this new opportunity
scholarship Madam speaker gentle
it is anytime of so it has to
occur between the loss of one
scholarship for one stops and
the other opportunity
scholarship begins.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's a great question.
Under the opportunity
scholarship somebody who lost
the lottery scholarship because
of the greater something would
be able to take a summer course
to recoup their standing in the
lottery scholarship.
However if there was a break in
time then they would qualify for
the opportunity scholarship.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generally that is for.
The amount of break in time so
let's say this I I'm right now
I'm in I'm taking classes at a
college.
For whatever reason I did not
make the grade point requirement
or the full cost slowed and I
lost that scholarship for the
the lottery scholarship Madam
speaker gentle lady.
A minute we could add this other
option kind like the state thus
the staff on top of each other
so that I can continue my
education or Sir but I have to
wait a semester and we applied
for this new opportunity
scholarship.
Madam speaker speaker and
gentleman there is a clause for
mitigating circumstances that's
worked out with the financial
aid officer at the given
institution so in some cases
that would allow them to resume
the lottery scholarship
if it did not.
Madam speaker kind gentleman
they could start the next
semester on the opportunity
scholarship.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlelady from Bernalillo.
The other question that I have
and actually
Representative Lane and talked
about the fully of motivating
Madam speaker gentle lady
because you know many of the
colleges are going away from the
traditional semester type
classes to actually six week
type module classes okay so
gentle lady madam speaker it is
possible that if I'm taking six
weeks classes that I may be able
to have more losses than
eighteen if I'm taking nine of
the six week cycle or you know
neither the seeds of following
this opportunity with this
option is going to fully cover
the cost of those because I
think that's something that's
gonna be important as as
Representative Lehman said it's
I don't advise it.
I know difficult it was for me
is for the student.
But now the number of internet
for six week classes.
Which can folks that they can
earn more credits per semester
Madam speaker gentle lady does
this opportunity scholarship
doesn't allow for that.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's a great question R. it
would be.
It would be up to eighteen
credit hours per semester many
of the six weeks courses
are sometimes they're three
credit some may still have like
six
You have like six three credit
courses each six weeks so we'd
have to look at the college
program but it's eighteen credit
hours per the equivalent for a
semester.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
One of the other things we talk
about new actually references
about a pause as you said that
unlike for maybe the eighteen to
twenty year old those soaps that
are just and our next in high
school.
Life happens right so you said
that is safeguards or there's a
process that if somebody had to
pause.
Because of life circumstances or
otherwise that there is a
process for that so madam
speaker gentle lady.
Is our opportunity to have more
than one pause if I follow the
process and it could be I'll
give an example of the committee
of childbirth or could be a
change in value adopted a child
or for other life circumstance.
Madam speaker kind gentleman
yes.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you to the lady the other
question I have about about this
is.
These funds transfer between
universities okay so I started a
university Mexico.
And my family or spouse my job
takes me down south to Los
crucis how how about how those
funds be transferred what I have
to go to the process and then is
this is Representative lane said
I can tell you the.
Any of those colleges classes
may not actually transferred
which could then as some because
it had to be taken thank
goodness for that hundred sixty
hours.
Madam speaker and gentleman
absolutely they could transfer
and as you just so ably pointed
out that's one reason why we
don't want to say hundred twenty
credits because sometimes what
you describe happens.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you deployed I was actually one
of those that you know I I
didn't have an opportunity
scholarship I didn't have a
academic scholarship was on a
football scholarship right so
that all the complaining they
kept on signing up for classes
so I definitely had more than a
hundred twenty hours
The my grade point averages are
stellar.
I just have two final questions.
And speaker gentle lady.
Is there a time right there once
again and become eligible for
the opportunity scholarship that
I have to finish my program.
In the reason I ask madam
speaker and gentle lady because
for some of the programs.
The requirements may change.
The classes is like the old
cliche cliche.
Once I had all the knew all the
answers they changed the
questions so madam speaker
gentle lady is our time between
when I start and become eligible
for the subject is caution to
the time I must complete my
certificate or degree.
Madam speaker and hi and
gentleman it's until you
complete your bachelors.
Thank you madam chair thank you
gentle lady I do have one final
this is going to be a financial
question.
Is how much non recurring
revenue will bands in fiscal
year twenty three.
That how will be replaced in
fiscal year twenty four.
Madam speaker kind gentleman
there sixty five million non
recurring for the next year.
And.
Excuse me sixty three million
and twelve million recurring.
Again thank you madam speaker
thank you a gentle lady I guess
the the only other question
again the concern that was
brought up and there's a lot of
things in a downturn in the
economy or a downturn an
increase or revenue that's
coming into our state can I do I
do think that that would be
somewhat problematic force for
madam speaker gentle lady I do
thank you for clarifying those
answers
I do appreciate what you're
trying to do my my father was a
adult learners took in fourteen
years but he did earn his degree
so I appreciate that I have no
further questions madam speaker
gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
June lady from Bernalillo healed
yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Employment some questions here.
This debate.
It was a high school diploma
required to enroll.
Madam speaker.
And gentlemen a high school
diploma or a high school a quick
bit of equivalency certificate
is required.
Madam speaker gentle lady on
computers about the mechanics.
Well the first situation.
Two year institutions.
Use this.
Reform insurance.
To increase tuition which has
occurred I think throughout the
country.
As a consequence of a.
Of federal lending programs are
there any safe chords
legislation that would prevent.
It could be if you will and
tuition.
Yes Madam speaker and kind
gentleman there's a memorandum
of understanding.
And wait just a second.
And madam speaker and kind
gentleman a memorandum of
understanding would entail that
the purpose of it would be to
identify best practices in
wraparound services like
counseling and health care
because we want the students to
succeed to ensure student
success and improve retention
while enhancing existing student
support structures tailored to
each college university and
branch.
Our campus the memorandum of
understanding will be critical
for sustainability as we will
that HUD will provide guidance
for tuition and fee increases to
ensure sustainability so they'll
be putting guardrails on that.
Court rules apply across the
board.
To students.
For example in the lottery
scholarship.
Madam speaker and gentleman they
are separate programs and so
each program has its own
memorandums of understanding.
To madam speaker gentle lady
would be possible for
opportunity scholarships.
Participants to be paid in
different tuition rates lottery
scholarship participants present
one whose.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
this would actually range in the
tuition and.
Put more money into the lottery
scholarship.
Hold on just a second.
Madam speaker and gentlemen this
would right then the tuition
fees
which would be the same for all
students and therefore benefit
the lottery scholarship I think
I got that right.
Thank you.
Come gentlelady.
To the mechanics.
A student signs up for say
twelve hours.
During the fall semester of the
mechanics.
The tuition rate is a student.
Going to be issued a chair or
will the diversity.
The state directly.
Madam speaker kind gentleman the
university provides H. she do
with the cost and they're
reimbursed at the end of the
semester.
Just.
John legend systems have
approach encouraging.
Use of.
Is that correct Madam speaker
kind gentleman you are exactly
right.
Madam speaker.
I'm curious about.
This is for two hundred.
To report on students.
And.
I'm curious.
Well whether you have any
statistics.
The success rate of part time
students enrolling.
All the way through to a degree
or certificate courses those
rules for semester two and then
drop out with no.
Questionable benefits.
Madam speaker kind gentlemen we
don't have that data because we
haven't had this particular form
of scholarship.
Is there a plan.
To gather this data as a
consequence of this legislation
so but we want to try.
Which were actually.
Students with degrees or
certificates Madam speaker and
gentlemen this first year of the
program they're going to track
all that data and see if it is
effective if it is working and
how many New Mexicans take
available of this opportunity.
Thank you
the final straw.
For this course.
The current.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and gentleman
twelve million will be is
recurring.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Out of the total projected cost
of.
Madam speaker and gentleman out
of the current allocation of
seventy five million.
Speaker gentle lady so the total
cost of the program.
All of the phones that are grown
this Forster amount to about
sure Coleman and.
Asian dollars shows it is
projected to cost one.
Madam speaker kind gentleman
seventy five million dollars has
been allocated for year one.
Although some of the funds.
It's is being swept.
Opportunity scholarship.
Madam speaker and gentleman
there are but they're going to
be allotted in the following
year.
And that's on let's see that was
I believe is twenty three point
five million.
The projected cost of the
program.
Hey is seventy five million
dollars.
Madam speaker and gentlemen the
higher education department
estimate sixty five to seventy
five million that's what they
project and I'll be tracking
that this year.
Madam speaker Jen Leasure twelve
million dollars per currently
available ceramic concern was
some commitments to the
would have funded going for.
Madam speaker and kind gentlemen
it is an investment this less
than one percent of the budget
and HEDT will be closely
monitoring it and reporting what
happens.
What he will be back next year.
Looking for another seventy five
million dollars a person.
Madam speaker and chairman of
the higher education department
will provide a cost estimate.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you for answers.
There's further debate the
gentleman from all those
counties Representative Roger
Montoya.
Madam speaker thank you in with
that lovely gentle lady from
Bernalillo please yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
kinds element.
Gentle lady a rise in support of
this opportunity scholarship.
Work that's happening it's
definitely needs to to be part
of the trajectory of education
in our state.
But I I do want to speak on some
concerns I have and maybe some
questions last summer at the
northern New Mexico college our
governor came and she was
speaking about this in
showcasing students and it was a
wonderful event if but as I look
at the trajectory of the the
cradle to grave sort of life
long learning I.
We have some decided holes in
the entire park
I'm particularly impressed by
the secretary group Groginsky
and the work that's happening
with the CEO CYFD that we spoke
about earlier I think the the
prenatal three it's going to get
some great traction I think that
our pre K. P.'s.
Is definitely looking better for
I worry is second grade to tenth
grade
I think the Mexico's failing and
if it pertains to this
scholarship so there with me I.
We are failing and how we
inspire lifelong learning for
and students to identify as
early as possible for their
particular passion and purpose.
Madam chair gentle lady that
will help them take advantage of
the opportunity scholarship I
made that point last summer for
the deepest respect for our
governor and is from Portland to
legislation which I support but
I just want to bring that for
that I think New Mexico clearly.
Is missing the mark in education
we have a long way to go for the
tribal remedy framework for the
Martinez Yazzie committees all
of the pieces were looking out
of the complexity
all have their their part in
this this pathway to.
Where we're all trying to get so
with that I just say thank you
for bringing this bill it is
critically important I do
believe it will help our young
people all of our people to find
careerpathways not only in the
traditional degree programs but
certificates and.
Career pathways that we don't
even know exist yet perhaps
because we have to be innovative
in how we approach.
Where are kids and young people
are headed so with that.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
yield back thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from all those six
counties Representative Harry
Garcia.
Okay we'll go on to the gentle
lady from Travis county
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chairman thank you very
much madam speaker excuse me
madam speaker.
Over the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield yes madam
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Travis county.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much of.
One of my questions is already
answered and that was the
students have to have a diploma
or a.
T. E. D. is what we used column
and you have answered that
question.
I am looking through the minutes
and I only see two amendments is
that all that has been presented
on this bill.
Yes madam speaker the Senate
finance committee did a
committee substitute and then on
the floor of the Senate
they did to amendments the first
amendment was cutting out two
words in the second amendment
with that in the the fact that
you could have an additional
certificate.
Okay madam speaker gentle lady I
would like if you look at page
five line twenty five.
You have four year right there
at the end for as of the online
sieve and the word four year has
been stricken is that just an
oversight do we need to correct
that.
Madam.
Speaker and kind lady that was
the technical the floor
amendment number one that
Senator Padilla did.
Is.
Okay madam speaker I was kind of
concerned but because it only
says on page five line seven
strike the word for your so I
was concerned about that because
it needs to be.
Corrected in my opinion
Madam speaker gentle lady excuse
me just one moment.
For those listen to what Madam
speaker line seven of page five
four year was struck but online
twenty five it's kept because
the scholarship is good until
you graduate with your
bachelor's degree.
From a four year public post
secondary program.
Madam speaker gives my concern
there the language is the same
A little table student graduates
from a four year.
And so there I had concerns over
that Madam speaker gentle lady
on page six of your bill
can you explain to me and on
online foils forces substantial
non compliance can you give me
forth into of that means.
Okay so Madam speaker and kind
ladies section six S.
termination scholarship is
terminated upon occurrence of an
that see substantial non
compliance by the eligible
student with the opportunity
scholarship after the rules
promulgated pursuant to that act
so if a student only rules and
three credits.
And had no mitigating
circumstances.
They could be
considered no longer eligible.
Madam speaker and kind lady it
could also be something
determined by the institution
for example constant use of
plagiarism something that went
against the rules of the
institution itself okay madam
speaker to me that was very
important because the schools do
have their own set of rules and
I wanted to make sure that that
was applicable to these
particular students as well and
that was the intent of that
language there so thank you for
clarifying that
madam speaker gentle lady.
I do have a couple of other
questions and I don't know if
you're expert witnesses will be
able to answer this or if you
know the answer and you probably
to madam speaker gentle lady can
you tell me what the average GPA
is that the students who have
been awarded the lottery
scholarships.
Madam speaker and kind lady at
the present time we do not have
that information available great
question.
Okay and and the other one money
might end up with the same
answer but I'd like to ask it
anyway thank you to me who put
the number of students is who
have achieved a certificate or
bachelor's degree that have also
utilize the lottery scholarship
funds.
Madam speaker and kind lady we
are exploring to see if we have
an answer if you can just wait
for a moment.
Madam speaker I would appreciate
that.
Madam speaker and kind lady this
semester we had ten thousand
three hundred students who
receive the lottery scholarships
of to your phone.
Your for your purpose.
And madam speaker in those lines
you said over ten thousand
students who are utilized in the
lottery scholarship.
Is this.
Up or down from say let's say
the choose two thousand nineteen
is the norm I don't think that
we need to call the.
Corona Khan to react Care a I
don't think a place in the rules
here but I I want to see how it
does compare going back to two
thousand nineteen if the
information is available.
Madam speaker and kind maybe the
number has decreased and they
can look for that information
and provided to you at a later
time if if you would like okay
madam speaker I was just kind of
curious I know that this is this
Mrs rig havoc on all of our
institutions our schools the
list goes on and on how it's
affected so I was just kind of
curious of I I would assume that
those numbers are down
considerably for the what they
were in two thousand nineteen
and so
My concern with this bill to be
quite honest with you I
understand it's for your
nontraditional students I get
that.
The we have set no time limit
doesn't seem like upon
completion of the certificate or
of a.
Any degree that they're
pursuing.
So I'm wondering if we are
really.
Not.
Distressing to these
nontraditional students that
they do need to work towards is
that that that the goal is that
they receive achieve whatever
they are pursuing whether it is
a certificate or an associate or
bachelor's degree and I'm afraid
that we might be disincentive us
and them but not in any sort of
time limit on it do you see that
as being a problem.
Madam speaker and kind lady I
understand your concern however
if if they stop the program then
they can't.
Without mitigating circumstances
then there dropped so basically
they have to be serious enough
to pursue at least six credit
units for semester.
So madam speaker six credit
hours per semester to receive
the.
A bachelor's degree let's go
bachelor's degree how many years
is that going to today just for
the listening audience.
Madam speaker and kind lady it
could take ten years but
remember during that time you
may be earning are viable
certificate that increases your
wages because you're getting a.
Credit bearing certificates in
the field that's been identified
as need you may be getting an
associate's degree in nursing
and going to work at a higher
rate skilled job in a high needs
area and so it's the fact that
you can take just six units per
semester that allows you to
balance your job
responsibilities in your family
responsibilities as you in which
your earning capacity and your
ability to contribute.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
appreciate that comment
but will this have any impact on
the future if if it just
actually taken one student ten
years to earn their bachelor's
degree follow the same instance
they can earn their associate's
to get an associate's or
certificates which will
potentially have the effect of
being able to increase the wages
fall there working.
Is it going to impede any other
students ability to apply for
this what are you calling this
the opportunity scholarship.
Speaker kind lady now.
And madam speaker and it gives
me concern it gives me a little
bit of.
Trouble here because I see that
it might be able to I understand
that there's are nontraditional
students that it.
They do have lots of lots going
on their lives lots they have to
juggle I get that.
But I'm my concern is.
As you all know we are.
We have a push out there to do
away with an industry that has
funded a lot of our the majority
of our budget this year and the
push is on to do away with our
golden goose and how can we be
Hackley wrist to sure that this
money will be coming back into
our but our.
Our funding in years to come I I
see that might be kind of
trouble so would you like to
comment on that madam speaker
gentle lady yes Mr speaker and
gentle lady I want to emphasize
that not everybody's going to
get a bachelor's degree for
example to get the manufacturing
technician degree that qualifies
people for high paying jobs that
entail it wasn't a bachelor's
program it was as I recall maybe
sixty to seventy credit hours so
on not everybody is going to
pursue a bachelor's degree I
just think it's important to
realize that.
Madam speaker I do understand
that I as there's lots of people
out there that don't need to go
ahead and could complete.
Their bachelor's degree an
associate might work just fine
form.
The it it we are still not
putting a set time limit on when
this is going to whenever they
do need to complete the program
so it can be self sustaining and
that's my concern so madam
speaker and gentle lady.
And Madam speaker and and kind
lady they do have to demonstrate
you know academic progress state
rules consecutively they can't
just say well I'm gonna take
sixty minutes and then you know
go do something else and come
back they have to be
consistently focused and
accomplish.
And I understand were you for
your state and yes they do have
to consecutivo spring semester
she is that does that take place
but still.
It will take a long time I've I
really feel like maybe we need
to say this has to be completed
in.
This time frame right here so we
can make sure that this fund is
sustaining.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you for your answers I do
appreciate it.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
representative are for.
Thank you madam speaker does the
kind lady from Bernalillo yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
kind gentleman from Santa Fe
County.
Speaker agility.
I want to first just to
acknowledge that to you have
been an advocate for education
of course not since you've been
here but for your entire life
and of course dedicate your
professional career to helping
was education which I think is a
laudable and I was one of the
first acknowledge them as
speaker and gentle lady and I'm
sure you're very pleased to be
carrying this legislation and
have that the opportunity so
Those are generally
Great job.
Really unlike a lot of my other
debates where I'll be talking
about the mechanics of how
something works and whether it's
a good idea or
bad idea or there's a better way
to run it.
Conditionally I'm actually gonna
give three stories
They're very personal stories
and I hope madam speaker
generally the body will forgive
me for being this personal.
But I think
these stories will help make a
point.
Of what has been generated.
Actually think this is a bad
idea.
So.
That figure generally the the
first Tory about one of my very
own children.
On my first child.
and he was given an early
birthday.
And I know masters really you
know really what that means he
was.
just finding kindergarten we
have no signs of any trouble.
But in first grade
he really started to struggle Mr
Julian and we would to have a
home we will try to help them
read Mr really he's really had a
hard time reading and keeping up
with the classmates.
And individually he started
falling into the bad crowd in
the first grade.
if there is such a thing right
the the back route.
Mr generally and and we spoke
with his teachers towards the
end of the year and they said
you know he meets the criteria
to go into the second grade.
so we're recommending that he
chief Vance.
as merely a my wife and I we had
a long conversation about what
was actually in his best
interest.
How we could set him up for
success.
Usually we made the really hard
decision to have him repeat
first grade.
Mr really I'll tell you we are
so glad to the state that we did
that.
Because that the from the time
he needed to mature.
And to catch up so that he can
move forward if they're just
pushing him through so it should
always be behind.
Really we're so glad we did
that.
And and.
Of course that didn't come with
you wherever you know rainbows
and butterflies right I mean
there were still challenges Mr
usually he asked us a couple
times you know we kind of became
worse of course like he was I
was I've done kid.
You know and just really we had
we had explained to him the
normal
not at all but
You need a little more time and
now look at what you're able to
accomplish.
as we really so
really.
Grateful that we did that really
impacted his entire life.
And.
And I'll talk a little more
about the seam of the store and
how relates to the next to in
just a moment.
but next the next order speaker
gentle lady.
A few years ago I had the great
opportunity to go to concrete
Guinea in West Africa and help
with Ebola crisis.
Message deleted as part of my
employment and send you labs I
was sent there to help manage a
the bill a diagnostic laboratory
that was set up there to help
the government with the crisis.
And you know as a an amazing
experience and holding like five
people of virus in my hands
right and
Mr Dooley.
I had lived in in hungry for two
years and had an amazing
experience learning so much
about the culture and you know
living in the former Soviet bloc
country just how much that maybe
appreciate the freedoms that we
have here.
Mr Lee that those two tours in
Africa.
I learned so many incredible
things just one that I want to
share.
And we're really is on all the
main roads there's all these
shacks that are set up that's
all things.
And I'd support half of them
were selling clothes.
Mr generally it was fascinating
all of these clothes were T.
shirts and shirts and things
that work from America.
I recognized all of those I mean
it was.
Clearly you know imported right
but Mr really wasn't really
important these were donations
the folks in America had made
out of the goodness of their
hearts to help people in Africa.
Mr Dooley they actually had a
nickname the local CENIC name
for these close the call them
dead white man close.
as usually I I just on a
fascinating.
What I learned then speaker
gentle lady was that.
We out of the goodness of our
hearts.
Actually destroyed a whole
industry.
Speaker gentle lady if one had a
sewing machine and concrete any.
One could provide for their
family.
Of the goodness of our hearts
and flooding the market with
free clothing speaker and gentle
lady.
A sewing machine Water meant
anything.
And so.
There are examples where we are
trying out of the you know
really from deep down to help
people in need.
We actually do the exact
opposite.
And madam speaker gentle lady
the third story.
My.
Liz child who I imagine the
prior story.
it's hard to believe this is his
first year of college.
Really I don't know how I got
that old of.
What happens right happens all
of us.
I'm sure you can relate to
Mr Lee we we very much want to
help our kids with college.
And we were saving my wife my
fifty dollars a month since we
were first married and making
twelve thousand dollars a year
together and struggling so that
we can have might help our kids
with college.
The Mr gently.
We did.
Was we presented him with the
Harper family scholarship.
And how that works.
Was for every a she earns we
would cover.
One hundred percent of his
tuition.
And for every
he earned we would cover seventy
five percent of that tuition.
Then for season these you know
we we we we would cover that.
And Mr surely he took a fifteen
credit hours that first semester
and I think only one class was
really challenging the rest
were.
You know as long as he showed up
and it is working you know state
law that he would have gone
straight days.
But the Senator generally.
because in a semester.
Yes so well.
we actually ended up only
writing him a check for six
hundred dollars.
that's usually he could have
done much better.
And so he he learned from that
experience he was actually a
little sheepish about it she
apologized those reserves you
don't have to apologize to us
this is your This Is Your Life.
And that hit up having to pay a
big chunk of change from his own
bank account for the first
semester of college.
The originally do you know what
his GPA is and now starting his
second semester.
It's a four point no.
Speaker and gentle lady.
So there's something to be said
about having skin in the game.
Versus being handed something
for free.
Mr speaker internally and I'm
sure you understand understand
that.
So.
I have had the great privilege
and honor of these last ten
years really.
From partnering with others in
this body but defending the
lottery scholarship.
And in those years we've made
several great changes improving
that scholarship I mean most
recently we added a gap year so
if folks don't have to go
straight from high school to
college they can actually take
some time to get a job or
whatever before going in and
other could change that happened
several years ago was ensuring
that someone who goes on.
military
no goes into the military or
someone who goes on like to your
service mission or other things
like that to take it returns to
qualify for the lottery
scholarship.
And then a really big one Mr
usually I think you're you may
remember for several years there
was an effort to decrease the
amount of the lottery dollars
that go to the scholarship right
now thirty percent goes and
there was an effort to decrease
that amount
and we're being promised that
yes that would be less dollars
initially to the scholarship.
But people buy lottery tickets
because there be higher pay outs
and so would end up later having
much more money into the
scholarship.
I had several problems with the
whole premise and I was happy
that the the body and partnering
with them that we we've defeated
that we haven't heard stuff like
that for a long time.
Mr gentle lady from one of the
also I think most important
things about the scholarship is
that applies to all New Mexico
kids Mr jelly I understand that
the opportunity scholarship here
also a set up that way and I
want to commend you for that
You know it's not just the kids
who have a high GPA.
not just kids that are for you
know it's really an opportunity
for everyone and not just even
kids in the opportunity
scholarship as usual if I
understand your bill correctly.
and I think that's really
important because there's very
few scholarships for folks there
in the middle class you know
they're not eligible for Pell
grants a lot of scholarships are
needs based or
you know.
Directed towards helping
minorities
so the the scholarship the worst
recession has been a huge help
to the middle class who don't
qualify for all these things but
also have a hard time paying for
it.
Mister Jerry I understand your
heart and why you're you're
hoping to go forward to help
bridge the gap here but I really
I really believe that right now
right now the lottery
scholarship doesn't cover one
hundred percent of tuition.
And I think that's a good thing.
Any to my son some skin in the
game this isn't free when we
give something out for free we
significantly lowered the true
value.
But my experience in Africa.
And and I think again I think
it's okay and probably even a
good thing that it doesn't cover
under percent of tuition.
and there are so many ways right
now to finance education I never
heard from anyone that they
didn't go to college because
they can get the funding.
I've never heard that.
Because there's ways
And I think.
Speaker I might've been.
Talking a lot I have maybe just
a couple more thoughts but Mr
gently all pause I I've shared a
lot but I'd love to.
Your thoughts before I.
Kind of finish up.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
secretary has alerted me that
the lottery does cover a hundred
percent right now and for the
next four years and of HB to.
I would add that students do
have skin in the game but some
of the need to foot in the door
and I think your children are
deeply blessed in many of our
children are deeply blessed not
every child has that opportunity
So that's what this is about is
not just about children there's
many older people late twenties
thirties forties who had to go
to work.
to support their families and
now they're at a point where
this opportunity scholarship
will make the difference.
Most urgently thank you for that
I really appreciate hearing that
and I know that there has been
some effort the last several
years to fully fund the lottery
scholarship with general fund
dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady and.
I really think that's a mistake
won the lottery scholarship
started we were promised they
would never use taxpayer dollars
can you talk to the four
founders of that they will agree
Republicans and Democrats and
there's a reason for that Mr
gently and I really feel the
best structure is to allow the
lottery scholarship to be funded
through lottery dollars not
taxpayer dollars and for there
to be a little portion of skin
in the game that that is the
best situation I think we've
done more harm than good by
fully funding it speaker gentle
lady.
but I also understand you're
saying that you know there's
older folks not just children
and some folks need to foot the
door as regionally I I totally
get it.
But again when you reduce the
value of some when you when you
make something totally free you
really do review reduce the real
value of a national giving an
example here kind of some some
concluding thoughts Mr gently if
that's alright.
So it used to be a state
minister gentlelady.
That I don't know if it's that
was anymore.
But when folks who had you know
really developed you know kind
of from nothing
you know wells and and you know
it had a really big for you know
for for whatever reason it used
to be a saying that they are
respected.
When they did into simply give
it all to their kids.
When instead.
understanding the great value in
the struggle.
And the lessons learned is that
part of your life.
through hardship and adversity
those lessons that we learned
from that
that that is a bigger gift to
their children than simply
allowing them to inherit all
this wealth.
Speaker gentle lady my by I'm
sure you're familiar with this
type of issue not in your head.
And and I'll just say you know
looking again very personally in
my life.
Those first five years of my
marriage when we maybe maybe
twelve thousand dollars a year.
And we're struggling.
to make ends meet
I look back at.
with great fondness on those
times.
how we learned in struggle
together in and then be more
grateful for the situation I
have I am in now and being able
to understand folks that are in
that situation because I was
there.
Senator gently those those
things that help define who I
am.
And and maybe the person that I
am.
And I'm just.
I'm I'm really just kind of
heartbroken because I feel like.
What we've done in this body
especially the last couple
years.
Is.
We continuing past policies and
programs.
The again like the Africa
situation I put are so well
intentioned and meaning to help.
Instead of really doing that
encouraging individual gross and
providing.
that opportunity grow respect
and self worse.
And and allowing for those
experiences that will help folks
grow.
From what we're really doing is
setting up a system that results
in people who are.
In a.
perceptually content.
Was being independent of the
state.
The state is where I go for all
of my help.
And that's what my son
who thought he was getting a
free ride to college.
Since ends up keeping them.
From reaching their full
potential.
Speaker and gentle lady.
So.
Again in an effort to help.
Our children and others in the
state I really feel like.
We.
Two more harm than good
sometimes.
As we originally and.
And you know I just I appreciate
you allowing me to share these
stories very personal stories
from my heart about this.
as bigger gently and finally
your hearts also in the right
place and you believe that this
is helpful Mr gently.
For something a renewable wing
and and uplifting and gracious
about struggling and overcoming.
And yes help along the way is
amazing.
But again if we just keep.
Giving fish after fish after
fish after fish.
No one is ever going to learn
how to fish.
And then what have we really
done to our society.
Mr generally and and and that's
wrong coming from.
If you have any comments I of
course would be happy to hear.
Madam speaker and kind of German
thank you for sharing I just
want to remind the body that an
adult can take six credit hours
and that's because such adults
are working full time and off
and racing family and that
scholarship for six credit hours
is it may willing them to.
Learning to try to fish.
Speaker and generally thank you
for that and and again I I I
know your hearts in the right
place must be originally.
those are my thoughts and I.
Just encourage our this body.
To consider.
You know the stories of my son
in first grade and college the
weather in Africa.
And perhaps.
A little bit harder about.
All the ways that we are out of
the goodness of our hearts
trying to help people.
But also understand that.
When we all of our lives when we
have the most growth in those
things that we look back on and
made us who we are.
It's because of the struggle and
we.
We are doing more harm than good
when we rob people of that
struggle.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
At this time the speaker would
like to suspend the rules to
allow the gentle lady to have
the seat.
Thank you and we have further
debate the gentle lady from
grant Dogo and Luna
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield yes madam speaker I yield
to the gentle lady.
Thank you gentle lady madam
speaker so we had discussion on
this this bill this morning and
Education Committee for as much
depth as we could get into on
the last full day of the
legislative session with only an
hour before we had to get to the
floor and I raised a lot of
concerns and you and I have had
many conversations over the last
few days of these concerns
but I want to back up just a
little bit and say that I have
taught public speaking at the
western New Mexico university
Deming for many years and most
of my students for returning.
nontraditional parents were
going back to school raising
families and working full time
and many of them would tell me
at the end of the semester I've
got to take a semester off all
of us so I I without a doubt
understand the need for effect
I'll say when I first started
teaching there was a little or
even back when when it was first
formed I was a little hesitant
over on whether we should have a
university in the middle of two
major universities because
western New Mexico main campus
is an hour away New Mexico state
is an hour away but once I
started teaching I realize that
my students could not have done
that they could not have worked
all day taking care of their
kids had somebody else take care
of their kids and driven two
hours one hour each way to
attend evening classes so so I
was had most respect for my
students I was amazed at what
they were juggling I so
appreciate the fact that we're
gonna try to help them and give
them an opportunity to to maybe
have a financial break as they
do this and they are struggling
there's you know it's just
because they're college will be
paid for does not mean that they
don't have a lot of other
emotional and and just
structural and and
organizational hurdles to get
through in their in their
problems but what what we were
talking about this morning is
simply that.
While this this money is in H.
B. two.
It is sixty three million of it
nonrecurring funds and before I
came up here I had to challenges
in my small brain one was to
make sure that we did not use a
nonrecurring funds for recurring
expenses but the second was to
make sure that we were able to
use our one time funds for truly
transitional opportunities for
New Mexico.
And after our discussion this
morning in education and
thinking about it and getting a
lot of input from people I
realize that this does have the
opportunity to try to be
transformational for the state I
always felt that with my
students in Deming Madam speaker
and gentleman that we were
changing generations because
those working parents with the
first generation to go to
college.
They had kids at school the kids
at school were watching them or
their kids at home we're in
school we're watching their
parents prioritize their
education and that next
generation would be.
Much easier transition to
college we were truly trained
changing lives and still are
that it's just a wonderful
facility there.
So if we're looking at what
could be transformational for
New Mexico I do think giving
these students that level of
support could truly be
transformational.
So we so my struggles there
we're looking at what could be
transformation with our one time
money.
And how do we not use one time
money for recurring expenses so
although I voted against isn't
in education this morning I am.
Toward voting for the bill
tonight because I do think it
needs to move forward I do think
we need to make this commitment
I am committing to help work on
future funding because honestly
if we don't find sources for
funding that's going to come out
of the I in need of those higher
ed universities and all those
presidents on our feed this
morning in health education and
supported it and I thought are
you still going to support it
when it actually ends up biting
into your budget so for looking
at their I. energy they're not
going to want to take money out
of it we can't make a commitment
to these returning parents
students and say we're giving
you a four year scholarship
we're giving a hundred and sixty
our scholarship we don't have
the money to do it so we're
making some commitments that are
gonna be challenging I think for
the state of New Mexico I think
maybe we're up for the challenge
so I am committing as you as you
know LFC organized a lot of sub
committees this year one of them
was higher it I don't I'm not
serving on that subcommittee but
I'm committed to helping figure
out how we can continue this
commitment to New Mexico so I
just want to put that out there
that that if we take these
hurdles on and realize what
we're doing so I I guess I
wanted to make the point that
what we're doing is making me
sixty three million dollar
nonrecurring commitment to
people in New Mexico and if we
take that on with eyes wide open
and make a commitment all the
way around to work on it I think
that we probably will do better
for the state so madam speaker
gentle lady thank you for the
bill thank you
experts for all the help that
they've given in coming to this
and thank you for understanding
all of the struggles that my
colleagues and I have mentioned
because it's not an easy vote
there's there's a lot of moving
parts and we get flooded with
important emails.
That make it sound so easy but
it's not there are there are a
lot of things that should be
considered eyes wide open where
is that money actually going to
come from and I and I just want
the body to realize.
What we're doing I think with
some of our our the money so
with that being said thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe counties
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county please yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from the three
counties thank you madam chair
figure want to I just want to
make sure I'm gonna try to
summarizes the best that I can
understand what the scholarship
but the first question I have on
this Mr speaker and gentle lady
is how and I apologize if I
missus and run to go get some
medication so.
How do you qualify what are the
qualifications for the
scholarship.
The qualifications are that you
have to be New Mexico resident
of which is defined in statute
but it's very there lived here
twelve months are you grew up
here you live here you're
financially independent are you
prove dependency upon resident
parents or guardians to provide
evidence of your address legal
residence and then you have to
enroll in a minimum of six
credit hours up to a maximum of
the eighteen that a minimum of
six and you have to maintain it
can you.
Can you.
Communicative two point five
GPA.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I know it's getting
very late on this so as a so
it's not really a scholarship
because there's really nothing
attached to it like in college
normally they'll be a
scholarship where maybe some
people get together in that poll
money or an association or or
there's if you do this or if you
do that or if you're getting a
degree in animal husbandry
there's all the scholarship so
basically this is just for
anybody who is a New Mexico
resident between sixty eighteen
credits for the two point five
of can cumulative said our time
of the two average is that
correct Madam speaker and gentle
lady you also are someone who
does not qualify for the lottery
scholarship because you've been
beyond the sixteen months from
high school graduation and you
are looking at a high needs area
as identified by the workforce
solutions list of the fastest
growing high need fields and and
worked out with the department.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
I are there any stipulations
like
You have to have a certain
income or is it just anybody
from any income.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this is not income based.
Okay center thank you I'm M.
sicker so but if I understand
the lady it's anybody who lives
in New Mexico and there really
aren't other than those it you
have to have X. amount of
currency grade point average
there's really nothing you don't
have to say I'm going to school
to be a florist I'm going to
school this study in a certain
thing this is just specifically
for it well it's not really
specific just for anybody who
lives in New Mexico and it
doesn't matter whether you make
ten thousand a year or ten
million dollars a year there's
no there's no difference and how
much money you make is that
correct Madam speaker gentle
lady of to make commitment to a
program and then make academic
progress in consecutive
semesters
but it's not income based.
Thank you madam speaker and and
John This Is gonna it so the
plans to people that are
millionaires hundred airs it
basically applies to everybody
who is going to say is is
interested I don't think I ever
I don't think I would have
called it a scholarship because
you scholarships there's some
sort of stipulations so I was
looking at the F. fire going to
the F. I. R. which is kind of
confusing can you.
Tell me.
Can you break it down for me.
Like let's say.
Here to into this program of
where we're giving
I'm I'm just gonna call it what
it is a given for college to
everybody in New Mexico with
every ticket certain credits can
you tell me madam speaker and
gentle lady what is the cost
going to being like year two and
year for for this program.
Madam speaker and gentle lady a
lot of that data will have to be
collected in year one.
And I want to remind the body
that the average salary in the
state of New Mexico is fifty
thousand dollars.
Madam speaker and and General it
was trying to say what is the
cumulative cost going to be how
much is it going to cost two
hundred billion twenty five
million seventy five million how
much is it going to cost for our
I'm assuming tax dollars to to
pay for this Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
With our current projections it
sixty five to seventy five
million but we have to evaluate
the response on the to the
program and the real costs as we
go through year one and year
two.
Thank you
Madam speaker and.
Delayed I'm trying to absorb
that that cost I guess what what
is troubling me is.
We've been getting so much money
from all and gas and I brought
up the other day as I quietly
like Wyoming Wyoming has all
this money in excess money
because they they fully embrace
the whole on gas so as we're
moving towards the clean energy
act that we're gonna here later
tonight and we're moving towards
the green new deal of moving
away from all and gas or where
or are we getting this money I
guess I guess this is going to
come from tax dollars is that
correct madam speaker and and
gentle lady Madam speaker gentle
lady the program has to be
evaluated each year based on the
data and based on the financial
and economic outlook that's
provide us with on a monthly
level or quarterly level by LFC.
Thank you
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
I'm getting a good I'm getting a
good understanding of this is
what it looks like that that is
we're giving free college nobody
there's no any kind of thing
where nobody apply for
scholarship there's nothing
where you do any type of
community service at all like
sweeping the floor which is
honestly something that my
husband did when he went through
college they have ways that you
can repay the school actually
doing work so when I'm seeing is
a cost to taxpayers of seventy
five million dollars for people
to have a free college when is
somebody said earlier they
really don't have any skin in
the game.
Because I'm gonna tell you.
One of the biggest heroes in my
life is my husband.
As one the reasons I'm fell
madly in love with him just
because.
He had a wife at the time and he
had two small children and he
wanted to improve his life so he
got a job and Idaho at the
national lab and he started as a
rad tech and in that era when
you started as a rad tech what
they would do is they would
periodically offer ways for you
to get your bachelor's and your
master's degree for free.
You work for the lab you work
for it to me I thought my god
this man has such amazing
character to have a family
worked forty hours a week he
went to college at night and it
took them twelve years to get
his master's degree I could not
be any prouder of him because
that is what I feel that people
should do to go to college if
you want to go to college there
are loans there are real
scholarships you apply for their
you can get a job you can sweep
the floors as what what he did
when he first went to college
she swept the floors to pay for
part of a schooling there's
other ways you can do and there
is one other really great way
that you can get a free
education.
It's called the military.
You can join the military my
husband did too he went to the
Coast Guard academy his kids all
went to will one of these kids
want to can we so the military
is also another great option so
I appreciate that my husband was
in the military and I appreciate
that he worked with the family
he had a wife and kids and went
to school at night every night
for twelve years solid and got
his degree.
And to me.
I think going to colleges about
putting in the hard work to get
they're not handing anything for
free.
You go there's other ways you
can get into college there's all
kinds of ways or scholarships
and everything and I think it
truly.
I guess I would have so much
heartburn about it if they at
least had to do something like
paint walls or.
Clean at night or something they
were doing something in a trade
it wasn't just handed to you you
have to work for it because when
I work for things I mean imagine
if we ran for office and is
handed to us we have to do
anything we have to raise money
to go knock on doors it means so
much more when you fight for
this so I'm a true believer in
the American spirit you fight
for what you want you work for
what you want and if you can't
do that you can also join the
military and you can get your
college paid for so I will be
voting no on this because I want
the American dream to live on
and I want people to fight for
what they want thank you madam
speaker and gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia
counties Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam speaker just
figure tell the facility yield.
So so speaker the voices coming
from above.
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you thank you gentle lady
I apologize for being the voice
from above to this evening I did
want to ask you a couple quick
questions about your bill.
and these are just sort of
Just general questions
in late the gentleman from Santa
that.
The points that the that led to
a larger point I think I have a
larger point at the end as well.
my first question is do you
think getting an education
provides a brighter future.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I think for most people it does
but it's a personal passed the
personal choice to take that
have.
So it's really a personal thing
in general for adults who
decided to go back to school or
go to school for the first time
it does represent some of the
steps to a brighter future.
Speaker jelly I think that's a
great answer I have a I have a
very fancy Education
I don't think you need a fancy
Education.
I think a lot of people.
You know I I hope we get our
young people through high
school.
I also hope you in high school
we teach things like financial
literacy but we're still working
on that
but you don't need a fancy
education but I also think in
education opens doors so I think
that's a good.
Do you think.
Education in general can help
break the cycle of poverty.
Yes madam speaker and gentleman
I do believe that education can
be a powerful tool and breaking
the cycle of poverty and raising
up an individual and their
family and even their community.
Thank you still in the the madam
speaker gentle lady I agree with
you again.
And and my third question is.
Do you think if we.
If we have an educational
system.
A primary secondary
that opens doors that the.
Creates brighter futures that
breaks the cycle of poverty.
Do you think in the long run
that will help address the crime
problem.
In New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentleman
absolutely when people are
empowered winds education means
to pull out literally to pull
out the potential and the
goodness within so as students
and young people discover the
power within and that there's
other paths to achievement
other than crime then they can
get help and it can change the
trajectory of their lives and
the lives of their family and
their community.
Gentlelady again we agree and
The other ten ladies there were
transformational.
I think that's very out I think
this bill helps.
It helps address the crime issue
no longer and it's literally
economic development for New
Mexico they're trained workforce
not only helps us attract
employers but also
By that workforce with more
opportunities with with
hopefully a better income and
that is all good for economic
development.
And I think something like this
is truly transformational for
New Mexico.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much for this bill.
There's further debate.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I think I'll
start with full disclosure.
Madam speaker gentle lady you
know and most of the people on
this floor no that I am a high
school teacher.
I have been a high school
teacher for thirty two years so
my perspective on this front
from the get go is biased.
I have been in this career for
so long in part because.
Okay I'm gonna let the secret
out of the bank madam speaker.
Because teaching is a heck of a
lot of fun.
And I have fun every day I do it
but the other reason madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Is because I believe.
To the core of my being.
That education is the route.
To economic security.
And economic growth.
Not just for individual New
Mexicans but for our state.
Education is the path by which
we will grow our economy in the
state.
Still are workforce shortages in
our state that we constantly
madam speaker talk about in this
chamber.
In every is essential field we
are short workers.
Education madam speaker is the
route by which we will create
that work force.
For individual New Mexicans
education is the route.
By which they up skill retool.
And their ability to grow the
ability to feed families.
To find homes.
To set aside that fifty dollars
a month so their kids can go to
college.
Madam speaker gentle lady it's
the pass that will allow them to
set aside a little nest egg for
their dignified retirement.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
education.
Is how we leverage our assets as
a state and as individuals
linguistic assets cultural
assets in eight talent
intelligence persistence and
dedication we leverage all of
that.
Through education.
Madam speaker gentle lady
education is also the way we
overcome the obstacles.
That we constantly discuss in
this chamber.
We now.
That New Mexico is a high
poverty state.
We know we have been educated in
this chamber that our children.
Face a high number of aces.
And at this point madam speaker
gentle lady it's the adults in
New Mexico who have lived with a
variety of traumas.
That access to this education so
madam speaker and gentle lady I
rise in support.
This tool that I agree is
transformational.
It has the power to change the
lives of New Mexicans all across
the state.
In particular madam speaker and
gentle lady this piece of
legislation is exciting because
it allows folks who are adults.
Who maybe couldn't go to school
right after finishing their
secondary education.
Or chose not to.
Back in the game.
To level.
Madam speaker and gentle lady is
a high school teacher I see
eighteen year olds all the time
who graduate from high school
and aren't necessarily ready or
don't necessarily know what
they're going to do next.
And it will be later in life.
Possibly after some screw ups.
They realize.
I do more I want to do more for
my children for myself I am able
to do more I am ready to do
more.
I believe madam speaker and
gentle lady I heard on this
chamber tonight.
That no one has missed the
opportunity for education
because of a lack of funding.
And I have to stand here madam
speaker and gentle lady and say
after working with more than
five thousand.
Students across my career.
That is absolutely not the case.
I have students graduating high
school who can't go on to school
because yes New Mexico
Hallelujah has a lottery
scholarship.
But it doesn't cover fees it
doesn't cover housing if it
doesn't put the income and the
families hands that they need.
To pay for the roof over their
heads.
It doesn't help the five
siblings coming up behind.
Funding and education is not
easy or we would not be talking
Madam speaker gentle lady about
the student debt crisis.
Page on them in New Mexico I
believe is about thirty thousand
dollars a student.
It is not easy.
But it is.
Path forward to raise in New
Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
to have some concerns that have
been expressed tonight about
funding.
The fact that we are using
nonrecurring funding to start a
program.
But there are three reasons.
What I'm going to voted favor
anyway over that concern and
beyond I believe in education.
One madam speaker gentle lady
have you looked at the LFC
economic projections for the
state of New Mexico recently.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
have.
Well madam speaker gentle lady
they're looking pretty good for
variety of reasons the federal
GDP is on a trajectory upward.
Just enter oil and gas
projections are good.
We know they're volatile madam
speaker gentle lady we know that
contains however right now in
the world we have some tension.
In Europe we have some tension
in Asia.
These things unfortunate as they
are.
Do tend to keep oil and gas
prices high.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
So one of our projections look
pretty good Madam speaker and
gentle lady second.
Madam speaker gentle lady how
many people are currently right
now this semester.
In college pursuing a degree
using what we call it the old
rule the opportunity
scholarship.
Madam speaker gentle lady seven
thousand.
Three hundred fifteen seven
thousand three hundred fifteen
as of today.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady and I believe a couple
thousand of those students will
have the rug pulled out from
under them.
If we do not pass this bill
tonight.
Because of language in house
bill two madam speaker gentle
lady
if that defines that scholarship
was only for two year and credit
bearing certifications.
Those students currently
pursuing a four year degree with
this scholarship would not have
it next August.
And I am not willing madam
speaker gentle lady to do that
two twenty five hundred students
here in the state of New Mexico
when we have good economic
projections that give us time.
To figure this out.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
The third reason that I'm
willing to invest this right now
even though it's nonrecurring.
Is because madam speaker gentle
lady that will give us one year.
To collect the data to measure
the need how many people are
going to take advantage of this
cool are they where are they
across our state.
So that we can craft a
comprehensive and long term
sustainable answer but madam
speaker gentle lady right now
when we have these funds and
when we have this need.
I ask every member of this house
to together make this investment
in New Mexicans and their
future.
And I committed along with the
gentle lady who spoke earlier to
continue working during interim
to find a long term solution.
To sustainable funding.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Catherine
Sikora Valencia counties
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady yield yes madam
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from those three counties.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady this is a robust discussion
tonight on the house floor.
One of my questions is.
First of all and forgive me
Madam speaker gentle lady if
you.
said this and I missed it but
does it cover any kind of
education vocational.
that and and then the second
part of that question is did I
hear you say something about you
qualify if workforce solutions.
Determines it's a high need in
New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes in collaboration with the
higher education department and
the workforce solutions high
needs area
they pinpoint which areas those
are in and currently we got the
list of the department of
workforce solutions fast is
going high needs areas and these
include wind solar energy
technicians and we all know
health care professionals
including educators we've all
encountered that information
technology what are the growing
certificate areas is
cybersecurity we sure read into
that computer science all the
stem fields which is science
technology
How could I forget and mass as
well as all the health related
construction and trades
education teachers educational
assistants.
The and so your staff social
workers therapists interpreters
and translations translators
those are currently the kind of
list that the higher education
department would review with the
department of workforce
solutions.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kind lady so every year a
new list would come out and
that's what to do we would
encourage.
That's what we would use to
determine whether we were paying
for their college education or
not.
Madam speaker gentle a great
question every year they would
release it but if you start the
year that you start you follow
through the trajectory so it's
not like all you know please we
need nurses you start out on a
nurse in the next year we don't
need to know you would continue
that trajectory as long as you
wanted to up to getting a
bachelor's.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kind lady I thought that I
had heard you say that about
workforce solutions so.
I had remember this conversation
the conversation I had with some
some lobbyists or someone for a
few years back where.
I said you know I would I would
kind of be and for free college
if.
It was the.
Map the needs that we were
lacking in the state of New
Mexico.
And so I actually appreciate the
list.
one of my other questions madam
speaker and gentle lady is why
would we not just change the
lottery instead of creating a
whole new fund.
Madam speaker internally that's
a very good question the lottery
scholarship is really focused on
recent high school graduates.
and that has now been funded.
It is now going to be hundred
percent funded for the next four
years.
The lottery scholarship requires
full time education like fifteen
units for semester what's
different about the opportunity
scholarship is that it meets our
adults.
Where they're at so they don't
have to take fifteen units and I
know there's some superstar
people out there that do handle
family
full time school and full time
working but most people can't so
this allows a person to take
consecutive semesters six
credits anymore up to eighteen
if they can handle more
it meets them in a way that
adjusts to their personal
situation.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kindly the I
I for several years now we've
been talking about changing the
lottery scholarship for after
two years of being out of high
school they could still go back
and access it so this would
actually cover the students who
don't go to college right out of
high school is that correct yes
madam speaker and gentle lady
this means they can get that
kind of financial assistance you
know I know people they are sick
of school even Hey love school
they're just tired of it the
travel around the world for a
year they work for a year they
do something else for a year and
then they can't get the lottery
scholarship because a sixteen
months or you know in special
cases where they've done a
church mission or something like
that has expired this allows
them to go back and get the kind
of financial assistance they
would no longer be eligible for
with the lottery scholarship.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady for those
answers.
How is this going to affect.
The.
Grading that we do for higher
education as far as attendance.
We're not really attendance but
Enrollment.
House is going to affect a rolm
enrollment and graduation rates.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
there's several things that are
at play here
it could speed up graduation for
many because summer courses of
at least three to nine credits
which is you know the shorter
period.
Students can go three they can
go fall.
spring and summer so for some
people that are focus that'll
speed up their graduation.
Hold on for a second.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this helps retention actually
lottery students because the
lottery students don't get
credit for summer they can
actually use opportunity
scholarship to go to summer
school if they have to raise up
the grade point average to keep
the lottery scholarship it gives
some support for them to regain
that.
Thank you madam speaker and and
kind lady so actually they don't
need to do that because they can
just.
Go into the opportunity
scholarship.
And so
you know telling the difference
in the the different avenues
whether it's opportunity or
lottery.
is going to get confusing in my
mind
and so you know every year
We look at report cards for
higher education.
Their graduation rate their
enrollment.
And so I'm I'm worried this is
going to skew that information.
That we
hold them accountable for
whether the do we like it or we
don't I'm afraid it might skew
that information.
So another thing that I wanted
to bring out is.
A lot of employers Madam speaker
gentle lady.
Use paying for employee.
college vocational whatever it
is as an incentive.
To come work for us.
We will train you we will pay
for your education we will.
Help you get housing we will
give you great medical
insurance.
But now employers will have to
do that.
And so it kind of disincentive
vises that.
And I'm I'm so a little bit
nervous madam speaker gentle
lady that it might actually.
Keep people from going to work
for those employers.
What are your thoughts on that.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
You know a lot of small
businesses don't have those kind
of incentives Ms and many of the
businesses
Have courses that are not credit
bearing.
And the businesses pay for those
because this the opportunity
scholarship.
Only covers credit bearing
programs so some employers have
courses that they pay for like a
boot camp or something that
would not be covered by the
opportunity scholarship and plus
some of the
some people won't seek out the
opportunity scholarship because
they have that kind of support
that's track to the business
Amazon in my district does that.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I I think there are
businesses in the state of New
Mexico that are.
Doing their best to try to
attract good employees taking on
Apprenticeships and other things
of.
You know.
For I think this could this
could possible be possibly be
something negative great for the
the student.
But I think.
Thinking that it's going to
create more work force I'm not a
hundred percent sure about that
the other thing is is what
happens.
The elephant in the room is
madam speaker gentle lady.
What happens in the year.
When we don't have the money to
pay for it.
And what happens in the year.
Like in twenty seventeen when we
were sweeping every single
agency we possibly could we had
no capital outlay we were
sleeping schools what happens
and how do we break the news to
the students.
madam.
Speaker and gentle lady
important question and if you
look.
if you look at section.
I.
Permit rulemaking and reporting
I believe it is just like the
lottery scholarship where they
had to you know sometimes that
right now we're going to be a
hundred percent for the next
four years it was sixty percent
another year it says on page
seven the department shall
promulgate rules setting forth
explicit re criteria in
accordance with the opportunity
scholarship act for
qualifications and the number
two calculating the total amount
of money necessary to pay for
opportunity scholarships at age
eligible institution of let's
see when we go down just.
Thank you.
I like having an expert witness
where you don't have to provide
everything on yourself of Madam
speaker gentle lady on the on
page four it says scholarships
shall be awarded to qualified
eligible students in an amount
not to exceed one hundred
percent of tuition and fees
after all other state financial
aid has been applied.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
it would it doesn't have to be a
hundred percent every year.
It could be at the average
tuition as is currently the
practice of the lottery
scholarship.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I to like many
speakers before and concerned
about the recurring funding.
I I did sit on the higher
education subcommittee.
I have as of right now I have
New Mexico tech in my district.
I think colleges and madam
speaker and gentle lady as a
whole.
They talked about all summer how
can they recruit and retain.
And I know when my children went
to college.
I fought tooth and nail.
To.
Get them any kind of
scholarship.
Madam speaker gentle lady but I
also I ran into lots of brick
walls.
I had a daughter the transferred
from one college to another.
She was on a pole vaulting
scholarship.
One day she was done I'm sure
I'm transferring.
Should take two summers.
Of catch up.
Because the college didn't
accept her
The classes that she took from
the other college we've since
fixed about but it was too late
for my daughter who I had to pay
for all of those extra credits.
Then she had to teach within a
sixty mile radius to her student
teaching within a sixty mile
radius.
Madam chair madam speaker gentle
lady.
So I think that there is a lot a
lot of things that colleges
could do to help recruit and
retain.
Not only for.
The lottery not only for the
opportunity.
But for the every day student
that's fighting tooth and nail
to go to college.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
other thing that I do believe in
is that.
We have to be careful.
And I I have full confidence
that they will promulgate rules
to be careful but I don't want
to.
bind future legislatures.
in this amount of money Madam
speaker gentle lady.
I guess we'll put our big girl
pants on when we're making these
decisions giving and taking.
And I hope that doesn't ever
have to happen Madam speaker
gentle lady.
But I also know that I would
really hope that all the
educators in the room.
Would make sure.
To advocate for going to college
but to advocate for doing
something different and not make
children feel.
Less because they don't go to
college.
thank you madam speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Dunn and grant
and Sierra.
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gently please feel.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you very much well speaker
David Lee.
You know I know education's
important it's important to all
of us some it's something that
we.
What been listening to and past
couple hours I guess we'll find
that it's important very very
important.
it's just that
We sometimes have disagreements
on how to get there and how to
get children into the bot
Education I don't think there's
a single person here that
doesn't want a kid to be
educated well educated I don't
think there's a single person
here that doesn't want them to
have a good paying job.
A good career.
Home and happiness and outcomes
with education all that.
And you know we all have done it
differently I mean no one of
those guys that had a
scholarship but I.
Kind of similar to what the
representative just explained
earlier administrative
personally aware.
We make choices and I was going
to go to one college and I
decided to go another and I lost
my scholarship and so I decided
I just Senator I had decided
that I'm just gonna put it on my
own.
And this was before obviously
the callers callers should Madam
speaker gentle lady and I had to
work a full time job and beyond
those times at two jobs three
jobs
as you all know how
administrative facility on a
funeral directors who worked in
the more tree business so I
would make my extra money by
removing of the scenes during
the night and to pay my bills
and to pay my screen and many
times I slept in the coffee room
DFA's my.
School and my.
apartment was fifty miles away.
The times I was a I was a
stalker grocery store and I've
worked all night graveyard in
the go to school the next day I
understand all that it's hard
and we want our children we
wanted our new the next
generation to have a little
easier than we did.
And I fully agree with that.
Also have five children Madam
speaker gentle lady and they're
all different of some to the
children that
Senator salutatorian I have a
top ten student.
And then I have it in the older
ones and then the the one that
didn't want to go to college I
want to go through and I spoke
about it before Madam speaker
gentle lady.
She wanted to recount three.
And get our education that way.
Sermon that is no I tell my kids
I got two other ones of those my
freeloaders a concrete or
specific facility because
they're still in elementary and
and and junior high.
But what I'm going with this is
there's a path for everyone.
And we wanted to be I think
everyone here agrees miles
because only that we all wanted
to be as simple and as easy as
possible.
I also agree though or I also
think though that they have to
have.
More than just going to school.
And and and want to go to school
and learn.
And all of us have done that I
was just talking to legislators
earlier and I said I remember.
When high school I mean I got a
three point five GPA but it was
just enough to get my dad not to
get upset with me speaker gentle
lady.
When I started my own college
let me tell you.
You you're paying for each each
credit hour and.
I graduated with exactly the
amount of credits needed to get
my master's degree.
So it just shows goes to show
you don't you don't want to
waste anything we have a little
skin in the game.
I think New Mexico has tried
their best.
We can always do better but
there they've tried their best
madam speaker to.
Educate.
Our children and give them that
opportunity.
And and so but I think for
failing for in that we're not
we're we're investing in our
kids.
And some of them are taking
advantage of it madam speaker
gentle lady for educating them
for other states.
Other places they don't come
back they don't stay home.
And so you know I I was going
to.
Sponsor bill and and I'm working
on it for it's more of a loan to
service bill Madam speaker
gentle lady the only reason I
bring that up is it you know all
of us are trying to yes stop
here that's positive but we're
not all going to have the right
language in the every bill and
so you know administrative judge
only that's the beautiful thing
of all of us working together
and listening to one another is
trying to get the best ideas
into these bills so that.
We benefit our children benefit
the state of New Mexico budget
reaching these children.
And so I I'm with my question
was is there any language and
your bill that helps retain.
Our students in New Mexico.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
I think the fact that this bill
targets people that are older.
So that are no longer eligible
for the lottery scholarship
there people who put their roots
here they live here they have
families here I have jobs here
and they're not planning to move
to another state they've lived
here they worked here and they
want to take a new path.
enter one of these careers that
didn't even maybe exist you know
when they graduated from high
school so I think by the very
fact that is targeting.
No Way pass high school
population in itself speaks for
the fact that these people are
going to stay here.
So madam speaker gentle lady
maybe obviously missed this does
this mean that someone caught
graduating from high school.
A person graduate from high
school as an eligible for this
benefit personally.
Madam speaker Mr chairman a
person within the sixteen months
of graduated from high school is
eligible for the lottery
scholarship this is for people
who are beyond that.
You madam speaker gently so
sixteen months after the
graduate.
Madam speaker.
Gentlemen yes this would be
people who did not go directly
into a post secondary New Mexico
institution after high school.
Or
for another acceptable reason.
To madam speaker generally so
this could be may before student
that.
Maybe one to the first semester
or didn't sign up because
there's if I kids in one school
so.
They have to sign up within that
first semester it and and after
the first semester the that
student or the parent or
whatever has to financially
figure the first semester if I
understand this correctly and
then after that the lottery
scholarship starts working is
that correct Madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and kind gentlemen
the higher into educational
institutions have a bridge
scholarship for that first
semester and then the lottery
scholarship Texan this is beyond
that.
Okay so my question on figures
only is so let's just say
someone because I'm just trying
to get centers in my mind so but
the student goes in and maybe
fails Our Jobs drop salvaged
stops decides to stop going to
school for whatever reason I
mean whether they flunked out or
the just.
For burnt out or they just
decided I'm not doing this I'm
going to go to work in just a
fund whatever it is.
That student has an ability to
come back madam speaker gentle
lady yes madam speaker and
gentleman yes that person.
It could be you know two years
ago could be five years could be
ten years they will now be
eligible to apply for the
opportunity scholarship and
figure generally in in in a way
I think that's good.
In a way madam speaker that
could be maybe not so good
because I go they burned maybe
through us and through the use
were burned but they go through
one.
Program.
That they may not be eligible
for again.
And and then they say well this
is the next one so without maybe
finishing so my question is what
happens of a student speaker
gentle lady is going through a
semester to save
After starting this gonna go
down and halfway through the
semester whatever they drop out
is there any.
Sort of.
On call back or anything are
they will they be able to
continue asking for it again
those are two questions funds
accordingly.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
if there were mitigate
mitigating circumstances I mean
it could be a death in the
family it could be a pregnancy
it could be many things and they
would work that out with the
financial officer but if they
just laughed
that probably wouldn't be
considered a mitigating
circumstance thank you madam
speaker said gently so that the
student would have to then yield
that Madam speaker gentle lady
to I'm sorry I didn't hear too
who.
Madam speaker and gentleman they
would have to apply for a waiver
or some subset somebody's rules
would be promulgated by the
department and concert and with
training in the financial
officers at each of the twenty
nine instead of public New
Mexico institutions of higher
education.
Thank you madam speaker
generally in the and and that's
really where
some massacre gently you know
for the loan for service
programs.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
yes I know what a loan for
services because then you don't
pay it back you pay it back
through a commitment of service
and I I have to this but also
focused on what I was gonna ask
next and maybe I talked over you
did you have any language in
here for anything like that some
something similar or anything
Madam speaker gently no madam
speaker and gentleman no there's
such a variety of high needs
areas like construction the
trade cyber security
there's very fields and this is
not a loan for service programs.
Speaker gentle lady is there
anything in the in the language
and I'm sorry for Mrs faster
generally for target certain
this necessary.
feels or target in anything like
that in this film industry could
only yes Madam speaker and kind
gentleman the department in
collaboration with the workforce
solutions department for those
are those credit earning
certificate programs they're
going to identify the top high
need areas each year the current
areas are wind solar and energy
technicians which you do not
need to be a for their
certificate programs or social
programs health care
professionals we have a crying
need for health care
professionals and educators in
our state information technology
cyber security one of the
fastest growing needs in our
state and in the country is
cybersecurity computer science
all areas of science technology
engineering and mathematics
statisticians engineers
construction there's
construction certificate
programs and a a programs the
various trades education we need
teachers early childhood K.
twelve all sorts of educators
and then we have a great need
for social workers and various
kinds of therapies occupational
therapists physical therapists
and then interpreters and
translators those are all
currently high need areas now
each year they would put they
would agree on what the list was
when you enroll in the program
you choose which one you're
going to go to and then you have
to make progress towards
completing that.
Madam speaker gentle lady I I
think I love the list that
you're giving and I.
If there was any way that I
would have any influence on it
madam speaker gentle lady it
would be that
We would do it by region.
In my in my district
For mining town.
Figure gently we need welders we
need that type of heavy
equipment operators and so forth
and so you know we would need
some of those.
Occupations or professions that
you certificate holders
positions in I would say that
there would be any need for it
madam speaker gentle lady but it
would be in high demand as it
would in in in my district where
mining and ranching and
veterinarian and and I know
that's this and this is going
beyond that but I I I I hope you
get what I'm from going with
madam speaker gentle lady is
that something that would maybe
this would.
To be able to take
Of thought in in maybe doing
something like that
administrative gradually Madam
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
absolutely I think that's why so
many Republicans in the Senate
voted for it because it
acknowledges the needs of
regional
Kamenetz fields of employment
like welders for example hi pain
it's something you can get a
credit bearing certificate even
our high school students are
already getting.
The current certificates when I
was down south in I think it was
in Los crucis at one of our
interim sessions we had high
school students graduating as a
journeyman welder going to get
jobs at sixty and seventy
thousand dollars so yes you're
absolutely right.
Thank you madam speaker
generally is you know I was just
thinking about all of us I thank
you from a family of six and
always do something different
some of us Senator or degree I
have said I have a couple in my
sister who.
I had a baby at a young age and
and had our children went back
to school and and got her degree
and got more degrees and I do
think she's you know and and the
there's others all my brothers
sisters are hands on people and
contractors and and and is all.
Think it's a beautiful thing to
confront the Madam speaker
gentle lady for from our.
I think we haven't talked about
it all but it's so important for
our parents and for us to
encourage.
All the students all the
children to make something of
themselves
we we sometimes give things but
we giving is just one thing
after gently and think it's so
important for us to express the
importance of of them being self
sufficient.
And having them stand on their
own two feet.
because when we're gone.
They won't be able to lean on
this this is certainly massacre
gently I hope to see that we try
to work on on on something like
that I mean that's just a
thought that I think should
should happen amongst us further
toward children grandchildren
nephews nieces nephews whatever
that we always do that so madam
speaker gentle lady one of the
questions that I saw them and
I'm not sure that anyone asked
to
of writing all the stuff down so
what happens to to a student
with a disability.
deserves any change in the the
requirements for GPA or anything
with that I mean the amount of
hours they have to take or their
GPA.
Yes madam speaker chairman great
question on page three lines
eighteen to twenty three it says
students with disabilities are
exceptional mitigating
circumstances may petition for a
waiver of eligibility
requirements per semester basis
the lead financial aid officer
of the public post secondary
institution for tribal college
shall exercise professional
judgment and consideration of
any request for a waiver.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady is so this obviously
disability would fall into that
administrative gentle lady and
and and maybe some hardship of
some sort of figure gentle lady
My questions my next question is
and I don't know if this is been
thought of in the bill and I'm
sorry I honestly didn't read all
of it on
and I try to listen to
everything that was discussed.
What does the.
Is this fun going to paid
directly to the college or to
the student.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
the college reports the amount
spent and the department pays it
directly at the end of the
semester to the college not to
the student.
Thank you madam speaker gently
my other question is and and I.
Hope this is a respectful way of
saying this side I was thank you
Sir
administrative judge only is I
listen to you saying that this
this particular fund.
Covers things that are normal
Lottery scholarship doesn't.
These housing food in a room and
board it did I misunderstand
that massacre gentlelady Mr
speaker excuse me Madam speaker
and kind gentlemen this the
opportunity scholarship covers
tuition and fees and then other
things like the GI bill or a
Pell grant could be used to the
students discretion and let me
add that the
opportunity scholarship comes
after such things as
Representative Baca mentioned
that he got a football
scholarship so all kinds of that
state aid comes first and then
the opportunity scholarship and
then things like the federal
Pell grant or GI bill which
students can use for room and
board and other things kicks in.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady and so because of you know
we have these.
Right now want to.
A young person graduates.
The reason I was asking that is
they graduate and they go to
college.
But the required a lot of a lot
of the colleges are required in
requiring them to stay in the in
the dorms and they're requiring
them to pay
for their food or their room
board there for the I believe I
don't know if it's a first
semester I thought it was a
first year can you.
Help me with a little bit
instruction lady.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
I believe the New Mexico
military institute requires
that.
But none of the secretary of
higher education says at this
point none of the other colleges
require you to live on campus
they may recommend it but it's
not a mandate
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think they have to I I know the
New Mexico state and I believe
that western New Mexico the lady
shaking their head so madam
speaker gentle lady maybe can
she can you please educate me on
that.
Madam speaker and gentlemen to
my expert witness is the
secretary of the higher
education department of
Stephanie Rodriguez.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you said madam secretary sorry
about that misinformed.
so the you get where I'm going
with this Madam speaker gentle
lady my flight again you know I
I I one hours our children.
It's so when I was and and and
and different.
When I was starting my business
one of the things that was
important that they would
explain to us is for us.
When people because I I wanted
to get a loan everybody wants to
get a loan right to when they're
building their business or home
or whatever and and all explain
what I mean by this.
And they're used to tell us.
You have to have skin in the
game.
And so madam speaker gentle lady
I remember wanting having little
to no money and trying to figure
out how I would advance myself
in in in life and and and so
skin in the game is so important
because it makes you it's makes
you more
apt to finishing something
because you're vested in it.
And so madam speaker gentle lady
I appreciate what you do you're
doing here
it is that the one of the big
things that that I've been that
I've been listening to New and
it is a big concern of mine
is the is the funding the
following year if if it's not
there we have certain students
maybe you know whatever that
number is four we cut him back
that are drop by drop all right
or the the lack of them being
the requirements changing madam
speaker gentle lady.
Takes away the their opportunity
and we got him started but we
didn't get him finished do you
have any.
I mean I know you're hoping that
we'll have that this continuing
funding what happens we don't
how many students would be be
hurting if I mean the
potentially because you'll be
helping so many so how many
students could potentially be
hurt by this.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
we know for a fact that we
already have in the budget for
years to thirty six point five
million that's a twenty four
point five million for the two
funds that are being combined
and the twelve million
reoccurring so we do know we
have that much we estimate that
sixty five to seventy five
million is needed so that could
be.
It could be from anywhere from.
Thank you of our Madam speaker
and gentleman we're going to
have to really see how this
plays out in year one
I think it realistically I don't
think that whole seventy five
million is going to be used in
year one so some of that may go
over and be added to the thirty
six point five that we already
know we have for year two.
We do we have to look at the
statistics the effectiveness and
truly have you know our
financial projections be data
driven from what really happens
we.
the secretary estimates that the
high number of students that
will participate could be as
high as thirty thousand.
but again.
Madam speaker and kind gentlemen
the higher education
department's going to be
tracking this very very
seriously so that they can
report to us accurately on
exactly what happens.
Generally I have been asked to
verify.
What I had asked earlier
concerning the first year
residency exemptions for housing
and residential life and I'm
reading here
all students are required to
live on campus for the first
academic year for the for two
semesters you may complete a
residency exemption request a
request form which should
include supporting documents for
your permanent address this is
coming from housing an agency to
dot EDU.
Thank you madam speaker and kind
gentleman that evidently is a
policy at NMSU.
Madam speaker and kind gentlemen
I would just remind the body
that policies change so that may
be the updated current policy at
that particular institution.
Speaker generally the reason I'm
telling you that is because my
children were I have a daughter
that was a salutatorian and.
She had to do that and and and
that's what I'm saying that
madam speaker gentle lady and
and madam speaker gentle lady I
also I sat on the foundation
board for come in and you.
Was from actual university and
so I know I want to say I'm on
the foundation part but I want
to see administrative credulity
it's also requirement there I
don't know but all the others
some of the other universities
but I do know that that is
something that is catching
fraction and so.
All you're making these rules up
I don't know if that's something
madam speaker gentle lady that
could help us tune because that
is one of the biggest deterrents
for them going because they they
get their their tuition rate but
if you look at the the the
housing and and food that must
be paid it's tremendous
administrative regionally and it
would be nice if we're going to
do this to help them get off
their feet those first right
when the first starting on is
that something you guys would
entertain madam speaker gently
Madam speaker and gentleman
rules can be very different by
age and family status many of
the most of the people getting
an opportunity scholarship may
have families they may have
children they need to be well
over that eighteen to twenty two
age bracket so therefore that is
not a consideration of this
piece of legislation this
legislation doesn't pertain to
the qualifications of a first
time students in the seventeen
year old to twenty two year old
range six starting college this
legislation targets more
remember the average age of New
Mexico college students is
twenty six.
and the reason why we have six
credit minimum requirement is so
many of the people who would be
doing the opportunity
scholarship.
R. far older working full time
family situations thank you for
pointing that out.
Speaker gentle lady you're
absolutely right sorry I got
ahead of myself and lost my
train of thought some of the
features only I didn't get the
answer or I didn't catch it when
you said when I asked to if they
drop out during this program.
What happens and all you did you
stole you told me they would
have to file that that read that
waiver right speakers of case
somebody's so they want to get a
third trial or to contract this
unless they file the waiver and
was accepted with is that
correct Mr gently Madam speaker
and kind gentleman if a student
has mitigating circumstances
they can submit that to the the
financial officer and that'll be
considered.
The madam speaker gentle lady I
I hope this helps and I and I
think I already know the answer
to this was a question I had but
I'll just worry about madam
speaker all of those tunes in
the last two years they've been
and on virtual.
And follows you know I don't
think this is going to help them
in any way and not nothing bad
toward your bill I'm just it was
something that was that was on
my mind.
Look at all the all students
that have been on on virtual and
how this is gonna transition and
help but I think this is some of
COVID totally different
issue Madam speaker gently sorry
about that so much my last
question madam speaker gentle
lady is is real simple as the
recipients of the this
scholarship.
Just in the state after getting
a degree.
Madam.
Speaker and gentleman no there's
not a requirement as to where
they live.
and for some of them who go on
to get a mask you know and a
bachelor's degree.
You know that might take longer
because they're taking six eight
or nine credit hours per
semester they're going to be
here for quite a while.
Madam speaker I would love to
sponsor or put a permanent if
you would.
Consider this amendment and
speaker
has it been passed.
Hi I move.
House amendment speaker we don't
have a copy of the amendment I'm
sorry also I will be able for
the finale to the pass it on to
sealed until the the I'm sorry
I'll wait until I think that
this bust up.
Madam speaker I believe the
amendment has been passed out.
I move house amendment number
one to the Senate finance
committee substitute to Senate
bill one forty is amended the
two two numbers point to to.
Two eight five zero point one.
Gentleman to explain them in an.
Thank you madam speaker so.
On on page six between lines
fourteen and fifteen answer the
following the new section.
The following new section
section seven new material.
Residency requirement to fall
back the recipient of a
scholarship so maintain
residency in the state for two
years after receiving an
associate's or bachelor's
degree.
The the department and the
eligible institution field
institute clawback procedures
and attempt to recuperate any
money or benefit received by an
eligible student who does not
comply with section a of this
section.
Is that a friendly amendment.
Madam speaker hello it is not a
friendly amendment and can I
give some explanation.
Gentlelady can.
Yes.
Speaker.
We do not track where the
recipients of lottery
scholarships live
and there's no reason to track
for these people who are already
so many of them the majority of
them would be paying taxes and
living and working and it would
be a unfunded mandate in the
sense that you have to get
Senator FTEs to do it so no it's
a and family amendment.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I'm sorry that you didn't
take it as a from the amendment
but I'd like to roll call vote I
stand for questions of I can.
There is debate on the amendment
the gentleman from all those
counties Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman from million of grant
and cedar counties yield I do Mr
Chairman Jonah I really am glad
to see you put forth this
ammendment it comes to my mind
that there's minimum residency
requirement well is a twelve
month was a twelve month Sir so
madam speaker John.
So with a little planning a
person could come here just a
little ahead of time get in
education for free and then just
move on move on to another place
we would need to win to reap any
of the benefits of the for the
the education that our state
paid for
wonder.
would they have to have a job
well the.
after the graduated or they just
have to stay in the state for.
For food time how would that
work mmhm figure gentleman you
know I I was worried about some
of the things you brought up and
that's why I wanted to bring
this amendment because.
We're educating the state of New
Mexico has probably educated are
tremendous amount of students
that have left the state end up
as a balance of the there's
different reasons it's not just
that and and.
We we want to just make sure
that we retain them here of one
of the things that I was worried
about administrative Grisham and
is.
Is how they would verify the
residency
would that be to appeal box
number or someone could love
someone else somewhere else
maybe within with the a roommate
in another state especially
since some of the boring areas
this is in Los crucis they live
in el Paso or you know some of
the other areas that more other
states and maybe level someone.
An aunt it could be of of
significant other whatever and
hold their their
maybe their address still at
home with their parents and that
is to know how they would verify
that Mr gentleman so madam
speaker gentleman if I lived in
Amarillo.
And I came over and worked for
Jack Chatfield on the rates for
a while.
Then I would be eligible for the
scholarship correct.
Figure gentleman I believe if
you just for the twelve months
the show if you if you just
state and I don't know if that's
a stated this is my my my issue
is I don't know if it's just a
stated
A statement that you just feel
check a box was there if there's
any verification Madam speaker
John so madam speaker gentleman
that you know as I was listening
awhile ago what is it what did I
understand that this is mostly
technical type of training or is
it any college.
Madam speaker gentleman it
actually there was a litany of
of different vocational and and
and regular colleges that they
could go to those of a lot of
specified
I guess education what it called
employment opportunities I guess
Sir or careers that that the
specified I can't remember all
alone I just remember some of
them so I don't want them I
don't want to start spilling
about and I don't because I
don't have it in front of me
miss madam speaker John.
So madam speaker gentleman was
is specific degrees or was it
just any any degree.
Madam speaker delimited seem to
be that it was a certain number
that are certain litany of them
that they were focused on but it
seemed like they were going to
possibly
treat you know look at different
regions is what I've talked to
the bill sponsor about so madam
speaker gentleman you I really
I really think it's a great idea
I just have to have to really
Take heart my vote
Representative Harper spoke
about and I know that myself and
my kids we went through the fire
to get where we had a job in and
I think it's good for you it's
not pleasant but sometimes it's
just good for you and the.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
I am concerned that someone
would come here get their
education and then just move on
to another state New Mexico at
the current time doesn't have.
As many opportunities as a as a
few of our neighboring places
and I think it's a great idea.
I'm a little concerned that we
might not get the results.
Madam speaker gentleman I know
the gentle lady's heart is in
the right place I have some
concern about the actual way
this this I bill would be put on
the ground.
Gentleman I believe that the
bill's sponsors heart is
absolutely in the right place
and I'm not trying to to push
down her legislation I'm just
trying to
add to it and maybe and has a
little bit you know given my
little sissy it's something that
I that I saw as a as an issue
only because we have just
invested so much into the
students and to watch him leave
the state we have such a huge
unemployment right now it would
be nice to have some sort of a a
way to to retain I'm here fill
some of the positions are in
great need
it's it's it's that's that's
really what I'm trying to do Mr
gentleman.
So madam speaker gentleman thank
you for the conversation thank
you for helping me understand
this a little bit better.
And the.
You.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker.
I moved to close debate Madam
speaker will there still debate
on this ammendment the if we
would love to have a little bit
of discussion on this debate
it just requires a residency
after someone attains a.
Of a a degree and madam speaker
and gentleman really just in
five minutes on debate on this
ammendment.
Mr speaker.
The gentleman we have the three
hours the gentleman's motion is
in order what we'll do is close
debate.
Then we will vote on the
amendment then we will vote on
the bill.
And the speaker would we have
requested a roll call vote and
Mister speaker I'd like to make
a call on the house.
Okay.
The house.
Members to your season stay in
your seats Representative
Pettigrew tier C. please Sir.
Representative Pettigrew please
your seat Representative lower
tier C. please Representative
Chatfield version of les.
Representative Herrerra to your
seats please.
