And then we will be concluded
with our business gentlelady
from Bernalillo Mr speaker I
move that we go to that order of
Business messages in addition it
is so ordered.
Click to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill one with
emergency clause and returned
same here with respectfully
submitted shared data on chief
clerk Mrs will be entered.
Delayed delayed from earlier.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker and rolling and
influencing Committee to home
has been referred house bill one
with emergency clause has had it
under consideration and reports
that same has been duly inroad
into girls preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted.
Cynthia Borrego chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption of a federal
committee report on house bill
one with an emergency clause.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
This post may.
The eyes have it reported up to.
The.
The record reflect the dually
enrolled in gross copies of
house bill one with an emergency
clause were signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
Illegal.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business messages to no
objection it is so ordered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of house bill one
with emergency clause has been
read in full inside by the
officers of the Senate and open
session and returned same here
with respectfully submitted
sherry due to on Senate chief
clerk this is will be entered.
Really.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Read members thank you for a
good start to the session I hope
you all enjoy some much needed
time off.
New Mexico Philadelphia Eagles.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until ten thirty
Monday morning.
I see no objections the houses
in recess until ten thirty AM.
