Dixon Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
By your Sarinana.
Here.
We have a quorum.
so there's a couple people not
here already
is there another meetings Idaho
Representative Garcia has a bill
money I I have a bill money
plaque so I think there's gonna
be a lot of you out today we
will
Stick to our custom of not
taking a vote due to the
temporary absence in the
temporary absence of a member.
I believe everyone.
I don't think anyone's like LESC
are gone for the day I think
everyone's just juggling other
commitments.
so we'll do that.
In person my absence by your
turn on the
will take over any questions or
comments or announcements from
the committee.
And that the webcast working the
okay good.
Okay so first up we have.
House bill one twenty one water
right these effective date with
Representative Chandler and
etcetera.
thank you Mr chair and good
morning committee members This
bill relates to the water
leasing Act.
And it is intended to.
Clearly rectify a problem that
has arisen in the state
engineers office.
In terms of how they have chosen
to interpret the water leasing
Act.
In about twenty fifteen the
state engineer adopted a
practice of what they refer to
as preliminary approval water
leases.
That is a practice that is
nowhere to be found in statute
it is the full just the creation
of the engineer's office and
what it allows the state
engineer to do is it in our
opinion.
Creates a situation where the
engineers in fact violating the
due process of water rights
holders when he does he or she
chooses to implement that
practice.
All of you know I'm sure that
someone who holds a water right.
It has a property interest.
And that's true of the person
wishing to lease the water right
or transfer of the water right
or and the people who may be
impacted by the transfer we all
know that we.
Water is derived from offers
and.
People are intertwined in terms
of the impacts of use of that
awful for.
And what the state engineer has
chosen to do because he is
found it may be inconvenient to
follow what we contend is due
process is he has found a work
around where he has given
himself the authority to
preliminary approval lease and
if there's a protest put the
burden on the protesters to
wait.
And challenge that in the wake
can be just as long as two to
six years so someone who's water
right may be impaired by the
decision of an administrative
official could be impaired and
not be able to rectify the
situation for some period of
time now.
This is this approach was
challenged in the fifth District
Court of New Mexico that's the
district that covers the south
east corner of the state and
that district judge has found
that what the state engineer is
doing is not in conformance with
the law.
that decision was initially
appealed but the state engineer
has withdrawn the appeal thereby
precluding our ability to get a
statewide decision.
It's my understanding that the
state engineer is not using this
practice in the fifth district
and is that right okay and then
instead using it where the
decision not jurisdiction ends
so to me that is almost a tacit
acknowledgement that there is a
problem with what the state
engineer is doing and he's
chosen not to litigate any furs
to because of the possible
consequences of that fact so
this bill simply adds Mr chair
the provisions of the water
thing after that explicitly
says.
After the application for leases
maybe notice and opportunity for
hearing are provided in the
application is approved in
accordance with the certain two
sections those two sections
requires a pre a pre
determination hearing not a post
determination Mr chair and
committee members and I I think
with that I will ask if I may
have senator Wirth share some
information with you as well
Sanchez.
Good morning Mr chair thank you
for the chance to present on
this bill
I first carried this exact
legislation in twenty fifteen
with Representative anti noon
yes it passed the Senate twenty
nine to nine that didn't get a
hearing that here in the house
what's frustrating about this
bill is that I think it's kind
of a unique situation that we're
actually.
Putting in place a statutory
clarification to a statute that
I think it's pretty clear on its
face.
And what we now have based on
the fifth district K. a judge
Romero and I want to be clear
who the parties workers I think
that's important Carlsbad
irrigation district challenged a
whole string of leases that have
been given to intrepid potash
and basically judge Romero.
His decision
is abundantly clear not only
that the statute on its face
doesn't allow this but the
underlying regulations that the
state engineer issued based on
the statute which require a
permit before you can proceed
forward also support the
interpretation of the statute
that we're trying to now make
even more clear the other thing
that's just happened that I
think is important is a member
of your committee representative
Garcia I asked our new Attorney
General for an attorney
general's opinion which I
received last night I'm not sure
if you have that all yes you've
got it
and our Attorney General also
has taken the position that the
use of this statute for the
practice that has been happening
of these preliminary approvals.
Is not legal so again I think
that for the reasons that have
been stated we're talking about.
Due process and water which are
incredibly important
concepts and and are bedded
throughout our code and really
what this bill does is simply
make it absolutely clear that
that process has to be followed
so when there is a protest.
The the application needs to
stop let me just say this there
there is a statutory provision
that allows for emergency
transfers of water that's
different than what's happening
here
and so.
Again you're gonna hear a lot of
opposition and and a desire by
the state engineer to have this
authority and that's certainly
something that the legislature
can consider if a bill is
introduced to do that
and I think that's a discussion
needs to happen.
What's frustrating though is
that the current practice that's
gone on for for many years now
and continues to this day
despite this District Court
decision is allowing this to
happen in in violation of the
language in the statute and so I
think this just clarifies it and
that's the purpose of the bill
and certainly we have Mr David
Benavidez here who can get into
some specifics if you like to
hear this morning thank you Mr
chair I also got a bill in the
high thirties on a beach up a
little too thank you.
thank you Representative
Chandler like your expertise.
The manager should be taken for
questions Mr chair I would
propose we save Mr Bennett yes
for questions.
I'm fine with that so just by
a show of hands of the public
who would like to speak on this
just like it says a lot so
so we're gonna do some
guidelines for small generally
no more than two minutes per
person of two opposition first
support what we have been doing
is doing to prove and they going
online so.
Opposition support
no more than two Mr person and
we will do
Have our for side the more than
half our side
yeah and.
Got stable time for people
online so if it's running late
we might not get everyone in the
room to my go online maybe
there's time left over we can
come back.
That's it if we should do have
our opposition interim online
and then you have our support.
Okay before we get to that so we
have public testimony appreciate
that I do see the general
counsel of the office each year
I would I would like to give him
an opportunity to address us
before we we do public.
Senator he and use the
microphone.
Just so we can all here in.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and sponsors are
I'm not checkers and the general
counsel for the state engineer
and I we I don't want to take
too much time we can talk about
sort of the legal nitty gritty
of our interpretation of the
water usually sing Act versus
other interpretations I'm I'm
not gonna do that right here
right now but what I wanted to
say is we do recognize very
strongly the need to protect
exists all existing water rights
owners whatever somebody wants
to change a water right or
transfer watery or these water
right so we have.
Locally available guidelines and
models and regulations that
establish how we are going to
look at effects on other water
rights owners when we when we
get applications under any of
our statutes including the water
usually sing Act to the best of
my knowledge I haven't seen any
Ation even that somebody has
been prevented from using their
water right as a result of a
temporary lease of water did was
preliminary Lee approved I
haven't seen any allegation that
somebody
There well when dryer the you
know they didn't have water at
their head gate as a result of
any of these practices we do
recognize there have been
there's been a lot of concern I
myself have been involved in
litigation to to rein in some of
the preliminary approvals
the we are open to limits to
protect interests that folks
believe her heart are are
potentially harms we take to
process very seriously and we're
open to to reasonable limits
that would ensure that this
practice would not be harming
folks the mere fact that.
Some people are allowed to to
use water under this practice
without prior to a hearing
Kering should happen only
limited circumstances but that
alone doesn't deprive other
people of water again we have an
extensive open process where we
the need people to pass through
that process before any of these
transfers happen in that process
ensures that other folks are not
deprived of water so we are
again open to limits on the
practice we would very we're
very open to clarifying the
legal situation
there's only been a few in a
handful of instances since the
general merit session came down
that we have
considered preliminary approvals
because we are we are mindful we
don't want to you know be
skirting you know any any
interpretation often the
judiciary but this.
This bill which is a complete
you know drive the process it's
it's our belief that it does not
adequately
give us the tools to to meet
some of the needs that our
business and our construction
communities need across the
state there's only a few other
limited instances in which water
it's can be transferred quickly
prior to hearing as the sponsor
and and senator Wirth added
emergency approvals are one of
those that's only for
emergencies if people have a
short term business need we
don't we don't think of those
emergencies and if if that's the
case there's only a very very
small quantity of water that
they could be transferred under
existing law that doesn't meet
the business needs of of frankly
New Mexico and so we as an
agency or sort of chasing we
have folks trying to to move
water to to meet their needs and
without preliminary approvals
there's there's a gap in what's
In in what they can do it again
our highest interest is
protecting existing water rights
owners we have always done that
will continue to do that we
welcome limits on the practice
but you know we we are in
opposition today to the bill
thank you.
Thank thank you for that there
working at Rio source are locked
until the need.
if you would like to speak in
opposition will start to let
please raise your hand if such a
down the road district.
Morning
my name is Wayne lo and.
Cables
The
building.
Because of the.
The protests are.
Members.
Committee my name is Liz Taylor
and a waterfall European Water
lawyer New Mexico for about two
years along with that hi what
law school classmates here
they've been in the business
center work
hi Representative San Juan water
commission which is a regional
water authority in San Juan.
And also represents sort of
energy services which using
watersport but we need to for
the next working which the act.
Thank you that better I
apologize
and I I also represents like
energy services which is a water
supplier to the oil and gas
industry in construction and
other other industries in
Southeast New Mexico so
literally from the northwest the
southwest southeast of the state
and some other people in between
and last two years ago the San
Juan water commission propose
this bill as did select I have
not talked to the state one
water commission yet to the
commissioners I see them
tomorrow and I I expect that
they will oppose this bill they
received a preliminary approval
within the last six months of
for an economic development
project in San Juan County and
that's what this what the
leasing Act really allows people
to do this economic development
the.
Two years ago as Mr Burciaga
noted
limit was proposed on the
leasing Act and in my clients
were in favor of that amendment
the amendment did not go
anywhere but that is a limit on
of you know on the the power of
the primary Authority apartment
approvals
the other thing to really keep
in mind is that the state
engineer look very closely at
preliminary approvals the Water
Rights the use of the water must
not hurt anyone and again
there's been no harm shown by by
any of the by any of the people
who are opposing this bill
so I would I would oppose the
bill and thank you for your
consideration.
Right chair members of the
committee the Antonio state
engineer
tools the only tool that the
state engineers office has given
some availability to transfer.
He basically non emergency
water.
That's extremely extremely
important straight state New
Mexico Senator Wirth said this
is frustrating but it's
frustrating that I mean I don't
know anybody that's been marked
by this preliminary approval
authority it affects so many
different people that we want to
renewable energy business in the
state of New Mexico we want if
we want solar energy we want we
need projects we have to have
this is a mechanism to be able
to do the construction rules we
can get that the state engineers
office does eight thousand.
Announces I every single
impairments that every single of
temporary approval process and
make sure that there is no.
For some instance down the road
there was a parent on not out of
that PEUC would have to pay back
that water that water right so
when you when you look at that
the opportunities and twenty
nineteen state engineer we put
up on commitment to the water
use the snap to protect the
state as a safety is more
protected these happen unless
the commissioners of the safety
of perfect and and just there's
no court is about.
Approval violates due process
there's several processes the
state engineer goes through that
that that don't require what we
consider a due process
announcement was our livestock
will permits for two
authorizations which have been
mentioned this temporary change
location or use of wealth or
just a small amount of water
within that doesn't allow for
large construction.
Of the New Mexico we're in a in
a in an opportunity here what we
have all this infrastructure
money we have federal state
funding related to build our
water infrastructure we need to
build our energy infrastructure
we cannot do it without the
tools that the state engineer
gets in this plan approval I'll
stop there thank you.
A gentleman to relieve them our
vice chair excuse me and
committee members my name is
precisely a registered lobbyist
for chevron we oppose H. B. one
to one in our Permian basin
operations over ninety nine
percent of the water uses from
brackish or recycled products
produced water sources unless we
still do require a small amount
of fresh water their operations
HB one to one could greatly
hinder industry leasing of water
and in turn create significant
regulatory uncertainty for
activities in Southeast New
Mexico additionally chevron is
supporting economic development
efforts by the village of questa
in northern Taos County.
Plans for the development and
growth of agriculture light
manufacturing and green hydrogen
production get all the
significantly impacted by this
bill we are alarmed at V. one to
one with the growth of quest is
supposed mining economy as well
as statewide progress toward
lower greenhouse gas emissions
for these reasons chevron
opposes H. B. one to one thank
you.
Madam vice chairman with the
members many missed healthy
Canada and I'm here on behalf of
the.
We respect we're proving to be
one twenty one watered vital to
our state's growth and economic
vitality and widely using
conserving protecting our water
resource.
Earnings for the business
community.
New Mexico continues to be seen
as having stable burdensome
regulatory environment this
legislation will contribute to
the project one of our managers
don't have the state
development.
Are you leasing Act provides a
way for the addition of
temporary transfer and use of
water and divergences iterations
of the state engineer the women
are really approval the pool is
currently working supporting all
types of stakeholders in their
activities for more rural women
are approvals eight farmers who
need additional short term water
supplies in times of drought
such as the controversy and
director goes belly farmers the
card to the state engineers
office many municipalities
reviews the leasing Act with
water that is needed for women
levels of also be used for large
construction projects were water
was not available including
spaceport America and the
intermodal facility near south
of finance so far the state
engineer has not reverse any
preliminary approval issued by
district offices on water with
we have occasion which
demonstrates the conservative
nature of the initial evaluation
no proof of any hard to find for
these reasons we respectfully.
Madam chair and members of the
committee.
Registered lobbyists formalized
Dr okay and we have a respectful
opposition this morning.
Part time water rates as defined
by state law and the individual
we need to make privilege to
live these right without the
government this legislation
create further interference and
because I do go home.
Currently every application get
due process the working.
Your life will be like.
What are you during the
protests.
What are you.
That is again back in the office
of the state engineer finds that
the you should not.
This is the state engineer
almost never ever been wrong
with Randy.
Will largely.
This legislation happens no
protest will be held application
as well as our protest of
federal the need for approval.
The problem with that
are in the backlog.
Getty.
Watering the thing a former.
I have it also provides revenues
releases that farmers and
ranchers.
To conclude this legislation
would get rid of a vital tool
that this state is here
they need to do their job.
I am very important.
I think the audience regarding
your.
This is so I think we're gonna
do this.
Want to get the opposition will
give the line and we'll have you
committed have to press the
button but I do that.
Good morning.
Good morning chair lady and and
our committee members my name is
Bronson corn with the New Mexico
cattle growers association we
stand and are respectful
opposition of this bill as well
one thing I am confused about is
what this bill isn't being
assigned to the house ag stake
in water resources as it
directly affects the agriculture
industry this bill eliminates
the preliminary approval what
you've been hearing about that
our farmers have to have to
quickly move their water rights
round to supplement the needs
elsewhere.
You may say that there's a
process in this built up to
combat this but the problem is
is that if I if there's anyone
protest on this is going to hold
the process up and that's going
to result in and lost crops the
biggest Valley artesian
Conservancy district in the
southeast part of the state as
gonna be most affected by this
that being said the the PVA CT
is the largest water
conservation district in the
state of New Mexico
consequently it's also the
largest paying off out for
producing county in the state of
New Mexico which has a direct
impact on the entire livestock
industry in New Mexico which is
a three billion dollar industry.
And let's not forget about the
oil and gas industry which
brings in a third of their state
revenues that third of the oil
and gas revenues which is being
spent here now.
And the if we are.
If they're not able to get the
water when they need it and
where they need it it's gonna
have a huge impact on our state
and so with that being said New
Mexico cattle growers
respectfully opposes this bill
thank you.
If you could limit reputation on
the things that we think about
our will.
Madam chair members the
committee try to stay a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Chile Association
speaking with you today to
oppose house bill one twenty one
the passage of house bill one
twenty one will eliminate the
primary approval process by the
office of state engineer and
what the late eight by eight
months and years our farmers
cannot wait months or years on
any water medially this will
lead a sense eight eliminate
that option for farmers to
utilize least water and requests
to make a lease process useless
for all of our members the
current water use lease act
process provides adequate
oversight by the office of the
state engineer.
And it's still protecting due
process of other water users the
OS is highlighted their
capability to do thorough in
depth analysis when it comes to
water these approvals and we
should not take away the only
tool available to them for
temporary non emergency water
demands especially when it comes
our farmers and their needs and
water usage respectfully ask
that you oppose house bill one
twenty one thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Jim Winchester with
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
independent producer stand in
respectful opposition when it
comes to working in the oil gas
fields obviously water is vital
and we do our best to make sure
to use as little fresh water as
possible I just will mention
that there are millions of
dollars that are in use when it
comes to drilling new wells and
any delay or last minute
cancellation or delay of a lease
will affect what goes on in that
operation and they'll have a
reciprocal impact on the entire
economy so for that reason we do
stand in respectful opposition
thank you.
Morning committee chair chair my
name is been it's very and I
represent on the secretary of
the New Mexico Chile Association
as well as on a chilly processor
we have a great concern about
one twenty one as it seems to be
written really vague and the
concern is that.
It might be turned into a
political tool to be used on
someone who's out of line.
And we risk we respect the
process that's in place and it
for us it seems fair it seems
independent and it seems devoid
of any political consternation
if that is the case that starts
moving into muddy political
waters thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee then my Estes with
memo that of reasons already
stated and of course the issues
outlined by the state engineers
office new logo opposes this
bill.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Mike Miller
Permian basin petroleum
association we think we
understand the purpose of this
bill but we also think that the
crop collateral damage of the
passage of this bill would be
detrimental to all sectors of
our economy in New Mexico for
that reason we stand in
opposition thank you.
Anyone else in opposition
leaders.
It's going to.
What we could develop our.
For the bills.
At the end of the line the same
way and.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Paula Garcia and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico a second so ciation we
have members throughout the
state of New Mexico a second
serve very important part of our
history and culture and the also
support a vast agricultural
economy.
The bottom line is that
preliminary approval has been
deemed unlawful.
By a District Court judge and
others is an AG opinion so as
much as we've heard how
convenient it is for industry to
have preliminary approval it has
been a unlawful practice because
the state engineer bypassed the
opportunity for public notice
and opportunity for protest and
a mandatory public hearing on a
protest application this is a
matter of protecting existing a
senior water rights as well as
our water in New Mexico the
state engineer has to consider
existing water rights this is a
fundamental tenet of our water a
lot that goes back over a
hundred years and we have water
rights in New Mexico that far
PCD statehood so by protecting
our water rights it's not just
about protecting a second this
is about protecting the water
for all of our communities in
the right to bring concerns
forward through the protest is
firmly embedded in our law
because the state engineer has
been circumventing it does not
make it right and there is the
the legal determinations that it
is improper this bill is
consistent with that legal
interpretation no I want to
respond to some things there are
important to form transfers
allowed within your occasion
district that is a routine
practice farmers can't get
emergency wells if there wells
dry up even a second can do farm
to farm transfers so that is
that is not a reason to have
preliminary approval as well the
idea of getting water paid back
that is completely impossible
after water has been used by UPS
so an applicant for preliminary
approval there's no way to get
it paid back and what when
people say there's been no proof
of harm.
That's not exactly right there
was an intrepid K. in southern
New Mexico that someone else can
speak to and we also have
percentage here who have been
affected but by this practice
thank you for your time madam
chair and and we've us tennis
part of this legislation.
Good morning madam chair
committee members Camilleri
Merrill with the New Mexico
State Land Office the Land
Office of systems part of this
bill thank you.
For those of you just given
research points.
Good morning madam.
Vice chair members of the
committee my name is Patrick how
to meal
former us a kiddo I also work
for the American friends service
committee we stand here in
support of this bill
Protection of water rights is
biz buff but most important and
this is.
Violates the due process of
water right holders this is
illegal and say that it's that
it's not harming anybody that is
a ridiculous argument this does
harm this harms of existing
water rights holders now and it
will harm existing water rights
holders in the future as well up
and the foundation of of the
water law that protects the
people the culture of this place
so we support this bill thank
you.
Good morning madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is that if you know somebody M.
up percent in the Martinez I do
best I get into my and I'm also
on the board of the regional
secular Association of the Santa
Cruz basin I stand in support of
this bill I'm for many reasons I
think we all understand the need
for movement of water for many
uses and we need to fully
resource the offices state
engineer so that they can to
fulfill their duties to do that
and support all the important
needs that were addressed by the
opposition I would like to share
the names of some of the
organizations that stand in
support of this bill in addition
to the New Mexico seconds
Association the New Mexico
acequia Commission The New
Mexico food and agriculture
policy council lost kind of the
need to institute American
friends service committee last
imia down south but to the
network I'm Migos Bravo New
Mexico environmental law center
middle Rio Grande water
advocates The New Mexico land
grant image that is Consejo
Shiprock traditional farmers
interfaith power and light
citizens caring for the future
farm to table but Lancia Water
watches black cassettes onions
and pickle Toyota the tiles
trout unlimited western
landowners alliance and earth
care.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you for your time and
service
I'm Jacki pile I was Lincoln
County commissioner for Google
terms is it working.
If that works out okay
I'm.
Okay now is that we're not very
good anymore if I ever was good
in the first place.
I'm the one that has been harmed
I'm from the Rio Ruidoso valley
between read also in Russell we
have a very small farms we have
a couple of big landowners but
the village would also hungry
for water because we're in the
desert file that one of these
they used to file emergency
approvals until we we couldn't
do anything about it and when we
stop those then they started
this a preliminary approval so
they were successful but do you
have to remember the ditches are
able to stop these but only for
their own did it that the trans
transfer was from thirty miles
be slowed to thirty miles above
so it affected those of us small
farms for thirty miles
in the past the village would
also as over use their water by
three hundred acre feet may not
some but well but yeah but that
was a whole lot of water to us
we challenged everything and
they were they did make them pay
it back but it was not water it
was not money it was paper
credits so we've been harmed
several different ways for many
years challenging this one cost
us over a hundred thousand
dollars and.
We get we get disasters pretty
regular we have the little bear
fire so this felt and ruining
our watershed and repair after
repair after prepare we'd rather
put our money in fixing our
water but us little people we
matter to and for municipalities
taking over for us and just
saying we've got to have your
water to grow but thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Douglas
Mikel China registered lobbyist
for conservation voters New
Mexico for the reasons that have
been outlined particularly by
the Sanchez the bill
conservation voters New Mexico
urges that you recommended do
pass for this bill thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Joseph where Aqaba deputy
Attorney General our office
supports this bill the opinion
that was issued yesterday was
issued on an expedited basis I
understand the members of the
committee have a copy the
members of the public can review
that opinion on our website I
won't go into all of the details
of the opinion but I do want to
clarify a few main points from
that the first is that our legal
analysis of this statue and the
corresponding rules of the state
engineer simply do not provide a
legal basis or the legal
authority to issue these types
of preliminary approvals that's
the basis of our legal analysis
we go into detail as to the
history of the statute in the
rules associated with it there
is as previously mentioned
concerns about due process and
that there are not death because
neither the statute nor rules
provide timelines are are pretty
specific procedures to any type
of preliminary approval there's
no there's no guarantee due
process in the structure of the
stature rules and our office is
available to answer any
questions that the committee may
have thank you.
You can stay around.
Yes.
Hello this is Serra I'm here all
to hear the president of the New
Mexico sic Association and this
is a simple ask public input on
such an important issue it
really is a transfer of water
and when he leaves a community
you know it may be really hard
to break it back to the
community because some of these
farms for a second people may
not come back and use that water
that's eight so it really is a
transfer that affects the
community the people in the
community and so you know it
should be investigated and there
should be public input to make
sure that you know in the state
and appropriate transfer watered
reality thank you.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee my name is Debbie
Garcia I'm the education and
outreach coordinator with the
New Mexico sic Association I'm
also a I see on the with the I
think it was on the site isn't
really but we are a second that
has
three global rolled Water Rights
this issue is is so important
terms of how I'm also a cultural
anthropologist and how water
transfers detrimentally affect
up the the the fabric of the
culture in many in many areas in
terms of a lot of the long
history of a sick as in New
Mexico and with that I would
like to say I support this bill.
Thank you madam vice chair and
committee my name is Anjali
building I represent western
resource advocates standing in
support of the bill today for
all the reasons stated I would
only add that.
Hearings in public protest can
be excessively burdensome but in
large part because the hearing
unit lacks capacity I mean
that's no reason not to support
this bill that I'm providing
capacity to the IOC is
critically important to ensuring
that hearings can go forth in a
timely manner but we urge you to
support this nonetheless thank
you.
Health
Bill Clinton or twelve people if
you are against bills eight
research and.
Right we are going to start with
the.
To.
Is a supporter of the bill
of what we're looking for can't.
The end of your yes the.
Thank you Mr palazzo working for
or against the bill I am for
okay we we working against.
Right so I went online there's
quite a few people
if you are against the bills
please raise your hand.
All right started to leave lop
Yazzie.
His favorite favorite.
It just stay on.
So everyone in opposition of the
bill please raise your hand
opposition leader ways.
This now if your this means the
product at our school request I
know.
So we some students right now
are you in opposition of the
bill.
I'm in favor of the bill.
The state sales would you.
Is anyone position that these
right everyone else lower your.
They just want to tell Americans
are.
Right.
When I was in favor of the bill
please read.
Okay
I think we have to limit to one
minute possible there's quite a
few of you so we're gonna start
was the loss of.
You still need it.
All right of the okay.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you just bear.
Okay tell me when I'm ready to
go you can go ahead thank you.
Yes my name is Steve Polack
going in the former president
and light is on for the
adjudication Water Rights and is
for the north Las Vegas noted as
the Rio Arriba I I favor the
bill house bill twenty one one
twenty one on behalf of a
citizen then yes it is vital to
protect due process and
transparency in any proposed
changes to water rights that
could affect existing water
rights as well as our rivers and
aquifers subdivisions
speculators threaten our
historic use of water especially
in the north watershed begin
statute the state statute
seventy three to twenty one PED
for tax governing a state
because if the and when they
adopt this statute to prove to.
Yield or to agree or not to
approve of the transfer lease
sale or Water Rights therefore
of of the bill we stand passed
the bill.
Thank you Mr block.
Admits he is capturing sure it
is your right yeah.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is
Katherine share it and resident
of Santa Fe thank you also to
Representative Herrera Chandler
into senator Wirth for bringing
this bill forward.
I urge the committee to please
heed the counsel of the
individuals who have spoken so
eloquently in support H. B. one
to one today.
As New Mexicans we need no
reminder that are with
restrictionist his are essential
to life as we know it they
sustain livelihoods provide
habitat to creatures of all
stripes and feathers and being
joined a light to the hearts and
spirits of all who reside in
arid lands they are
irreplaceable part of our
state's cultural heritage in our
water so beautiful and powerful
are also tremendously multiple
as they come in under P. C.
increasing pressure in the
decades to come as they are sure
to it will be more important
than ever to ensure that the
state's decision making around
and is fair and transparent.
We must take action knowing that
once our waters our illustrious
grade they may never be restored
HB one to one by preventing a
lawful Water leasing actions
such as preliminary approval
will work to ensure the people's
right to involvement in
decisions that affect the lives
of so many I urge the members of
the committee to please support
HB one to one thank you thank
you the next big thing will be
done for the study.
Thank you madam chair my name is
don postal set up produce a I'm
a farmer I've been farming the
same land my ancestors are
farmed for over three hundred
years.
I would like to make sure that
our water is available for the
next generations to have enough
water to grow food.
To be able to feed their
families and their grandkids
it's important to protect our
water in the astute cast for
future economic development
around northern New Mexico.
I am chair person for that real
can model Rio three colors
through and maybe on the order
that through stream systems
community association we have we
represent sixty three just
seconds and over five thousand
points on this on those a state
guest.
I am also proud to say on the
Mar open for the S. secondary no
Santa Cruz thank you very much
and we stand in support of house
bill one twenty one thank you
madam chair and committee
members thank you next
generation.
Yes.
Good morning cheering Committee
and thank you for entertaining
this bill my name is John Brown
a Franciscan sister and
executive director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith communities and
people facing contents all over
the state and many are concerned
about water because water is
sacred waters life and must be
governed by very particular
ethics of water in the
utilization and management and
I'd like to name these three
principles I called for three.
Well that must be considered the
first to scientific knowledge
which includes cultural meaning
and traditional knowledge the
second is justice with the
spiritual and human rights
related to conservation and
health and the third prong is
sustainability and biodiversity
related to democratic governance
law and policy which must engage
people in public process so that
there is due process and
transparency today we've heard a
lot about economic interests
that these economic interests
how we manage and utilize water
must be done within these
ethical principles for the
common good.
So we support this bill thank
you very much.
Is a hundred.
Thank you.
And that was the my name is I
have the alliance I am coming to
you today from Santa Fe I reside
currently Bernalillo but I grew
up Valencia County and my
grandparents still heather Water
Rights the are
the water down and but also we
do subsistence farming
but I wanted to say I support
this bill because it gives
transparency
I think a lot of industries that
spoke against a today we all
have to play fair and water is
life and I think it's really
important that we remember that
this state was built on the
tenants of that water is the
only reason why we're here the
middle Rio Grande and the folks
who settled of the public are
the reasons why we are here to
day and why we are where we are
at and I think it's important
that we have a fair process and
hearing for those transfer water
it's because once they leave the
community they are gone and I've
worked with the southwest
organizing project on sub Lena I
work with ability water watchers
again on on water whites
transfers that is very
difficult.
All right it is even her name.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes.
Council for calls better nation
district and participated in the
Romero decision and I guess what
strikes me about the testimony
today is how
it has not been discussed how
much we were talking about the
intrepid case involved well
thousand acre feet of water
being pumped from the papers
revert.
To show you how big an amount
that is under the rate agreement
settlement the target supply in
the entire stream system to
avoid priority call this fifty
thousand acre feet that's a good
deal this was the state engineer
review process that you've heard
about did not work the water
rights were illegally taken from
the papers revert and subsequent
litigation where these water
rights for judicata judge Wexler
rule that the rights were
abandoned and forfeited so the
process did not work those
revert rights work and are gone.
They were not being there's no
way to have them utilized in the
year they're taken this system
does not work at all thank you
Mr.
Next the mass live.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's
thousand academic staff attorney
and registered lobbyists of the
New Mexico environmental law
center and supported eighty one
twenty one the law center serves
individuals and communities
across the state I environmental
justice which includes the right
to due process currently
required by those use water
leaks procedures and the
constitution.
Opportunity for individuals to
engage meaningfully in the water
use lease application process is
essential to the well informed
and equitable water management
in New Mexico those these
preliminary approval processes
both contrary to existing law
result in environmental and
Justice they excluding impact on
water users from the process and
harming water users who are
already most impacted by threats
of future and existing water
scarcity we ask that you support
H. B. one twenty one thank you
for the opportunity to speak
today thank you.
For.
She.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is part of the and I'm organizer
with yucca youth United for
seven crisis actors are yeah
causing you thought organization
but thousand members and
supporters throughout central
and northern New Mexico at four
eight what twenty one because we
know that water is the lifeblood
of our communities with climate
change already underway our
water resources are being
diminished and waters for
precious Communities will face
increasing water security and
given this context is more
critical now than ever that our
communities are notified water
uses are being considered
adequate public notice and due
process must be the law must be
enforced for indigenous rights
holders are lab based
communities for all of the users
as well so thank you for voting
yes on H. B. one twenty one.
Thank you next this morning.
Representative.
Good morning madam vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Marlene parent I'm the sister
of mercy and I thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of HB one twenty one.
We use our water right from the
oil from one of the old SA kia
degree degree a collateral
acequia here in Albuquerque
Albuquerque to grow food and
fruit trees we respect and
follow the digit writer where
and how long we can use the
water.
No one has the right to use
water however they want to.
A water rate is not an absolute
property right the right use of
water is subject to several
conditions enshrined in our
water code the first one water
must be put to beneficial use.
We need to the water use will
not impair existing water rights
and the water use will not be
contrary to conservation.
And what.
Next is.
Hello my name is issue and I'm a
community organizer with
citizens caring for the future
which is a small environmental
advocacy group based in Carlsbad
that supports this bill as a
kind of pricing worsens and
Education continues to take hold
here in the desert what if you
could just care for an even more
precious resource here in
southeast New Mexico where the
majority of the state budget is
being made our water is being
sold to the highest bidder
without community members having
any say and whether or not our
precious resources are taken
from us further sacrifice in our
community along with our
opportunity for livable future
here in southeast New Mexico for
the sake of profit in the water
use leasing act it makes clear
that that claim to ensure that
the water use will not be
detrimental to the public
welfare just this week I was on
the field talking with the
community member concerned about
the safety of their well water
here in southeast New Mexico I
just want to say that the state
truly has no idea what the level
of contamination is here in
southeast New Mexico meaning
that water is even scarcer than
we realize because so many of
our water sources have been
contaminated by things like that
disclose chemicals and DFA's
most of those you've heard from
an opposition do not call the
places most affected by this
practice home it is essential
that communities.
And remember it's just one
minute thank you up next Marian
Thompson.
Hello can you hear me.
I am merry Dixon in Los Cienega
which is just south of Santa Fe
I have a small organic farms
three acres my husband grew up
on it
our water right state back to
the early seven hundred so we
have senior water rights and we
definitely have seen the water
being diminished throughout the
years and we are in support of
this bill to protect the small
farmers in northern New Mexico
to keep our state kia and our
water flowing so we can feed the
community and
That's it thank you for
supporting the bill.
Next is Robert.
Yes can you hear me.
If you can't.
Okay I'm Robert Templeton I am a
person out there on the second
both state and Dixon New Mexico
I am on the board of the little
valley regional acequia
association in the same place.
I stand in support of this bill
from for the many reasons that
have been elucidated before and
I want to remind everyone of
something that I think we tend
to lose sight of that the
gravity fed acequia system of
New Mexico is perhaps the single
most important infrastructure in
our state in this time of
changing climate and changing
energy regions the acequia
system maintains a critical
potential for maintaining local
food security.
Anything that reduces
transparency around the transfer
of water rights can not be good
for our future thank you very
much.
Mr Barnes.
Or just part.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Samantha park castle and general
counsel for the year Asian
district in southern New Mexico
EPA days stand in support of the
bill in its current form for all
of the issued previously stated
I'd just like to boil them down
for you essentially you're
familiar with this issue across
the entire state where senior
water rights are flashing with
newer uses in the name of.
Business growth economic
development but the reality is
that we are undergoing massive
climate change lower water
resources than we've ever seen
before and taking water from the
senior without process cannot be
law in New Mexico we all know
better than that it is the law
to protect our culture our water
right and if foundation we're
built on for those reasons we
ask for your support of this
bill in its current form and we
think it's sponsors for bringing
over.
Thank next is Barbara.
Good morning madam vice chair
and committee members.
I'm Barbara Calif I represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico the league believes
that land use and development
must be tied to water
availability to assure this
final approval from the office
of the state engineer should be
required before development can
proceed we thank you for
bringing forward this bill and
ask you to vote to pass thank
you.
Hello.
Can you hear me.
All right what is yes good
morning everyone my name is
exhibit about us
I'm wistful Senators institute
doing our of our mental and
economic justice work
as mentioned before most of the
news institute is in support of
this bill for all the reasons
that have stated not to repeat
anyone ultimately we think that
we need
additional security and and
process and and an affirmation
from water and absolutely agree
that are sick as are critical of
most important infrastructure
for states of dissenting is
institute is in support and
thank you.
Thank you thanks very important
part.
Estimated.
Going to intervene in.
Rotate.
My name is Angelina Lopez Brody
I come from a family that has
irrigated with us thank you just
for generations and I'm a
commissioner on the list I just
that please go a second I also
work for the American friends
service committee The New Mexico
bureau of geology and mineral
resources bulletin one sixty
four states that the Rio Grande
basin and expects twenty five
percent.
Less precipitation and that
mountainous regions of the state
maybe even more extremely
effective in the next fifty
years due to climate change I
stand with this bill because it
will help us steward our
precious water the OS also needs
to be fully funded so that it
can enforce water protection as
well thank you for your time.
Very important thank you.
Can you hear me now yes we can.
Okay good morning madam chair
and committee members my name is
merry Barnhart I am currently.
Press.
C. ID also plays a major role in
insuring New Mexico water
deliveries to Texas under the.
As part of C. ideas settlement
agreement in the adjudication of
its water rights.
You're in the Americas.
Aware that the LESC had issued
preliminary authorizations for
over for a total of four
thousand.
You are here and in an acre feet
were diverted before the range
was.
Authorizations were canceled in
twenty twenty one.
is here twenty.
Thank you New Mexico's what.
US Christensen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Moscow Simpson
live in Albuquerque are
representative the Rio Grande's
indivisible it's a small
conservation organization.
I've been able to water and
water.
Access for all forty years as a
sportsman conservation and also
regulating public water systems
is a critical bills to bring
transparency and are urged
committee to passed house bill
one twenty one thank you.
Yes.
Yes we can't.
My name is Camilla I on them and
the director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club I
thirty five thousand members
stand and support eight one
twenty one to ensure fairness
and due process and the way the
office of the state engineer
grant approval and non emergency
water applications if there is a
need for time critical approval
of water right the.
To proposed procedure should be
developed through the
legislative and rulemaking
process that considers
protections very moderate thank
you.
Thank you zero three.
Well yes good morning everybody
madam vice chair and the steam
committee members thank you for
allowing me to speak my name is
sterile metric and the president
of the only mothers Chama
secular Association here in Rio
Arriba county serving on over
six hundred Garcia is all an
eighteen a secular as with the
oldest being here in my
community with party date of
fifteen ninety eight I stand in
support of this bill because in
my opinion what I perceived it
it gives a voice back to the
small wonder that was taken away
through with you know without
any type of due process and and
which restores our voice and for
that reason I support this thank
you.
Next is Nancy saying that.
Thank you chair committee
members my name is Nancy same
I'm speaking on behalf of three
fifteen New Mexico rural support
group we're here to support this
bill the fifty year water plants
scientists tell us that New
Mexico is facing in that within
a fifty year window a thirty
percent decline in available
water due to the impacts of
climate change this bill is
critical because we're facing
greater water scarcity and in
these conditions it's more
critical than ever to have firm
ethical and Justice water
protections in place thank you.
Thank you next is generally.
Online madam chair and committee
members thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak on
behalf of important table and
the New Mexico food and
agriculture policy council my
name is Pam right we are here in
absolute full support of house
bill one to one water right
niece opportunities that or
the water right research and
most importantly we totally
agree with all of the sport this
and stated here today and we
want to say that water is life
it is the number one thing the
need for life and water should
be prioritized for our farmers
here in New Mexico work feeding
us here in New Mexico that
providing for food security
economic opportunities people
like Mr Moustakas who spoke
earlier in it is so important
our farmers now have more
opportunities than ever to and
are selling to schools senior
centers early daycare centers
armors markets in our grocery
stores and we need our farmers
and if we are you are.
Is Ernestine.
Our.
Hello yes.
Yes I I am in support of this
bill I am a soil health champion
of the United States in the
delegate of the New Mexico
acequia Association and a firm
parcialmente in of the executive
menu water is needed to recharge
the aquifers and and the a
second US help to recharge those
aquifer's we also don't have to
put in a big investment before
the season even starts to be
able to grow food so it costs us
to to do that if we lose the
water we've totally lost our
investment to do are planting
and to do our season so yes I'm
in support of this bill as so
many people are thank you.
It's a little bit.
yes we'll say have no clue what
this I represent the estate
Justice of the Sunday of the
bill in the cellar keep of all
house Kodi and for all the
reasons that will prove mention
we stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Texas billion The Dallas.
madam chair and committee
members set up an initial in
cells member of the New Mexico
extricate Commission also a
member of the day okay
necessary.
Just stand in support of this
bill thank you.
Next as mentioned rose.
Good morning good morning madam
madam vice chair members of the
of the committee my name is
educator metal.
Look for something on a second.
younger than I yeah well and I
own a small farm mountain rose
farm and ranch in Taos County
I'm also a water rights attorney
I'm in support of HB one twenty
one because this process a
preliminary approvals of the
state engineer has been engaged
and has been deemed unlawful by
the courts and by the Attorney
General.
This bill clarifies that due
process is part of our legal
framework that protects senior
an existing water right owners
in addition HB one twenty one
clarifies that these decisions
which affect communities should
not be left up to the discretion
of government officials and
district offices they have no
connection to the communities
impacted by proposed transfers
and do not provide any notice to
those communities that are
impacted thank you madam vice
chair thank you last.
Hi can you hear me.
Good morning members the
president hello facing a second
cessation I have six years of
early me and we feel that is
very important to protect our
water rights and protect our
farmers especially in time of
food scarcity everyone's going
to the store and we need to
really protect the people that
are growing the food where we
live thank you.
Yeah Senator had.
Thank.
Thank you madam chairwoman I'm
state senator Leo how do we
representing state district five
which includes Rio Arriba Los
Alamos Santa Fe and Santa Fe
counties and I stand in strong
support of this bill and want to
think Representative Chandler
for bringing it forward there's
a number of us sectors that flow
through Rio Arriba county and
Santa Fe as well as Los Alamos
the DNA of our make up as New
Mexicans includes water because
water is the The New Mexicans
and so I stood in support of
this bill because preliminary
approval it's a I'm lawful
practice at which the state
engineer grants approval of
water leases before communities
have their legal opportunity to
review it and gather community
input and puts us thank you as
it recovers and the operators at
risk of improvement that out
standing for the S. thank you as
I want to make sure that all of
you know us the kids are vital
portion of our communities we
need to make sure we can do what
we can as New Mexicans to
protect them thank you madam
chair.
Never go back to.
Thank you madam chair I think
that covers it and list my
expert needs to clarify anything
okay yeah we're happy to
entertain questions.
Start with.
Thank you madam chair I may need
to cut it short I have a little
present other committees so my
phone goes off and then we come
back in addition thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Yes so we.
Decision general Merrill has
been put front and center let's
talk about that the decision for
a moment.
Madam chair representative.
Because the presentation with
your patient districts are for
this call up they requested a
writ of mandate.
Mr chair madam chair and
representative I don't know but
I'm happy to entertain that I I
would note that
that we can proceed do you have
any and and.
Of.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes there was both a
remained in the state was issued
budget dryer and a and a series
of findings of fact and
conclusions of law both
documents concluded the same
thing.
The action itself was was
seeking a writ of mandamus that
wasn't your normal lawsuit.
Was Madam chair representative
well madam chair and
representative I don't know what
a normal lawsuit verses and
abnormal it's a process that is
provided by law and it was
certainly a lawful process.
Okay.
Madam chair representative
Representative Davis is an
action to help administrative
official to do a non
discretionary act is.
Madam chair representative I
think that's a fair
characterization it is Madam
chair representative it's not a
case between two litigants were
to litigants are I go before the
court and argue and
present their respective sides
of its matter between.
The parties and the agency so
other
parties were involved that that
the.
What we're allowed to be a party
to that case and to interject
offices.
Madam chair Representative I do
not I was not present I do not
know who was allowed to percent
I do understand that their work
was expertise to Monte provided
is that not correct Mr Bennett
yes from intrepid with who was a
party who was effected by the
activity that was on going in my
correct but that Mr Bennett yes
yes okay so certainly peak
individual companies and others
who could have been affected
were participating and they did
have paid experts providing
testimony as to the various
issues madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair representative other
than the HSD the state engineers
office and.
Yeah trouble.
Program district maybe one other
Otis cooperative.
Whether any other parties that
were able to purchase for
actors.
Madam chair
and representative of I don't
know we do not know
The state engineer madam chair
and representative certainly had
the opportunity to appeal the
decision if there was some
dissatisfaction as to the
quality of the hearing and the
ability of that those involved
to participate and and present
evidence.
Madam chair representative
In securing the the rep.
The.
Sure focused on.
Forty arises under.
Transfers of water rights did
not.
Madam chair and Representative
no that's not correct.
They were applying the water
leasing Act.
The judge not to.
Specifically look at section
seventy two dash five dash
twenty three yeah making its
Determination.
Madam chair representative yes
they did and they also looked at
the water leasing Act and if you
look at paragraph fifty two of
the
Right that was issued these it
said the state engineer has no
authority under the water
leasing Act to grant the
applicant's luminary
authorization to change the use
and location of the least water
so clearly madam chair and
representative
the judge was looking at the
water leasing Act which is at
issue in this bill Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative what
my real concern is the.
Representative Romero.
The side of the case.
Which I think was of action that
was subject to
interpretation there was one
that.
Same somewhat inappropriate for
members and it certainly the
other parties from intervening
or being engaged in that case
and so I wonder why we're
putting all our eggs in aspic
seeds of the fender lines nature
of that that case is somewhat
limited but I'll move on
Madam chair and representative.
Would you propose that we get in
the higher wage bills in the
state of New Mexico if your bill
passes madam chair and
representative I refer you to
seven seventy two dash twelve
this one point three which is
Authority for the use of
underground public water in the
amount of not to exceed three
acre feet not to exceed one here
it's better it's better for
public works projects and madam
chair I would point out that
there seems to be a lot of
discussion about what's going to
happen well this
change occurred in twenty
fifteen madam chair the state
engineer started applying this.
Self develop luminarias process
in twenty fifteen.
And prior that we were building
roads.
We were doing a lot of things
and so I my question is those
processes were in place in
twenty fifteen and they unless
something has changed and I do
not know about madam chair and
representative those process he
still exist.
Madam chair representative we
disagree on the date that up
level lasts a.
The state engineer for service
to medical amount of time as few
losses process not only
to.
S. farmers.
Meeting.
There needs times of drought
you know you might want to the
well provisions those are really
up for situations but we have
seen at least in the district
that I provide you with the need
for propped almost immediate
need for a.
Ability of one farmer to lease
water from their neighbor jobs
live at to a property would
otherwise be jeopardized and Sam
so that's one the we've seen it
with respect to our construction
of highways and we
Representative fortunate to have
a lot of highway construction
three acre feet certainly yes
began to meet the needs of the
construction projects of we're
seeing it in our part of the
state right now and so three or
three seems like a lot of water
but we're doing
Those long stretches of highway
it's not water at all.
And then.
For the oil and gas industry.
Temporary use of water for for
drilling and
Completing wells there's been a
source.
Temporary uses utilizes process
to do so.
The farmers of taking advantage
of that opportunity so that they
can utilize that water that
fashion and I've heard a lot of
the people who are supporting
this bill saying that it.
Yeah the process would
jeopardize a waterproof yet.
That water would be used on
crops if it were being released
to
restructured company or two of
oil and gas company or to their
neighbor's apartment so it's
really not a very the water
issues be temporarily use for
for for something other than
which it was.
Approved an additional so it's
it's being used on the next
section of where it's being used
the the put contract and and.
But down the road course there's
less water that would be.
Because that this the charge and
all that
so I don't I don't see where.
This process that people are
wanting two or three of the fact
that we reset maybe two to six
year process is going to advance
us at any point in time.
So Madam chair representative.
If we do.
Yes this piece of legislation.
Do you believe that there's some
other mechanism that we should
be using.
To allow for these problems.
To use that require almost
immediately.
Approval to get the water for
these very temporary uses of
without having to have a two to
six year process well first
madam chair I believe the state
engineer is required to follow
the law and I hope we can all
agree that the state engineer is
required to follow the law.
So going beyond that there's no
question that the state engineer
needs more staff needs more
hearing officers and if there's
frustration with the amount of
time being spent on these things
we have a solution for that.
We the legislature need to
ensure that they have the
ability to do what they need to
do.
And lastly madam chair I would
point out again that this is a
relatively new process and from
day one I think the first year I
filed this bill was twenty
nineteen so twenty nineteen from
twenty fifteen that for years so
it had only been in place for
four years Madam chair in the
exact same arguments that we
hear today that this is a crisis
we need to do this we need to
that we need to move forward we
need immediate ability to do
whatever we need to do whatever
we need to do it were being
argued at that time and to date
not one of those individuals
have brought any legislation or
any proposed any process that
would allow them to do that and
I would submit to you Mr chair
and committee members if this
really is as critical as they
say and I frankly question that
they have the ability to offer
suggestions to improve to to
make that happen giving the
ability of the Legislature to
fully that they have not done so
so I must question whether or
not the crisis that has been
suggested to us on numerous
occasions starting when I
started it and I imagine one
senator Wirth started in twenty
fifteen still exists.
Mr chair and representative up.
Fortunately I just have that
discussion
so
If if this legislation does pass
sure that there will be
someone just solution possibly
next year together while also
year after.
To to deal with right now under
the current.
Our business if you will.
We can argue about whether.
You find it to be according to
law hi I certainly do we that
others I think that it's in
accordance with law but if we
change that and require as.
The.
Long process then we're going to
have to do something to
recognize that that this state.
I cannot come to a whole because
we put and administrative work
doesn't exist to that for
whatever reason.
Apple.
The use of water.
And take your.
As for the number of occasions
in the debater wasn't that.
State engineer has to be
somewhat flexible of stuff
because.
Reporter.
Is the.
To be supplemented Water.
So that farmers can grow this
crop when I would be may not be
growing in the.
It may need to transfer that
because it's not
Would be sufficient water to
take care of the.
FRA's situation and it's
happening all of
this but I want to this is the
family of the poplars nobody
Nobody.
Soon as we heard the topic K. is
about water we have a long
tradition of drop it is that
intrepid was trying to we use
water.
That frankly and in years ago
and that was of the gods of the
kids it really didn't have the
the water to we said it was to
do the lease that's not the one
of the things.
Rather cases far right have some
water that they don't do that
here or really to forego that
year to allow someone else to to
the server uses that we have to
have a flexible system to allow
that to for without going to a
two to six year.
For the process to determine if
the leasing is appropriate so
madam chair I I just.
Support because of the drive for
automatic of faxes going to have
all my district but if it does
pass I would offer to you
We need to.
Yes minds together to figure out
how to deal with with that issue
because we can't having to to
the six year process or was
represented and still
make things work at least in the
state of South thank you madam
chair thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative either.
True.
Mister Richards walked yes we.
Support.
On.
This is.
Sure.
The traditional teacher
currently.
Two thousand eighteen.
Yes.
The second instability.
Yes please could you elaborate.
On.
All up can I just yes we can and
we can explain what it but I
would point out that the state
cues can speak to the public
interest of all citizens in the
state and so in doing so I I
they have done that in this
hearing as well certainly they
have their own interests but
they also speak Mr chair and
representative to the greater
good of the state as well and
they should not be assumed to be
limited to their own specific
interests Mr Bennett yes thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee and representative
Scott I'm David Benavidez an
attorney and research this with
New Mexico legal aid have been
working out representing sectors
anagrams for thirty two years
for legal aid and the
legislation that you're
referring to
what ended up passing was that a
safety as if a water rate is
being moved water right
associate with the sec is is
being proposed to be leased for.
Or another watery from outside
the state keeping least into the
acequia then the second through
its by laws can
decision go before the state
commission however I which point
out the situation that I miss
Powell from Lincoln County
mentioned which is that even
though there was a state kids
occupy certain spot on the river
there were there was a proposal
to
to use this preliminary approval
process to these water rights
that we're not an acequia that
were thirty miles I believe
thirty miles below the state
can't transferring it up thirty
miles upstream from the second
so that new a new diversion
would be taking place about the
thank you so so even though
there is some protection in the
statute for sick is in certain
situations Isaac is are still
available to the premier
approval process as is every
water right owner in the state
that is potentially affected by
these primary approvals.
Okay.
Representative right.
Language in the statute.
All.
Clearly states that these
reasons the.
Issue sort early in the need to
use what.
Four Mr Chairman.
At a protest rates.
To.
Four years.
So.
Contrary to work.
Great question.
Mr Chairman representative.
Which.
For.
Temporary.
But we should to comport.
The ability to.
The question.
If I may madam chair and Mr
chair I'm sorry and
representative Scott just this
raised immediate use in that
water you statute was addressed
by both the court and in the
Romero decision and the attorney
general's office and the court
correctly pointed out that the
phrase immediate use yes
What it means is that someone
can offer as a proposed lease
something that's going to take
place immediately upon approval
or can offer to the state
engineer no we've worked it out
where we want this lease to take
place five years from now ten
years from now and so that
sentence in the water usually
statute doesn't have anything to
do with the approval being
immediate has to do with the
nature of the.
Of the proposal whether the
proposal is for something that
would occur upon approval or
later and and that's what the
court pointed out and that's
with the attorney general's
pointed out that you use doesn't
mean what's up with some people
have tried to say it needs I
would also point out that that
that interpretation of the
raised a meat use the what
usually statute had been in
effect for decades without that
interpretation being
Being proposed and and then the
state engineer without any
legislative authorization or any
new regulation
kind of decided we're going to
interpret the phrase immunity
used to mean that we can do
these preliminary approvals and
both the court and the Attorney
General I said that that
interpretation is incorrect
the phrase immediate use.
Mr Chairman.
Nonetheless.
Dispatcher this.
Use on purpose.
One.
If we consider.
Mr Chairman representative.
Well as property.
All of that property.
Trump
Transporters.
That.
To.
Another person to do.
Issues.
In the state engineer.
The consideration.
Hello.
Which.
Grants a temporary.
Just with you.
The holders.
Winds from.
Which
is our process forward.
Have to right.
For those folks.
Expanding the search.
Mr chair and representative K.
when you use the word temporary
you talking about leases that
could last as long as five or
ten or fifteen years is that
what you're referring to is
temporary.
I just wanted to.
Changes to the temporary use I
just want to.
This page.
Thank you all.
Mr chair in response in
Representative in response to
your question I think we need to
remember to this a couple of
things one is it's not just the
person over here who wants to
lease it who has a property
right it's all these people over
here who have property rights
to.
And those property rights Mr
chair also have to be considered
when we're just talking about
this and I'm afraid Mr chair
this conversation has very been
very one sided in terms of we
hope who is it or is it to
whatever however we are who were
concerned about.
This is similar to the only
conversations or temporary use
permits and the like there's
always more than one party and
it's not just the individual Mr
chair who wishes to do the least
that matters what matters is the
folks also the folks on the
other side of the equation who
have property rights that may be
impaired and yes Mr chair it
could be that they could pursue
the protests after the state
engineer has issued a
preliminary determination I
agree with you but it's those
individuals who could be waiting
five or ten or fifteen years to
challenge whether or not their
property rights have been
impaired so the question is Mr
chair and representative who are
we going to favor in this
balance will
to me these folks over here of
warrant serious consideration as
well and they are waiting as
well to have their concerns
addressed and what you're saying
Mr chair and representative this
let's trust the government let's
trust that that the state
engineer to make correct
determination every single time
that property rights will not be
impaired because he has decided
through his own consideration
process without the ability Mr
chair and representative of
anyone who questions his
decision to challenge it
pre determination prior to when
their property right may be
impaired and I Mr chair I
disagree that that's the right
policy determination and that is
what we're trying to clarify Mr
chair and representative in this
bill.
Mr Chairman representative I
would just have one very brief
thing and that is thank the
concern for the rights of people
who are potentially affected are
actually
Start.
Thank you.
Our.
You
are actually how how the water
how water was constructed so
throughout the whole water code
and from from nineteen oh seven
until until now you will see
different types of transactions
that can be done in different
laws have been passed over the
years and they all say subject
to a proceeding to determine
that no existing water rights
will be impaired so we we have
the legislature has made a
policy decision that changes do
not proceed until that
determinations bait that other
rights not be impaired believe
me it's the nightmare of every
water right owner in the state
that something will happen
where's we're a new water use
will appear suddenly without
their knowledge and without
their ability to weigh in to
defend the rights either on
their stream or in their basin
SO that so our water law is set
up for that not to happen for
those for that process to take
place before the change took
place thank you.
Mr chairman if you will have
districts.
State engineers still.
Question for him.
Question the.
Is there a technical knowledge
all right to have the patience
for this.
This.
Is there a technical analysis.
The for the temporary.
This is the is the next.
Thank you Mr chair
representative there is a
process in place it is an open
process we're not just us no
trust us we'll get it right we
have many basin specific
guidelines in which we apply
sort of they're they're out
there and they're available to
the public to see exactly what
criteria we will apply and we
also have general statewide
guidelines that again on our web
website for areas that are not
they're not specific basin
guidelines that we apply a.
hydrologic analysis in every
case to determine whether a
proposed use would affect any
existing right and if there is
an indication that it would we
would not grant preliminary
approval and to the best of my
knowledge that
None of the preliminary proposed
having granted to date if there
been
you know it have deviated from
that process the intrepid races
Representative never stated
there there was a decision made
to determination initially the
questions rates were valid
and ultimately the court ruled
otherwise but in that case the
point of diversion was hello
everybody it wasn't a case where
they were taking water directly
away from another party
There are other interstate
compacts insurance with with
that point of diversion but but
to answer your question the
The process in place for all of
these preliminary approval
applications to
technically insure that per
person are open guidelines that
anybody can can review there's
no apartment to existing right.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator.
So.
Mr Chairman representative.
A plain reading the whole.
All of these.
Which.
One to choose the problem is.
Representative.
Changing the wording.
Statute.
To.
The process state engineer.
Has been used.
Mr chair in Representative Scott
that is not a public policy that
comports with my values that is
why I filed the bill I did Mr
chair and representative and
actually I'm not sure I need to
answer a question about why I
filed it certainly is it is it
Mr chair that sounds like
bringing it to a personal level
that I I believe Mr Chairman
representative is
not in conformance with our
rules Representative Chandler I.
Okay.
One last.
Wait.
The yes.
Process.
State engineer has been using.
What.
At
two point four agencies.
I have also worked the ability
to timely.
These water right to ground.
For.
Development coach.
This blog.
Change the plain language.
To allow soon.
Or change language.
Yes.
From all walks.
So instead of being here to
transport.
All the time.
If we need to do for your
process.
It is.
And the party.
Yes.
Thank you thank you.
There is a step down.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative
I thought it was interesting.
That.
Senator said this was the exact
same legislation he introduced
in two thousand and fifteen and
here we are today.
years later that same piece of
legislation.
It has failed on numerous
occasions with members officers.
A new.
Working in the of the actions
that have taken three to cross
the out of those people that
were opposing your bill today
and say this is how we can work
it out this is the better plan
that we can bridge the gap.
Mr chair and representative I
have certainly had conversations
with various people about
this bill and what they would
prefer they would prefer that
I'll leave it at that because I
can't speak for what everyone
prefers in the audience.
Mr Chairman representative about
I appreciate that but when you
come to have such strong
opposition from each such
strong.
It is a organizations across me
to wonder there's been a.
Work just to see what middle
ground.
If I may I can offer some middle
ground and that is in the bill
it's not exactly identical so
that's a little bit of the
statement we added on delayed
effective
dates that was in put in last
last time we put twenty twenty
one and that was intended to
accommodate those entities that
have been relying unfortunately
relying on this process so that
they could determine a way to
find alternative sources of
water.
Appreciate that thank you Mr
chair.
Along with my my colleague from
Travis county mentioned
construction of highways could
be impaired.
Have you thought about how the
developments and all of our
communities and we many times I
have to have water rights when
they go to get their plastic but
the county commissions start the
bill of the value of the
properties that we thought about
how that might.
The impaired House someone who
doesn't want to new development
where they get to look at the
mountains are they just walked
to the you know for all.
Sorts of reasons.
This yes.
We thought about the I mean
don't you believe that would be
an impairment that that
development.
If they could Mr chair and
Representative Townsend.
just to be clear to all the
members of the committee there
is the regular lawful process of
water use leasing that has taken
place for decades when the since
the water usually sing Act has
passed and that is a process
which which provides protection
for everyone it's a proposal
goes to the state is here gets
published if there if there are
not protest that is a matter of
months usually this when a
person gets the product it is
protested then it takes longer
there's a due process of process
of people being able to to weigh
in and have a decision being
made as to whether anyone's
going to be impaired
so that that's the regular
process and that's a rare
process that subdivision owners
and others have constantly used
this other process that's not
provided for in law is an
attempt to to not have that
process and that protection
place but that doesn't mean that
the regular process lawful
process doesn't serve doesn't
serve the interests of both the
people who want to transfer
water to the people who want to
be protected from potential harm
this change.
Mr chairman and.
There was a reason that the
state engineer.
Adopting the program.
It here yes.
there is there is there was a
refund.
That.
This process was adopted do you
have any idea what that recent
loss.
The Mr chair and representative
we've heard from the state
engineers office on this point
and I think they Mr chair and
representative Alex wineries
and.
I.
Mr chair representative they
provide a profit.
They didn't explain the reason.
There's a difference.
Representative.
Impairments
out of work.
It would be.
May be the water level dropped.
Comparatively the that we're
gonna draft it is possibly
problems.
Are there are there are is there
a requires.
For someone.
Weaponizing yes protest process.
Mr chair and representative.
I'm not sure I know what you
mean by economic lines people
have a right to file a protest
if they believe that their water
rights are being impaired by
another person who wishes to the
state water I I have no idea
what you mean by weaponized I
would hate to think that people
who exercised their
constitutional and statutory
rights are not going to be
cap characterizes people who are
weaponizing
some process that's afforded to
them by law in the state and
federal constitutions.
Well.
Mr chair representative.
I don't think.
That just happened.
We all know that this has
happened down to the school
board levels recent time so.
That's a different topic.
Let's talk about endangered
species are.
Are these water rights
sometimes Representative are
they very quickly graft and the
conservation groups take water
rights and leases and take it
out of the water ways to protect
endangered species.
Mr chair and representative.
Mr chair representative Thompson
center I believe I'm familiar
with one application on the Rio
Chama on a tributary of the Rio
Chama
that may have sought to do that
for a stretch of river that was
approved by the state engineer
they're not common.
Chairman and Representative
I think it's also stated
impairment.
The state in two years testimony
today let's not pop.
And so I think that is important
for all of the interesting.
My colleague the Lee County
talked about.
Water right to someone else to
do but it is cations in.
Where three quarters of all of
our waters used in that colorful
today your movie from one farm
to the other thank you all for
you I have a partnership beyond.
and sometimes you don't have to
help you cannot wait for
emergency to occur.
In order I mean you shouldn't
wait for emergency currently
growing property need water made
to prevent an emergency have you
thought about that I have yes.
Process that you're proposing
could limit that.
Mr chair representative Johnson
a yes and and the committee
membership you're aware that are
in existing law as it stands
right now for irrigation
districts for Conservancy
districts in four seconds there
are mechanisms in the existing
law to to quickly move within
the district farm to farm
transactions on water rights of
the powers there in the statute
to do that and many sake is and
addition districts and
Conservancy districts have set
up water banks are similar types
of things I'm aware that can
take place
you know if there are
types of entities in the statute
your that don't have that power
you know that would be that
would be something to consider I
think more than.
More than eleven LA advised
change to the statute that
affects the entire state and all
different types of water at
something maybe very targeted
could be done if there are other
entities out there that want
that thirty but there is there
are four of the large number of
images in the state
nothing they have.
No we need to do anything other
than apply the laws that exist
right now for those from
different transactions to take
place in those districts.
Appreciate that Mr Chairman
representative of that French
yes I day on both sides of the
aisle.
which is not uncommon in New
Mexico if we start talking about
water.
It happens all the time.
That Mr Chairman representative.
I think this committee has to be
very careful when they think
about.
The value of that water right.
L. that process can be.
What is that and I know
replicate it in like that but
lost for another work right now
I think it's true that we all
know that in the water right.
Rail.
Protest come from of a lot of
reasons you can protest.
Really believe your water right
is impaired to protest because
we don't like the action of that
in to do you don't like the
industry that that you do if you
don't like where that.
Housing developments we would be
built in like where that road is
going to be built it happens all
the time.
And I think the committee has
to.
Has to consider that.
The this legislature has look at
this on a number of occasions
and has repeatedly.
Opposed to the projected to its
passing there's a reason for
that.
And I would strongly urge and
icy the state engineer.
It training the state engineer
application that we're here to
work across the aisle.
The hello apparently that effort
has not occurred in yes process
over years and we need to force
that what happens I mean we need
to find some middle ground where
things get fixed.
We cannot we we can't have
subdivisions stopped can't have
construction stop we have to
figure out a way to make this
work for everybody in the I look
forward to that but I can't I
can't and won't support this
bill as it's currently written
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Townsend so it's ten thirty we
three more people on the list
for this bill do it will ask the
representatives
if you
Thank you encourage you just
questions that the.
That we represent small.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative Mr
chair representative.
You include the delayed
implementation date in order to
as you describe it both provide
for the certainties of folks who
are using this process now to
chair representative do you
think this also provides time to
perhaps look at a different
legislative approach in the
process.
Mr chair and representative
certainly there's opportunities
for anyone who has an interest
in this pop pop pop public
policy to file a bill that they
use for thank you Representative
think it's it's very fair and I
very much appreciate the
inclusion of the delayed
implementation Mr chair
representative
farm farm transfers certainly a
very important issue down in the
communities in the valley where
I come from we heard the general
counsel for the old computer
edition District just find some
strong support for this
legislation
my understanding is that the
farm to farm water transfers
that can happen year to year
even in that year based upon a
lot of different factors that
there are a number of processes
including sort of the emergency
spaces allowed in the statute
where those brought those
transfers take place quite
frankly is that accurate.
Mr chair representative of small
yes that's accurate and
again I don't.
Reporter speak for the B. I. G.
or their counsel but I am
familiar that they do they did
have some major legislation
enacted in two thousand three
that facilitates without having
to go through the state engineer
internal relocations of water
within the district thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
So Mr chair out for this
legislation in the past I will
do so again today I do want to
note that in my mind and I think
it's been adopted by a number of
folks there is a next there are
next steps including probably at
the legislative level but I
appreciate the work that's gone
into this and will support thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative smaller
that Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Chandler at four
the conversation this morning
and at four providing.
Right amount of resources have
for us to use in discussing this
bill.
Mr chair representative could
you walk me through the time
frame for the hearing and
protests
under at ten that.
You know normal process.
Mr chair Representative Dixon
there is an application and
again this is the lawful process
there's an application to the
state engineer gets published
once a week for three
consecutive weeks and it's all
also posted online on the stages
website and then there's a
deadline by which there any
protest with the files.
Mr chair and I apologize David
Benavidez Mr going to be this
what is the timeline for the
protest to be filed
okay out she should notice it
used to be when it was only
district Republic cations within
thirty days of the final
publication.
And now it's seventy days thank
you thank you for this.
So.
So Mister chair Mister Bennett
B. this so three weeks for the
notification of the hearing
seventy days for protest
and so then
At once the protest is made does
public hearing take place after
that yes Mr chair and
representative said I should
note that I did mention this
earlier hate to repeat myself if
there is no protest then off and
I've been told by folks in the
water it's division our office
of the state engineer that's a
matter of months if there if
it's an on protest application
after that deadline passes that
the change can occur so that
delays are when there's
approaches application and then
it goes into kind of a you know
like a hearing mode whether a
hearing examiner who serves as
like a judge and uses kind of
the rules of civil procedure in
the rules of evidence that are
used in the court takes over the
case and so that it can be
longer or shorter depending on
how much discovery there is how
much how many motions to dismiss
or summary judgment motions
there are those types of things
if there's a if there's very
little of that type of thing the
hearings can can be a shorter
time frame if there's a lot of
those types of things you can do
in a longer time frame that we
for two years or so.
Mr chair is it possible could
this state engineers office give
me
The median amount of time that
this process takes.
When there is a protest.
Mr chair of Madam Representative
I don't have the data that we'll
give you a precise median but I
think that we we have a roll
that tries to complete protest
within a hundred and eighty days
hearings and we almost never hit
that because of the the motion
practice I think two years is
not a bad not about median to up
to use is a testament to some no
longer.
The
The and the shakers thank you
for that we're gonna stop going
to the audience.
Okay so thank you that that's
fine but we're just.
Okay.
Mr chair representative so.
What is that time frame then in
this preliminary approval
process from
eliminate approval to
a project being able to begin.
Mr chair and subjects and.
I I'm not sure I understand your
question yes preliminary
approval was given the changes
allowed to occur right away.
And then there will be shaped
and then there will be protests
and then and then I don't know
if this is the other part of
your question and yes if there's
a final decision either pro or
con what was originally proposed
incriminate proved that could be
that could take as long as what
we've been discussing for the
hearing process to take place at
the end of that the state is
years determination well either
have been determined to avenge
incorrect or correct.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative.
in the interest of time I will
try to consolidate my learning
of this process which I'm
interested that this is the.
Right
I am very concerned about the
fact that.
The legislature frequently.
Passes statute without setting
time frames and that we do not
have a mechanism with which to
hold our agencies accountable
for permitting and
Forming necessary functions in a
timely manner and I also agree
Mr chair representative that we
frequently do not fund I'm
agencies to be able to do that
so I would say that my two big
concerns are there's you know if
if we're going to say that
preliminary approvals are not
lawful then I would like to see
in statute specific time frames
for when permits unit this
entire process and I.
Quite honestly I would do this
for every agency
and I also think there needs to
be transparency in reporting
back on how long these things
take I mean I think this data
should be public
and I think if funding is
required to support the state
engineers office to be able to
do this in a timely manner than
I think in appropriation should
be included
I don't disagree Mr chair
representative with with that
greater goal of this legislation
but I have very specific
concerns with the
implementation the time frames
of this process thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative for
someone to.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Chandler
I believe my my concerns are.
About what what I what I believe
might be the unintended
consequences.
Of this legislation.
I do believe what water water
is.
very precious commodity to
everyone on all sides of the
issue.
But the the the folks
Mr chairman that that I I think
maybe I have a little bit more
concern for.
are the are the folks who talked
about the timeliness of it and
they're not they're not big
business there.
Farmers and ranchers.
And and the I I believe both the
the current.
Representative here today from
the office and and and the
former.
director of both mention that
the emergency.
Powers of the emergency
applications very very limited.
Just because it's and it's an
emergency to a local farmer I
don't believe that makes it an
emergency
it is my understanding it's more
like.
A forest fire or something like
that that's an actual emergency
it's described but the emergency
of someone having
The timeliness of of the failing
crop.
I know back home
the profitability Mr chairman of
a of a local alfalfa farmer is
how many cuts might they be able
to get that is here and during
the year of drought to cuts
might be necessary for them but
I I do it was mentioned that
with in an association that
those what that those rights
could be transferred but I know
in San Juan County we have we
have as many as ten different
ditch associations and they
criss cross throughout San Juan
County.
We have other water users
associations as well as.
Maybe half a dozen so sometimes
the water rights are not with
in.
It will a single jurisdiction.
And so the.
my concern
with this legislation is that.
The end of the unintended
consequences could be a farmer.
Losing an entire crop.
my concern is and there's no
recourse I mean we we heard that
I think we just heard as a
question from Representative
Dixon it hundred eighty days
might be a medium.
At a number of days for protest
that's a that's a lost here for
a former.
I was reading Mr chairman.
here potential fiscal
implications from the from DOT.
potential this fiscal impacted
New Mexico DF DOT operations
cannot be quantified at this
time but a lengthy delay in a
contractor's ability to use
least water on highway
improvement projects could
result in project delays
increase in project costs
related to New Mexico DOT
contractors having to pay more
for alternative sources of water
or even the loss of federal
highway funding of projects
cannot be built as scheduled.
All of us in here.
When our projects don't get on
the D. O. T. or the governor's
Right are we all have what like
we're gonna have this year high
amount of capital outlay funding
in a lot of I I know I I.
In San Juan County myself and
the other legislators we get
together and we funded big
projects usually road projects
bridge projects something.
All of these projects including
is including.
Folks who of who are looking to.
Build wind farms or solar
projects all of these are going
to take a large amount of water
for that for that.
For the concrete Siemens every
project that has seen it is
going to use a lot of water much
more than three acre feet.
My concern is if if if someone
were to drag this on because
they did not want a row project
forward.
Housing development to move
forward they did not want a wind
farm to move forward a single
protester could drag this on.
Long beyond what is the.
Fiscal viability that project I
think I think the one group that
might not be harmed as much as.
Oil and gas I mean I I I think
they could go purchase I think
we heard that
those folks in use brackish
water for most of this but the
amount of water that with
purchases less and I I think I
think those projects which have
the profitability in their kids
purchase.
Water from another source maybe
a less contentious source just
have the cost of transportation.
But the the folks who don't have
that ability or the hi we heard
from the chilli farmers com
forwards Association saying this
could be detrimental and they
don't have a hundred and eighty
days.
so at this is Mr chair rather
than asking a question this is
more of a.
This is more of a statement.
I'm concerned for the unintended
consequences to the people who
can least afford it and I tell
you what I I know after three
years Mr Chairman
we start looking at projects
that have been held up in those
dollars have not been
appropriated to pay for one of
our capital outlay projects they
get swept back.
And those projects in our
communities don't happen.
So hi I think it's important to
get this right not just to get
it done.
I think it's important and if if
there's a if there's some sort
of middle ground that we can get
to to make sure that the service
not a not a forget oil and gas
industry.
Our farmers are ranchers.
I think we need to take their
concerns seriously I don't think
I don't think.
I don't think we can just pass
it off as well other people have
the right.
To to protest I understand that.
But they have the right to
survive we don't want to harm
those folks I I I think.
Take a little bit of time to get
this right.
Is it shouldn't be a problem it
shouldn't be either or.
And I I would hope.
that's their concerns the
average New Mexican the average
person who stood up in here.
I think we should at least take
the time to get that right not
not okay well there's a delay
maybe we get something else as
passed by if there's a if
there's a way to.
Representative Chandler I would
hope that as this goes forward
if there's maybe there's a.
I acre feet amount of water
that.
That maybe projects within a
certain amount surely we could
protect folks with some sort of
an amendment to this.
And I I would just hope that as
we go forward.
that that we look at the the
little guy.
Because it is it is this if this
goes forward I could I could
see.
So many things being stopped by
a single person.
Be on the viability of the
project for beyond the ability
of a week of a local farmer
rancher to to survive a year of
drought thank you Mr chairman.
Representative separate.
Thank you Mr chairman
First of all you know I want to
just mention that what I'm
hearing I'm hearing two
different things here and as a
community planner who worked for
twenty eight years in the
community development projects
in fifteen years of that was in
development process and I see
this is really development
process what I'm hearing here
from some folks and I'm hearing
disenfranchise from other folks
and in listening to the
conversation
we all live in this community
together.
Want to remind us all around all
of this that we all live in this
community together and we want
to see good quality projects in
the state of New Mexico and I
think
you know understanding that we
don't want to just hear from one
side or the other we want
everybody to feel like they're
part of this and that is what
gives us good quality projects
and so I just want to remind us
of that
I think that it is a much
impaired maybe we do look at
some funding for the state
engineer and I and I just want
of the things that because I
worked on internos not bringing
that water water project into
the
decided kirke when it worked
with Bernalillo county and I saw
the sort of
you know having worked in the
city HSD myself for many years
the water the engineer the state
engineers hands kind of time
because it was hard to get that
water system in place Mr chair
and I just want to say that you
know I think it's important that
if we want to really look at
development process what makes
it better to have everybody's
voice is heard not just one
group or the other
I think I think this is really a
good start and and a good move
in that direction I'm not sure
that
You know we've covered all the
bases but I think this is a way
to start moving in the direction
where.
And and some projects maybe
delay delay you know I've seen
it before but if if people are
doing their work up front to be
inclusive all community.
Including the executors and the
farmers then we can come
together and work toward the
projects so I just wanted to
make that statement Mr chair
because I am listening to you
know two sides to the story and
it doesn't have to be two sides
if we do the work up front that
it's not a project that's going
to be too late and thank you Mr
chair appreciate that time.
Thank you Representative for
radio.
seeing no further debate
committee members of Taylor
would you like to ensuring
closing.
That's.
no Mr well yes.
Briefly I really appreciate your
consideration and I just want to
point to you again we need to
think of the side of the
equation over here Mr chair the
people whose property rights are
being impacted by these
not that it
at least one hearing leases.
Thank you Representative
Chandler was pleasure I move the
pass subject motion to take.
We have a substitution table six
priority of a.
You call the roll on the six.
Representative Thraco.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio no to
table.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend yes.
I share Sarinana.
Chairman queen no.
Seven so the most to table a
motion they also go back to
Representative reviews two
thousand motion.
And we have a second
representative or any other
equipment and the equipment on.
On the do that social.
Representative Braco.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend no.
I share Sarinana yes.
Chairman queen yes.
Thanks to I.
The the two thousand ocean six
five thank you Mr chair thank
you committee.
There's a lot of water people in
the room I ask you to please
quickly and quietly we as we
have one or built to the.
I
think thanks
to.
Yes.
Things like.
September stations outside the
room.
Here's.
Thank you.
This line.
Thank you.
Is that.
Space.
Thank you for being here.
Walter.
Our next bill is.
Bill I filled when they.
Increase free fishing.
the time to read your bill.
The reason is if you could
percent your.
As possible yes Sir actually
after that long since you just
went through I am thinking that
this will be short and sweet
good morning Mr chairman and
committee H. B. one ninety seven
is a bill that amends section
seventeen dash three dash
seventeen B. to add one more
week in a day add to the to
enter free fishing days
I can leave it at that or I can
keep those.
Thank you okay.
Okay and with that also for
questions I have my expert
witness if we do need to get
into the weeds.
Are you in the audience would
like we can support.
Okay.
Our support is also is this
from.
I'm here as.
The residents how weird is.
Especially for but it and that
loves you those there for.
Thank you.
Mr chair members the committee
storyline Representative New
Mexico department of game fish
stands for the bill additional
days to this office throughout
the year with the can be
beneficial for people to get out
there.
Is there anyone in the office
opposition see anyone is there
anyone online who feels the need
to speak on this.
Seeing that posible con.
questions or is there a motion
Representative.
Zacks Act so we don't.
She would like.
Tell us pause for just a moment.
I promised that you would not
take the.
For expecting much more.
Like it was the list of a.
These personal.
You may have a.
The previous representative one
month before on my bills that
need.
Good.
Okay.
this is just going to be what it
for bill to take longer than.
Yeah.
This is the act this year prior
to those.
We did try.
Yes.
stalking.
Thank.
Thank you so let's take a look
Representative we would do this
much yes.
Right yes.
Representative great.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert yes
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Scott this
Representative small.
Representative Townsend
absolutely.
I sure Sarinana yes chairman
yes.
That night though you have a.
Thank you much you're you're.
