And in the legislature on
section nine up until this point
section I recommendations are
included in the executive
recommendation for a budget
right so what's interesting is
the executive director renewable
include that amount of money
that rich is here with the
legislature so last year section
nine appropriation store about
three hundred seventy four
million dollars a hundred two
hundred forty of that for
construction so there again
comparing contrasting to the
current recommendation of a
hundred ninety seven million you
know the equates to about fifty
percent of that total funding
and so what we did during remote
force is work like other
agencies to kind of you know
swing for the fence or shoot for
the stars however you prefer to
leverage the revenue estimates
in in in the current the current
session so what Mr Katongo
through now is essentially how
we formulated that request and
basically for the.
Very much chair of the committee
thank you for your time today
appreciate it as we start so the
first slide just list of the
fifteen projects the
we're gonna go over the
federally funded so we're gonna
go over of funding through each
district of the second slides
the state law the twenty twenty
two such full.
Department transportation is
requesting fifty nine of twenty
five million for opposition
right away planning design and
construction that's not other
state or federal funds for
projects through for projects
appropriations made in section
reviews for the following
products that we have listed
again these were priorities
brought about by each district
of we have a couple of projects
for district I will go over the
list of completely there but
**** District wants total assets
about eighty one million dollars
district to about a hundred
thirty million dollars district
three is a hundred eighty two
million dollars that will
highlight letter D. in district
of governed country interchange
project that is assigned to a
project that we've been working
toward for the last several
years on the field to be
received or funds for it
unfortunately we were not
successful in getting major
grant funding for that project
so the total us on for that
project is going to be about a
hundred thirty nine million
dollars or so but that is a top
priority for the for the state
as far as as far as construction
projects on this bill district
four has five twenty nine and a
half billion dollar US district
five fifty two million and
district six more times than I
forty bridges of sixty five
million dollars US those total
total about about five hundred
forty million in of funding for
projects that we have under
development very stages of very
stages and then in addition
we're asking for another hundred
twenty million for grant funding
for for match basically offer
potential successful grant
applications and redistribution
of federal dollars at the end of
the federal fiscal year so any
states that are successful in
spending all of their
appropriations of the states
that are successful in house
already projects shop there on
the shelf ready for all of will
receive some additional federal
funds and so we're requesting
that that the hundred twenty
million to help with our.
Match for those potential
additional federal funds that we
receive at the end of each
fiscal year madam chair one
point about the the grant
manages to part of what.
By by.
Bipartisan infrastructure law
allows the all for local
governments counties
municipalities and in many cases
even tribal governments is the
opportunity for that to appeal
directly to U. S. department
transportation for
infrastructure projects right
two recent awards include
requests in Carlsbad in
Albuquerque for example and so
we've been working with FHWA
Federal Highway Administration
to essentially figure out how we
all service support partners for
those communities echo after
billions of dollars of those
infrastructure on their own and
we're working out with those two
communities to off of the kind
of manage those projects in
partnership with them right so
what we're hoping to do
also leasing encouraging local
governments to seek federal
funding but cert but with
posterity has that partner
allowing us to leverage state
funding for their match so if a
community after an eighty
million dollar grant and they
need twenty percent to match
that grant in order to get that
project from the ground working
through us with the state
resources for match helps us get
them where they need to do to
get these projects for so it's a
combination of one kind of
pushing communities to use us as
a resource and to give them the
facts that they need to
essentially get those projects
funded so a hundred twenty
million could be translated to
seven hundred million basically
multiply that by five on the
twenty percent that we could
realize upwards of seven million
projects one question I have
the forty secretary service with
the bill back better access
there is federal bills that have
brought more infrastructure
money to New Mexico I know that
the governor had appointed
Martin Chavis to kind of oversee
the spending of those funds has
your department been interfacing
with them and if so how and if
not why not absolutely sure of
the committee what what I think
of their job is and and you can.
So we all go or thanks for she
stepped on is the coordination
of how federal funding is being
spent right so it isn't
happening in isolation so we
have so they've essentially pull
together as a team secretaries
that are for lack of better
words you know using most of
federal funding that's coming by
way of federal legislation and
so by bringing us all together
we understand how we can
leverage out funding across
agencies to essentially ensure
that we're kind of maximizing it
to the state's best interest so
for example when we're talking
about infrastructure investments
down the border were having that
conversation with the
environment department's
economic development department
of tourism and department of
transportation right so that
we're understanding how each of
the missions of those agencies
kind of fits into the puzzle of
how we spend those resources so
we've actually been engaged
with.
from electric vehicle from
electric vehicle to supply chain
issues to offline Bridget of
priorities of our road
infrastructure.
And yes thank you we have
Representative thanks to a one
you talked about partnering with
the local jurisdictions County.
And I'm worried that the state
partners to the extent that
roads are certain sections of
roads are taken over by a
particular jurisdiction.
What can you briefly describe
what that is Sir contractual
arrangement discount yep I'm
just the state advocated
supporting those jurisdictions
and those situations can
describe that for us please sure
sure madam chair members so what
will effectively do wonderful as
the forces interim committee
into Cremins region in that
light industry mints for the
purposes of handing over to a
local government the
responsibility it's enough for
the both what they want to
what the Madam chair
representative so typically for
instance on city Santa Fe New
Mexico to go to this what's
called our treatment all where
he sexually will commence of
complete construction funding
instructional seem construction
of a road that'll bring it up to
standards that the municipality
income.
Expects and then we'll we'll get
to the level of this interview
but also we have in in general
when we have a project to go
through to the US lighting
civilization of the secretary
of it will go we interesting
online entrance will be
responsible for the maintenance
and the power of for the signal
lights on but will continue to
what we for structure itself so
we've we've entered and several
students with several different
responding scholars and comments
from the state typically that's
the route that is the
contractual or agreement that we
that we enter into this cultural
exchange thank you chairman just
a follow up question so is it
during the new construction that
these arrangements are made or
is it.
For the life of the road
subsequent what whatever time
period is being talked about so
madam chair representative a
rotisserie human will and then
their their their job to several
different ways Francis one Santa
Fe so this on fate it was
originally
author when I was constructed on
the deal to committee
constructing five ninety nine
and then see who's gonna take
over synthesis of cereals but we
have to do some additional
projects so we've been doing
some projects Los Rios slowly
transfer that probably would
city getting it up to the
especially the one hundred over
the next you will to maintain at
that point for the life of the
facility so that they would
responsible for continued up
keep on future maintenance and
preservation projects that would
that would require.
Chairman another question so in
doing what you describe are you
advocating your authority and
its exclusive now to that local
jurisdiction madam chair
representative wants to look
into that will exchange again
because they have all the right
a week is reported to them with
the quit claim deed they're
responsible for all permitting
whether it's dry we permitting
facility permitting any of
roadway use permits that they
might have all authority would
be transferred to the pool
Cheryl assumes that that the
local jurisdiction with the
capable and understood
understand all of the nuances
related to that particular road
or or even your requirements.
In doing that.
You have no longer any state.
Madam chair representative and
as far as ownership of the road
we we transfer all maintenance
of ownership responsibilities
over to the entities so you know
at that point in time they are
responsible for permitting of
any use of the facility whether
Strudwick programs to announce
of utility permits again they
would be taken off our
possibility of it and in turn
that would lessen our burden for
as far as maintenance of
facilities because oftentimes we
we're stretched pretty thin so
it's a win win for both of us
typically that the entities do
want to take over control of
that facility because it tends
to run right heart of the
community they have a lot of
skin in the game when it comes
to construction and
rehabilitation for the facility
and use that facility so all of
the all ownership
responsibilities transferred
over to so but so it's for that
stuff to perhaps thank you
chairman thank you very much I
believe ranking member brown
have questions I do thank you
madam chair.
So I'm a little confused about
this lied six seven eight hi my
number and
this has to do with
Sanders was said earlier these
are section nine projects for
your priority projects for the
district and some of their
fifteen of them one and two were
not Cheryl just wondering.
What has.
Reading this correctly two more.
Gov Madam chair representative
that the I do believe that
system a number here so really
the projects if you look at
three and four of those are just
this really the project listing
that does also support slide
starts at five goals down to
fifteen social there is a
request for the match funds for
the system number here okay
thank you madam chair.
And also right we will be
spending more time on section
line mother have faster CF thank
you madam chair David Law slide
the year where you're the
projects this to.
On district six you got involved
with this twice what one of the
this is the.
District six thousand four
hundred basement thirty five
million Iraqi forces district
six.
That individual Madam chair
representative great question of
those actually two separate
projects the first one is a
bridge replacement for drop on
I. forty twenty nine point seven
Plymouth twenty nine point seven
and the other project as a
replacement drainage improvement
projects young people of that
mile marker twelve point thirty
five good question thank you for
but let me clarify one more
question.
David we had a meeting up that
three seventy one couple weeks
ago and one of the district six
people in there said that these
people need to be a shining star
to get any funding for private
do up there and this is a safety
issue because you have a what.
And we try to get lighting four
of the passing lane or turning.
And the COVID to doctor up to me
and Representative dot.
The rules are one of the.
People reserves there should be
a shining star because they're
not
in the office of the funding
that kind of bothered me.
The lead COVID the people not
ask for hand of us for our
little ones and that that was
that is brought up in regards to
all.
Witness that it was very
unprofessional and inappropriate
with this before session after
preservation and you know
there's an issue of we sent you
a four ninety one also a
lighting issue that is this.
We need to address the issues of
the people out there because.
There is no lights at all.
My concern is.
Dropped off by a lot of.
The
secretary could go.
Madam chair Mister off of
representative Garcia
absolutely.
I think I think madam chair
representative that that that's
the balance that we're trying to
to discuss the jury Committee
the question was asked how do we
balance these safety related
priorities redevelopment
priorities and others and it is
difficult because the state is
going to be built primarily
around those safety of those
court related issues and safety
priorities for drivers
pedestrians cyclists.
And so after that right our
kinds though once you know on so
many fronts we really want this
for this community or what this
for development so judge your
question no you don't need to be
a shining star the equity issue
is important to us and we can
sit and talk about how we can
get that community what it needs
but going back to Representative
crucis question and and we are
the presentation the priority to
hear on this page department
transportation project I you
know back up chair Lundstrom was
was was the development of sixty
nine the establish a forty five
million dollar recurring
appropriation right for
transportation projects.
And under the previous secretary
this program was established
essential to allow funding to
local communities to maintain
their roads systems with with as
little as a five percent match
was projects and the options for
provide for hardship in the
event equipment for that match
so last year I believe we
appropriated till one hundred
twenty seven million dollars to
local communities so the support
for local road infrastructures
continues through a program like
TPS and local government growth
fund so that whether that road
was a prop up was an asset that
we exchange with them or if it
always belong to the counties
and municipalities for the
tribal government they they can
apply for upwards of their their
shareable hundred twenty million
dollars of these last year so
that they can maintain and
upkeep.
Also that's a primary function
of the T. V. T. F. programs to
support local governments in the
upkeep of their of their
district.
And now lastly madam chairman
Sir thank you very much madam
chair I appreciate the chance to
ask a couple questions I really
look forward to your leadership
on this I have always seen this
committee is a I participate
yeah been on it for two decades
and it's always worked well
together and I'm glad you're
going to take that approach as
we go forward just a couple of
questions I have for the
department.
You know the I think the key to
the Department and it's my
favorite department I need to
say is that
it's it's about looking at the
total budget at the end.
When you look at page one I
think at some point us in the
department of bringing this
forward is looking at one thirty
five and how is that interest
rates with the rest of the state
initiatives really second line
is something that we so the
HSD a few years ago because
that.
The half and we did have the
extra we did have the extra
General Fund.
But at the end of the day we
need to understand the full
budget for this department
hello it's integrated with the
local projects and help really
does integrate with sections
not.
No at the end of the day section
time is approved I progressions
Committee this committee can
make the recommendation but in
their deliberations they may
decide to change that we we just
don't know that yet I
If you look at like eleven the
state road focus what is
actually used to match line
thirty five our portion of the
state's questions so I question
them secretary certify we
anticipate additional federal
money to come in this next year
Senator Representative think the
amount we're looking at is
percent a two percent increase
in federal funding this year.
Hey so madam chair we have a two
percent increase in federal
funding we have to match that
and what categories are going
to.
Three hundred category on this
Representative so we're looking
at contractual services which
applies to construction correct.
So I think it might be it might
help us to understand in this
all inside each one of the
district's steps what those what
those priorities on how intended
use funding I know there's a
bill that's going through now to
move all the motor vehicle
excise tax into your budget
which is it should've always
been anyone but when we were
tight for money we had to use it
for other things so we we need
to think about that all so at
some point looking at the total
budget the board for us my
district and I'm really looking
forward to some of these
innovative ideas and plans that
you're working with some of the
other departments especially
when it comes to things like
alternative fuels looking at how
we might be able to help with
disruption of the supply chain
issues looking at multiple
feeling opportunities I'm really
looking forward to that
appreciate all your hard work
and under great leadership to do
this thank you.
From chair of this quick
response and looking at how we
can possibly look at other
revenues I mean for example
working on legislation to
responsibly create incremental
increases to registration fees
we're looking at the increase to
motorcycle registration fees
increased distribution of
aviation funds so we know that
it can't just be an ask ask us
and get get get the climate will
always be like this so we want
to be sure that we don't get in
a position where we're looking
at increasing rates for you know
we've distance you know special
you know registration fees
special feel packed in you know
ridiculous way that really
starts to creep concern for a
lot of concerned parties and
partners so we'll be looking at
how we can meet those increments
changes to sustain you know that
the increased costs of this
thank you thank you very much.
At Mr secretary we have.
Sixteen minutes to finish your
proposal so.
Quickly so we can move on the
Senate floor from general and so
we are moving on
again we're asking for of eighty
million dollars for
transportation projects one of
we're asking for a hundred forty
two million dollars for made
into the furnace or lift as I
wait or wait take the open I
would access and that'll be
distributed through each
district all pretty much equally
is what we've been doing in the
past and then another eight
million dollars to purchase
total request the new nine point
five million of false light just
a little bit more detail on
project our reserves and
projects that were identified
each district show the full
project estimated about current
of funding that that the
projects have and then
highlighted on the far right for
the second phone call to the far
right of the actual funds needed
to make the project whole so
they're just some comments on
the side in a identified what
what stage what phase the
project is undergoing
development so phase HB is
basically plotting very early
stages
before we can actually get to
design that allows us to get
them to do our environment
processes and one final designed
so there's a question
specifically about what these
each of these projects are are
in all of us actuals questions
offline.
and then of all the subsequent
slides are just going to be up
and district look at we're
looking at these district
project priority what the
fund of the funding us is that
just a map of where it is
located so for example District
one we have of New Mexico to
thirteen widening New Mexico to
thirteen New Mexico for forty
interject for that corridor that
runs down from someone part of
two of two of the four oh four
interchange two thirteen two
thousand five that's the
extension for us yeah so.
so that's the major priority for
district one basically and it
really is a safety issue also
each subsequent slide is just
focusing on on those districts
projects and whether act so
again this is just some added
information for this project
already if you would like to go
over these in more detail at but
this is just the best idea of
where it's located and the
second is focusing on those on
those of twelve project costs.
Excuse was that again last night
because a lot of issues.
So I will stretch of apologies
but with that madam chair
members of the committee off of
that question for the doctor for
no major improvement project
thank you very much and I am
going to allow members of the
committee thirteen minutes to
ask any questions on specific
function related projects
Committee body having.
Our reserve chairman and members
of the which is one of state.
Thank you for the the project
two thirteen whiting it has been
in many decades of lot of axis
Services Department from eight
to the extension of the could
also help circumvent a lot of
those issues where we can always
development colorful Fassel and
I will completion of all for
coming here that's going to
create these thank you to see
what I'm showing.
In the members.
Garcia
thank you.
Thank you for what worked what I
need the interstate from Arizona
to all of us to make it
mandatory is there anything in
their school work well that
Madam chair we had to shut off
point for the conduct for
action.
Because I already right now
Madam chair representative
Garcia Garcia yes I don't you
know as as of some of you may
not be where we are where the
process of undergoing a
feasibility study and private
participation for spending
capacity of forty from Arizona
to Albuquerque all right now and
we're really we're we've are
we've had our first public
meeting we're trying to identify
where which best start at home
to help projects currently under
development designed to wipe my
forty but really we need to
participate where we were where
should be white and first where
should we got from the rules
with our weather appropriate and
really come up with eight eight
good of the up ten to fifteen
year plan to get that to get by
forty done I believe one of
first presented that that study
to tears couple years ago Gallup
the price tag was about one
billion dollars from the state
can last year of this past
August coming back in giving an
update on that project with
price escalations what about two
billion dollars now so this
hence the US right on these of
these projects that we have been
under or within a priority bill
default for quite a while for
distributing very stages so as
we develop the prices of the
school is significantly in the
last couple years so we really
are trying to get a handle on
that but it is a priority and
we're when we're all we're
making our way to simply not
study and that sort of I
projects get development
representative projected growth
in the quarter of the time thank
you very much specific
techniques we have
Representative Chris thank you
chairman committed secretary can
you briefly describe your
planning relationship with no
regrets Council governments
please.
The council.
Of the Madam chair
representative absolutely it's
on so and you see us sits on all
the committees of the house seat
on all the committees from for
Mr call we're of the our partner
with with Mr called on by myself
in the district engineer just to
get some sort of metropolitan
transportation board to identify
project priorities Mr call does
have and J. to have federal
funding programs forty so the
one if you want our state that
actually gets federal funds to
program months there shipped and
these projects.
In two districts of the state
the have to go through the call
because district three.
Mr call coaxes all.
So we are good partners with
them we work hand in hand with
project priorities projects
selection updating in in doing
their up by annual federal
reviews were we we are are of of
of partner with them on that we
also work with the Mr call on
smaller groups of the rules of
the RPO for Mr call if you will
with district I and district six
as well so we're constantly in
communication partnering with
them to identify project
partners thank you so much
Secretary.
Our next Representative Harper.
The manager of Secretary
regulations for digital team
here.
so.
And very interested of course I
mentioned earlier in the Mexico
highway three forty seven.
the last ten years most of us
three iterations legislators
gathered.
twenty twenty five million.
Capital outlay a lot of work to
get the right of way done person
done so another part is working
really hard and I think it's a
great progress on that and then
I think last year we also give
house with two very grateful for
that the the the the folks here
for making that happen this is
about three million start
Rating four that interchange of
the R. forty some just have a
quick update maybe follow up
with.
Madam chair representative on so
we're of we're going on for R.
F. P. to basically continue from
believe it's rainbow aware of
the counties finishing a project
to I. forty in order for that
project to make sense as far as
federal participation we're
working from north to south so I
forty would be the last project
that interchange itself would be
the last project so that's
basically how we gonna go for is
yes it is going to fight how
many faces with the needs of all
split that less respect for
right to and the develop those
projects accordingly as you know
we're in the process of
acquiring right we for it we
required majority if not all the
right of the for the emerging
self so it's moving along is
progressing but with of the
project of that magnitude takes
time but we are a we are getting
there for sure so the RFP will
be coming out of here this
spring for for that portion from
I. forty and you'll start seeing
some more progress.
Thank you Mr next we have
Representative Brown thank you
madam chair question for the
tournament.
we have six transportation
districts do we have a member of
the committee for at least one
for all six point
Representative.
I'm Representative that is a
fantastic question to which I do
not have an answer but I will
have one for you by this
afternoon okay I wouldn't mind
being over representative for
district two.
Of the reason I ask is I know we
care about the whole state
transportation system but I do
keep my district is understand
that so the question I have
madam chair next is regarding
its in district two it's the
intersection of I was thirty one
point twenty eight.
Talking about the needs there
for very long.
Do we have a design do we have
to come up with a final last I
looked well in the beginning for
even looking at the overpass
potentially we figured across
both can have an overpass so
could we.
Ceaselessly that the cost was
really.
We did something else.
Madam chair of the stops that
portion of of of the former if
you will that is focusing on
design build so the.
We it's what if there's a lot of
flexibility still when we were
moving the ball for design build
we we allow for the design
builder to come to the table
with a different
of innovative approaches to
project difference even even
potentially different
intersectional Alliance roadway
lines to help project lots of we
are it's not set in stone yet so
too we can actually go out and
get a design build on board
that's when what should fund
final is typically designed
built on we'll get to about
thirty percent gonna fly
alignments and identify with our
performance specifications will
be for the project that we
wanted to hear to and really
give them the flexibility to
meet those requirements so a lot
of design changes still drive
okay then chair and then just so
we have time to date yes from we
are hoping that we can other
ties for that or if P. this July
again one of our priority got
some in is you know as a state
or local government our number
one priority state this is the
number to the design build on
the opportunities that it builds
up to offer right now are still
right and to take anymore time
labels products and more with
probably not the thing for the
state for the duty manager and
and senator al yeah if if we're
doing a design build because
damages to doing it but if we
delay we kind of lose the
effect of it so
are increasing.
After.
We we agree wholeheartedly in
fact even yesterday is this a we
had a conversation about how we
might actually dedicate our care
your fund balance to ensure that
ongoing commission this project
you don't have to lose the
interest of the contractors we
might be dedicating some
resources in the next couple of
weeks to ensure that those
projects keep moving forward so
that again those contractors
that have already signed on of
those projects don't feel as
though you know.
We don't have the funds for.
Just for quite a few what what
sectors also because we
shortlisted are proposed
projects we've already gone
through a Rick on the costs for
qualifications those projects
shortlisted the contractors who
can go out of your.
Thank you thank you very much I
said representatives Judy G.
Andrés Romero thank you madam
chair and thank you all for the
hard work that you do specially
the secretary when I called up
the traffic issues on Rio Bravo
you're definitely really helpful
in resolving that for for my
constituents I did have a
question about the gives an
interchange.
He just wanted I represent both
the project that you're gonna be
working on the real problem
bridge replacement on which we
certainly appreciate but also
Gibson Gibson interchange with
services the the current for
space and large portions of my
constituency as well if you
could give me a bit of an update
on that we need to catch up
online it's totally fine to.
Madam chair representative we
are currently negotiating a
contract for the extension for
Representative that's also gonna
be a design build project so
Horrocks engineering consulting
firm was the selected engineer
engineering firm to help us
develop those performance specs
so we wanted to design build on
obviously that still is down the
road so to give you some
perspective we went to the R. F.
P. for the owners Representative
upcoming need about three years
ago so that's where you are as
as far as a timeline goes is
respect respected Committee and
I guess madam chair part of it
and I remember talking with
Former Representative Powdrell
Culbert as part of this
committee about some of the
crumbling infrastructure around
the kids interchange for.
That issue like we have with the
real brokerage on the Gibson
interchange so so hopefully it
could be a little bit sooner but
I understand some of the
obstacles on that may be present
thank you madam chair.
Much okay at this time we say
two minutes thank you gentleman
I really appreciate you and
everyone from DOT coming today
after this is not the last we'll
speak with all of you on and we
really do appreciate all the
information you provided will be
in touch I'm sure thank you
madam chair thank you.
The.
This is what does.
If you.
I.
Thanks for.
No for a little bit.
If you have.
Yes.
With.
I just want to.
This is the first of.
Thank you.
Next we're gonna have jobs from
the legislative finance
committee to give us the LFC
budget recommendations relates
to the OTC Jerry taken away.
Of the morning and chair members
of the committee at the ministry
jobs in the LFC analyst for the
department of transportation and
problems we do that we do have a
hand up in front of you that
includes a lot of the LFC
materials related to the
departure transportation I'm not
going to go through this word
for word chair that would take
way too long but I am going to
give you a high level overview
of the executive and the LFC
recommendations in specially of
some things that were discussed
by the committee over the last
Senator ourselves if I just me
for seconds or seven so for
those members of the committee
who have not been on the budget
committee before the way it
works is we get and executive
recommendation from the agency
and they also get
recommendations from LFC and
then the process to go through
during the session as we combine
those budgets to come up with
the final number so this is our
way of getting both sides of the
equation essentially so that we
could see what the to
segmentation as and then what
LFC the LESC recommendations so
I just wanted to make that
clarification for those who
don't know.
Yes thank you madam chair I'm
actually gonna start on page
three of of my presentation this
is we call differentiate between
the executive and the LESC
recommendation for the
department of transportation for
the department of transportation
operating budget I'm actually
just going to direct you very
quickly to the far right column
where it where it says LFC over
under executive for the total
recommendation and you can see
on the wrong both revenue and
expenditures which have to
always the difference is thirty
million dollars and you can see
on the revenue side that's
thirty million dollars in fund
balance that's department did
not request was not included in
the executive recommendation you
heard a few moments ago from
this spans and are just with the
department actually they they're
not thinking that amount might
be forty to fifty millions of
the LFC Representative was a
little low but we included that
number because we knew there was
going to do something
as
as you said madam chair we're
we're gonna go through the
process of looking at updated
revenue estimates from the
department the forecast state
road fund revenues and.
June and January and so when we
get those updated
Revenue estimates were we'll
take a look at what's available
for the department and and
bring forward recommendations to
you all for inclusion in house
bill three.
so the as I said the difference
on the revenue side is in in the
budgeting a fund balance the LFC
recommendation include splits
that between a couple of
different programs a couple
different functions twenty five
million dollars for contractual
services project design and
construction program for the
department which oversees all of
you know your can construction
that's essentially for matching
funds for construction projects
the five million dollars in the
other category would be for the
highway operations programs
allow the department to purchase
additional supplies and
materials for maintenance
programs to the include that
and.
And we're going to discuss all
of those issues as well
the next couple of pages are
just note are
Different sheets for each of the
four program department of
transportation of weapons go
through all of these
following that you can see our
performance.
So part of the budget process
the LFC and the executive
committee attended public
consensus on a number of
different performance measures
for each department including
part of transportation those are
all listed here I will say
There's there's a fair amount of
the treatment on some of these
where there are some major
differences actually are in
regards to the highway
operations program and
particularly for road conditions
so the department significantly
improve the conditions of a lot
of New Mexico roadways in fiscal
year twenty two I with that
equipment
the LFC recommendation actually
didn't take into account some of
those improvements were just the
executive so
I would just say to you the
executive recommendation on for
programs on the highway
operations program reflects that
improvement that probably should
be considered by the legislature
for inclusion in house bill two.
Finally you may have noticed on
the different sheet madam chair
the department request a very
slight decrease in their
personal services employee
benefits budget on page ten of
your packet
on is what we call the PS help
she for the department
transportation that's
essentially as a tool to LFC
uses to determine how much the
agency has for filling the
various positions at the
department and really the key
today she is called an on the on
the bottom half of that she and
you can see that's.
That's what we call the funded
vacancy amount for the
department and the department
has twenty three million dollars
essentially that they can use to
fill
existing vacancies and that I
think that helps explain why the
department did not request
additional dollars in the
personal services employee
benefits category one either the
executive or the LFC
recommendation includes
additional dollars there's
because essentially this is
saying the department has
sufficient appropriations the
personal services employee
benefits to fill all of their
positions that they need.
On that finally and and you
talked about this a little bit
madam chair on page eleven is a
different sheet for the
nonrecurring section nine
appropriations
so as was pointed out
traditionally the
This is been a legislative
process
And you so you'll know in the
executive recommendation column
there's there's no
recommendation there
You know so this is this is
something that the legislature's
kind off point particularly
online for of the sheet you'll
see there is a hundred seven
million dollar recommendation
from LFC for roadway planning
design construction and
maintenance.
Additionally the legislature has
selected specific projects for
inclusion in house bill two to
list out those are projects this
recommendation doesn't include
specific projects it's just a
lump sum amount for the for the
legislature to then go through
their process of considering
those projects so what you're
saying just summon as we will
need to spend some extra time
with the executive to figure out
where those projects are coming
from and what they would likely
include it so
so madam chair as I say that's
for you all to consider how how
much you want to get involved in
that process I would just say
traditionally the legislature
has weighed in on what projects
are funded in this section of of
the appropriation L..
Also point out madam chair so
you the department
transportation is right here so
this is part of an overall
nonrecurring package on the LESC
side it's one point two billion
dollars the executive
recommendation not including
zero for the department of
transportation is two point two
billion.
So just to give you an idea of
how this fits into the overall
budget there's a significant
amount of
Recommendations here in the LFC
wrecked that are reflected in
the executive director and
they're a billion dollars I on
the nonrecurring side.
Okay thank you.
and then madam chair I just want
to point out
There with the rest of packet is
materials from LFC is very small
pages thirteen through fifteen.
provide a good overview of the
department budget issues us from
going to you all probably have a
hard copy of that back in your
office
For it provides a good overview
of some of the issues and and I
can prove that at at your
leisure begin on page nineteen
is the fiscal year twenty twenty
two
report card for the department
of transportation and I think as
I mentioned before.
On page twenty at the top.
Is a
Is.
Reporter on road conditions that
department does every year I
just want a having compared to
dress briefly the FY two percent
twenty twenty count here twenty
twenty actuals versus county or
twenty twenty one actuals you
can see there was significant
improvement and up all of these
areas.
the department credits two
things with that the first is
just a better data collection
date there was some improvements
in that area the second is the
is the amounts that you all have
appropriated to section nine for
various maintenance and
And construction projects across
the state that's helped the
department significant increase
those road conditions.
Of and then finally the last
pages twenty three to twenty
seven.
Our our materials that are
completed a long free sort of
supplemental tables so on page
twenty three.
This is the overview of the more
than one point three billion
dollars that you all of
appropriated to the department
You know in section nine for the
past several years I just
direct your attention to be
expended column so this is a
little bit old understands and
are just provided a little a
little bit of date on that today
so this is through November
twenty twenty which is sort of
our publishing deadline for
three five hundred twenty two
million one point three billion.
Most of the twenty twenty to
appropriations have yet to be
expended or encumbered part of
that is it just takes the
department a long time to plan
design and get these projects
under contract and what at which
point they become encumbered but
there is several
areas here for the department to
be focusing on the next couple
years you'll notice also the far
right column has the reversion
date so you know as we get
towards the top we start seeing
your reversions at the end of
fiscal year twenty three that's
in June ninety six percent
expended twenty and twenty four
you see you know some of these
are more expensive than others
but you know was still on that
day hundred seventy five million
we were talking about before the
only sixty five percent expended
as of states with very the end
of FY twenty four.
okay in particular there some
areas here the department didn't
request additional funding in
these areas but I just know
there is funding available for
the department to over the next
couple years addressed rest
areas
and
On one that's further out that's
actually the special
appropriation electric vehicle
charging so there's there's
money outstanding there to the
proper department to do some of
these things get on on you know
on a nonrecurring basis.
On page twenty four.
So this is a projection of the
department's debt service
payments over the next several
years so as you can see there's
a pretty significant decrease
beginning in FY twenty five
that's going to free up the
department is free after
resources for the department to
reinvest those dollars that
would otherwise go to debt
service to poor road project so
over the last few years the
department did a really good job
of
came down data and also
refinancing that into a lower
interest rate to really save the
state money and spends find more
for the road funds to fund
projects on a recurring basis
is so you can see here by FY
thirty one essentially there's
no debt service payments.
and then with that manager these
are again just supplemental
cables I will go through the
rest of them but you can you can
look at those I can answer any
questions you have on and with
that I'll just stand for
questions Madam thank you very
much Mr Simons will start with
Representative Lundstrom thank
you very much I wanted to make
just a quick comment on page
twenty four I think this is
excellent we started out with a
whole bunch of different
initiatives
thank you for being one of those
rare at the time.
This will because of course
using our federal allocation for
on.
This is really good I want to
compliment the department LFC
staff and everybody else to
making sure that we're not going
to have to in in these close out
years we're not going to have
these big debt payments and.
and what that does is that puts
the money back into the
construction program back into
the into the state program and
moves us projects a lot faster
so I just wanted to make a
comment I want to thank
everybody for working really
hard on this.
Representative Harper thank you
madam chair thank you for the
great presentation I really
appreciate LFC great work you
guys do and partnering with the
DOT also talking about two two
quick questions also talk about
the the debt service here.
understand these did start with
the grip project stature
Lundstrom mentioned but the
majority of these.
Of the current that I understand
correctly is the rail runner and
Yes what were the current
I believe that a little payment
and then we we we
did that that service and spread
it out it is that the majority
of what we see here so chair
representative I might need to
get you more I don't you for
information so I mean to get
more information get back to you
on specifically what the that
that that was I will say I do
what I do know is you know
Senator really are mentioned
that when the pandemic yet you
all hold back seventy five
million dollars from the special
appropriation that you all
allocated but you get the
department bonding authority so
I can tell you seventy five
million of that is from that
that funding amount of it but
going back regarding the need to
look into.
Okay yeah thank you madam chair
thank you that's that's helpful
to understand what this is
composed just say you know a lot
of the state's we look to have
really good road financing they
pay cash for every single bond
because you end up getting.
You pay one dollar instead of
two for for each unit of role
that you're making so you get
more role for the Buck so I'm
glad that we're trending this
way and hope we continue to
trend that way.
the the last comment honestly
Wish we had more time but I
really love page twenty seven
that is the key.
The age age forty seven is so
good because of
a new spenders the few minutes
looking at this understanding
so.
The the revenue streams and how.
The state of the half of the
pardons funding right because
the other half of the face with
us the state for and and it's
kind of very quickly for the far
right see the roughly twenty two
percent of the funding comes
from the regular gasoline tax
another twenty six percent comes
from special fuel tax.
Out of a few numbers here in
other twenty two twenty three
percent from weight distance and
Tritax oversize with fees.
You see vehicle registration to
fifteen sixty percent more
requests as a ten percent we're
gonna see a big change your.
which will help but.
As you look at how this is
changed over the last several
years to go back further you can
also see that there are some
problems.
the the first is the gasoline
taxes used to climb and notice
flat.
The gasoline tax rate tax to use
user fees rate if you're using a
road use up your car with gas if
you are using a vehicle that is
damaging more damage to the road
because it's have here you
usually have less fuel
efficiencies you're paying more
than in gas taxes are great it's
a great tax but we're having
some challenges there.
anyway I I will I will go on for
for the rest of time here we
really need to look at how do we
help.
Which is seeing
increased costs because of
inflation in their materials.
When nearly all of the revenue
streams are now last.
so thank you madam chair except
from collects yeah that's right
chair just make a comment on
that real quick you're correct I
actually have a longer period
table of different revenues into
the the road fund I wish it
included and didn't but just
looking at gasoline the special
deal you'll see special fuels
about twenty six percent
gasoline about twenty two
percent thank you to be flipped
right so gasoline tax has been
relatively flat as you say even
as the special fuel the diesel
taxes account for a larger
portion of the amount and that's
primarily due to increased fuel
efficiency right so yeah people
are people using less gas which
is
Really mentioned just on a motor
vehicle excise tax I can see
down there it's kind of the
third one so what sixty percent
currently goes into the state
general fund and doesn't go
you know into the road fund I
point out for you all.
Thank you very much
representative thank you very
much Joey with only three
affirmative overrepresented
planned to be so at that point
we're going to thanks for your
work and I'm looking at the
American council of engineering.
Check this legislation are
filled.
We used.
The transportation.
Morning madam chair in morning
that is my name is John Pena I
am the operations manager for
the civic Fund.
I also the chair of the
government affairs committee for
AC
ACC is the American council of
engineering companies we
represent thousands of companies
and we are the boys of the
engineering industry element you
see throughout the nation for
more than a hundred years ACC is
a federation of fifty one state
regional councils represent six
hundred engineers six hundred
thousand years architects and
others a special.
Was primary mission here locally
is is to strengthen our business
environment.
For members government at its
fantasy collection education
our firm's works Representative
basically all forms of
infrastructure throughout the
nation we work on water
wastewater projects are down and
community development
transportation utility surveying
environmental services
stormwater communications
analyst for structure so
we do partner with other
organizations to the state
including a DC AC in this week's
association counties just to
address issues that are
important to our industry and to
the state's infrastructure so
with this today we have Joe
Thompson the future is there
this year
on the hill and then we have
Danny Sims we also have Debra
takes on the line every case is
going to be present I don't
believe we have that capability
if trial cover it so we can keep
the presentation we will make a
affirmative action is.
So
That is that is P. another
continuing for locally and
so
Explore areas of importance we
have Senator is on committees
W. or formalization obviously we
we as a as a committee within a
given to you Albuquerque
Bernalillo county water utility
affording County City of
Albuquerque city Rio Rancho
local governments that
representative and we do C. B.
MFA DFA Office of the state
engineer southern New Mexico and
the US army corps of engineers I
organization and it really our
industry is instrumental to
planning and executing
infrastructure projects most of
our capital outlay requests come
from money that we through our
or programs that we work with
the clients that are right
you're probably gonna need this
much money for this project move
forward in this.
Construction and so on so very
much
she tied to communities we
represent them in terms of
finding their projects but also
education and making sure the
the you need the order of the
local government agreements
within your team where they get
their financing from so
R. A. C. E. C. initiatives we
focus on a lot of water waste
water funding projects the same
with transportation and utility
funding we work a lot with
tribal entities are on their
capital outlay funding and also
there tribal infrastructure
funding so
As far as the government affairs
committee goes
we really focus on legislation
that that talks to quality based
selection
We really feel as an industry
that you don't want to have a
COVID engineer working for use
thank you as a quality basically
most of the state entities
stated to use are required to do
that we still find some asking
for for a fees on engineering
services from time to time but
that that's important to us
privatization
partnerships it is something to
keep an eye on we were
instrumental in bringing in
those ideals.
That legislation C. NG C. last
year
we also internet in
identification because those are
the contractors are always
factor industry
increase on call I think that's
an important thing at as it
moves forward a lot of agencies
do not have the staff to execute
their program and they have
limit themselves to to lower
dollar amounts on these articles
up in those limits allows and to
work with their own column
juniors and and higher capacity
we're also looking at contract
term limit extensions system
sustainable funding for
infrastructure and then long
term replacement of oil and gas
revenue for transportation fund
that's going to be a significant
issue with the state knowing
that we pay for money our roads
infrastructure with oil and gas
and we are committed to keeping
our moving forward so tell you
guys anything you don't know
that it it really is something
that we really gonna have to
replace it so
With that being said cover just
about everything bottom line
ACDC is a resource to
politicians to the nationalities
to through whatever at eight
o'clock that infrastructure
we we know everything about the
infrastructure of the design of
these we're going to build it
offer money to finance it so we
are we are resource and we are
available at any point you have
any questions he was from back
up to the committee so with that
I'll open it up to any questions
you have.
Thank you very much.
Chair Mister thank you very much
I did have a question for you
we've had members of the
legislature for years trying to
get a P. three health and
Stating that now in the house
join care and and and and others
she's been working on that I'd
like to ask that you help with
that in other words what's been
most difficult for people to
understand is how the P. three
actually works.
And what happens what happens is
that there's a lot of
misconceptions.
I think it would be a great tool
for the state of New Mexico I
personally carried that bill
choice curated learners are not
get carried and I mean there's a
number of people over the last
fifteen years of caring that
feel that it's time for P. three
guys and please help her with a
diagram of how it actually works
I'd like to sit in on that
meeting also.
I know she's very interested
transportation P. three stuff
thank you madam chair thank you
the representative from thank
you madam chair
stupendous I am interested in
knowing even with
well there's there's a
difference of opinion about how
much we need to reduce the use
of fossil fuels two camps really
and then everything in between I
would like to have some data on
how much.
We need oil and gas for paving
materials operation of the heavy
equipment things like yes if you
have anything on that I would
because you stayed to work with
the department to get that for
you
But I I will tell you some
stature okay the amount of money
that you to realize this this
well yes.
Santa.
by the managers Act numbers okay
okay Madam chair if I think I
have a little different twist on
the question.
We used for oil and gas to
source materials for paving
And we use these examples for
every question.
I would like to know and we
cannot ship issues altogether
because we just need oil and gas
all off she's well if you ask
for so much in our everyday
existence so specific road
projects.
What.
The secretary because
for.
Yeah yes is quest I would ask
for concrete
Jerry if.
Work for what we're doing or the
primary as I understand.
So that we can continue as a
group thank.
Privatization I worked at the
last fifteen twenty years on
privatizations in North.
A lot of experience with that
government realizes oral at
military base housing twenty
years and that program was very
successful that in terms of
we're gonna have to look to our
partners in other states in
terms of transportation but I I
do agree with you we need to
move on this.
And with that we are two minutes
early in.
Thank you.
Thank you for having us.
The.
All in all it is here.
Seventy three.
Is is.
Okay good.
This.
They are this.
And I see.
Is is.
Thanks.
Yes.
No I'm just.
Yes.
These lines.
All your.
The state does.
I'll deal with.
In order all right so what what
one time so we're with this.
We were not successful thanks
for.
On
the front side.
The only.
Use that.
Hello this.
It is important either I was
going to be.
Because I have.
So you're.
Some of.
And
they're.
Right because nobody said here's
yes this is a medical.
Members.
The.
Mr.
The.
Gentleman from.
Thanks for.
Yeah.
No.
For.
I don't know that.
Representative.
Shares of.
Yes.
Yes.
You know.
Are you.
Thank you.
A.
Have you guys thought I forgot
my laptop which would be insane
I would never forget that.
What.
What
we want to do with the excess
just going to circle thank you
okay.
We get those.
Thank you.
And they replace state plate
state and it will move around we
gonna in the.
Are actually going.
Not to be a minor.
I.
Good to go can help you with.
The place to go on.
What what was appropriation was
of health.
Okay procreation and what house
House nope have.
A little.
Connectivity specifically some
go to three twenty four then.
Right that's one third.
You don't have to.
If.
Thank you.
I did talk.
What is.
I think so later later but not
now.
They set to work here on.
That that.
This is.
But I.
I think the.
Is everyone.
Thank you.
As.
Yeah.
The.
We have.
Please.
Thank you.
In their statement.
That is.
These.
This.
Chris.
K. still.
You know that.
I.
I think.
Any any updates on the issue of
citizenship and fees because I
know they're taking public
comment right now as of right.
Paying.
Here's.
Yeah we.
They.
It.
Is.
Great I see I see because they
brought.
Basically.
Yes I I.
Yeah we.
But.
This
is.
Yes.
There's.
I'm
here.
Still yeah yeah.
Have.
What.
We can use.
A summary of kind of our
legislative.
Activity.
Thanks for the session we have
yes I know so that mentioned
that were some also is spirits
in the support the immigrant
workers the option which is
talking this Monday and there's
kind of a set of priorities
recall last around so I don't
know so that one do you want to
start us off on that that condo
or any happy to.
The the the bills that were all
kind of unity coalescing around
for the for the session but also
the major again options so that
includes that unemployment
feasibility study.
looking at
what the top you know have fun
with the costs would be with the
need is New Mexico to expand
unemployment insurance to those
who are not currently covered
including but not not slowly
adopted in workers
were also gonna be supporting
expansion of the child tax
credits
we're looking at and continuing
to organize about around rebates
right so definitely on you know
we've been organizing for years
and years together on this with
our economic the working group
right on really about looking at
the discriminatory exclusions
Representative for immigrant
workers and this is a
continuation of building up on
some of our past logo's
so also if you want to talk
about just transition I know
we've been even talking with
congressional offices about that
and all headed over to a just
transition because you all he
would not have they are working
on that and this and that was
not and centers also really
involved during the session on
the go to Rights Act
on voting rights and then we're
monitoring growth there's two
different minimum wage bills
right now what is at sixteen
dollars plus colada
and that is being spearheaded by
Representative Chandler and and
I believe the Senate cited
senator Wirth
and then there's a whole slew of
co sponsors and then
Representative Garcia is also
introduced a bill
that is just strictly call up.
the cost of living increases and
so I think the ones were working
on collectively and if you want
to add anything to them and talk
to us transition.
And we will have like a one
pager was all that programs with
our logo is on in the next
twenty four hours and we share
that with you all rotation team.
Southeast.
It
is.
This.
Here's.
Thank.
Hills.
So it.
Also.
Why did.
That's all.
All of it
A lot of that is.
Federal level.
That we take.
Representative.
Last.
Earlier this month sorry.
Our opposition.
That lack.
For these
programs.
Overall just.
Anything else.
The.
Large.
That we have workers that are.
I thank you for.
Process.
I.
Thank you.
Response back.
I.
Year labor.
Last week.
Getting started.
It
is.
Kind of a process to locals.
I.
Over it yet.
If there are any issues that
arise from.
Problems.
We find just imagine we had a
great round table with
congressman us this last I think
was last week yeah and then
about forty fifty members and
some folks from us almost a
dozen everything so
Representative I know last and
Jack in the last time you talked
with said maybe it might make
sense to have one of those
meetings
with staffers from the other
offices I don't know it is
things are moving right out the
federal so what do you what do
you all think about the timing
of that.
The year.
For the year started willing
transaction during
early last.
Maybe what do you all think it
seems like in right a month it
would actually be good timing
just because we can also give
updates as to kind what's really
moving up at the legislative
level and so what do you.
What what the rest of the state
so they're not in the body do
you think maybe having like a
meeting a month with the the
staffers of the different
offices and especially because
we're just starting a
relationship right with the
staffers from operation by this
is this is that makes sense.
Do you all.
The.
Yes.
Hey yeah it was crazy but we can
part of the time yeah we can
always find a hearing room and
and you know it's it's a short
meeting so yeah.
Why is it on everyone's radar
returns person crazy.
It.
That's perfect.
Very
thanks everyone.
Get a talks okay.
Yeah those lessons on this you
know thanks Jackie thanks for.
I am the.
Okay Sir.
I was one we went straight into
the into the hearing room
because we just at the rather
than just about the voting
rights act so they don't I
haven't seen her yet up here but
I have been walking around the
state just a question so what
did you all like water what are
you planning on for the hearing
today on minimum wage the
hearings.
So is there.
They're supposedly said house
lever there's gonna be a hearing
on both each the twenty five and
G. twenty three twenty eight
both of the minimum wage bill so
yeah we've been trying to.
Figure out.
So on slack I think it's the
they set up like a channel with
the old paid sick leave
coalition so I think it's still
title pieces please hold on.
That.
The.
office.
The last five years and
Is that.
For the.
I
have part of the.
Have.
The.
The.
On the.
The office.
The the.
Yeah the.
All.
The bill.
One.
And.
Yeah.
The.
Your.
The.
All.
Your.
We.
There.
Here are a.
here the the.
The.
Roughly of medical.
The.
As Israel.
I.
The.
Okay.
Yes.
You know how to turn it off
because there's no keyboard or
mouse.
Yes I.
The whole Kate Upton that are
stationed at remote in sure.
When it.
Thank you.
Are you in office.
Thank you very much.
Siemens terms the the with with.
Webcasted through I.
Cool things.
Since the.
