Thank you for having me madam
chair.
Committee members.
I'm the director of programs I
was appointed by the governor
line.
so we've had about six months in
operation in the meantime of the
in house staffing office because
it was really just need a couple
for training consultants when we
started out still there now of
the operating budget what is
you're gonna see as I walk you
through the three year plan here
that we're gonna need more for
the office to really do all the
initiatives we need to do.
What's in statute and also to
capture all the federal funding
and then to administer that
federal funding across the board
and really do a good job because
so discipline a lot going on
this is my first legislative
session so really getting are
you still doing my own bills and
then respond built up and how
that might affect the officer
from and taxes into.
So we had the in statute a
requirement to submit a three
year plan
it was due January first so that
was submitted to the governor's
office and the LESC.
I want to take this opportunity
of January committee of for
session the kind of want want to
K. through it so that's ten
today as to what recruit so this
is kind of a summary here.
And this is the full three year
plan.
They are here.
So this is two hundred and for
you
the first ten pages is a real
executive summary so if you only
want to read that eight to ten
pages you can really get the
whole the whole additional
memory okay.
And
So let's get started in fact
okay.
So when I walk through that
gender here we're going to walk
you through a background how do
we get started.
How does not flown to our top
local that we're going to went
over the next three years
Not be noted that the cabin for
you what we did accomplish in
twenty twenty two.
Flowing into our our vision
mission and values for that my
office then how does that all
the proposed to get our
strategic priorities in our key
initiatives and then those all
flow into critical success
factors key performance
indicators actions for the
office and then anything that
has to do a strategic planning
so that's how a lot.
Okay.
So we got started in twenty
twenty one
with the statutory obligation of
Senate bill ninety three offered
by Senator Padilla it provides a
comprehensive overview of the
state's primary goals priorities
and initiatives for this really
flown in for the three year
plan.
Okay and also this is your plan
will flow into our five year
plan that's due in August to the
NTIA the national
telecommunications and
information association we have
to submit a five year plan in
order to could to capture the
hundreds of millions of dollars
that will hopefully flown to New
Mexico to bring internet for all
across New Mexico so this is
this three year plan will become
the basis for the five year plan
and we're off working on that
now we needed less five million
dollars December first to do
strategic planning for across
all of New Mexico they give you
two hundred and seventy days
land to produce a five year
plan.
That's due August twenty eight.
we're gonna try and beat that
insulated delighted twenty eight
because it gives a little bit
more time for what's called
curing we're NTIA is going back
and forth with you and really
understanding your plant and we
kind of want to be the first out
of the issue okay so
We're lucky that you guys
requiring this in statute
because it really gives a good
place to be ready for the five
year plan.
All right so these are kind of a
summary of what's in Senate bill
ninety three I think that's a a
type of their sorry.
If you could fix that on your
Terry they didn't notice at
first.
I think it's.
Right okay
So the directive there is
written on January first that we
have to do I need a three year
plan and we will update it every
single year.
Others are listed there will
provide an assessment of what
happened services across the
state and over to the side for
each requirement shows you in
this plan how are pro to
reunite.
So the fact that we have to
provide an assessment across New
Mexico the broadband services we
talk about in this plan the
availability that we have right
now we've done detailed mapping
we work with an assessment
company called CTC we work with
the FCC to mature massive work
with the ISPs we had a
continuing thirteenth deadlines
that all back to the FCC and
those maps tell you we're we're
unserved where were underserved
and the availability of services
is all in this report.
Those still have to be matured
more.
They're not no state right now
is that a hundred percent okay.
Being totally accurate so
there's another deadline March
first where we have to
challenge again is called
challenge the of the broadly in
locations that are shown on the
map and the services available
there's another deadline after
that so this is a this is a
cyclical process but at least
where we are right now all we
know right now the maps in this
practice plan the desk
definition of unserved and
underserved reflects all the
federal rules out there okay
stakeholder outreach of we have
to do heard the federal
guidelines and per the state
guidelines we have to do
stakeholder outreach and
engagement where we're getting
dialogue back and forth of
what's available what is it that
you need what help do we to me
that a network diagram you need
an RFP what is it you need and
we have since I came on I
believe that a hundred and fifty
engagements across the state and
nine tribal education.
Hey so we're going to continue
that and meet the federal
requirements of across the
counties across the news agency
ruinous policies across the
whole state across the tribes
and pueblos and even existing
broadband organizations that
have been paving the way we have
to engage with all of that and
provide a certain amount of data
that.
Okay all right so.
Absolutely being having those
requirements having the federal
level.
The level.
Lows into four major goals that
we set for the office.
Okay number one.
Is universal universal
availability of fresco please hi
speed scalable Broadland
numbers.
Okay.
now this list rest your base
that's because the federal
requirements really kind of push
you to fiber in the ground.
Okay because it's the most long
lasting.
What staff about a hundred years
fiber and lasting about thirty
five years and it's the most our
future prove sustainable and
upgradeable I for one though I
believe in other alternative
technologies as well as back up
for the state and it's just
right now most of the budget
required to wrestle but there's
a lot of big
fixed wireless solutions for
some of our geographically and
population to challenge areas
then I was also not interested.
how did they do it hi tech
satellites and high altitude
platform stations so we need to
those are we need to also have
those as part of the plan.
number two
white brought the widespread
adoption and meaningful uses of
the internet what does that mean
that means that you can have
everything in place you could
have fiber to the premise and
were across the state and you
don't have enough of the
resources to be able to actually
use it and there's barriers
mainly don't have a laptop for a
device you really don't have the
right training we we don't have
enough money and still sign up
for a subscription human we
I don't have
Kind of you maybe don't even
have a need okay so there may be
areas where somebody does we
wanted but you have to kind of
break all those barriers as part
of it so that new full usage and
adoption happen.
Kate goal number three and
finance one of next generation
networks that's the having to
deal with partner right now with
the public school facilities
authority on the statewide
education that we're because
since they have to connect eight
hundred forty schools across New
Mexico it becomes a good
backbone for the middle line.
We have to have open access
middle mile network that means
all communities that reside in
close proximity open access
middle mile network they have to
offer reasonably priced hi speed
limit services and dark fiber to
facilitate back fall and support
private leagues and this is
required by the federal and
state that treasury as well that
they have to be a lot anyone
can any company could come in if
there's a tactful and be able to
connect in and have an
interconnect.
Okay we also have to look at the
the mobile aspect and I'll just
be honest with you right now
really been focused on office
with the groundless
background a services but I know
my head we have to start
focusing on the Google
participate as you know when you
drive from Santa Fe to to
Albuquerque and then you're on a
call you're gonna drop the call
right happens to me all the time
when we need I need to get to
Albuquerque to present something
in my vault apps so we have to
bring in the universal Google I
do and I'm just sort of breaking
down breaking into that with the
providers but in the plan it
talks about that we have to
ensure that we have a reliable
signal from the international
wireless networks as part of the
plan.
Okay resiliency redundancy and
security of as we know and I
know some of you are on the
cyber security committees but we
we put driving in the ground we
do fixed wireless we have to
have secure upon.
Hey cybersecurity security
operation centers network
operations centers all have to
have all right you know in a
hack into the terrorist type of
years put into it so this is
this is he and and making sure
that we're resilient for the
future.
Okay programs starship that's
our fourth goal I really feel
like with hundreds of millions
of dollars slowing down to New
Mexico and also the state
investing through the
legislature that we have to make
sure that we're good story.
Of the public expects
accountability from both the
government agencies is here in
the funds
so my O. line leadership and
staff were committed to the
utmost transparency and
accountability and let's
programs and also to be
very.
very respectful of sovereign
lands as well.
And then accountability from
grant recipients a liable my
office will actively monitor
Ortiz and hold them accountable
on will be putting out quarterly
reports to show how is doing
hello the use of the money doing
with the bills our dealing with
actually implementation and
others very detailed compliance
requirements I have higher as
compliance officer so that we
can make sure we got applies
across all the teas or what's
requirements of federal and
state level.
Okay so that's four goals.
economic and walking through
what sort of the state of the
state where are we okay on
broadband availability and
adoption
we've had some progress in
moving the needle the first time
the assessment report was put
out I see to see within twenty
twenty of we've had some I
persons on availability and
adoption but much more work
remains down.
For private availability I'll
give you some numbers they're
approximately twelve point six
percent residents and businesses
addresses are still concerned.
Or lack of access to with FCC
calls twenty five three now all
of our projects we've been
getting up to the grants of with
some of the funds capital
project funds and we require
actually a hundred over twenty
with the right to a hundred.
So twenty five is very low but
that's what the FCC users to
call Sir okay below that
Okay also approximately twenty
five percent residents and
business also underserved.
Or lack of access to lan
networks operate at least a
hundred twenty Russell the use
of the federal funding so
If you look at the twenty five
three X. twelve point six but if
you look at the hundred twenty
that the Feds required it's a
twenty five percent.
So we've been kind of going with
the fact that one in five the no
one in.
One in five around us really
need really need access point.
So those are really fed into
kind of had a session with my
team at the end of last year to
really set our vision mission
and values you can really think
of the vision as kind of a long
term for you need to go long
term and then the mission is
kind of where you need to go
right now.
All right and you can see that
my team likes the word bold.
Yes it shows up in all three.
So in our vision.
Long term vision is to achieve
pull affordable funding
solutions for New Mexico.
That honors the state's rich
heritage.
And all of these the quality of
life for all so part of that on
the the state chairman we have
such a rich culture and
operations leaving of different
cultures coming together so part
of that is also honoring and
respecting the sovereign lands
across our taxable at all but
also elevating the quality of
life for everyone across because
you know this to do your
telehealth pay your bills thanks
very kids can submit their their
homework in the portal and make
sure grandma and grandpa can see
the grandkids that all takes
internet and it all finally
brought in Texas everything
small businesses to grow
everything.
the mission is passionate
leadership out of my office to
programs to derive full
equitable and inclusive
broadband solutions so that they
can be adapted if we get if we
get a solution to your home that
you're actually at the office
using.
And then our values are to be
bold honest curious innovative
respectful collaborative and
analytically rigorous that
analytically rigorous is there's
what's called an initial
proposal that's due in December
to the NCAA that is really yeah
we let.
Because it has to be very
favorite.
Has to be not only all the data
from all those hundred fifty
engagements and more all the
data of the needs assessment all
the data from the maps and all
has to be integrated so that you
can analytically make wise
decisions from that and then
project for the and that is how
you're going to get the
underserved get the the unserved
hiring under service in time and
highlighted in a B. Y. stewards
of money so that analytically
rigorous is gonna be a challenge
as of right now in a very small
office and they don't have any
data analytics on but we're in
the process of hiring a data
analytics person and we've also
brought on CTC for
for that kind of heavy lift on
the data and we also have in the
engineering will that will do
some help with that as well.
What were the key achievements
and twenty twenty fill.
That significant accomplishments
across all facets of the
business.
Okay first we did so we'll keep
broadband infrastructure
expansion.
Out of the commitments co pilot
grant program which was five of
funds we awarded on the way if
one thirty seven point two
million dollars to connect over
thirteen thousand unserved and
underserved residents and
businesses and this was ninety
percent in the rural areas.
And we got some really small
companies like Sephora electric
of central New Mexico electric
so really they need to a great
job of really figuring out how
to enter the property market.
we had some also some historic
companies that have been in it
for awhile and but every place
was will we have all of you
maxim that some real wrote our
rural areas of don and the
county and moving the
we it was really kind of a
It's kind of a happy time where
we had to give money to the
rural areas so now there's no
need to emulate.
Eight to one in the process of
scoring right now.
Following him around another
third of the hundred twenty
three million and then we have
eight three that still involved.
And some of the some of the
applicants is that we coached
him from when one and said if
you feel these things you can
reapply for for late.
So it's not that we're just
standing back for also in the
process of CO two all.
Okay we are also the PRC as you
guys know provided twenty three
point seven million in grants
the tribal broadband
connectivity program for like
sixty nine million the reconnect
program one hundred thirty nine
million the FCC art office
of legislative fifty five
million to eighteen thousand
locations and the B. finding did
receive the planning.
So if you put that all together
we had three hundred and sixty
two million dollars.
In forty real driving projects
that are going on right now due
to the money that has flowed
three hundred sixty two million
and forty projects so my office
needs to help there's a reason
why we need to grow my office is
in help for me almost forty
projects make sure everybody can
interconnect and house with the
need to internalize full it off.
So it's it's a it's a big left.
Okay the second accomplishment
is that we did have some
broadband option include the
full use states we receive seven
hundred twenty eight thousand
the funding from the and today
to do digital equity planning of
the forty bility connected with
the program we signed up over a
hundred forty two thousand
households not people as health
schools we were able to sign up
for affordability.
Services to help them with their
subscription and we want to get
more we also do the hundred
fifty plus community engagements
and we supported mining is Wes
but the twenty three tribes and
pueblos we need to do more there
right now we're working with
would do enough and we're
working with Navajo Nation and
our in the for you some more in
a phased approach.
Okay what else do we deal with
the third thing as we did costs
of work on the next generation
networks you can treated
procurement for phase one of the
statewide education network they
can connect at least a hundred
and fifty thousand students and
teachers we also received and
said funding for the follow
education network connections
from nineteen people of those
into tribes and we did so middle
mile investment in that we
applied for a forty million
dollar grants to the state.
For middle mile.
For governance is the connect
the council ordered is our
sister organization and has lots
of subject matter experts on it
where we come everyone we're in
the six working groups and we
promoted supported over sixty
stakeholder working groups.
For the oversight organization
and operations we did hired me
and seven staff members and for
consultants and more at our
operating budget for the state
broadband Matt which you'll see
pictures in here we have a front
and seven mappers and right now
challenging the FCC's both of
location data and availability
of services.
For public affairs we lost in
the website in New Mexico Oregon
you will notice that is at the
top right.
now how does that see what what
is it now we have to do going.
Okay we have the four goals
apiece no values that flows into
thirteen he strategic priorities
that we have to do across the
office to advance those for
adults and that breaks down into
twenty two initiatives and
that's why we need people as
well each initiative have a
project manager cemex so that we
can meet all of that key
performance indicators and not
SuccessFactors in order for our
thirteen
the strategic priorities are
listed there and those and then
you can see to the side how does
that the composed into
initiatives and if you go read
the report those even decompose
down and actions and then that
decomposes into key performance
indicators and critical success
factors so I don't want to you
know for you all and this and
overwhelming but you can at
least see that that was
thoughtful
looking at the four goals
looking at our mission and
values.
How does that translate into
real work.
And that's where the thirteen
priorities and then three to
four initiatives for each pair.
Thanks to get the work done and
then actions for each one of the
okay so the first repeated
priority is grant funding to
enable all its deployment make
sure you capture all the money
that's up thank you so how do we
do that is we look at the
connect New Mexico pilot program
where we get the final word.
Mark we've got to connect New
Mexico fund of seventy million
that were assumed is grappling
he's over hoping to.
Services rulemakings or hoping
to do grant making and then they
of course have the five year
action plan that we're going to
submit.
Second priority current and
accurate brought in that's why
I'd run on seven Matt.
Robust demand for spatial data
management and analytics
evolutions of the State
broadband not with all the
deadlines of the FCC's given us
and then launch of this analytic
and decision support tools
Robinson will keep tools we're
gonna bring in some more that
help with all that data
analytics.
Number three remove deployment
areas related to permits right
away employment taxes this is a
big one we just put in some
legislation is to start this
issue without and then a few
smaller but we have a lot more
work to do.
we've got to be working at the
federal level and the state
level the State Land Office
DLT is here today that have been
great at supporting us and we
disconnected at the end reducing
fees like and how it can do in
kind all kinds of stuff but now
they've got more to do at State
Land Office said they'll be
working very closely with us to
get into workforce development a
lot of pride in skills that
we've got for blue caps that are
being lost as we speak.
Technical assistance program
those forty project I told him
we've got a runner said
everybody and insurance offering
you.
Okay so that it's going number
one our universal broadband
availability.
Goal number two decomposes into
three priorities participation
and all the anti I. programs.
We have an additional equity
plan due to the state October
first and a digital equity plan
due to the fence in the summer.
Broadened affordability we've
got to get more people in the
affordable connectivity program
we just applied for grants
January ninth for that.
Additional equity and inclusion
for tribes and pueblos we look
at in the process right now of
launching the tribal community
digital inclusion program.
So that's support school number.
To why Brandt widespread
adoption.
Goal number three next
generation and statewide
network.
Is three priorities statewide
middle mile networks we love
we're like I said we want to
phase one of the statewide
education that we're and we have
some legislation coming in for
public private partnerships for
minimal route.
Coverage of I need like I said
and just started the mobile
piece and we're just starting to
talk to ISPs network resiliency
and security we just have cut up
in up in Gallup and everybody
went.
Waves authority for fourteen
hours we can have that happen so
what the the password for that
is that you have if you've got a
kind of a you have a a redundant
Kalyan another path to go you
can only do that by creating
resiliency rings across New
Mexico and in our network plan
will see in this plan the plan
were you have to have on the eve
across the state you have to
have alternative ways to go.
On the fourth hole decomposes
into two priorities and for
initiatives the first is why
transparency and Callum counter
the lady priority we're going to
rulemaking on the grant programs
and that's going to be approved
in February we have the
financial progress report we
have to do quarterly reports to
the fence and we have a program
evaluation and socio economic
impact assessment that to
October first.
Are requests the accountability
for all programmatic a
compliance requirements we have
a comprehensive system are just
bringing on some softer all the
serious that we can foster grant
to accountability so the
drawdown of funds to all the
compliance reports and do the
quarterly reports.
So that's a little for goals
right down into the thirteen
priorities which breaks down
into twenty initiatives.
And then if you keep reading the
report those for you into
actions.
So in order to get that all done
there's critical success factors
to make the mission and to let
the by office excess full okay
the first is additional funding
of CTC has shown that cost
anywhere from two point two
billion to five point five
billion faxes across New Mexico.
We expect around eight hundred
million flowed in New Mexico if
our maps are mature enough
because of things into formal
funding so we're gonna have to
find other costs of money and
have to get some state
investment or a combination of
both I in this
this first stab at the
governor's office on the
executive budget has put a
hundred forty six million down
for us to get started of the LFC
budget as put fifty that.
Okay so those on the budget to
get us started with everything
that we need in order to do all
of these initiatives to capture
all the funding I what we need
to do keep them offers on those
kind of things okay so we're
going but we're gonna have to
subsidize
The investments that we expect
the yet to be able to the whole
rule based network deployment.
So the the capital required it
just kind of walk you through
the existing resources is we
have the hundred twenty three
million seventy million up from
the New Mexico fund but we're
gonna need more right yes seen
kind of.
Around three point six million
if you think of the range of the
to point to the five point five
and.
Middle of the three point three
three point six billion so what
we need from our legislative
action.
Need to increase the New Mexico
funds are so that we can do
middle mile expansion he
requesting that that neck New
Mexico on and make sure that we
can do everything that's going
to be in the five year plan
submitted an office continue to
support our mapping and data
collection because that's all
feeds into the formula funding
and create a fund to purchase
store and utilize capitalized by
family we can get the full price
scene we can be ready when
somebody's ready today but we
need to we can address I need
to.
Okay so that's kind of that's
kind of on the funding prior
what else is a critical
legislation factor is other
legislative support okay is
we what will we have to have a
line four hundred do it to be
able to own some resources PS
update on this in light of the
case number can.
So again either do that with
legislation for for allied to be
able to own it only assets or we
can create a public corporation
to do that.
We also need a current funding
to be less restrictive some of
the budget the benefits of money
that we have we're so
prescriptive when we needed
seven mappers with this urgent
request from the FCC to be able
to put in all of our mapping
data by January thirteenth they
give us seven weeks notice to do
that I was over the holidays.
Doing I work through my operate
we're trying to find a bucket of
money that we could do that and
they were also prescriptive.
When we turn ourselves into
pretzel the real that there are
so we have to you know have
similar offer we can do what we
need to do from the federal
level and we can take care of
these pop up of things that
we're required to do we can
communicate that late.
A little more general has right
now says six really tough
Also
Support expansion of electrical
telephone easements and rights
away the funding for that
Let's see we wanna appropriate
previous funding with the
passage of a constitutional
amendment to we want the FAW
Center I have this little this
little city called down I hadn't
collected there only for the
city council the hospital in the
schools of four point one
million dollars to build out
their networks in the whole I
work out of the whole city and
they were prevented by the
African nation law they couldn't
get public money to private
entities and I couldn't get.
So you need not only the thing
that passed in November.
But we have to have companion
legislation as a to do an act
right now if you guys could be
looking for a.
it has to support we can pay
money to the private internet
service providers to do this
work.
We have also learned the right a
hundred twenty million the
seventy million we're going to
get some more from the feds you
is someone from the states we
have to be able to pay people to
do the work because that are up
there that that they're the ones
who do the work the private
companies are they have the
court often.
So we have to be able to pay
them.
We're putting in a clarification
of the state then concern the
eight
we're trying to bring up the PS
that they the state education
network operations from
yesterday to by is that we're
more closely aligned with the
doing that for a joint powers
agreement.
You.
And then supporting of why and
public corporations and a and
public private partnerships and
then just we've got to increase
the office size to do all of
this work all these initiatives
all these accidents all is
tracking Fund.
I'll this grant regained we've
got to increase office and we do
expect increase for the fiscal
year time I.
Okay
Okay so.
This three year plan passing on
is going to flow into two things
in the following for the five
year action plan due to the
Feds in this.
And I'm not gonna kind of bore
you all with that but we already
have what used to be in front of
you it's listed here for.
And that's a lot of this plus
okay and then we have to turn in
a digital equity plans to the
fans to be able to capture about
seventy million individual
equity and everything that needs
to be there is also listed here
for you.
Okay.
So the real focus in the office
going forward isn't take this
three year plan to the strategic
priorities and initiatives in
actions and a lack of.
And yet this support through the
key success factors like the
funding in the legislation and
then turn in the five year plan
the capture anywhere between two
hundred fifty million and seven
hundred million
turned in these two hello
Reports they're very data.
Okay and that's the five year
action plan the plan so that's
been the the focus of my office
going forward.
Okay.
That wasn't too much for you
know it was perfect thank you so
much Madam.
Mislabeled for giving us all
this information as someone
who's kind of been watching this
entire process evolved since you
first got here I will say it I'm
so glad that you you are here I
think it's a great example of
what happens when you bring at
forty some odd year Boeing
engineer into state government
with the single because that's
it to get this plan done so
thank you so much for everything
that you've done this is great
information I know I have a lot
of questions but I wanted to
further my colleagues first I'm
gonna start with Representative
hardware.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for providing legal with the
team here.
Very grateful for the
presentation it's nice to see.
A thought out detail please I
know over many years to what's
been doing their best to to
implement some of these grateful
for that but having.
Of your team with this one focus
you know we have a much more
detailed plan.
Education.
So thank you for your team's
work I'm not sure is the.
Public comments
and it was like a big.
Science nearer to space do good
of the and.
I'm sure madam chair is legal
your familiar with the the big
push for rollovers market
satellites for complying
internet yes.
So we are not sure couple things
because I this is the stuff that
gets me excited we had and it's
the future.
So right now the most advanced
was starving Act because there
are.
Three thousand four hundred
started satellites certainly our
goal right now.
That is huge that is forty
percent of the satellites that
have been deployed around our
world right and our plan is to
go from thirty four hundred to
forty two thousand.
And the band returned for those
right now I mean it's it's like
sixty five to a hundred megabits
percent reflecting surfaces like
streaming Netflix right.
And of course
You know regular using the
falcon nine rockets launching
negative about fifty or sixty
per launch but that also rocket
talk about last night the
starship.
Additional point four hundred at
a time.
So we're gonna have this make a
constellation of.
In a few.
Exactly.
Right and they're not the only
ones right.
the latest one whether that's a
bus one roof there's Amazon has
cheaper there's this stat which
is Swedish I'm here in Saudi
group they're planning their own
there's G. states was used
Chinese characters tell us that
we just Canadian European you
just
for about six billion dollars to
make their own.
Satellite constellation.
and then right now T. mobile is
piloting if you have access to
the sky.
Starwood satellites for your
income for yourself so so this
is going to I mean I'm super
jazzed in the next decade half
of us are getting cell phone
coverage internet.
From satellites.
now
Our senior issue still with this
right now to have where site
right so we can on cell phones
right now.
Right so we are still in the
cell towers.
but those cell towers FY site.
And they might fiber.
The near future.
Right and also they show that in
dense areas like population
centers the this overhead
satellites can sometimes have
have issues right source so that
in itself powers we're still
gonna be fiber projects.
Bring all this up because.
I just want urged to be
cautious.
Right if if the feds were
throwing money on this let's
take that money right and if we
need to have matching funds for
some of these requests what's
the use of our state funds for
that match let's be cautious
about using our state funds
I'm looking at slide twelve your
it looks like the estimates
about five point five billion
for broadband infrastructure to
deploy throughout the entire
state okay two point two four
five.
Right so I said sort of three
point six is in the middle yes
so right and so I'm just
thinking you know if we wanted
to the state could buy a
Senator Stewart of satellite
system for everyone except for a
fraction of that price like for
five hundred million right
Saunders first cautioned us with
our own money.
Let's be careful because I
really believe
lowers corporate satellites are
the answer for the world problem
or costs millions of dollars
from fiber out there we
additional a satellite
At and yet we're still the fire
here is.
In all urban areas right
So that.
I guess that's that's what
Colorado did your respect yeah
if it's okay let their response
please hang up and thank you
Representative for your question
thank you madam chair and so
glad for that dialogue cousin
came in third in to all so I
understand you're saying but and
have to tell you what kind of
reality we're in right now each
of the fence not prioritizing
startling in fact the money we
got from our doctor is not in or
out of use for it okay we have
to show them that we're using
we're doing these long term in
the ground infrastructure and
also the FCC not being the whole
not being challenged they're
taking three things completely
out and not counting them as
well sterling last sat in Hughes
they're not in health and okay
so that's one kind of reality
that we're just under okay when
I level this you know all in the
new part okay there's also some
issues with startling that they
lost their million dollars of
our enough funding because their
speeds and and quality of
service and their late season
come in as out of Texas.
So they lost the completely lost
it they're still going out right
now that's good.
what we're finding in reality
there's a couple more years
that's hurting us so long time
to get on service you're on you
get on a waiting list.
the FCC account as available you
have to we'll get on a service
within ten days.
Thank so if you can't they count
it as not.
Okay it's also six hundred
dollars the receive and a
hundred dollars a month and some
our citizens can not for that.
The other thing that we're
finding is
that the the Netflix streaming
speeds work well if you're in a
rural area and not not a lot of
what's called real time in
simultaneous users.
If you get in that area let it
servicing where it's more
densely populated everybody's
using that the same time it's
bleeding Office beats.
the line of sight and as an
issue right now right now all we
do in the fiber to the cell
towers right
so though I would love to go
there but that the fans are kind
of put in the roadblocks up
right now use the money for that
yeah so Senator was embarassing
yes okay I I agree with
everything you said and I think
and I understand that the Feds
publications on grant I'm not
implying that we should use
federal money for start okay.
The state and you've got
exactly.
Eight hundred and whatever state
match we can find you and
broadband.
our.
It started right now has less
than ten percent of the
satellites up there one specific
their second generation settlers
the new system right hi right
ten years ago because right all
I'm saying is.
It went back in time right when
fiber a broadband started.
And and we said no we're gonna
make a huge effort copper
everywhere in the state reg and
invest billions of dollars to
copper and then coppers and
callers with us right now okay
so I just I don't want to spend
billions of our state dollars
toward fiber in the ground ten
years from now.
To see it all dark.
Right right but the money was
is that those and I do have a
couple success story to go with
what you to San
Juan is in queue up you know
what he was like great I do okay
and then.
If they funding they've.
Of what he called access
starting for a lot more in that
it's really been a step up for
them okay also we are working
with the rural healthcare
clinics okay because that's such
a boon that say our seniors all
have to die the Albuquerque for
their specialist they can drive
total health care clinic and now
we have these machines I'm not
allowed to say the name because
can't proprietary but
actually seem like in looking
off looking you're you're look
at Iraq's given all your vitals
to the specialist okay and they
need they need to get
simultaneous users doing that in
Thailand oral health that they
might have a really good speeds
and connectivity with so on some
of we have been able to work
with the local provider to up to
up the speeds when someone we
had to go to Stanley.
The gate open so there's cases
where it's just gonna work for
us right but the last pieces
were roadblocks of moving up for
me and we know Senator we also
do this that this for your
knowledge this is pretty.
and you know I can I can kind of
appreciate that thought but
right now all the roadblocks for
that had been really put up and
to get the money can be passing
users are.
Yes.
Thank you thank you Mr.
thank you Mr I know that my
colleague my question was
because couple of comments but
we're really lessons can ask
Google questions.
New Mexico I can always.
Get in touch to offline order we
have to get a hold of you but we
talk a little when we talk all
the time I'm in terms of the
status of the broadband service
map I'm gonna reiterating how
important that is for our state
right making sure that
representation because our
federal grant money is dependent
upon that path right and we have
sentences that ninety seven
percent of New Mexicos covered
when it's not it's not it's not
a good situation for us do you
he talked a little bit more
about your plan do the
corrections happen houses how
can we help especially is yes
and I was for you guys I can
have to help with the challenges
cells.
but we have to get.
I thank you.
Chair with questions really good
question and then office would
tell you the good news on the.
That's okay there's good news
and bad of the
when we got the win
Is that why am CA that has kids
in need to commit to years of
the brand name on.
Okay you have to know and we
have to put a dollar on it
saying it's a broad groups
serviceable.
So that's the most important
thing you can think of that is
that Kate okay do you have the
whole right now okay New Mexico
we probably only have two thirds
of the Kate.
Okay.
and you can't even say whether
something's available if you're
on the look.
It so that part is challenging
what's available what services
are going into that is the
frosting on the cake you can't
cross the case the part of the
Cape is not there.
Thank slide.
So we went into hi speed not
only yet locations identified
and
Availability for us of that and
in fact.
So then this is anti item and I
typically on locations there's
an eighty percent reduction
right.
Okay from the FCC they have to
prove every location that
and then there's an eighty
percent reduction.
So that's gonna.
the two businesses and TI and
pull me aside last week or two
weeks ago at the at the press
conference on them giving us our
planning Fund until only we are.
Hi estates and improved and
location.
We had forty thousand over forty
thousand.
Growth but it was in that with
the cleanup of old ones or
removing some holes in that
twenty thousand four hundred
fifty locations.
most states you're there stay
the same went down.
And we are one of the top
improvements but are we done now
the team is still simmering.
This is still submitting
availability Townsend we have
another deadline coming up March
first and so we're just gonna
keep going.
Now NCAA
that
The NCAA is going as well
because you don't know how much
it's going to get in but they're
gonna draw the line at some.
And that's enough flow into
their formula funding and we're
not gonna be there.
Thank.
Few states that are probably
going to be done I I believe was
in on the line in California
others a few that will be done
but most states will not be.
They will be on.
What are we going to be a lot
better than we work on the seven
numbers and
we also have a company were
bringing on our is twenty one it
is cannot help with more
detailed tools in analysis and
help us from a long term.
Act but we did not plan approval
and according to.
But we're not we're not done
thank if you look at it there's
levels are still missing time to
stop.
In China can run alongside the
shops but it's still it you
think that if they don't have
their own not being.
For to use their own do I ask
mapper very hard for them to do
it.
So I don't know if I'm
explaining all right here but
it's like I said this isn't good
news some good improvement but
More work to do.
Thank you thank you so much for
that explanation and I also want
to thank you to use here in the
room so I know you guys are
doing a lot of work right away
for you to continue to have some
seasons and anything we can do
to help you with your
legislative initiatives to all
be circling back with you in
terms of bills okay I think it's
a list have a talking point the
great and now I vice chair.
Representative is in meeting.
You probably already answered
the question but I'm asking
again this year on page ten in
order to hear this the school
you do is waving the fees.
The the the the the will be
waived the food infrastructure
who fly to deal.
Cruz.
Senator of money.
Okay.
This is bill waived fees for you
to get the structure for the
orders awful I to be fair all
right now.
Thank you for the question by
terror Garcia and committee
member I believe only in their
analytics promises in here but I
don't I believe it only applies
to like their highly corridors
okay and a lot of times you want
to do fiber the kind of this
parallel to highway currently I
do and I and I and I forty but
it doesn't apply to other there
areas you don't think so.
I use my question would be if
there's other utilities that are
on the same till it just for
that do we they're not be
additional fees SPLC's we got
more work to do with the
utilities State Land Office
Federal.
Federal parks national parks we
have more work to do at that
area and I wasn't ready enough
to.
Please.
The the night think this
question after it's all but is
that is this legislation
override capsule joint use
agreement until these are in
that are being placed on fuel to
right away.
Now thank the.
Another question I have is.
How are you working to pull ups
funded for structure needs for
Rod messages of old patterns.
What thank you for the question
vice chair and CFO committee
members we have a working group
through the connect New Mexico
council called permits right to
lay employment tax prop for
short and the full impact
students we really just started
to the into the reserves so that
it is quite
Even though it's maybe only a
few dollars per pole per month
if you've got them in a very
close together to make this
exponentially add up and can be
very expensive for a company to
to do that and we're just
scratching the surface right
now.
The.
The manager thank you of.
You'll want X. wishing words
come from you know my district
you mentioned a little bit of
that ninety percent will be
served.
Of course a ten percent.
Mention rule out from you and
mileage and not you know that's
rural my district funds here you
know how we serve the people
should fund Mexico because every
time we talk about this is the
same thing good service and in
service Madam chair in a
present for you of mention lows
in the.
Well about fifty miles north of
London.
Hello readers are is the people
that it's also often have to be
in criminal Hey you know
building want to get to one area
a lot of times you can build on
that to get to the next area and
then build on that to get to the
next it is part of the plan to
to
To get the everywhere but when
it's for hearing actually be
addressed.
And I would really I think I've
called in for a really would
love to come in and of.
See it all we're doing that
project that Baca chapter houses
we're doing a project it's David
Skeets that's not far from where
you are like to see how we might
be able to kind of on replicate
that across your area I'd like
to see how far apart is anything
and and all that.
Really pretty much are driving
the figure it out Madam chair
in the presenters I would love
to love to use it to put a lot
on the best of the.
Thanks for reading and for the
wrong yes that little dog in my
district The New Mexico can be
four miles away those are
probably my district is facing
we really did present because
they have kids what else does.
We're being left right now I
don't want to leave you out no
one called me a few times.
Right around.
Thank you what a bit of this is.
What's the challenge but.
Have to see it to figure out is
it fixed wireless because things
are ten miles apart is it you
know what is it doing can we
leverage one of the schools it's
in your mind leverage the local
education now I have to come
see.
We would have to get a plate and
thank hello we have good one my
district is like four miles
distance.
And there's one area that's
going a representative of the
rest is that is that through is
that like one.
One fifty mile radius that's yes
Representative on the other
three hundred miles in the chair
I think only use of the valley
thank the the valley is fifty
miles.
North of interstate twenty five
minutes forty minutes fifty
miles.
Department of okay.
Unity has.
Well I believe
in people the wrong the whole
one hundred mile radius.
Chapter eight chapter goal for
the scene which mother chapter
of the hundred mile okay that
is.
And would very rural.
The people but these are there.
These are the.
The.
One of the.
We would.
Representative Harper.
Hello.
Is more logical he's what the
what satellites because of.
my district also helps to really
tell.
Okay
come up with a plan for that
like I'm doing a plan right now
but to the late.
Because I had to go and see and
see little.
so we do limited knowledge of
them it seems that we can
replicate that across Senator
district we we need to do that
but the reality of it.
At the end of the day a journal
of the.
To rule not the social the
program was.
One L. fifty one of the help to
see little connecting both of
the just one thousand okay we
spoke to you whether with I'd
love to come see.
Things are not need.
As well as other patients.
Because the public is.
Thank you thank you thank you
very much Mr mislabelled we
really appreciate you being here
and open invitation to come back
and update us on your progress
of the time thank you Mr
personality.
Thank you for your time.
And I'm sorry by chance on the
chair of the struggle is not
personal.
Gives you but I.
Hi spot would look enough after
my constituents this new movie
to us we if you would not feel
we Americans.
I'm sorry no that's hard this
fall.
And and they are going to do
additional funding on this.
Thank you.
Thank you of my staff I see and
and just for time to everyone
it's ten ten years back on the
floor at ten thirty I want to
give us an extra ten minutes on
top of that so next we're gonna
hear from audio T. aviation
department they're going to get
this presentation on what they
are up to.
Right.
Hi
everybody get covered in this.
We actually had five copies of
that okay.
Two hundred nine it's
I think there's.
This is.
It's all it is not the fantastic
thank you my name is.
The M. D. director he should.
thank you madam chair.
This.
He's also.
Happy to see you both here.
Thank you madam chair committee
member and with staff.
The issue.
Your.
What we percentages
presentation.
I just to give an overview of
the of the division's the
division was first established
in nineteen sixty three we are
creating agency to communities
with their forecasts public use
airport.
Assist with the construction
development maintenance.
Choose the for these are phones
we're usually mandated to
encourage an advance aviation
through
Senator public outreach type
things there's there's a few
this year I nationwide credit
that we try to attend we have
been able to in the last two
years I will be back out there
and in the coming year
we assemble and distribute
information relating to aviation
the comes down from the FAA and
other officers were related to
transportation secretary I will
responsible for the registration
of all the aircraft based in New
Mexico and licensing of any year
cracked the of.
That we're responsible for
maintaining the rule error
server Care Services Hans with
program which was I have first
passes legislation twenty twenty
one we've had
some success pharmacy to Gallup
has air service direct to
Phoenix that started in August
of twenty twenty two and most
recently Los crucis Albuquerque
is started students started to
surface in the state of Armitage
Act actively seeking.
service from their creative
directed Denver so we'll have
more on that flees to
participate.
incurred with that we assist
with that air service marketing
program
to help these communities.
Researchers
internal wrangles provided safe
effective aviation system state.
As a function of the division
would provide funding in tech
technical support to to the
airports in our communities to
help them develop and maintain
their boards and that in the
system as a whole.
Staff report a with the federal
government the FAA local
governments from the fruit for
aviation infrastructure projects
that includes safe giving
security navigational equipment
and other fixed assets on the
airport snow removal equipment.
But and things like that.
At issue we develop and publish
the New Mexico or an apple chart
we try to do it annually we've
got to have pause here in the
last two years but we're
actually going to have to do our
our charges coming.
Here.
Additionally from the rules and
enforcement of aviation laws on
the books most recently with the
development the ruler service
program and develop the
administrative code that.
Additionally we do some
regulatory compliance
inspections at airports for
safety security we do this in
conjunction with the FAA and
retain Madam third or fourth
annually for this district for
inspection programs.
There's.
Forty six the public use public
on airports in the systems that
are eligible for federal funding
there's an additional twelve
airports.
Get any federal funding for and
I also for at least five health
boards and once the plan is to
just sort of a general this let
everybody know where the car.
The division is funded
The aviation fund itself is
standalone Fund non reverting
fund and.
On the pandemic is that our
resources the fuel first
resigned jacks you all the first
one is part of the gasoline the
second part of the gasoline tax
act
the third one is that the
percentage of general fund and
that's one of the.
Secretary St actually has a
sunset clause that will sunset.
Thirty one less.
We have
An annual on the from the
general fund three million
dollars those two particular
issues are actually on the table
in HB seventy eight in this
session to address.
And then thirds are the last
sources through straight and
just as a note that the
structure for registration of
aircraft the state is not banned
modifier dresses is how to
nineteen sixty three so that
might be a future tasks.
The uses of the aviation fund
are mostly capital improvement
projects.
About ninety to ninety ninety
five percent of our annual
budget goes back out the door
and through grant programs to
communities
In addition out again for the
marketing program in some state
only projects but all that is
included at ninety plus percent
annually addresses those two
maintenance our guide Division
staffed operations ministrations
and maintenance as well too
state owned airports that.
Now.
just a snapshot of our our
budget for this fiscal year FY
twenty three
are operable rates by just doing
alors.
Of that we have practically five
million dollars that was
earmarked for a couple of
specific projects.
the next line with that the
federal funding that is the plan
alignment that's not in the
secure funding at this point
that's basically our planning
number hopefully comes in around
there that's a combination of
the traditional airport
improvement program funding and
Representative what they call
the A. I. G. funding which is
part of the ninety million
dollars over five years to the
airports in Mexico and that is a
breakdown the example of the
state owned airport contemplates
eligible for part of that A. as
you funding but they get a
certain allotment every year for
five years K. and your point
like that is a hundred ten
thousand dollars a year over
five years and you can carry
that money out of five years in
use at all one or you can use it
for so it's not it wasn't a lump
sum ninety million dollar
distribution in the state it's
spread across all the airports
at different rates to be use and
New Delhi Act allocated annual
loans.
But I told program issues
looking at cost almost fifty six
million dollars if it all comes.
the next slide is just a nice.
So volatile the aviation
outreach and promotion
opportunities that we try to
take advantage on the annual
basis what we can get out there
we'll go into details on but
they're they're they're for
buddies with you can with that
we will stand for any questions.
We appreciate the brevity
Development thank you very much
it's actually quite amazing how
intricate the funding is
radiation I'm still trying to
wrap my head around it with your
help of course
other than this you bills prior
to bills that you mentioned is
there anything else that you
need are you Committee L. which
would allow us to better
advocate for aviation moving
forward.
I just have one one comment to
this is the those issues
generally our funding in the
intricacies of that you're
talking about the funding I
statutes that Mr Moran mentioned
madam chair in the for those.
I statutes actually overlap with
the with the funding.
Four rules.
Hi Bridget is completely
different source so that's where
the story for us.
I totally separate investors.
Assistance by areas need
actually amounts to besides the
amounts that Mr mentioned we get
special funding for a lot of
work this year marked or
permanent funding actually
hovers around six million
dollars a year plus Senator.
In a sector.
It's not.
Thank you the funding we were
taking their money taking hours
so let's say the end this
historical the aviation
Division HSD.
Ninety six the legislative.
DOT but that completely they
kind of have some separate
provided the order thank you
thank you very much because they
have a big softie turnarounds.
Thank you very much for your
presentation and I have any
other questions members of one
sure
Madam chair and gentleman are
you familiar with the program
for students call systems go.
I am not okay we did talk about
Education promotion
opportunities Madam.
This is a program that's run
through the arm are you see is
the detection school system and
every year now for many years
students from schools in New
Mexico have gone to the general
kind of Eunice area of the state
and the Senator school year
building rockets I don't need
small rockets I mean like I said
taller and yes it comes in to
help the students to launch
usually it's and I think it's
able to replace it's a massive
project it's it's good well it's
highly educational of students
get scholarships out of it.
Really engages our students in
that aspect should.
So you might add that to your
list of promotion opportunities
the parents by the way the
students for the chase Cruz.
so everybody gets involved in
this program it's one of the
best things we have going for
students so Madam just want to
mention that thank you else.
Thank you very much gentleman we
appreciate.
And last but not least pop up
then the secretary Schardin
Clarke and representative office
from the motor vehicle division.
Taxes.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee
thank you for the invitation to
present your committee on sept
park in the cabinet secretaries
taxation revenue.
Transaction dollars and be
acting secretary.
Matt so we have a lot of
exciting news to share with
whoever is willing about how
things are going and the the you
know we all know that for
decades it has been a running
joke in sitcoms New World to
joke about how bad employee do
is but I think New Mexico than
we do right now is is in a
position to kind of turn that on
their head and people have to go
experience it for themselves to
to actually believe that but for
various reasons partly provided
support for our budget partly
the appointment system our state
that we're working under really
proud and really think we have
something to write about
consuming iterations of we give
some slides to it looks like
they're passed out others for
the first couple of mission
over.
madam mediums like to we got a
snapshot of sort of we think of
it a little bit as pre comment
post comment appropriations but
the thing that really changed
the way we emerged from COVID
was the point the system and
that has so much to do with the
the turnaround we see on the
left hand side you can see that
pre comment before we had an
appointment system the average
wait time for around fifteen
minutes but that could really
you know it's really short and
some of our smaller offices in
very long and some of the larger
urban offices compare that to
now that average of fourteen
minutes is going down to about
four minutes currently so that's
basically from the time someone
checks in for their appointment
to the time they start being
helped by an agent is about four
four and a half minutes
currently and you might ask has
the payment model reduced so the
number of customers you're
seeing not really in twenty
eighteen we saw a four seven
hundred forty thousand customers
in twenty twenty two we saw
seven hundred thirty six and so
population is changed a little
bit really that differences that
folks to become more familiar
with our online services and are
opting for that because it's in
their best interest to do a lot
of things online
and then you know averages can
be deceiving this isn't sort of
like a regular bell curve of
wait time data so we also
provided for you a couple other
ways to look at the wait times
before that point and model just
seventeen percent of customers
were waiting thirty eight what
sorry seventeen percent were
right last minute and now that's
down to six percent so we've had
that more than it did but by
about two thirds and then the
percentage of customers waiting
five minutes or less has gone
from thirty percent to fifty six
percent so by far the majority
is waiting for some kind of
that.
and then just a little bit more
about online transaction counts
course it costs us to be more
innovative than ever and push
harder than ever to get more
transactions online so you can
see that are online transaction
comes come up very significantly
increase per year with about
five hundred and sixty thousand
transactions twenty eighteen up
to seven hundred ninety roughly
in twenty twenty two and the
twenty twenty to twenty two
hours so that's helping our in
office performance as well.
Thank you members of the
committee one of the key things
that are working towards is how
to make sure that customers get
the information for the field
offices one of the key areas
but and you'll see us there are
starting each fiscal year our
call centre with transaksi
please come fifteen minutes what
is now I mean I think in and one
of the key areas are vacancy
rate call center always have
high making as about thirty six
percent to now four point five.
One of the key everyone to work
on this retention and training
so are can I choose between
their adhere to the next it is
our the mandatory training to
focus on not only our technical
skills but also the possibility
to that customer service.
In addition to that we want to
make sure including million for
use that comes our way gets
answered within a day or next
to the current average where
And that we also have options
such as a kiosk right now the
only have to be working in
you'll see our year over year
numbers have increased and right
now only do we check the
transactions with three of the
easiest customers customers can
do and self like registration
when you duplicate registration
online citation payments we hope
to add more Laura so that
customers may stay out of our
field offices and get to do our
transactions at their own time
to fill case of the location the
next two to three thanks again
and these kiosks are you might
think okay as he has yes they
must be in in the lobby but if
you haven't seen these yet
they're in retail locations
there and Albertsons in
Albuquerque area as well as a is
it Sandia federal credit union
okay on that on the west side
and so it's just basically
making a little self service
kiosk where the customer already
is it's a it's at the for
service model so it doesn't cost
the state anything.
I'm on slide six just update our
vacancy rate we we are happy to
stand out as sort of a shining
star among a state government
with the seven point eight
percent vacancy currently in.
Why is that you might think gosh
the vacancy should be high these
workers that it had to be in
office the whole time they were
never afforded the ability to
telework and yet really it goes
a lot to you and legislative and
governor support we received
about one point two thanks for
those of over million dollar
recurring increased for budget
if you fiscal years ago and that
allowed us to create a career
ladder that makes it possible to
to rise the ranks and continue
to be promoted for good work and
we do and it's made all the
difference and then also course
just management and training and
everything else we can do to
improve the corporate culture is
that budget really has made a
dent in our vacancy rate needed
easier to recruit and retain
great people.
with that you're pressed for
time most dental professionals
and your contact information.
Thank you so much Secretary
Sherman park and and or if it's
all just I never miss an
opportunity to come back on
state agency that I think is
just killing it thank you for
being here I know that
Representative Harper had a
question.
Madam chair thank you Secretary
I apologize to the students
Gonzales Texas this is also
thank you for being here great
to see you as usual and this is
a great success story thank you
for sharing this I I usually
skip one butchered I think it's
so important to say adding
career ladders
you know we're we're actually
going through that right now
it's India and people can just
really feel like their stock
there's nowhere to go over to a
management tool and perhaps they
have no business being in
management because that's one
way up so having ladders keep
the people that elected
portability so I'm really glad
to see that.
The the I guess the question I
have is going to be a part of a
small you know go by my better
half you know was need to run to
amputation thank don't take a
lot
see how that would help because
if you want to point the project
was to start bringing heritage
and so so I can understand why
that's a better model for you
all but is there any plan or not
for allowing water as well Madam
chair representative Harper
to the extent of possible if if
a walk incomes to one of our
offices and and serving in one
set back if we could schedule if
there's availability the agents
will serve that person but
really
is in the long term it's in
NBC's best interest to say
without point and models
basically what it it is
guarantees that the customer
will receive much better service
when they arrive because that
customers will arrive at a speed
that we can handle them what was
happening before as people with
spend so much time worrying
about their trip to N. B. T. and
then they maybe show up like an
hour before their opening just
to try to be there at eight AM
on Monday morning it's like what
you just guarantee yourself a
one hour rates.
Probably worse because so many
people arrive at the same time
everybody would arrive at the
lunch hour and it would just
wakes up you're right people are
more more informed and better
prepared when they get there
also the agents aren't so behind
that they can actually take more
time with the customer to
explain what's needed so that
maybe if transaction done today
they will come back and be
successful next time also the
agents have sometimes time that
they can for example you know
come over here to print to label
for you so that you don't have
to go in come back they're
they're able to help customers
get to test more often on that
versus.
Mexico okay and one thing we're
family practice we do have same
day and next day appointments so
even if you decide at twelve
o'clock I have to go ahead and
do do you can come into our
leader and right now all of one
out of thirty two offices in far
as thirty second office we'll
get there which is half filling
up two vacancies will help to
get that one as well.
Thank you Mr secretary I really
appreciate great great work
thank you thank you.
Representative thank you madam
chair of surgery to see in this
Gonzalez so when I entered the
Legislature twelve years ago.
Question the two chief
complaints I receive from my
decisions were about MBT and
livestock inspections.
So I started tackling those and
I went down and courses a
consumer of FBT Services in
offices many times in the past
but I took it on the economic
pass the director in the at the
time to come to Carlsbad and see
what's happening can diagnose.
And that happened and he brought
some staff with him and it was
interesting to watch because
rather than just start talking
the second quarter and he
watched everything that happened
in the office for customers
coming to the front door to the
service counter to everything.
And I think he came out of the
film industry and he knew how to
do things logistically so at the
end of the day he gave me his
opinion of what needed to happen
and changes better training
better postings at the front
door customer service values
everything changed for the
better and in fact we got a
little smiley face thank you
push the button if you liked
your service about that came out
of that visit.
Other other good things and it
was so turned around in a rather
short time the governor came
down to what the employees and
we had a barbecue in fact it was
such a it's such a great
advancement.
And then after what kind of
phone part again and so I like
what you're doing with your
appointments anything you can do
to make happy customers that's
what it's all about because you
are the face of government a lot
of people
Madam madam chair I want to
mention one other thing and if
you've been a transportation
committee before I say this
every time I get a chance when
people are in the waiting room
and and we do office instead of
watching some channel off the TV
I would rather we have a set of
educational videos loops
educator drivers.
About how to be a better driver
things change over service
asking that for that I don't
know if we're there yet but I
think mentioned that's my
question.
Insurance Representative Brown
we do get approach pretty
frequently with folks that are
saying Hey can we put our
content on those screens in your
lobby and PED the hitch is that
all that technology is provided
by New Mexico donor services so
it is reserve for donor services
content and so we can put up
signage and posters and like for
example we're in the process
right now getting unclaimed
property posters up an increase
in the office and housing
availability all that kind of
stuff we can but the screens are
sort of a captive audience.
Madam chair members secretary so
That's new information for the
that back back then I was told
we don't have that right a quick
minute every office to do that.
So anyway you know
Everyone needs to be reminded
about how to do that I currently
for drivers yes it's only a few
questions I can for the state a
hundred questions.
And we don't do nearly as many
so he can get drivers.
Good thank you madam chair.
Just enough.
Madam chair.
Area one of the.
Welcome.
In order to be able to I
us through.
The problem with us.
The lady and you go in there.
Out of there you want to wait
for hours you're basically in a.
FY FY.
For the number you will not.
Schools thank you thank you.
You're all doing right thank you
so much for coming in here today
madam chair just for the members
the committee I wanted to
preview that you'll probably see
director Gonzales and I back
again we have to N. B. T.
related bills that will become
chair coming your way one has to
do with federal CDL compliance
the other has to do with medical
reviews of driver records and
will afford to presenting this
to say testing indicates this
lesson okay thank you so much to
that thirty five.
Tax and that tax.
Yes.
Thank.
Download.
Yeah.
Here's.
Go ahead as the recycle.
Taking.
Thank you.
I'm going.
For.
