Any questions or doubts Spence
from the committee before.
Representative Townsend I as I
explained to you last night I
had a number of.
All concerned and the timeliness
of two seventy six the.
FY are in the early this morning
sometime.
And the there are many people to
I.
Have more.
but I need to.
And that this.
what.
Most helpful so I definitely
considered that to explain any.
Lee James I would like to read.
The what worried about it but I
just want to make this record.
We did have that conversation
there were a number of people
that were very concerned.
thank you Representative
Townsend
taxation about the twenty four
hour rule to twenty for practice
which in my opinion slides to.
Bill but majors the minutes of
the substitutes
don't always get them Elsie's
what it was posted last night so
this least twelve hours out
which I know it's tough for a
morning meeting
And yeah everything we do here
is less.
I appreciate your concerns can I
do think they're ready to ensure
that.
The committee.
Their first bill is house bill
two sixty one expands on lawful
taking of big game
Representative Ortez thank you
Mr chair members of the
committee.
HB two sixty one expands our
state's existing law against the
wanton waste of game animals to
include have a leaner could err
and there.
Want to waste happens when
hunter kills an animal eight
that carcass in the field of to
taking just the head with
because.
Right now there are many species
that are on that wanton waste
less elk deer and sheep many
others.
Really strong hunting traditions
here in this state but Senators
are in the minority there's only
six percent of our population
counts regularly.
So it's really important to.
Check the reputation of those
hunters when in New Mexico
hunter kills a bear or cougar or
have a Lena and legally right
now the staff carcass in the
field it tarnishes that public
image it sends a message to the
non hunters that hunting is just
about sport we know that it's
it's not just that.
The goal of this bipartisan bill
is to ensure that our our state
laws near the respect that
hunters have for the animals
they hunt.
And to protect the traditions of
hunting in the state with that
Mr chair I will stand for
questions.
The.
Mr chair and we do that then I
introduce my expect this witness
this is Jesse develop from the
New Mexico wildlife federation
thank you very much Mr chair
representatives I look forward
to answering any questions you
all might have about this bill I
am a lifelong hunter the
executive director New Mexico
wildlife federation which is the
state's oldest and largest
organization representing
hunters and anglers in the state
we believe very very strongly
that this bill is critical to
ensuring the future of these
traditions helping communicate
to the non hunting public how
much reference hunters have for
the and so we pursuit thank you
very much Mr Chairman
representative.
Thank you
so before we go to the committee
we'll go to the audience is
there anyone here who would like
to do yes I opposition to this
bill.
I would like to testify in
support.
Senator hands I just ask you to
be brief
Director.
Yeah.
Tax on every game the I was in
support of the bill is.
Excellent the one.
Sure the use of the what I.
I.
Yes.
Right Sir this for chevron but
I'm speaking as a personal
answer and all this stuff thank
you.
This
the initiative.
of the strip of the chapter of
the state is support for this
legislation would simply ask
waterways protection for their.
The there's just because of here
in the morning other.
Mexico well that's enough
because.
This is an important thank you.
Mr chairman and committee
members here Romero executive
director registered lobbyists
The New Mexico yeah I we also
think it is important.
Outfitting industry is actually
already operating act is already
in place of their own maybe.
What the.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
Okay we'll go online first up
we're gonna do opposition.
If there's anyone online to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
Okay seeing none anyone in
support please raise your hand.
Adrian and you look.
I thank you for recognizing me
Mr chair can you hear me yes.
Thank you so much one of the of
the body eight or nine hello
with the New Mexico wildlife
federation I'm actually in the
building of running over now but
I wanted to stand in support of
this bill is a bipartisan bill
it's supported by the agency is
a well vetted idea and it will
continue to ensure that hunting
as an activity is not only
improved for ethical hunters out
in the field utilizing the
animals that they hunt but it
will also ensure that the non
hunting public don't become anti
hunters and will allow us to
continue to put conservation
dollars into our New Mexico
department of game and fish to
continue to conserve the
habitats that are good for the
heard and good for the birds
thank you so much.
Right thank you for that
anyone else online in support.
Okay.
Seeing that members of the
committee.
Representative that.
Thank you Mr chair
just a couple questions.
Looking at page two subparagraph
three.
I look at the list of animals.
It seems that the reason that
animals were included on the
list yes currently in law is
because those animals listed are
generally.
Concern.
Five people two we have an
accurate statement.
Mr Chairman representative hi I
do believe that would be an
accurate statement and I would
also add that lack there we're
also expecting.
That leads me to.
Yes.
Is there a difference between
the animals currently listed and
the ones that the that you're
adding Aveling of their
in in terms of the propensity to
consume.
Mr Chairman representative I I
believe most hunters who are
hunting.
We are already constrained those
animals again the statutes
as it currently exists doesn't
require to be able to questions
of those at the remove button
the general practice currently
is that most of them are I would
also just mention that we're in
black there have the possibility
of caring trichinosis which is a
parasite the same reason that we
generally don't the pork chops
rare because pigs and swine
historically also carry
trichinosis but I will add that
it's very simple to avoid any
risk of transmission simply by
clicking the the meat two
hundred and sixty degrees
Fahrenheit.
So Mr chair and.
Present I guess testimony as
these animals also fit in the
same category you choose not to.
Adding things and not.
Seven five people.
Mr Chairman representative
that's correct.
Shares Mr chair Representative I
like to add that adjustable be
doing some demonstrations
session.
You're invited.
Yes.
Radio.
Thank you Mr chair just want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward
if it were up to me every animal
Alliance would be on this list
but thank you so much.
That.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative are there any
predation issues.
Mr chair representative Scott.
There is certainly the potential
for mountain lions and black
bears to trade on domestic
livestock things like that but
those concerns are handled by
the New Mexico department
increases depredation statute so
this does not affect on
depredation losses that
currently exist.
Mr chairman what we.
Mr chair representative Scott up
if how billing or damaging
personal property my
understanding of the the current
deprivations statute is that a a
landowner could legally remove
those animals if they do that
they would then have to contact
the New Mexico department of
game fish to report that in this
expansion of the wanted we
statute would not apply in that
situation that's my
understanding this director
solar chief lightly I would like
to clarify.
Thank you Mr.
The.
Click thank you Mr chairman what
happens if you do need this.
Mr chair representative we don't
act this bill then hunters who
possess a license for javelina
black bear and cougar can
legally shoot one of those
species of animals and and leave
the carcass in the field which
again I believe is inappropriate
I believe it's unethical I
believe it has the potential to
negatively affect the fuel
funding by outdoor
recreationists might come by
such a carcass and then be
offended by the fact that
carcasses been left in the field
so I think it's really important
that that we pass this bill and
basically codify in law the
practices that most hunters are
already in active in the field
thank you.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
yeah I I believe that is the
case I have had all three.
Of those I would not call
excellent table fare.
They are edible.
we still have a leaner.
In the sets a and I think.
Maybe up to Jersey and cutting
up question spices on to really
carried out that uses for
tasting
But I do believe that that that
most of the folks who are taking
them.
R. it the practices is to eat
that portrait so.
Anyhow I just a I only had this
we with one thing and then is a.
Whether or not it was fine table
fare.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative your
questions from the committee.
This got for a second time.
Mr Chairman representative if
you ever hope to turn.
You Mr.
Mr chair representative got I
have heard it but I don't agree
with that.
K. Representative Townsend.
Share.
And
Just a question.
Currently the.
Thank you just for starters to
the.
At all.
This is
really the way.
Is that something that you need
supported it but it thank by
the.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
that is out of the scope of this
bill but I'm happy to turn this
over to my.
Expected coming Mr chair
representative just
Representative Ortez mention
that this bill has no effect
whatsoever on on the situation
with the feral cattle in the
human person I'm not an expert
on that subject I do believe
that those cattle have been
doing significant damage to
delegate riparian areas and I
fully support the removal of
those cattle as to how those
cattle removed and leave that
decision up to the experts thank
you very much.
Thank.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Sarinana.
The passengers to sixty of the
of the motion passed motion the
state of Representative radio.
The.
Representative very go yes
Representative Dixon yes.
Senator Garcia.
Representative much more.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
Sure Sarinana.
Chairman themes yes.
And.
It has zero.
The.
Warning.
Right.
Real.
The privative this morning.
The.
K. R.
Bill this morning might not be
that quick
Are you sure.
Casey it's
so we were again again.
Presentation the bill they'll
take public testimony will do
twenty minutes each side and one
to two minutes per person say
that again by the bill up in
rural development.
Be excusing myself temporarily
investors are gonna
take over.
X. in the questions process.
Okay
Representative Romero thank you
Mr chair this is house bill two
seventy six essentially updating
our ability to revoke and
tonight permits of actors I'm in
the oil and gas industry
currently we don't have that
solidified power within our
government to be able to do that
so we're trying to do is clarify
the law given the power and
clarify the parameters if which
permit is revoked or denied Mr
chair with that all introduce my
experiences more Yarborough good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee and more Yarborough I
am an attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
also registered lobbyist with
that organization and I look
forward to answering your
questions today.
That
thank you for that so of the
opposition first I just show
hands here would like to speak
in opposition.
To that okay so we we would work
at the time around of the more
than two minutes please and we
might have some people online as
well so also I left this
message.
you Mr chairman.
Date but it is not.
Regulations.
Asian.
This.
In fact.
But we're wired to have a
here for everyone is to be to
thousands of public hearings on
impacting staffing needs
definitely process for these
reasons of Utah's house bill two
seventy six thank you Mr
chairman.
yeah so I forgot so the people
of I can't hear you thank you
for your comments we heard you
just fine so I will ask everyone
who wants to speak to come up we
use the ported by.
Of the threat see I don't think
you have to repeat your comments
but first everyone else please.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Patrick
Killen registered lobbyists for
chevron
in twenty twenty one I were to
Sandra Ely after the New Mexico
environment department on a very
similar piece of legislation it
was house bill seventy six it
was passed that you're and
signed into law.
Provided for additional
compliance history review for
individuals seeking NMED
permits.
There is a major difference
however between house bill
seventy six from two thousand
twenty one and house bill two
seventy six from this year and
that is section apps on page
nine of the bill.
Which requires no ruling should
be made on a permit issuance
suspension or revocation with an
opportunity for a public
hearing.
so as motivated stated does this
mean that through a conservation
division is going to hold a
public hearing for every single
permit coming before that body
four thousand permit
applications per the FIR.
In there does not have the
resources to do this we are
working with EMNRD to support
their budget recommendations
upcoming and and house
appropriations and finance even
with that proposed increase they
will still not be able to
hold a hearing provide every
single permit so let's call this
bill for what it really is a
back door attempt to block
future development in New Mexico
thank you.
Good morning madam chair
committee Mike Miller Permian
basin petroleum association
many of the comments we were
gonna make it already been
stated but I can't stress enough
the four thousand applications
the lack of staff and the
The cost to implement this bill
And it's just gonna further
delay these permits and further
double A. as as a Patrick said
development of oil and gas in
New Mexico thank you.
Good morning everybody Mr
chairman committee members my
name is over with the others
with Marathon Oil I'm here to
speak in opposition to this
legislation up Marathon Oil
spends approximately five
hundred million dollars a year
in New Mexico drilling oil and
gas wells and this bill would
effectively shut our industries
down it's untenable and I urge
you to vote against this
legislation thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester with independent
trauma so she should of New
Mexico Representative about
three hundred fifty members and
many of them are small operators
I'm here today to oppose this
bill on behalf of the members
not because we're here to defend
bad actors that is not the case
at all what the concerns are are
specifically with small
operators in the terms used in
this particular bill under
financial solvency and
demonstrating financial solvency
that's a very broad definition
already as required through New
Mexico law bonding has to be in
place and that is the procedure
to demonstrate financial
solvency on the part of
operators in order to obtain a
permit this gives up a lot more
discretion on the part of
regulators to deny a permit for
reasons which are not very clear
and so for those reasons in
those already comments we do
stand in respectful opposition
thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Bill
Brancard from the energy
minerals and natural resources
department I'm not going to
repeat what was in our FIR which
details what we think the fiscal
impact will be on our agency and
and why that is I just want to
go into one number that I think
several people have used which
we put in our at FIR which is
over four thousand a permit
applications a year.
You have to stop here and
realize that unlike all the
other environmental statutes
which talk about.
Discharge permits into the water
quality act hazardous course
permits air quality permits the
work permit as in their own.
Does not appear currently in the
oil and gas act.
Okay so what we did was we went
through our rules and found out
where the oil conservation
commission has used the word
permit.
there are a lot of requests
applications every year for
authorizations approvals for
various actions oil and gas
operators a small number of
them.
Are defined as permits by the
conservation commission these
include permits to drill permits
to inject permit for landfill
etcetera but most other
authorizations don't have that
title so while we found four
thousand applications last year
for these types of permits.
There were over forty thousand.
Applications for other types of
approvals and authorizations.
Okay so.
Much of how this bill will work
as a law will depend on how the
oil conservation commission
interprets defines terms that
are not defined in this bill
etcetera and if the commission
will expand.
It is subject to this bill
beyond what they have already
title as a permanent so.
That's where our analysis came
from it's just from how the work
permit is currently used in our
rules it has nothing to do with
the permit in the oil and gas
Act because there is no permit
the oil and gas so thank you.
Madam chair for the record I
don't know if you've just for.
Chair.
After members met tops with
Apache corporation
the bills laid out as to the to
allow the division to go after
bad actors I think it's been
addressed on the permanent side.
Potentially there some work that
could be done there however.
What the compliance aspect was
substantially affiliated
companies is another area to
look at and also the definition
of a fiscal year financially
solvent those are two pretty
broad areas so I don't think
anybody that has stood up in
opposition of this bill has a
problem with the division going
after bad actors we know that
the environment environment
department does have the ability
to revoke permits for bad actors
perhaps that is someplace that
that the division could go as
well but this bill does need to
be tightened up in quite a few
of the definitions and also the
the public hearing aspect is a
is a huge problem thank you for
your time.
Right
we are going to go to the
virtual resume if you are if
you're in opposition of this
bill please raise your hand.
For.
Okay.
Get their top position first.
When opposing on online.
Okay.
Well first to support your
support.
It was how to get the money and
Mexico.
Thank.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Charles to sail and I'm a
registered lobbyist for
coalition for clean affordable
energy and I'd like to speak
today in support of house bill
two seventy six
the bill would allow the
director of the oil conservation
division to require an applicant
for a permit to demonstrate
sufficient insurance coverage
and to do it demonstrate fiscal
solvency would also allow OCD to
to deny revoke or suspend a
permit if the permit to use out
of compliance with the oil and
gas Act has Act operated without
a permit his meeting knowing
Representative just
representation has been
convicted within the past ten
years of an environmental crime
or a.
Time that involves fraud or or
misrepresentation this bill
would help to address the
problem that New Mexico faces
with a large number of abandoned
oil wells and I want to also
comment on the hearing
procedures as I understand it
the intent of those hearing
procedures is to allow the
permit T. who is subject to
having a permit denied revoked
or suspended to have have an
opportunity for a hearing it's
not intended to create a new
hearing requirement for every
permit that the oil conservation
division issues
Thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee he's going to
with the Sierra Club you're
gonna chapter again we strongly
support this piece of
legislation in twenty twenty one
the same body passed maybe with
a few different people a past
similar bad at actor powers for
the environmental approved
import at the environment
department is the key tool to
ensuring that companies with a
history of environmental
violations don't costs the state
and taxpayers by violating laws
and then declared bankruptcy and
the top of that I think you know
it is time that we put a stop to
that actors to keep extracting
in New Mexico so we strongly ask
you will support this bill thank
you.
Chair members my name's don
Schreiber I'm a rancher from
northwest Rio Arriba county all
hundred twenty two gas wells on
and around our range.
Twenty two years we've been
dealing with bad actors.
and what we often hear from
regulators.
Mr Brecher see you.
is that their hands are tied
they're going to funding the oil
company and that's what they can
do.
Up regardless the repetition
regardless of how all that what
company goes forward.
And.
Is our concern that it's not
just the small mom and pop
operation of course but the
gentleman spoke earlier about
representing small operators.
You know that's not really our
problem.
New Mexico we have the largest
methane polluter in the United
States operating in the San Juan
basin.
Well I have far fewer wells.
This operator pollutes more than
Exxon does.
This operator.
Was find.
One point six two million
dollars for violations near our
range last year.
And.
This operator is a private
equity fund from Houston and
their owner you can check is.
Net worth every day four days a
week on Forbes to type data so
yesterday was ten point two.
Billion dollars.
So one point six two million
dollar fine negotiated down by
OCD to nine hundred eighty two
thousand cash it's not a
deterrent and that's pretty
obvious because we have the
same.
Losses we have the same
violations we have the same this
cooperation we have the same
accountability time after time
after year after year for
frontline families like mine.
For my neighbors.
In their communities my teenage
brothers and sisters who are not
able to be here today very
difficult I had to come out on
the freeze this morning I could
get out the five miles to the
highway in my vehicle.
Because the roads are maintained
we can't find our way out of
that these oil companies.
Thank you need to be held
accountable let's do that let's
untie regulators hands.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is sandy
Kalyan the climate energy
advocate with conservation
voters Mexico and for other
reasons he per today we also
that we ask that you strongly
support this bill thank you.
All right we're gonna go to
third wouldn't support please
raise your hand.
Start with Mary Feldblum.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Mary
Feldblum and I represent earth
works as a resident of Santa Fe
County five years ago is
involved in an issue that deeply
alarmed county residents that
are pueblo native.
Company called Sandridge
received an OCD permit to drill
an exploratory well new Rio
Rancho receded needed a county
special use permit hearings were
packed when OCD came to one of
them Santa residents among them
scientist realtors and financial
advisors we're shocked to here
that it never sought information
about the company's out of state
environmental history words
financial status residents were
the ones to discover that the
company had violated various
Oklahoma environmental laws
residents were the ones who
researched its financial status
why they asked wasn't this
information required in the OCD
application for permit to drill
and after withdrawing its
request for special use permit
Sandridge went bankrupt bad
actors do not play by the rules
one recent example Cobb
operating in Lee County recently
was fined one point eight
million for multiple and
repeated violations of oil and
gas rules and this is the tip of
the iceberg of the situation
that actors cause environmental
damage as secretary Kinney
recently stated before LFC
compliance rates for oil and gas
facilities in southeastern New
Mexico have historically not
been great bad actors abandoned
wells the energy minerals and
natural resources states in its
two thousand twenty two annual
report quote unfortunately a
significant number of wells have
been abandoned by operators
after becoming financially
insolvent average cost to plug
the well seventy two thousand
number of abandoned wells
fifteen hundred who pays for
this the damages in the plugging
weather comes from federal or
state coffers as a taxpayer who
pays for these is irresponsible
behavior bad actors whose
ultimately harmed by these bad
actors all of us including the
companies who pay.
Try to play by the rules well
it.
Right next is Candace ****.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is tennis fox
and I'm a senior attorney with
western environmental law center
we stand in support of HB two
seven six presently the oil
conservation division has
limited authority under its
regulations to deny or revoke
revoke permits based on
environmental violations HB two
seven six would bring the oil
and gas sector into line with
the other major environmental
statutes in the state that
contain that act provisions that
authorize the state to
scrutinize rejected appropriate
a permit application or revoke
or suspend a permit based on non
compliance.
Other acts in the state the
legislative that have better
after provisions include the air
quality act and hazardous waste
act well that act provisions do
not come into play very often
and for that reason do not cost
state agencies substantial time
resources they are critical
tools for state agencies to have
in order to identify companies
that are right flagrantly
violated environmental statutes
and assess whether environmental
permit should issue or be
revoked that actor provisions to
protect the state's interests
and making sure that
environmental laws and permits
are followed and had no
negatively impacting companies
with good compliance histories
for these reasons we urge the
committee to get H. B. two seven
six and you pass thank you for
the opportunity to comment.
Thank you next is Katie shoot.
Hello my name is Kelly shoot my
mic community organizer with
citizens caring for the future
and Carlsbad New Mexico in the
heart of the Permian basin where
the pollution is so bad the
ozone pollution and that the EPA
was looking at designating us
and on a team and some our
environment is decorated.
Did generated up beyond repair
and we have thousands upon
thousands of wells we see this
as a common sense policies to
protect frontline communities
such as ours where bad actors
are prevalent also I did hear
lobbyist state that permits can
be revoked.
Make no mistake any of Permian
basin whether thousands upon
thousands of wells sometimes for
further away from town centres
these pollution incidents are
not being followed up on there
not being seen and that
regulators are not enforcing
what can be enforced so we just
see this as a way to you know
make sure that you're protected
in some small way and that we
are not compounding that Lucian
issue that we already have going
on in the Permian thank you.
Thank you for listening
delivering.
Yes committee chairman committee
and sponsors of the bill my name
is John Brown a Franciscan
sister and director of the New
Mexico interfaith power and
light and we support this bill
for the many of the reasons that
we have already explained we
have faith leaders and people of
faith all over the state and we
are specially working in
solidarity with of folks in the
Permian basin and very concerned
about people's health and their
right to
healthy air especially for the
children the elders and those
who are vulnerable so thank you
very much for bringing this bill
forward.
Thank you.
That's all for the
it so next we'll go back to
school to partition.
Thank you madam chair Justin
response I just want to to
refocus the committee on the
fact that this is only bad
actors and there is not a clear
remedy for those bad actors as
you heard from the testimony
it's focused on being able to
remedy these horrible situations
environmentally socially
economically the impacts are
great into I just also wanted to
bring up that are advocates
I've spoken with EMNRD have
worked with them in in trying to
make this bill better in
December and day two agreed that
this was something that needed
improvement so I just wanted to
bring that we've engaged thank
you madam chair.
Okay we're going to the
committee first is your.
Thank you madam chair.
Oil changes.
I
twenty.
Through which each district.
Well intentioned tweet you.
This will be.
Which which.
Madam chair representative to my
experts.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question.
There will be a rulemaking.
Necessary through the agency and
you know perhaps we can claim
this language up and make it
more type but the words
efficient can be further defined
in the role in the agency's
discretion.
Hello there's also it that
clause that suggested the agency
needs to approve the third party
insurance provider.
So that we that gives the
HSD basically the agency to.
Hi make those determinations.
The intention is to and ensure
no pun intended that
Operators are insured not are
not self insured that they're
insured by a company or a
insurance provider that will on
their own determine whether this
whether they will take the risk
with this operator and that that
will free up agency from some of
its preemptive.
authority to reject or deny a
permit.
So madam chair.
Representative sure will cover.
Large.
Multinational corporations.
Well since.
Which to be required.
Purchasing terms that's correct.
Madam chair representative.
Sure.
Issue your.
H..
Information is good hi and.
Bonding requirements each.
Just recently can you describe.
Any consequent change which
sure.
Legislation Madam chair
representative can you clarify
how.
Can you just make the connection
for me as to what you're
referring to with bonds and how
that how you're connecting it to
this legislation well financial
insurance.
Our tool used recent.
To provide for.
State additional insurance
against.
Well she.
Infractions.
Take it can't and the operator
as a consequence of that new
legislation.
Twenty one.
Madam chair representative I
don't.
I don't know maybe my experts I
don't know either
We're we're distinguishing
between bonding our financial
assurance and.
Environmental insurance
environmental insurance would
cover and beyond.
Reclamation.
As an operator leaves the state.
Recovered accidents
Other other incidents that
damage communities and the
environment.
And you know I can defer to my
colleague Charlie to say like
he's been this work a lot
longer.
The internet with.
It may I do that yes thank you
Moquino two if there's.
Funding.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Scott I I believe
your question went to whether
the
with the oil and well
conservation division at UC
authority that was granted to it
by legislation a couple of years
ago the answer to that is yes
they definitely have been using
the administrative authority
that they now have
that they did not have prior to
the enactment of that
legislation to enforce the oil
and gas act through
administrative enforcement
actions I don't know the numbers
but I know that that actions and
number of actions have been
brought.
So.
Madam chair representative yes.
Question too would be.
This will.
Solution in charge of a problem.
I'm sorry Representative could
you please repeat that last
sentence well.
Given that the OCD is already.
Prosecuting stations.
That
**** to businesses Lucien
chargeable call.
Let me
Let me ask which clarification.
All exactly madam chair.
Representative what.
Is covered by.
Insurance hello small operator.
You have not forty years.
Hello Bob and required to
purchase which.
Could you describe.
The
coverage.
And the projected cost.
Yes.
And for the small.
Madam chair our expert will talk
about.
environmental insurance policies
of course will very
I don't believe it's the late
that's right madam chair
Representative.
K. to the Department
I don't believe it's the
responsibility of the
legislature or the agencies to
determine the cost of
environmental insurance of each
individual operator of
environmental insurance would.
In general covers such aspects
as
cleanup should an operator
cause pollution to groundwater.
Or land
They're very.
It could be more generally be
more specific and that would be
up to each individual operator
to research their provider that
they would put she's developed.
Madam chair sure well that would
be.
You know which yes cation what
that insurance would cover.
Left to the discretion.
The OCD.
Madam chair representative again
that's going to be up to each
individual operator and their
pathway they choose to take
shape and provider.
It's like car insurance you know
developed a recipe to go with.
State Farm.
What does this work could help
page three.
Want to read.
This requires Appleton robbery
to New Mexico fiscal solvency do
you I don't see a definition of
fiscal solvency in this
legislation what would that.
Thank you madam chair
representative fiscal solvency.
Basically what point to whether
a company is on the verge of
bankruptcy or whether it you
know two eight it's a predictor
of.
Whether an operator is
potentially able are going to.
What from their operations
leaving taxpayers and
communities holding the back
as for definition I spoke
earlier to the discretion of the
agency to.
clarify and tighten definitions
in a rulemaking process.
And madam chairman sure both
there are people.
Employed or to the state
agencies that would be able to
make it reliable determination
fiscal small Madam chair
representative
The bill asked or suggest that
the the HSD.
Manage the fiscal solvency
review.
It's again up to the discretion
of agency whether they choose to
hire staff or choose to contract
out and we specified in the bill
that that costs would be covered
by the applicant for the permit
applications.
By the Canadian whose time is
potentially going to be
resolved.
And madam chair sure we'll do we
have yes that.
Fiscal solvency review my
college.
Chair representative from from
which angle are you talking
about the firm the one seeking a
permit or from the agencies
perspective the one cheeky.
Representative it shouldn't cost
them anything it's basically
just being able to show and
demonstrate that they are
solvent it's not a high standard
that we've put in the bill here
depending on how and wants to
handle that we basically just
want to show that they were not
near bankruptcy in trying to
seek after this permit
essentially being able to.
Be a bad actor not pay for any
potential damage that was caused
so it would be just a basic
financial statement madam chair
representative they could
demonstrate that there solvency.
Madam chair representative.
How often.
The school children to review
need to be.
Madam chair representative I
believe that we're just talking
about when they're asking to
have a permit issued so
basically that one time.
Unless they were bad actor and
they were either denied or
revoked Department under this
legislation than they would have
to show again potentially if
they wanted to re apply for a
permit madam chair
representative okay was often.
Madam chair representative this
with one time.
That's correct and chair
representative with this
legislation Madam chair
representative your opinion.
These bad actors parties will.
Our church for.
Development.
Thank
are.
Estimation chest Graeser all
time.
Activities part.
The insolvency.
K..
At some later date.
Madam chair representative I
wouldn't speculate as to where
bad actors would be when they're
deciding to.
Apply for permanent.
That's just not in this
legislation madam chair
representative and I don't know.
Just.
Yes your question the health
sector this.
The.
In the long term when.
That good actors good actors
come back active to the
financial sure change commodity
prices.
Madam chair representative this
is not meant to be a gate
keeping exercise but being able
to demonstrate solvency it's
meant to just be one element of
being able to show that in fact
at the time you're playing for
permit that you are in good
working order and we expected to
be there in the long term
however madam chair
representative if they're doing
their job and they're executing
accordingly according to our
laws according to our regulation
they shouldn't have any issue
with that chair representative
and then find that's a big chair
Mister Representative
The agency will also have the
discretion to request
disclosures I find this bill
solvency.
Beyond the permit application
process so it does mention a
good actor can become a bad
actor or that I'm a good actor.
The HSD in its regulatory
function can require us if an
operator to provide proof that
it's still it's basically
solved.
Madam chair representative
that's already current practice.
Okay.
Madam chair representative.
Well for.
This long list.
It was resolved to ten mile.
She suspension or revocation
Madam chair representative which
page are you on.
Thank you madam chair of no
objection to the terminal on
page.
Mention.
Question which.
It.
Conduct.
Madam chair representative who
will conduct please background
check.
Madam chair representative that
will be conducted by the by the
agency.
Yeah madam chair.
Sure well not long history of
doing video CD out chair of the
law.
The detective Raul is yes.
Expertise that they will have to
develop going forward in order
to.
This piece of legislation Madam
chair representative well in
their.
There rulemaking process these
they may create a.
Eight for variety procedure by
which applicants will disclose
this information and whether
they choose to hire a detective
or
you know higher technical staff
or utilize current staff that
that again will be up to the
agency's discretion I think they
address that in the FIR is also
madam chair representative if we
have a list of things that we
just want the folks to discuss
with thousand have to be
invasive or we don't need to
hire.
He added look at this real us
for misrepresented facts asking
for disclosure of provision of
oil and gas deprivations asking
for conviction in court based on
this activity we're asking for a
felony related environmental
crimes crimes defined by state
or federal statute
and basically those and
operating without a permit we
have all of the explicit sort of
parameters about what we're
asking for their defining
whether or not are they are
after on its face and do we have
to perhaps investigate further
do we want to look further as to
what whether or not this is
going to be an issue and so we I
think there's a substantial list
here of of what we're asking
folks to wrap our hands around
chair representative.
So madam chair.
These questions from the
patient.
Madam chair representative yes
with most permit process these
in the state.
Looking for bad actors.
Chair representative we're not
speaking out bad actors we're
just asking them to disclose if
we've they've had a problem in
the past we do that for you are
licensure we do that and so many
other areas permitting them to
Representative including just
driver's licenses.
Madam chair representative just
one last question up.
Use the cheap statutory over
broad.
And basically workable.
The end of the day OCD or
somebody state agency will be
charged.
This.
The number.
Documents these folks process to
that.
This causing.
Significant collation chunks.
Roger to the toward and I can
see.
Madam chair representative this
last.
Madam chair representative when
you apply for a job you got to
fill out an application you've
got to disclose your previous
occupations you know often what
you if you were we don't have
the we found the box but at the
same time if their specific
disclosures that you need to
have in order to get a job
that's not at all in conflict
with what we're asking for your
madam chair representative it's
it's basically just asking folks
to disclose if they have had
problems in the past we just
want to know about it Madam
chair representative she.
Why
there is a significant.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative you
stated that this only applies to
that act.
But I read this bill and it
makes no distinction between bad
actors and.
For lack of better words good
actors.
Madam chair representative there
question there.
There was a question the
question is.
You stated that it only applies
to that act.
When I read the bill I do not
see a distinction.
Between its application for bad
actors have good actors to
exploit.
Madam chair representative
office supplies going bad actors
sure Madam chair representative
so it's basically being able
it's a filtration system if you
well it's for us to be able to
have a mechanism in place to
filter down whether or not there
are bad actors that are speaking
from S. right madam chair
representative right now we
don't have that ability to
revoke or deny permits based on
those at bad actions so in which
case if you're doing everything
above board and it's a
streamlined approach applying
for permit you don't have an
issue in the past.
You shouldn't have a problem
madam chair representative we
were talking about what we're
putting in place is to be able
to give a mechanism for
identifying those bad actors
currently we don't have that.
So Madam chair representative if
it only applies to bad actors.
The for lack of better words
good actors should not have to
purchase the insurance is
required in patients to.
One eighteen involved separate.
Sorry chair which page are you
on.
The insurance provisions on page
two.
Winds fifteen to twenty two.
I'm sorry your question.
That's a good actor as we're
calling them have to secure the
insurance required on page two
lines eighteen through twenty
two is.
Madam chair representative all
my experts
yes thank you madam chair
Representative.
Section one that you're
referring to it does require
this applies to anybody applying
for permits that part of the
that you're good after would be
showing that you have third
party insurance yes.
again we're not this is not a
backdoor attempts to block
development this is a front door
attempts to keep.
Out of New Mexico who.
these protectors would suggest
that potentially.
damage the environment damage
communities like communities
damage public health and walk
away.
So madam chair and
representative contrary to the
statement that it only applies
to bad actors this is a white
man's cast that captures
everyone involved here on oil
and gas operations in the state
of New Mexico.
Madam chair representative if
the standard for all operators
in the state to meet and if they
are Madam chair representative
in a place where they are not
financially solvent they have
had a record of that action in
the past the date disclosed or
have been discovered by the
agency madam chair
representative and there will be
a permitting the issue with the
issue with
Madam chair representative this
is the standard that we're
trying to set for all actors in
order to identify the bad
actors.
Madam chair and Representative
could you point me to the state
of the Legislature tracks of.
I don't see standards of here
Madam chair representative
violence.
And and and what what madam
chair.
What it what do you what.
You set up this bill sets
standards I I read the bill I
don't see standards I see.
What.
Madam chair representative.
For I'm using that word
interchangeably.
Requirements standards.
Rules regulations we're just
trying to be able to step four.
In order for us to be able to
understand who these folks are.
Well let's go back to.
Insurance.
What what's the purpose of a
company acquiring insurance what
what is an individual water
future.
Not specific to this visit
generally what people a choir
purchase a product called
insurance.
Madam chair representative the.
The focus of this insurances to
indemnify those who are.
Essentially victims up is that
action.
I see no indemnification
language in this bill.
The issue and notification
Language madam chair
representative that's the
purpose of insurance.
you madam chair of
Representative.
Indemnification.
Is not a purchase product
insurance is a purchase product.
So this bill.
That deal with Indian Education.
This bill deals with.
At least on page two.
Deals with the acquisition of an
insurance policy doesn't.
Absolutely madam chair person
and so my general question why
do people generally secure
insurance and I was.
Tell you it's not for
indemnification.
Madam chair representative it's
to ensure that they have a
problem required by current
terms I don't know why we're
speculating about this because
it's not direct to this bill
Madam chair representative to
ensure that if there was an
issue with your action that you
have substantial coverage right
or necessary coverage or
liability coverage to ensure
that if there is a problem that
you can pay for it.
Okay in other words a person.
Madam chair representative a
person acquires insurance.
Because I perceive that there is
a risk.
And they don't want to
jeopardize other resources if
that risk.
Becomes an actual issue for.
Here.
We're requiring every operate.
To purchase ensure.
I think your goal is to make
sure that those people have the
ability to address that and even
our.
Insurance bills dealing with
automobile insurance.
You don't have to purchase
insurance in New Mexico drive
accord .
Madam chair representative that
has nothing to do with this bill
what has nothing to do with this
bill.
The but it shows a point.
As.
Wireman for drivers to obtain
insurance or.
Show that they have the
financial where with all to use
in essence self insured.
There's no provision like that
here's.
No madam chair representative
there is an.
So Madam chair representative
even if you have a company that
is quite capable of assessing
its risks.
Meeting in a financial
obligations that may accrue as a
result of.
Those risks being
Realized.
We're still requiring the
acquisition of insurance cover
those costs are we're not Madam
chair representative we did
confirm about why we wanted
third party insurance and that's
because madam chair
Representative when you look at
some of the bad actions that
have taken place you can write
off by creating a shell company
it the problems that are created
in certain locations and then
selling that office staff and
therefore saying you went right
bankrupt in this given given
area madam chair representative
and a third party doesn't have
to ensure that so Madam we've
seen the broad implications of
the bad actions that are taking
place and how these that or.
Basically these environmental
disasters madam chair have been
written off the books of certain
very solvent companies Madam
chair representative we wanted
to ensure that that third party
is an intermediary there so that
that action can take place Madam
chair representative we we.
Basically ensure that within
this legislation that there is
not that bility to just put it
off the books chair
representative.
Madam chair representative even
with respect to the body one.
If I recall correctly companies
can.
See the other mechanisms to
comply with those bonding
requirements for that are.
Madam chair representative I'm
I'm not sure to Charlie there
are no.
Madam chair representative
Nibert yes that's correct.
And so I.
Yeah sure is as to why.
We are.
Wiring proof of insurance.
From a third party insurance
provider.
In a bill dealing with.
But that actors but with all oil
and gas operators there
potential we all oil and gas.
Companies with interest in the
state of New Mexico.
And so you know I've.
I heard you say you didn't want
to the state was passed on to
the maybe a shell property would
have to I might even agree with
that.
But.
This is not covering those
transactions it's covering all
operators all of takes away all.
Persons engaged in oil and gas
activities Mexico.
This would be the first batch of
that I'm aware.
That.
Requires insurance from a third
party provider without having
mechanisms for other forms of
addressing the risks associated
with that activity Madam chair
representative do you have
suggestions about other forms of
risk mitigation that you might
consider.
I think our bonding statutes
haven't clearly spelled out
there's a there's another the
motor vehicle code partnerships
there's other opportunities to
to have other alternatives here
to address your perceive risk to
Two suicide
Madam chair representative
There's a little bit about
financials for fiscal solvency.
Fiscal solvency.
If I urge your answers to
questions addressed by the
gentleman from Lee.
You're worried about people on
the verge of bankruptcy.
Yeah Madam chair representative.
I've been.
Spending my entire professional
life dealing with companies that
go through why cycles in this
industry.
Today times are good.
Companies are doing very well.
three or four cycles of my
professional life.
That the I can recall.
Brought the entire industry to
it's the even the most
substantial companies
Are you are.
Having difficulty and in those
times price goes down ten
dollars a barrel it's not good
for companies it's not good for
work communities it's not good
for the state I am good for this
nation
But that slide.
It's easy to look at this
through a prism of a virus that
are at twenty twenty three
because of have the industry is.
In most years.
It's not like.
We've seen the last few years
it's a lot different and.
There are companies that are on
the brink of bankruptcy.
And.
Some of these.
Companies and some of these
vigils.
That have the tenacity.
To stick with it.
Get that permit.
At April that next well.
And they become so we've come so
che come.
Eight eight tremendous member of
our community contribute.
I see this bill.
If that's what we're going
after.
We are going to do you.
Permit.
Those people who are willing to
take that risk for my have.
If I have to.
But.
We're going to deny the permit
to those individuals.
To.
Get themselves right get
themselves
Are on course and I'm here to
you almost every small operator
the state of New Mexico.
Has been on the verge of
bankruptcy.
And I think I could say that
with some confidence for the
there's probably some exceptions
to that a lot of people.
That risk everything to to
continue to stay in in this
business and the we see at times
yeah so I'm concerned about that
investment concern that that is
is what we're doing because.
I it's very nature the oil and
gas industry is.
Not for the faint of heart it is
a risky endeavor.
It is a risky endeavor for for
those engaged in it it's a risky
endeavor for the employees the
service that work for even
people like me to do are on the
periphery that provide goods and
services to that.
so if we are now going to look
at at.
Whether they're on the verge of
bankruptcy in Germany whether
the team issue of get a permit.
To I would submit to exercise
their private property rights to
go on the property and conduct
operations.
We are going to
We we are going to.
Potential wages I am from.
Ever securing.
Their private property and
allowing them to utilize a and
so I just.
A few questions in that regard
Madam chair representative how
do we deal with the aspects of
potential takings issues that
would arise from from that type
of policy.
Madam chair representative.
Firstly I want to be able to say
that the provision of.
That financial statement that
we're requesting is it is a
factor it's not denying a permit
based on their financial
statements Madam chair
representative and so it's it's
it's a factor of evaluation in
order to issue a permit madam
chair representative and to if
there's a question about it
through the rule making process
chair representative there is a
corrective action provision as
well so if in the case that
there was a discrepancy there
there's an ability to correct
that that action as well
Madam chair representative so
going back to your question
about taking.
Where do you where is your
concern with that and the bill.
The the issue of takings yes
the.
Madam chair representative your
statement was that.
You were saying that people on
the verge of bankruptcy and
having section to apply to them
which is ultimately if they
can't show that they're
physically capable.
The permits to be denied.
And so I I'm worried about.
If we have that up the action.
We have maybe resolve their
bankruptcy situation out of
optimistic tax years to to fill
our coffers because we stayed
out this plot their their
property that they were
intending to
Secure Madam chair
representative they're only
required to demonstrate it.
Madam chair representative
they're not required to be
solvent.
They're not required to so there
the demonstration is what we're
asking for when submitting an
application.
What have you straight solvency
when you're.
In your words on the brink of
bankruptcy.
Madam chair representative again
it's a factor they have to
disclose their financial
situation we hope they do it
honestly as with any permit
application Madam chair
representative with that said.
We're asking them to do that as
part of the application but
never the less madam chair
representative it's a factor in
issue and.
Of that permit.
What what the the the intent of
of some of the testimony of
sept.
We're going after.
Folks can't demonstrate.
Financial solvency and and your
words on the verge of
bankruptcy.
It seems that the messages to
the agency those are the folks
we don't want to issue permits
to because they may not be able
to the bill.
There.
Future responsibilities that the
that.
The state is expecting them to
fulfil
I was I see the cop wonder I
just.
Think that there could be some
real implications there that
Or not to concerned about.
Madam chair representative.
Specific well page seven line.
A lot.
It references that a disclosure
statement has to be filed.
M. line eleven with the
information listed in section.
I look at section B..
I don't see a list of
information that's being
requested by the.
Some conclusions are for some.
Should be yes but I don't see a
list so could you help me
explain how are you
ten for Lima Levin on page seven
so line up with the items.
Information listed in section.
Madam chair representative so
subsection B. talks about the
last your W. to in reference to
section one are you talking
about subsection B..
Update seven line hello.
Says that the disclosure
statement.
With the division
has the information listed in
subsection be separated because
subsection B. which is online
fifteen.
That's really not a list of
it's.
It looks like those are the
conclusions but the I just
wanted you to walk me through
how the information listed in
section B..
What information is on that list
I don't yeah Madam chair
representative this we're
talking about a form to debate
be developed by the division
referencing each of these
disclosures so madam chair
representative these are the
things that would be submitted
with the form.
We fill it out to get a permit
madam chair representative.
So so what is this important
going to say.
Madam chair of.
We would ask on the application
have you know and knowingly
Representative material fact in
the permit for a permit yes or
no.
If yes then please attach a
statement item to have you
refused to disclose the
information required by the
provisions of the oil gas act
yes or no if yes please attach
the disclosure.
It that's what we're asking for.
I'm and again this would be
developed by the agency chair
representative so you can go
down the whole list we're just
asking for disclosures.
Yes yes.
Madam chair representative it is
just.
What I would slash applies to
for.
Chair representative not.
That that I don't understand is
purpose built up the.
This form only going to be used
to hang someone later on.
That would be its purpose madam
chair representative.
There's no significant
information being.
At answers just I haven't done
this I haven't done that I'm not
of the oil and
It is just a statement and
hopefully the agency has a lot
of those never get stuff there
whether they're out of
compliance with the have the of
the agency has a I'm here
Representative that's what we
want to get houses it's not a
hope anymore it's a
determination it's a determining
factor in their relationship to
this Madam chair representative
we the pope's we would like to
be able to be in statute so that
way we can enforce rules and
regulations on these folks Madam
chair representative.
Moving on to page nine
One six.
I believe
There was some discussion about
some states with over here
I think that term.
Particularly in the oil and gas.
Contacts maybe
May be subject to a variety of
interpretation so in your words
madam chair representative.
What is an affiliated
substantially affiliated.
Also companies
I'm here Representative I
understand that substantially
affiliated is clarified and in
regulatory language chair
representative Charlie can fill
and.
Out.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Viber the.
Current regulations the OCD
regulations
explain it's not exactly a
definition but they explain
certain types of of affiliated
entities that may be affiliated
with the applicant and that
includes a director or officer
of a corporation a partner or an
owner that owns more than twenty
five percent ownership so that
would be an affiliated
organization affiliated entity.
Thank you.
So Madam chair representative.
Substantial number of oil and
gas wells drilled in New Mexico
are thrilled.
And I don't like to work
partnership that they are
basically.
In partnership with respect to
the growing about well.
They combined their their
interest to thrill out well.
Are you saying that those
parties who are engaged in the
line of that well about so we.
Substantially affiliated.
Eight.
I'm here Representative
So again that is further to
defined in the existing
regulations the need to look to
the agency in
Administering this this stage B.
two seventy six would if they
wanted to further define
substantial variation so whether
they would.
Whether they would address.
These partnerships the state
they don't want to call
partnerships I no idea it's
going to be able to whether they
include that in the definition.
Madam chair representative did
you agree with Mr the silence.
Statement.
Madam chair representative.
About substantially related.
Madam chair representative yes
it's hard.
So madam chair representative
state affiliated.
Would.
Bring a a lot of people.
As being the substantial would
fill it even though those.
Harding's.
I have no relationship with one
another other than with respect
to a specific while.
With that we an accurate.
Conclusion alive are.
It seems to me that no
relationship Madam chair
representative seems to me that
no relationship is.
the opposite assistant
substantially affiliated but
again I'm not the HSD and
agencies linkedin minister that.
And the related regulations.
The budget that Madam chair
representative it's been
utilized in in regulatory
language numerous times there
hasn't been a change to that
that I know of chair
representative as to what that
relationship
Yes it's working currently madam
chair representative.
What.
Representative the problem is.
That if.
By virtue of our.
Realligned X. Y. Z. well with
Eddy County New Mexico now makes
this stage we affiliated.
When that sound goes real what's
next well this section says that
they're going to look at the
compliance history of correct
Viber in determining whether
Exxon can do real well and we
County.
And that will be a huge huge
issue not just for apps on
because.
Probably closer to bankruptcy
the Max on
But.
It's a huge issue for us but
it's going to be a larger issue
for the talents and then the
third row Madam chair
representative if I may that's
whole section I think you're
over reading it Madam chair
representative of this is that
they may consider the compliance
history of a person who is
substantially affiliated they
may consider it if you're a bad
actor and your doing business
all across the state and many
people did business with you and
perhaps are bad actors because
of that affiliation that they
have with you because of the
relationship that they had with
you Madam chair representative
the department may look at that
as a factor of.
Whether or not you might be
after Madam chair representative
we're just implying here right
that we're just trying to cover
all the grounds of those
affiliations relationships and
and.
Essentially just to have a look
at it if there is that
connection madam chair
representative the may consider
is really for us the opportunity
there for EMNRD to to look under
the hood if they feel like maybe
there's a connection if not no
worries chair representative
Madam chair representative.
The industry.
Yes it is.
Substantial but it's relatively
small.
And I would submit to you of
thousand definition.
Basically substantially
affiliated under that definition
going to capture the whole lot
and so if you have one bad actor
in the state.
That bad actors going to Tate.
Everyone else.
Because.
Through.
Through all the.
Agreements and things that that
exist you're going to find some
relationships that.
And it's a gift yes Exxon's
having red barber the working
interest owner in in X. Y. Z.
well in any county New Mexico
the next them substantially
affiliated I've become
substantially affiliated in
every well than ExxonMobil
drills.
And there's going to be some
other person related to the to
the Afghan and everybody will
get tainted with why.
Inability my.
On the verge of bankruptcy Matt
bye for compliances St apt
everything else is associated
with I prior regulatory
experience with the agency.
The.
We have like a list thirty
minutes.
Probably not.
Chair and representative do you
see the the problem with with
the definition if I'm
substantially affiliated with
that.
Because I was a working at this
phone or in a while with us on.
I don't think that's what you
were trying to capture but if
that's the you've captured.
You and your cast in the up that
I think consumes the entire
industry in New Mexico yep I
think that goes well beyond what
you were trying to do.
Representative will acknowledge
your problem with that language
our interest in having that
language madam chair is to
ensure that that web of the
degrees of separation from a bad
actor to other folks that might
be under scrutiny madam chair
representative is allowing the.
Commission or the division to
consider that as a as a factor
Madam chair representative that
they may consider it they may
not it's up to them but we want
to be able to create that
mechanism for those degrees of
separation on substantial
affiliation.
The other
Major issue that all point out
is.
The that that's been caster
placed upon the burden of of of
CD.
I think this record told us that
forty thousand approvals.
Were issued this past year.
All of them called permits but
certainly approvals of the
administrative body to for a
company to engage in certain
activities.
The language in the bill says.
No really made all permit
issuance suspension or
revocation without opportunity
for public hearing of the.
so if you if surface pro at
their.
We talk about some permits
elsewhere.
Wondering if the breadth of the
language would cover other.
Approvals Madam chair
representative.
Managers Representative this is
specific to permitting.
So.
During
a document that is not possible
for a man allows one to engage
in an activity would not be at
the department.
This bill no chair
representative that's not the
state of New.
So so Madam chair representative
specifically which comments are
we.
Try to capture.
Madam chair representative
permits to drill.
Primarily also construction and.
Permits to operate.
Related oil gas related
infrastructure.
And I think you're getting to Mr
records point about the actual
work permits not being in the
act
The OCD despite the fact that
there's no you know actual work
permit in the oil and gas
sector.
Has a practice obviously of
permitting.
Act of permitting and is
utilized their regulatory
authority to do so.
So this language here gets to
That practice.
Whether we whether we get.
He looked up on semantics and
the omission of a word from well
yes that.
this would very much relate to
the practice of CD in its.
Approvals have.
Related construction and
infrastructure operations state
so so madam chair
representative.
There's four thousand
applications permits through.
If there's even.
Another ten thousand.
Other.
Things that are approved maybe
not all permits but they deal
with the the items and you just
described.
The new cap for those as well we
not by this bill Madam chair
representative again the HSD
will undergo several process to
determine how.
These provisions.
That's the.
The yes.
Monumental feat
Madam chair representative
The.
Want to change that issue of.
Having public hearings for each
one of those I think you made
the statement or state was made
that it would only allow the
permit the to challenge but when
I read paragraph F. on page
nine.
I see in line twenty two all to
interested first and job you
the regional chances with the
the secretary of and.
It's a public hearing and so is
all interested persons limited
to the.
Permit the.
I'm here Representative we just
caught the attention of friendly
amendment
on a line twenty I have it
should say at the end of line F.
no ruling shall be made on
permit denial suspension or
revocation not issuance so it's
not.
It should be focused on whether
it's denied suspended or revoked
and the interested persons
should be related to that
I.
That specific situation Madam
chair representative so maybe
that helps clarify and we would
take as a friendly amendment if
there was an interesting
clarifying.
Well this call Mr chair I would
I would move the NM up on.
Page nine live for rates.
Strike the word issue of and
insert in lieu thereof we were
deadlocked.
And women.
That is true for me Mr chair.
The the the minutes.
That is not the.
Mr Chairman representative is
there any other place in here in
the calls for public
a public hearing or is that the
only players.
Madam chair representative a lot
more at this the other.
There is.
Madam chair representative I
don't I don't see another one
so.
Yes actually.
Yes we are Representative.
On page nine.
section.
This this this section refers to
the corrective action plan
provision which is when a
committee has been denied or
there I'm sorry eight applicants
would not denied a permit or
permit he has been other permit
suspended or revoked they they
may create a corrective action
plan.
In cooperation with the agency.
And the
EMNRD and OCD may after public
notice an opportunity for the
public to comment on the plan.
Approved that plan in writing
and during that time what's been
approved in writing they may
allow that after the permit you
to operate for reasonable.
So that does contain public
hearing please Madam chair
representative that provision I
was is not the initial permit.
R. it's going to that they're.
Pretty limited in scope.
Of.
Mr chair of the.
I do have some other questions
but there's other so I will deal
with.
Thank you Representative Nibert
Representative Townsend.
Thank you.
Share.
Representative.
The question.
That but.
on the.
On the language that requires
all.
We have third party insurance.
That.
Particularly in the and that
we look at.
Market value.
On this date.
Six out.
And you look at most insurance
companies that I just.
Through.
Stock exchange they were like
want to emphasize thank you in
the or give us in the.
Better sure these.
When you hello.
One of the.
The dollar index.
Seven sure.
Allow them to go out and get
insurance from a company that
has.
Up on one hundred million
dollars.
The state will serve.
Madam chair representative we
did contemplate again this.
Language and I think just
Sanchez.
Concern is how to be able to pay
for the rest Madam chair
representative is Representative
Nibert pointed out chair
representative the issue that we
had had why we chose a third
party it take and state it is
that we want to make sure that
there's that intermediary there
of that these companies don't
write this debt off or issue
off and this is something that
they can put into another shell
company and essentially it's no
longer there liability I'm here
Representative that's why that
self insurance issue was
something that we contemplated
we're open to.
Finding a better way I think the
the point of the matter is how
to hold folks accountable madam
chair representative.
Chairman.
We have members processes
currently and regulations for
the.
That.
I think the track record since
the work opted is the.
And so I am interested in what
you believe these are that
caesarean.
Madam chair representative again
we're open to the idea of how
what different accountability
mechanisms might exist when it
comes to insurance or that
factor of of paying for problems
that arise Madam chair
representative if if funding is
where we are open to bonding as
a factor that we would like to
be able to demonstrate.
Thank you.
Job growth.
This question is particularly
troubling.
As the market conditions very
significantly in.
And solvency.
That mission.
Hi great concerns but because it
it.
Can you tell me if I'm wrong get
the company have their project.
So.
What future permit state.
Denied because of market
conditions not anything they
did.
Madam fifteen you're looking at
San.
It's a factor madam chair Mr
chair representative it would be
a factor but.
There I mean we would anticipate
that Mr chair.
General gentlelady.
State actor.
Yes but are you saying that it
cannot be resolved after.
Mr chair representative the idea
here is to have a holistic
approach to.
Identifying.
That actor setting the floor for
everyone to be able to comply Mr
chair representative so if
market conditions show that we
may be headed for a bus here
Mister chair representative I
think that should be a factor
for us to route be able to say
whether or not this is something
that we might want to look at Mr
chair representative so General
provided only by that.
Market.
So they were headed for a
downturn.
What is stopping Division.
Mr chair representative we want
to deal in facts not
speculation Mr chair
representative if we are in a
last year and we are in a
downturn Mr chair representative
that's factual right we we were
in a recession if we were in a
situation where these folks are
becoming insolvent Mr chair
representative that would be a
factor in determining in New
determining a new issuance of a
permit Mr chair representative.
Thank you.
Right one of five the.
Impact of the State Land Office.
Yes
there's a.
Bill was enacted.
Mr chair representative can you
make the connection for me what
you mean by that sure each page
this and State Land Office all
right source of.
I mean funds for the children of
the Mexico those what long yes
how the White.
Lands the minerals and.
At the state.
Mr chair representative in
contemplation of this
legislation the state land
office is in support of this
legislation so if the factors
that you're discussing Mr chair
representative there in favor.
It speak today it's in the FIR
Mr chair representative.
I'm sorry there's an Alice this
provided to us the state itself
Mr chair.
Chairman
That was the.
Comment made during the.
yeah the.
I think representative that.
I've heard.
Yes
Right right.
Check the.
One of the.
Or or.
Fire one of the.
That was.
At.
Yeah to stop.
What is your reaction to that I
think that is very important
because.
this bill comes out of the dark
with the meeting.
there was a lot of time to.
The the so.
The new year.
At the.
The opportunity to respond.
And that I'd like to hear that.
Okay.
Yes we'll.
Well.
Points to the committee.
Mr chair representative that
thanks for the softball today of
all the questions asked.
Mr chair this bill is about.
Ensuring that bad actors are
held accountable this is about
accountability transparency this
is about ensuring that there's a
process before we get to the
point of having a problem Mr
chair representative we want to
be able to empower agencies to
do a good job to vet those who
were allowing to perform really
challenging tasks as everyone
has said in in our state and
should there be a problem Mr
chair representative that the
state has the ability to deny or
revoke a permit but there's a
process for that Mr chair
representative that the folks
can go through to show we fix
the problem we are we're we're
we course corrected we're able
to do that without this bill
without this this the substance
of of having that process Mr
chair representative we're going
to continue to pile up problems
that we can't pay for that we
can ensure that we can't
Have the ability to remedy
without being able to do this Mr
chair representative so you
heard the advocates for this
bill speak about it this gives
us the power to to remedy some
big problems that we have in the
state and and at least create
the floor for how that works
moving forward Mr chair
representative and
like to add Mr chair and
representative also this it
would not be the first
occurrence of a bad actor bill
in the state the air quality
control act has been enacted
provisions that were passed two
years ago and became law and the
money the state mining act
that's going Act has backed
provisions and hazardous waste
act to Mr Roberts questions
requires liability insurance and
all operators.
So and I would I would argue I
would guess that those acts have
not those provisions have not
deterred development in the
state and like I said before
this is not a back door attempt
to block development is the
front door tend to keep bad
actors out of our state who.
The damage.
Public health damage our
environment and further pressure
frontline communities.
General gentlelady be careful
characterizing some long
messages they are often trapped
for years that the.
And.
That is exactly what.
There is a problem in New
Mexico.
There is the option yes that the
track.
So you can.
Try to catch up in the industry
development.
That's the issue.
That the issue of course today.
That quickly that
Age is.
I eighteen.
Verification is registration
change of ownership permit
application process will have
that to provide for the
application.
Through the Alan policies issued
by the insurance provider who
budgeted.
What will be the criteria for
approval by the division.
Mr chair representative as per
you know other liability
insurance we talked about the
hazardous waste provision on
having liability insurance Mr
chair representative when we
talk about that level of what
we're asking for through the
rule making process we
anticipate something similar.
Yes believe that brought in
over.
An undefined so that a
rulemaking fan the end
characterized as Labor Day
that's correct Mr chair
representative
Required versus city of
registration change of ownership
department application for
example gas Act illustrate this
point all.
That to the fine.
Mr chair representative we
anticipate something like a
financial statement
again this is just a basic
parameter for understanding
whether or not they're in good
working order Mr chair
representative and so we just
want them to submit that with
their.
For work Mr.
Gentle gentle eight is that
your.
What process yeah a company that
to date has this will solve the.
The approval for me at the
retention draft forty three all
there was a third one might be
denied tomorrow to market
conditions.
Mr chair representative no we're
not trying to predict the future
we just want a good cross
section of time when they submit
their application.
Well I think.
Mr Chairman gentlelady.
What the bill says is different.
It also adds on the into that
online one page three.
The award and.
And it goes on and it says
required application operator
Romero physical stop the reviews
that is conducted by the
division are for and founded by
the fans operate the idea of of
cost of money.
For more on Marathon the for
exonerated G. or for a large
company that of non.
Multinational works around the
world.
Hi impact is part of those Mr
chair representative the idea
here was just to be able to give
the power for the
that.
Agency to review the application
that was submitted otherwise
they submitted with no review so
the and right there Mr chair
representative is to review the
application to look at the
paperwork submitted otherwise
the submitted without review and
so Mister chair representative
what that looks like for us is
just be able to have somebody
there to have a look at it.
Have a look at that don't walk
right here you.
That's been my point all on this
on this current issue is at what
price yeah and how does it.
How are.
Are we going to do.
Are we going to.
How might that be manipulated.
For the that is desired.
What the ants that from being
manipulated.
Mr chair representative you
mean.
What prevents the.
HSD from looking at these the
the entire process in a negative
sort of way is that your
dissipation here I'm I'm gentle
gentle lady I think it's pretty
obvious that over the last
twenty years.
The way that many state agencies
look at this industries change.
And so what what was.
Repair I mean the.
From enrollment I maybe
agencies.
Is now.
Now.
Legislation like the opposite.
What I'm trying to figure out
is.
I don't think it is.
And I I don't I don't think it
is.
of the legislature this is the
end of this vote for.
Definitions.
To a rulemaking process.
This is.
You figure it out.
When we are asked to vote on
some that we don't know what it
is.
That's awfully hard.
The lady if you go on to.
Seven.
By Senator.
It is and I'll suspension
revocation.
Work on plans history.
Is that history.
Ten years.
That was.
Mr chair representative online
seventeen within ten years
immediately preceding the date
of the submission of the
application yes.
So.
Out of this rule making process
addresses the new CD of the bill
to come into custody following
it up start all over.
Create a new.
Initiatives new statements of
the corporations and names he.
He is the
need all the tools.
I have a history how does he
could over that how does she get
over Mr chair representative
that is precisely why we have
the hearing provision in this
bill so that way they can state
their case if they don't meet
the basic criteria they can go
make a claim saying I'm a new
CEO you believe in what we're
doing we've cleaned up our act
and we would like you to
reconsider this Mr chair
representative reconsidered.
Chair that's that's the issue if
they happen jump over the hurdle
of the sins of the past of
someone else for your employee
or something that's correct Mr
chair this is this entire bills
purpose is to ensure that we do
not allow bad actors into our
state at the front end Mr chair
representative we're asking for
folks to be above board I think
that's a reasonable request Mr
chair representative to take to
show up ready to engage in this
work without that record of poor
performance that's what we're
trying to prevent you Mr chair
representative
In the.
Anyone coming in so this is the
only covers
the company's coming the New
Mexico.
The list of the chevrons and
Exxon's American arms and
offices and those are operators
Mr chair representative it's for
new permits right so if that
history and that record of
performance is important.
General.
How often do they have that
disclosure statement to the
agency.
Mr chair representative it's to
the agency's discretion.
Chair of the late that.
Mr chair representative on the
final pages just to talk
discusses the forty to deny
revoke
a permit is under change of
ownership or other authorization
under the oil and gas act is to
that that the authorities to the
agency's discretion.
General gentlelady on page seven
line
There is no yes Representative
Senator Trujillo that.
The application for.
Can you.
Want to buy that Trujillo.
That.
Madam.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative material fact is
it you know the term of art
that the agency will determine
so if somebody has ms
misrepresented their role
perhaps in.
In a previous environmental line
violation case in another state
for example and they on their
disclosure form miss states are
given misinformation about that
that could be maybe consider
material fact again that's going
to be agency is going to be
conducting these reviews and
they will have their
determination.
The general.
He said in another state I did.
So.
Yeah need a I.
The the another state.
Maybe tonight permit based on
that oracle want to that.
Mr chair representative the
language in this bill first
other states are forced to
Eight companies history of non
compliance or conviction of a
felony.
For environmental crime in any
state or under any federal law
the United States.
That is what that other states
references specific to.
Doesn't it doesn't say
specifically if you buy a
company if you've been
convicted.
environment trying for of other
crimes related to price fixing
or fraud for example or bribery
town.
Those would be factors.
Again in this list of factors
that the agency can consider.
can delay after working for a
company that.
Thank you very yes.
Right.
And to for all of their
employees the same day.
I have to agree with the.
State made.
This this legislation although
maybe maybe well intended.
Get the
The users have weaponized tools.
Yeah.
The future development.
Property.
We'll be right.
Act gentle our.
Mexico hi hi we are I.
The new actors but the bad
actors.
Well I.
Committee is that the way that
that's the this is targeted for
those companies that are
responsible for having the three
point six billion dollar
surplus.
That's Mr chair representative.
They haven't had a problem they
won't have a problem in the
future we haven't had a problem
and.
That's the the the point here is
that I'm at actor's as yet so
Representative us you not to
here Representative arms
thousand you get.
This table and asked everyone to
stable and we had a
Representative in the last few
years you got to speak.
Two years I think the part of
the all state purposes.
And you might be included in
that.
Yeah yes bill that's that into
that category and hi.
It's very troubling to me the.
people say we this is good for
the state.
Thank.
Thank you representative will
have for people on the list we
were expected on for ten thirty
we have an excuse Representative
Romero the excuse is well we
will finish this bill today so I
would just be brief
Representative small thank you
Mr chair if the representative
I'm asking questions to sort of
lay out a few thoughts first Mr
chair representative thank you
very much for bringing this
piece of legislation I deeply
appreciate you and your experts
hard work however Mr chair
representative
what what we've heard here today
in committee from the energy and
minerals is that this could be a
range of four thousand up to
perhaps forty thousand actions
sort of a new potentially
cumbersome an indeterminate
public hearing process
that that is one of the sort of
the core areas that that while I
appreciate you bringing this I
will be able to support today
but thank you very much.
And.
Thank you Representative small
Representative radio.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative thank you so much
for bringing this bill again I
have a number of questions and a
happy to sit with you and talk
about that I don't want to
repeat some of the things that
came up but what really comes to
mind two things
One is when you talk about
financial statement solvency and
I just happened to sit on the
board of directors credit union
you know I don't feel like
there's enough.
Sort of direction about what
that entails
it could be anything from just a
financial statement to I mean
there's a lot of.
things that are involved in
financial solvency so I think
that's a very broad term used in
this the other thing that really
really concerns me with my.
Thanks very is and.
When you talk about a.
And hearing I think that this is
that the level of hearing
officer I don't think that it's
just a permit process that goes
to somebody that's employed by
the state Mister chair I think
it's this comes to the level of
the actual hearing officer
because I do think that there
are some questions about taking
and I agree with Representative
Nibert Mr chair and
representative
and I think that these are
things that need to be fleshed
out and there are still a lot of
other concerns that I have but
in the interest of time
Prefer to sit with you and talk
to those thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative
appreciate your time.
Thank you Representative
Representative Scott.
Mr chairman so I can change
this.
Which.
Questions committee.
Because.
Four years ago the not.
I have several million dollars
expanding loans thirty dollar
per week.
Ten months later.
What was shown to nine.
Dollars.
I.
Mr Chairman representative I was
in San.
Working conditions create a lot.
A major oil company came to we
have forty five.
What would you.
That we want.
And I was able.
Mr Chairman representative.
That will lead you to our list.
What.
I knew.
The
student.
portal which.
Rep I could make.
Thank.
Average institution of calls and
make to work I'm sure this would
are have been approved.
Change of operator.
To acquire the two part of the.
Mr Chairman representative that
is a question.
Mr chair representative I think
it just depends on the entire
application is presented and
again through the rule making
process to be able to determine
what factors were important to
that so it would be based on
just a storytelling it would be
based on facts and the
application as it would be
provided for that permit Mr
chair representative.
And to add to that you know my
Mr chair representative with the
correct corrective action plan
as related to this bill.
If you have been denied you
would would given the
opportunity to show your your
plans for the purchasing that
property that you describe for
how you're going to become worse
solvents.
And that's and that that
includes public hearing process
at which you would be able to
present all your data all your
facts.
All your anecdotes all your
plans.
So that's built in for just that
kind of circumstance.
Congratulations on making it
work Mr Chairman representative
to the sharper us.
Waste was operating she tried to
launch that.
There was no one.
Federal regulatory agency would
refute model.
Has been able.
To make.
Maybe it's.
At least.
Which.
Please.
All right.
Although for many years.
And that sure constraints I made
want to.
Is.
Thank you Mr that's.
Thank you representative that.
that's it from the committee we
are waiting on representative
Garcia there's a Romero G. the
closing costs.
Mr chair members of the
committee thanks for the great
insights I appreciate that want
to have additional conversations
and for clarifying I think in
anticipation of a rule making
what would be promulgated and
what the perhaps the hearing
process might look like I think
that those are clarifications
that we would be absolutely
interested and I appreciate the
amendment today
and with that Mr chair just want
to keep yep the open mind about
what the bad actors are that
we're trying to identify and and
how we can do that
in in statute Mr chair
representative thank you for the
conversation.
Thank you Representative Romero
with pleasure committee chair
Mister chair I have over the
past we have a motion for you to
pass the second.
This call the roll Mr chair so
people.
So I appreciate that I was to
give you a chance to and I ask
for the the clerk to call the
roll of all those on the first
page.
As.
Representative break up now.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Or one of the best most asset
two thousand and.
I will yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
I share Sariñana.
Chairman queen yes.
Seven the motion fails
Representative Nibert would you
like to make tabling motion.
Sure I will make them.
That.
Motion.
Representative Braco.
Yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rubio noticing.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small yes.
I.
Chairman Greenspan nope seven to
four.
Those table
thank you for your efforts
because Mr chair thank you too
many we are turned.
