Um
We will start with house bill
with roll.
Representative Locke,
Representative Lord.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson, Madam
Vice Chair here, Madam Chair,
here, Madam Chair, we have a
quorum.
Thank you, and we'll start with
House Bill 405 volunteer
firefighter service and training
and uh Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, um,
thank you committee, um, today I
am here presenting a bill um
that essentially provides job
protections for our volunteer
firefighters from across the
state, um, coming from a county
that is reliant, um, entirely
dependent upon volunteer fire,
um, also coming off of our
state's largest wildfire, um.
This is and will continue to be,
um, my number one priority is
making sure that our.
Service personnel, um, are well
taken care of and supported, um,
over the years our volunteer
firefighter numbers have
dwindled drastically, um, within
San Miguel alone, um.
From COVID to fire to now we are
down over 50% of our enrollment
in our volunteer firefighter,
um, within Semio County, um,
right now we're, although we
haven't enrolled 110 to 130
active members are less than
half of that, um, statewide,
they are reporting that um
they're in rolled there are
3,131 paid firefighters, 4,312
volunteer firefighters, 7,443
total, um, but it has also been
reported.
That out of those numbers, there
were only about 1500 what they
would consider active volunteer
firefighters across the state.
Um, so with that, especially as
it affects rural counties, um,
counties that are dependent upon
volunteer fire, volunteer
services.
Um, essentially with this act
does is it provides up to 112
hours.
Um
Approximated to be about 2 weeks
of job protections for.
Professional development for
training and certifications, and
it provides an additional 112
hours, um, as defined for active
service time. Um, granted, there
are requirements and different
differentiations of the two.
time allotments, um, for the
training leave again giving much
longer notice, um, that would
allow our volunteer fire
departments to
Beef up their skills for lack of
a better words, um, increase
their, their ISO ratings, um,
really be able to adequately
train.
During due for EMT services as
well as fire services, um, you
know, beyond nights and
weekends, but they may be
accustomed to as of now, the
in-service time would again just
offer those job protections
should they be called out to an
emergency um throughout the year
this act also does ensure that
they have to certify using
their, their county chief to do
that certification, um, and
being in communication with
their employers about their
active time.
And so with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, um, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition?
Anyone on Zoom.
OK. And anyone in support?
OK, anyone on Zoom and support.
OK.
Um
I'm sorry that it was so late
and you probably lost some of
your, you know, audience, um,
we'll go to the committee and.
Are there any questions about
this bill?
and
Oh, I didn't
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. Good
to see you twice in one day.
So I did have some questions
about this bill and I
I don't think.
I'm very fond of some of the
language in here. So Madam Chair
Representative.
Can you just tell me a little
bit about
What this would require like
notice wise for
For some of these employers
because I know that.
And that that doesn't move and I
think they like glued it to the
table or something, which is
very weird, but anyway, I know
when it comes to these
emergencies, they're emergencies
that happen, and some of these
folks they're, they're just
called out. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering what that means for
The shift that they're having to
work that day or something. How
does that work when it comes to
the employment, because if they
can't.
Take off anytime they want.
Currently, I don't believe. How
does that?
change
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I also wanna make a note
that um we did review and
formulation. I did, you know,
work with fire inspector, work
with my chief, you know, um, my
county chief, um, as far as you
know, what is, you know,
adequate notice, um, so with
regards, so the differentiation
of time with regards to the
training leave, um, they would
be required to notify their
employer 30 days in advance.
They gave me any thought anytime
they would sign up for training
or there would be something
scheduled they indicated that
they would have well over 30
days' notice, so that their
employer.
could adequately prepare, um, in
the case of an emergency, you
are exactly right, there is no
rhyme or reason as to when
emergencies occur, um, the act
would stipulate that upon
getting called out, getting the
call to service, they would be
required to immediately notify
their employer, um, and then
upon return within designated
business days, they would need
to also essentially turn in an
excuse from their chief, letting
them know the active service
hours that they were actually
out on call to retain that
leave. So give them as much
notice as A during an emergency
time while they work.
called out to service.
Thanks. OK, I thought there was
like a, a hurricane or
something, some kind of
earthquake or some crazy thing.
The ghost is back. I think it's
probably the ghost from the
other day at the floor, maybe,
but Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, so, OK, so when it comes to
the actual leave time.
So
For me, if I was an employer and
I was hiring people in this job,
this bill was signed into law.
A lot of the time in interviews
I've been in, they ask you what
your hobbies are and what you do
for fun and, and so when it
comes to this, if you say, oh,
I'm, I'm a firefighter. I'm a
I'm a volunteer firefighter.
And
Your employer
Realizes that are your potential
employer realizes that I feel
like they actually could.
Be less inclined to give you
that job because of this
requirement. And have we
considered that when, when it
comes to drafting this and
Cause I mean, it, it could
technically be discrimination
against that person for being a
volunteer firefighter, but
that's not a protected class. So
I'm just wondering how that fits
into that, and I'm sure.
Make sure,
um, so Madam Chair
Representative, know that that
was discussed, um, you know,
although it's not a protected
class um with discriminatory
practices, um, I, my hope is
that this would be regarded as
an active service similar to
jury duty, similar similar to
military leave, um.
You know, asking somebody if
you're in the military, I'm not
gonna hire you because you're
serving in the National Guard.
Um, I don't think that's a fair
question of an employer, um.
If the person is employed in the
community that.
That they serve, um, I will tell
you that some communities are
very aware of the volunteer
service requirements. They are
very extremely supportive, um,
again, I mentioned San Miguel
County, but I've also been in
talks with my Moriarity fire
with my Torrance County fire,
um, in those community areas,
there's a vested interest to
have the service personnel to
protect their homes to protect
their businesses, just to
protect their communities, um, I
will tell you from personal
experience within our calf
Canyon fire, um, the entire
duration of the fire was over 3
months.
And so some of our volunteer
made that call to quit their
jobs so that they could protect
the homes in the communities and
that, that were just so valuable
to them. So, and, you know,
again this leave act would not
encompass 3 months, um, but.
Often the value, as you
mentioned, we're trying to
promote value. We're trying to
add value to
Doing this valuable service for
your community, um, in the times
that I have seen people have to
make that very difficult choice.
It's often when they work
outside of the county in which
they serve.
And so that is where the job
protection would more than
likely come into play, um,
because again, everyone within
the communities that have
volunteer fire, um, realized the
value of the volunteer fire
department.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, and,
and in my county, we also have
volunteer fire. So I do get the
concern, and I also have heard
from some employers around the
state who said, well,
I would love to be able to
afford this, but if it's
something that the long
duration.
And they'd have to hire a new
person or they'd need a temp or
something and that could
complicate it for them from,
from what I've heard.
Um, so
I will continue to listen to the
questions, and I appreciate you
bringing the bill forward and I
think it's a good.
concept, I just uh have some
concerns when it comes to the
the employer. I'm sure you
you've heard those concerns
already, so I won't.
Belabor that point, but I really
appreciate it, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much for bringing
this forward. And if you had a
response,
please Madam Chair, and in
response to that, again, this
doesn't, um, you know, currently
policies in the case, some may
have other leave.
Benefits within their company,
they are also welcome to use
those, um, this does not affect
should they get called out to
any sort of paid service. So for
instance, like Forest Firework
or, um, like if they also were
serving with the in a paid
capacity, this would not cover
there and this is only for up to
2 weeks for in-service job and
again up to 2 weeks for
training. So, um, again.
Like in the case of 3 months,
this would not cover the
duration of 3 months, but it
again is meant to provide at
least a minimum job security for
those that do continue to serve
day in and day out.
Anything else from the
committee?
I'd like to move a do past then.
OK, uh, you pass from, uh,
Representative Romero and 2.
OK. Is there any, go ahead and
take.
Representative block? No, ma'am.
Representative Lord, yes.
Representative Romero
Representative Thompson, yes,
Madam Vice Chair, yes. Madam
Chair, yes.
You have a vote of um.
I do pass.
On house bill.
Uh
405 and um a vote of 5 to 1.
You're good to go.
OK. Next we have House Bill 190.
Victims of Crime Act changes,
and I believe you have an
amendment.
We will pass out.
did mature,
um.
OK, Madam Chair, um, looks like
the amendment is um 039.1.
And what this amendment does,
Madam Chair, is it addresses,
um, some of the direct concerns
that your committee members had
mentioned about um making it
entirely clear that the process
being prescribed in this bill,
um, was entirely within the
scope of this bill and writes
that um victims are allowed to
have within the scope of this
bill, um, just as as it's
pursuant to the victims, uh.
to the victims of crime Act, so
I can go through it line by line
if you want or we can just do
kind of a generalized, um,
summary, it's really up to you,
Madam Chair.
I moved the um.
Um, a man, yes, the amendment
for discussion.
Thank you. Um, let's see.
Because
Um, yeah, let's go through line
by line, since there's quite a
few and there was um some
concern about different things.
Sure, so, um, going starting on
page one.
Line 14, we strike out who is an
attorney authorized to practice
in New Mexico.
And on, um, line 16, we after
the semicolon, we add to enforce
a victim's right pursuant to the
victims of Crime Act.
So that's one instance in which
we make it.
Extremely clear that, um, the
proceedings are just to be able
for a victim to enforce, um, the
rights they have pursuant to the
victims of Crime Act, then on
that same page, line 24 after
action, uh, we were adding in
state court to make it clear
that these actions can only be
brought in state court and
nowhere else.
Then on line 2, madam chair.
Starting line 2.
For uh crossing out file a
petition.
And we are, um, placing bring an
action in state court, general.
Uh, let's see, authorizing the
Attorney General to bring an
action in state court, again,
making it crystal clear where
and this action is to be
brought.
And how?
Um
Next on page 5, Madam Chair,
line 12.
After the period, um.
There's a large paragraph, and
let me get back to the
amendment.
Here
Including filing pleadings,
appearing in court, or otherwise
speaking on behalf of the victim
regardless of whether the
victims representative is an
attorney authorized to practice
in New Mexico.
Provided that a victim's
representative may only file
pleadings or appear in court to
enforce the victims' rights
pursuant to the victims of Crime
Act.
So again, making it very clear,
um, what this specific remedy
is.
Then we go back to.
available under the the um bill
here. Then we go to page 6.
Line one, and we are eliminating
line one all the way through to
line 5.
And on that same page, page 6,
line 17.
Um, after Victim, we are adding
at the victim's last known point
of contact.
So the the sentence and read the
district attorneys district
attorney's office shall convey
the information concerning the
scheduled court proceeding to
the victim at the victim's in
that same page, Madam Chair, um.
On line 23, a
victim, we have eliminated May
and its place have a place has a
right to immediately appeal.
The court's decision to hold the
hearing, line 24.
We have strike stricken, taken
de novo, and, uh, in its place
put filed in accordance with
Supreme Court rules for
appellate procedure.
Provided that the appellate
court shall apply a de de novo
standard of review.
Um, if the appellate court finds
that exceptional circumstances
did not exist in the notice
period shorter than 7 working
days was not required.
Then on page 7, line 10, lines
10 through 15, we are
eliminating those completely.
Re remunerating those
paragraphs, um, starting with A.
And then, um, line 20 again page
7.
We're inserting after 1978
subsection B.
If a victim requires language at
a scheduled court interpretation
on a scheduled court hearing or
other services necessary for the
victim to observe or participate
in a court proceeding, those
services shall be provided by
the courts.
Next page 8, line 24.
Um, after action we're adding in
state district court again to
make it very clear where and how
these proceedings can be
initiated.
And lastly, on page 9, Madam
Chair, line 5, we are striking
file a petition and in its place
we're putting bring an action in
state district court, so the
sentence would read the Attorney
General may bring an action in
state district court against the
state or political subdivision.
Um, and so that is the
Amendment
Sure
I was wondering why you didn't
just do a, a committee
substitute with all these
changes. Um, Madam Chair, that
is a wonderful question, so I,
um, tasked my export, my export
Madam Chair, to address some of
the concerns that were brought
by the committee, and so, um,
admittedly I let the expert
expert and so by the time all of
the changes were brought back to
me, um, it was in the form of an
amendment I didn't realize that
we were gonna have so
changes, um, if I had known
ahead of time we would have done
a committee substitute, I
apologize, but um it was just
kind of the messiness. OK, I
understand how that works. OK,
um, since we took, um, a lot of
time on the bill before, um,
And this has a lot of the um
things I think that were being
addressed, but I'd like to take
um.
Uh, comments on the changes
themselves from.
Uh, audience and from Zoom.
Um, is there anyone?
Um
Objecting to these um changes
how they are.
Is there anyone on Zoom?
Yeah
OK. How about in support?
These changes in the audience.
OK. Oh, OK.
Would you like to speak or just
say yes, you're supporting.
Sorry, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Frank Zubia
director for the New Mexico
Crime Victims Reparation
Commission. This bill proposes
and with its amendments.
Uh, to state victims of crime,
enhance protections and rights
to crime victims.
This bill aims to expand the
definition of applicable
criminal offenses, improve
victim representation and
notification and established
remedies for violations of
victims' rights.
HB 19 seeks to strengthen the
rights and protections afforded
to crime victims in New Mexico,
ensuring they receive timely
notifications, adequate
representation and meaningful
participation in the criminal
justice process, and we ask for
your support.
Anyone on Zoom?
4 people in support of the
changes, OK.
And those of you who are um
online if you could.
Uh
Just keep your comments to the
um.
Changes to the bill.
And one minute please.
members of the committee, Mary
Ellen Garcia, the chief
executive officer of the Damaico
Coalition Against Domestic
violence. He stand in full
support of any version of this
film, particularly with the
amendments that enhance the
rights of survivors of its
partners, um,
for us this is one of those
pieces of legislation that is
incredibly long overdue
as it creates um which
survivors have, uh, right and
remedies for those, right? So we
um
We encourage the committee and
uh the uh uh.
Linda Akson.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm the executive
director of the Victims' Rights
Project. Uh, we have the teeny
tiny agency that has been uh out
enforcing as best we can and I
love seeing this legislation
with the amendments. I strongly
urge you do pass on how so 190.
Thank you.
Adrian Gomez.
Uh, good evening, madam chairing
members of the committee, uh,
Adrian Goman is here on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. We support
uh HP 190 with amendments
because it will help victims of
the crime and important ways.
The bill would expand the scope
of crimes and make it much
easier to obtain assistance
through the victims.
Victims of the Crime Act, one of
the most important parts of this
bill is to systematically ensure
participation in court
proceedings. Finally, the bill
would add healthcare workers and
the victims of human trafficking
to the group of a protected
people. This is a good bill. We
stand and in support of HB 190
with the amendments and that we
ask for a due path. Thank you
for your time.
Alicia Otero.
Hello, Alicia Otero from the New
Mexico Crusaders, uh, victims of
homicide, and I am for this bill
because victims are
re-victimized through the
judicial system constantly. We
are not notified of any um
hearings.
And we would really like to
change and we would really like
to to be passed. Thank you so
much.
All right, is there anything
else you'd like to add?
Represented. No, madam Chair, I
think we're open for questions
again.
OK. Do we have a motion for the
adoption?
Oh, I'm sorry.
It's, it's on the amendment.
Were you asking for a motion to
adopt the.
Oh, OK, OK.
All right. Do I have a motion?
No, I'll wait till the, I'm
sorry, I.
It's Tuesday.
That's what I thought, OK,
representative Lord.
Yes.
Sorry,
Ma'am, I was kind of on overload
with I've never seen so many.
A lot written up.
Um, but
Chairs representative.
When we go through this.
Uh, can you spend it, what's the
difference on number 4 when it
says strike, file a petition, or
bring an action in state court.
What's the difference?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
so I'll explain on one part of
it and then I'll defer to my
export export, but on the state
court part is very clear that
this is an action to be brought
only in state court under the
laws of the.
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for your question. Um,
it was just to clarify that, uh,
however, an action is most
appropriately brought.
You bring an action, um, most
actions are filed petition, and
so it was just to make sure that
that was clear and that an
action can be appropriately
thought.
So my representative on H5 line
12 before the period you
inserted, including filings,
pleadings. How does that change
about what difference does that
make?
And the bell hops down. Madam
Chapresentative, so you're
talking about the including
filing pleadings appearing in
court or otherwise, yes.
Including filings.
Mhm
Filing pleadings, appearing in
court or otherwise speaking have
to go back to.
So
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for your question. Um,
that is just to address the
concern that was raised about
whether in a variety of of
impact reports and by this
committee about whether the
attorney who represents the
victim could just.
File whatever they want about
whatever they feel like and and
this is to make sure that it is
narrowly focused on them
representing a victim in the
capacity of their rights under
this act.
Madam Chair, it, it's
unfortunate. I do have more
questions, but on the bill
itself, but since I can't ask
those questions, what I'll do is
I'll keep reading through here
because there's a lot of, I've
never seen so many reports, it's
like a lavella over here.
Um, thank you, ma'am.
OK. And any other discussion on
the.
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, expert,
um, for, um, I, I did receive
your, thank you for bringing me
the amendments, um, early,
unfortunately didn't get to
connect before the um the
meeting because I think they're
still quite a lot of questions,
um, in particular with, um, how
we're asking the court to sort
of engage in this and
unfortunately, we don't have any
um.
um
Personnel here to speak in favor
or against it, and I, I think
that's part of one of my major
concerns where we're looking at.
How the sort of question on a
number of the um analyses to
begin with in changing the
process for AOC for the appeals
court.
Um, and certainly for the law
office of the public defender,
um, they were really concerned
about the process and now with
layering and some of this de
novo processing, um, I'm really
concerned that I don't have like
a good technical knowledge of
what we're asking them to do,
um, with the various, um,
Sort of ways in which we're
we're layering this in. And so
what my understanding is, is
still at this point, it's not
quite um
Ready for prime time as far as
just looking at some of the
analyses that we did receive,
um, I'd be happy to, you know,
work with the sponsor on some of
those to be able to relay.
Um, a number of things going
section by section, including
um.
You know, the titling and the
concern about how this all wraps
together between being able to
take a, a
What we understand in the
criminal process, but trying to
narrow it down in the civil
process, creating this new sort
of way in which we can have um
victims have rights to appeal
and whatnot.
I'm not entirely sure we know
how to do that, or at least I
don't know how to do that today
in a sound way without that
input, um, so I'm unfortunately
not prepared to to vote on the
bill in favor of it without sort
of.
Having that process understood
fully and what we would be
recommending, um,
So I just
Having wrapped my head around,
uh, what we could today, Madam
Chair, um, I think this is a
great start on um the amendment
language is to, you know, what
we're sort of trying to to parse
through, um, but it still
doesn't get us there fully, um,
and again, there's a lot of
details since it is such a big
undertaking with this bill. I
mean I'd be happy to work with
that, but I'm not prepared to
vote on it today. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Maybe I respond, but I'm sure.
It wasn't quite a question, but
we was not true, um, but I, I, I
again, I think the
representative makes a salient
point, and if, if the crux of it
is bringing in those agencies
that are going to be tasked with
actually putting together the
process and the rules for this
particular action, if, if that's
what it's.
Gonna take to work with those
folks and bring them into the
conversation so that they are
giving us, um, additional
information on how they see this
going since they will be the
ones charged with administering
it.
Again, I, I think that's good
feedback and so, um, and if it
means committee sub um with
under the advice and consent of
let's say AOC and LOPD and the
DA's office, if that's what it
takes, I'm, I'm never gonna
think that's a bad idea, and I'm
sure.
Madam Chair, I would also
recommend the appeals court just
since they are named as one of
the.
folks who are going to be
getting this load rather than a
writ or the process that is
designated at this point to you,
representative.
Um, any other discussion?
Yes.
Um
I'm sure, um, if it's helpful to
adopt the amendment to continue
to have the discussion, I'm
happy to do that, um, just cause
we know technically when you're
trying to pull up legislation
and review it, so it's all in
one place. I'm happy to move,
um, adoption of the amendment.
Alright, it's been moved in
adopt and seconded to adopt the
uh amendment.
Um, is there any objection?
OK, seeing none. You haven't
amended.
Bill
And um so we'll go.
Um, to the bill.
I mean, as amended.
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass, um.
Is there
Madam Char just given the
changes that we are hearing that
the sponsor is willing to make,
um, I.
would ask Madam Chair for the
sponsor, I would prefer, um, not
moving it forward, um, and if
the best way to do that is to
table this just to keep it in
this committee that's one
direction, um, or we can just
continue to roll it, whichever,
um, I think, you know, with the
willingness of the sponsor to,
to continue to work on it.
That's one thing if a a tabling
motion. I
I know it takes precedence in
order to be able to to keep it
here to keep that discussion
going.
If that's what's necessary, just
would defer to the sponsor with
the preference would be on the
motion.
Because I've represented, would
you like to roll it or do you
like us to?
Um
What we have emotion.
but not a second for due pass,
but um.
Well, madam, sure, I mean, my
understanding of the procedure
is, um, if it were to be tabled
that requires additional
procedure to unable and so if we
do roll that just kind of keeps
the momentum going. I appreciate
the um offer of the
representative, and I think, you
know, again, we, it sounds like
we just need to have ourselves a
little conference with everybody
and the majority conference room
and we just talk it out and I'm
get a very good idea of what the
process looks like in a in a
nice cleaner sub um.
But if, if it's OK, Madam Chair,
I would like to hear additional,
um, thoughts from maybe some of
our uh Republican colleagues
just if there are other issues
that can be addressed in the
bill at the same time if
there's, you know.
Additional procedural questions,
I'm, we're open to hearing those
as well. It's up to you, man.
I'm sure it's your committee.
I'm sure I agree with groups and
Romero that that little bit more
work and the stakeholders are
all mentioned here should be
involved as quickly as possible
so you can get that.
I think it would be better to
have that discussion offline,
um, and to go ahead and roll and
we'll bring it back as soon as
you can, you know, uh, get with
everyone, uh, that was suggested
and um.
With, with the committee
substitute probably easier for
them to see everything together.
Very good. OK. Thank you. Thank
you.
Does that does the motion to be
rescinded or taken back.
There was no just making sure
that you don't have any problems
procedurally. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
presenting House Bill 532, so
this uh seeks to require school
school boards, charter schools.
To uh give some education on,
uh, swimming safety, and I'd
like to introduce my expert, uh
Casey McGovern.
And uh I'd like to ask you to
say a few words on the on the
bill.
Yes. Madam Chair, committee
members. My name is Casey
McGovern. I am the executive
director of the Every Child is
swimmer program, and I'm here to
testify on behalf of this
legislation that I hope you will
consider. I am a mom of a
drowning victim that set the
course of my journey 15 years
ago, I lost my 19 month old
daughter to a drowning in our
backyard pool.
And at that time, nobody was
talking about water safety.
Nobody, pediatricians, schools.
Nothing was being done and so
when she was brought to the
hospital, I felt that I was the
only person that this had ever
happened to.
But spending the week in the
hospital.
Learning and hoping and praying
that she was going to recover. I
learned how big of a problem it
is and drowning is the number
one cause of death for children
1 to 4, and it's the number 2
cause of death for children 5 to
14 and 15 years ago.
It was that, and it's still that
to this day.
And not only that, actually
non-fatals have gone up, so for
every one death, there's 8
people impacted by a non-fatal
injury, which means they were
submerged, needed to be
hospitalized, resuscitated, and
they're going to be impaired in
some capacity, so we have a very
big problem.
And what this legislation will
do is educate the parents and
caregivers to the school system.
And provide vital information to
let them know about that issue
as a whole, because I think that
people feel that it won't happen
to them. It only happens to
those parents when they see the
real life faces of actual
victims and families that have
suffered the loss, they'll
understand and they'll become
relatable and also more normal,
you know, and I think that's a
conversation we have to have,
um, my my model of this
legislation is.
Fire safety is talked about in
the month of October through
every school throughout the
entire country.
And yet drowning claims more
lives by far than any fire fire
issue has ever happened or has
ever had, um, and so I want
people to start talking about it
and start normalizing.
Water safety, risk factors is
100% preventable and we can
prevent this by sharing this
information with parents and
caregivers and through the
school systems, it's just the
biggest net, you know, for us to
be able to push the information
out there, and every child to
swimmer program is here to help
assist with the implementation.
Thank you, Madam Cha. Now we
stand for questions.
Thank you. And sorry for your
loss and um.
Thank you for being here. Is
there anyone in the audience,
um, who is in opposition.
Yeah
And, and how about in support?
OK. Do you like to speak? OK.
Uh we'll go to Zoom. Is there
anyone in opposition?
How about in support?
OK.
Um
We go to the committee.
OK, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, I'm also sorry.
Um, my husband ended up joining
the Coast Guard.
He was swimming with a friend of
his that was right next to him
the last time he saw him.
Oh well,
um, my chair.
Representative
What, what does?
Water safety look like to you?
What would that program look
like?
It's not a curriculum that
you're going to introduce into
the school I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, I'm sorry, get very
intimidated by this process. Oh,
don't, don't be, we're just
madam Chair, um, what does it
look like?
Um, it does not look like a
curriculum that is pushed out
and having the staff do anything
or the teachers do anything in
the schools. It's just simply.
Having the resources to share a
robocall something on their
website, a flyer that goes home
with the risk factors and the
resources that are available to
parents. It's that touch point.
It's, it's the point of
educating the parents and
caregivers about the issue and
what to do about the issue and
the resources that are
available, so there's no cost
involved and there is no
additional work on any um
teacher or school school board
member.
OK, so I'm chair representative.
So you would want the school.
School board governing body of
the charter school. And and why
is it, is it only charter
schools? Oh, it's oh no, it's
also public schools, it's all
charter.
So you're looking at them.
You want the
them to come up with something
that talks about.
rounding for kids.
And then get that information,
is that correct, Speaker?
And I'm curious, uh, maybe my
expert can give an example of
how this is done in other
states, real briefly.
Yeah, Madam Chair, um, this
legislation was passed in
Florida, Georgia, and Arkansas
already, and it's actually
successfully implemented. We
work with the Department of
Education to be able to the
parents and caregivers through
the schools and it's a tool kit
that they can pull from and use
any one of those resources, they
will not be tasked to create or
add additional work onto their
staff to create this
information. Um, a lot of our
swim school partners because.
Our program not only is
advocating for legislation, but
it also provides learn to swim
scholarships for any family
member that makes belo or any
child that comes from a family
that makes below $50,000 a year
because we're trying to promote.
More people learning to swim.
54% of adult Americans cannot
swim well enough to save
themselves. And so with the
touch point of educating them
about the need of what they
should do or could do, and then
also showing them that there's
resources out there for help,
that's kind of what our two
prong approach is, and we want
to see it successfully passed
just like we've done in the
other three states and hopefully
in time, you know, throughout
the entire country.
Madam Chair, uh, rep I just
wanna add, uh, you think, uh, or
do we have swimming pools in the
rural areas or that we have
aseass, we have ditches, we have
a.
When I was a kid in elementary,
they take us once a month to the
swimming pool in Espanola.
So, uh, it does affect, uh,
Most of our state. Thank you,
madam.
that affects everybody.
It's
I'm trying to think
For some of our smaller schools,
our schools.
No, I know printing out a piece
of paper is all.
There's nothing
The budget
Madame Chair representedative
no, but like I said, there's
free resources all over the
Internet, uh, in fact, uh.
Casey's nonprofit offers these
resources for free, so this is
something they can as simple as
uh researching and downloading
and offering it so.
Uh, it should be a minimal cost,
if anything, uh, that's the
question I asked, is this gonna
be an unfunded mandate, but
after researching, it's not.
Thank you. Oh, go ahead, Madam
Chair, um, yes, um, we would
also, if there was any uh
deterrent that any of the
schools cannot afford to to
provide these flyers, all they
would have to do is write an
email to us and say we need
10,000, we need 5000 of these
flyers, these are the flyers
that I choose from and we will
mail them to them because we
want to see it at work. We want
to see the families getting this
information and so there's no
cost involved for any of the
schools, um, if that is is a
factor, we will show them other
best best practices that have
been um implemented in
actually successfully done.
Not opposed to. I'm just trying
to figure out if.
Because I haven't heard from any
of my charter schools in my
schools have any issue with, OK,
if we got to print this out for
students, there is a cost in
that, so.
Um, that's all the question
A representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to thank the sponsor and
expert for bringing this
forward, I think with the
degrees of separation that
someone has to a drowning
victim, my grandfather was a
drowning victim as well. I think
we, you know, carry these
stories in our family, but
there's proactive ways to deal
with it, and I really appreciate
you putting that in the schools,
I think it's a critical way to
not only create water safety,
but for lifelong learning, um,
in safety around bodies of
water, so I really appreciate
you doing that. Um,
And also, uh, just to, uh, the
point of being from the North,
the Iona was the only thing that
kept us away from the ditches. I
think water savviness would be a
little bit better, so thank you,
Madam Chair. I appreciate you so
much.
Representative Thompson.
Me, chair, thank you. I think I
forgot my question.
It's been a long day,
the liona
was a recommendation.
Not, not quite so just out of
curiosity, I mean, every time
I've tried to change anything in
schools, the school board
association and the
superintendents come out and
have a fit. I'm just curious if
they, if you've heard anything
from them,
OK, thank you.
I have a few questions, um.
Um, my kids are 42 and 49, and
we went to um.
Uh, the pool during the summer
for mom and to, you know, um.
Swim classes and I was wondering
if instead of in the beginning
of the school year, if you had
something in the fall, I mean in
the.
Spring, yeah, before they get
out of school and um.
They can enroll the kids into
different um swim classes and um
also if your tool kit.
Who provides that, Madam Cha,
thank you. Um, we provide the
tool kit and what we've done it
in the past with the other three
states is we provide them with a
flash drive that has all of the
different resources that they
could pull and use in some of
the cost, um, or not there's no
cost because it's just putting
it on their website, sharing
these resources that's available
and putting on their social
media, sharing that these
resources are available, um.
And
Reiterate with the question. Oh,
the time of year actually my
preference would be um the month
of May or in that springtime
leading into the summer because
it's national water safety
Awareness Month in the month of
May, um, and I think that that
it's more on the radar radar at
that time. So I'm open to
whatever would be more.
Appealing to the schools to be
able to share it at that time. I
agree with you, but so far we've
had the best luck with the start
of the school year being able to
share the information in the
schools just kind of putting it
in the new parent packets or on
their website or through social
media on that account, but we
work with the Department of
Education in the three states
that they have passed it to try
to make it work because every
state has different issues and
different things that they come
in contact with as well as.
Florida from the South Florida
to the north part of Florida is
completely diverse and
different.
So we do want to work with them
because we want to see it
ultimately implemented and
getting into the hands of the
parents and caregivers.
That sounds great. Um.
So there really isn't a a a set
time. I mean, the schools can
just do it whenever they can,
but they would have to print out
their own materials and um or
just put it on the website,
things like that.
Don't, um, cut trees.
Uh, I just want to emphasize to
meet the requirement, they would
just have to post it on their
website or uh.
Social media, there's nothing
that requires them to print
this, but that would be great if
they do that.
I'm sure it does say that.
Um
No later than the 10th day of
school, uh school day of a
school year.
Um, and things having been in
schools forever, things are
crazy for the first, so it, I
mean, not that it's a must, but
it may make more sense to give
him a little time because you
might get pushed back on. Oh, we
can't possibly add anything more
in the 1st 10 days.
And if they have, oh, if they
just do it onto their website,
um, then it would be there for
the, you know, spring too.
So.
I'd like to move a do pass. OK,
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass by Representative Romero in
a 2nd by representative Rubio.
Is there any objection to No.
Yeah,
Madam, I just say something just
really brief the school board,
but we're not.
voting yet. We're OK, we have a,
OK, and then explain your vote,
sorry
OK, we have unanimous consent
for a due pass, uh, or house
Bill 532, um.
On a vote of 6 to 0, you have a
new pass and to explain their
votes representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
think you're
Believe it or not,
Even though it's a great idea, I
would highly recommend that you
go start talking to school
boards because somewhere along
the line you might run into
people who don't want to do
this, um, I'm just letting you
know that make sure you start
talking to some school boards
about implementation and all of
that stuff cause they do tend to
get a little irritated when
things get passed without them
knowing, so.
say thank you.
OK, Representative,
I mean the lord again.
Thank you, madam, it's block. I
know, Lord, it's easy to say,
just say blurred and you'll be
fine. But thank you for bringing
the the bill forward. I
I love the idea. I support it
wholeheartedly.
But I do think that school
boards probably are gonna kick
back and at least my school
board, I love my school board
members. They're great people,
but whenever it comes to
trying to put something on a
statewide level for everybody.
It can be a little difficult
cause I mean, where I live, we
have like one public pool in the
entire area. And so I think it's
all dependent on just educating
and then also I know like the
local community.
Maybe, maybe even talking to the
cities because they have public
pools as well and maybe just
talking to them as well. And
then also, I don't have any
really streams or anything in my
district, but
I would definitely just try to
get the word out there too. So
thank you so much and I really
appreciate the bill. Thank you
so much.
