Locals are closed we have a
quorum.
Good morning members happy
Thursday.
Gentlelady.
Dries for today's implications
provided to us by Representative
gentleman Anthony Allison.
Thank you Mr I would like to
first for in my native language
and then translate into English.
Joe Biden it's in the he on the
dates are.
You can not only.
Where he had to cut by needs
and.
It's not that we need to leave
home plus and here's the house
on in the case the one that the
funding that she thought that
the public is strictly the link.
Is on a your call will be on
hold so he could table.
The card.
The hard rock hotel be cut
accrued losses because the in
the day Senator on the US side
hold us to adopt side.
The.
I should talk to you today I
don't with the.
With the.
On his is on it and then the
it's not the cutting the public
it's still out of the question
of the week and then the it's on
the costly and the public it's
just the the the thoughts of
lost so I.
To India on the can be sold out
of that money could.
Two questions that isn't from a
lot of extra time the end you'd
day.
What's is it was all the care
told us within each of us will.
Because it was all part of the
plot only to put the new day
which of the state question has
the because of the state because
honestly.
Are there have been the father
as we humbly areas before the
we're thankful for the many
blessings that has blessed us
with.
For the peace and safety that
has brought us together today.
We thank you for the moisture we
are receiving.
We ask for your continued
blessings as we continue to work
for our fellow man our
communities and our
constituents.
From all corners of our great
land of enchantment we came
together to plan for a better
New Mexico.
Different ideas and mindsets
bless your father to formulate
these ideas into one line one
plans to progress one New Mexico
one nation.
Father we just blessings upon
our families who we left behind
to allow our legislative
responsibilities.
S. R. health care workers as
they continue to be our
frontline defense against this
pandemic and other illnesses.
Just our public safety officers
first responders are men and
women in uniform that our
leadership locally and
nationally.
Let us go forth with beauty
before us to the behind us all
around this beauty beneath us
the above us in beauty it is
finished in beauty it is
finished in beauty it is
finished and beauty it is
finished we ask this through
Christ our lord Hey man.
Thank you gentlemen.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
And if the Likud leaders in the
pledge of allegiance.
The morning
Busy for all of you I'm sure I
want to ask a couple of things
and then go to members for an
announcements we do have flu
shots today from ten to two from
Blue Cross blue shield of New
Mexico on the east side of the
capitol building
there is also the
border industrial association
reception this evening at six PM
I love on the in that that also
rural this morning we had the
New Mexico counties legislative
breakfast who's agree breakfast
cream presentations and also
today it is senior day at the
legislature all day and I see a
lot of our folks appear in the
gallery welcome welcome to here
house of representatives we
appreciate you and we love you.
Are there announcements.
Thank you Mr speaker I don't
want to be a neck but the
sergeants told me after I made
the announcement about the
recycling that the papers ended
up the front part of your lower
right door is trash with the bag
behind it is paper recycling so
please recycle the paper thank
you.
Furnace.
Gentleman from some of our
representative on this.
Thank you Mr speaker she's not
even here but our freshman
representative review was named
a Albuquerque business first
woman of influence yesterday and
I would like to
To give her some credit for that
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John and graduations
furnace.
Gentleman from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I have some good news
to share with the body today Mr
speaker are we're so lucky we
have the best staff the most
dedicated individuals and they
bring with them a great wealth
of experience from their
personal lives in their
professional lives so I wanted
to recognize today our Senate
liaison and our leadership
assistant major office this
Veronica crop Nick she is going
to be recognized today by
performance Santa Fe as a Santa
Fe local hero for her work as an
advocate in the foster system
working to improve the well
being of children especially
indigenous children here in New
Mexico and across the country
she just sits on half a dozen
boards and committees and she
regularly travels to Washington
DC to speak about issues facing
children particularly our native
children so please help me and
celebrating Veronica Kramnik.
Thank you lady congradulations
of for instance.
Okay I have I have a few minutes
minutes members of.
I apologize in from Bernalillo
Mr speaker thank you as a little
bit late but I just want to make
an announcement well looks like
we have a full chamber there are
house Education Committee will
have our organizational meeting
at eight thirty on Monday
morning room three oh nine so
has education organizational
meeting
presentation from the
legislative education study
committee on Monday eight thirty
AM in room three oh nine thank
you Mr speaker I thank you as
organizational meeting at seven
AM tomorrow morning gentleman.
The lady from Los Alamos thank
you Mr speaker I also would like
to announce that your house
staff oops your status here he
can run one Juliet.
Your house Judiciary Committee
will be meeting on Monday at one
thirty or within half an hour of
the end of the floor session it
will be an organizational
meeting and we also have two
bills on to hear believe it or
not so will have a real agenda
thank you Mr speaker thank you
for the announcements the
gentleman from Cibola.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
labor veterans of military
affairs committee will meet this
afternoon about fifteen minutes
after the session I know it's is
one thirty on the calendar here
but we're going to go out and
legislative time of fifteen
minutes after we get off the
floor.
Thank you gentlemen already
provided time that was quick.
Divertissements gentlelady from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
the house health and Human
Services Committee got twenty
one bills yesterday so we're
gonna start at eight o'clock on
Monday with a very brief
organizational discussion and
then we're going to try and get
through ten bills so it rests
this weekend and be there at
eight o'clock thank you.
Thank you Julie for those
minutes gentle lady from
McKinley as a whole thank you Mr
speaker colleagues Indian
Affairs state government and
elections will meet on tomorrow
eight thirty AM room three oh
seven we will have an
organizational meeting and we
have seven yield to review for
Monday thank you thank you lady
wiser Senator on the floor of
the house.
Welcome center how to me.
Welcome to house the other
chamber.
Announcements.
Right and get a few
announcements I don't see
anybody else hand of so many go
members in consultation with the
minority we've got appointments
to make to the rules committee
as well as in rolling in and
grow seeing a and B..
I've been told I speak too fast
appear and sometimes webcast
doesn't even catch what I see.
Will be slow and.
Here all right the house rules
committee.
Representative Andrea Romero
chair.
Representative joined Garrett
vice chair.
Representative have you had
Martinez Representative Gail
Chasey Representative Rina
semansky Representative I want a
lot of Representative Elizabeth
Thompson.
Representative Derrick J. Lente.
Representative Wonda Johnson.
Representative Christine
Chandler.
Representative on this role
metal.
Representative Doreen guy it
goes.
Representative.
Ryan lane.
Representative Jason Harper.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Greg Nibert.
Representative Andrea Reba.
Representative James tells.
In rolling and grossing eight
chair representative Eleanor
Chavez.
Representative Janelle are non.
Representative Kathleen Cates.
Representative Joseph Sanchez.
Representative John block.
Representative mark Duncan.
And Representative Andrea reed.
In rolling grossing be.
Representative seen double eagle
chair.
Representative Gainey to go to
a.
Representative terra how to
meal.
Representative Charlotte
Liddell.
Representative Reno semansky.
Representative Allen McInnis.
Representative Jamie Mason.
Representative Tania Maria.
And Representative Fajardo in
Vincent's.
I'd also like to clarify for the
sake of council service
a statement they made yesterday
regarding a committee assignment
Representative John block which
we had a great table ready with
the minority but I didn't say
the magic words so here it goes.
Members I'd like to clarify a
committee announcement that I
made yesterday initiative and
set up this way Representative
John block be removed from House
labor veterans and military
affairs committee remain on is
to substantive committees house
government election in the
affairs and the house consumer
and public affairs committee.
A thumbs up that's good I see no
objection it is so ordered.
Any other announcements.
Members here is the play of the
day we're gonna start with some
introduction of legislation.
We don't foresee going tool long
into the afternoon
house bill one is in the Senate
and they're considering it on
the floor.
And our expectation is that it
will go through without
problems.
So with that in mind
Can see no further announcements
I will go to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order business introduction
of legislation to no objection
it is so ordered.
House Bill to this is the better
days by Representative small and
Dixon districts and act making
general appropriations and
authorizing expenditures by
state agencies required by law
House Bill to introduced by my
Representative a small and
Dixon.
House Bill to having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
The sweater.
House bill ninety nine
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and act relating
to the New Mexico school for the
arts providing for an annual
transfer from the excess
extraction taxes assistance fund
to the New Mexico school for the
arts dormitory Fund making an
appropriation house bill ninety
nine introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero.
House bill ninety nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the task house taxation and
revenue committee this house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one hundred
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero an act relating to
firearms requiring a fourteen
day waiting period before
completion of the sale of a
firearm House Bill number one
hundred introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero.
House bill one hundred.
The stress again house bill one
hundred
minutos Y. title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer public affairs
Committee sens House Judiciary
Committee and for the case we
don't know what house bill one
hundred is kids the house bill
that is sponsored by those who
will be hosting our hundred bill
party for the staff of the New
Mexico legislature we have high
expectations and hopes
Representative Romero.
It is so ordered.
House bill one oh one introduced
by Representative Andrea Romero
an act relating to firearms
prohibiting large capacity
magazines prohibiting assault
weapons providing penalties
house bill one hundred and one
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero house bill one one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one hundred and two
introduced by Representative
Lara.
An act relating to state
insurance benefits increasing
the employer share for employees
covered by the public school
Insurance Authority house bill
one oh to introduce by
Representative Lara.
House wanted to having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee and
the House labor veterans and
military affairs committee.
House bill one oh three
introduced by Representative
McQueen and act relating to
campaign practices amending the
campaign reporting act revising
this reporting schedule for
expenditures and contributions
standardizing the supplemental
reporting requirements for all
elections to include any
contribution or pledge for one
thousand dollars or more
requiring the reporting of
monetary contributions received
during the legislative session
fund raising provision period.
House bill one of three
introduced by Representative
McQueen.
House bill one three and
amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee vans
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill one oh four
introduced by representative
Allison and act making
appropriation to the Human
Services department to provide
clinical supervision for
behavioral health mental health
and counseling professionals
house bill one of for entities
by representative Allison house
bill one of four been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee vans
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Hey.
Of the staff house bill one oh
five introduced by
Representative Alcon.
An act relating to the railroad
safety requiring at least two
persons for the operation of a
railroad train or locomotive
that is used in the movement of
freight prescribing penalties
house bill one of five
introduced by Representative of
coffee house bill one of five
min read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee
thanks House Judiciary
Committee.
The
house of the house bill one oh
six introduced by Representative
Alcon thank you an act relating
depend public pensions
increasing the maximum amount of
the pension that a member is
permitted to earn pursuant to
the public employees retirement
act house bill one of six
entities by Representative
Alcon.
One of six seven minute read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee the
since the house Judiciary
Committee
House bill one oh seven
introduced by Representative
block an act repealing the
opportunity scholarship act
declaring an emergency house
bill one of seven introduced by
Representative block.
House bill one oh seven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
there is a house government
election in the first committee.
House bill one oh eight
introduced by Representative
block and act relating to public
schools allowing students in
schools that need improvement
interventions to transfer to
other public schools in the
school district house bill one
oh eight introduced by
Representative block house bill
one week having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one oh nine
introduced by Representative
block an act repealing the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act sections
forty one dash for a dash one
through forty one dash for a
dash thirteen in in just a
nineteen seventy eight.
Being laws two thousand twenty
one chapter one nineteen
sections one through thirteen
house bill one oh nine entities
by Representative block house
bill one oh nine having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee events House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one ten introduced by
Representative block.
And act relating to elections
requiring all voters present
identification before voting
providing for free
identification cards to be
issued by the motor vehicle
division of the taxation and
revenue department providing for
xerographic copies of the
voter's identification document
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the N. M. S. A.
nineteen seventy eight house
bill one ten entities by
Representative block house bill
one ten having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee presents the house
Judiciary Committee
House bill one eleven introduced
by Representative Herndon.
An act relating to public
education and acting the
Holocaust and genocide studies
act providing Holocaust and
genocide studies as electives
and certain grades house bill
one eleven introduced by
Representative funded.
House bill one eleven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer public
affairs committee this house
Education Committee.
House bill one twelve introduced
by Representative Herndon an act
relating to public schools
creating a pilot project to
demonstrate that the
availability of wellness rooms
for students in need of a
calming Environment to self
regulate emotional mental and
behavioral stress will have a
positive effect on student
resiliency student outcomes and
soon behavioral health making an
appropriation.
House bill one twelve entities
by Representative Herndon.
House bill one twelve minute
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house education committees and
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one thirteen
introduced by Representative
Chandler an act relating to
magistrate courts making the
magistrate court a court of
record revising magistrate
qualifications expanding
ministry Jr jurisdiction to
encompass the Jews judicial
district.
House bill one thirteen entities
for Representative Chandler.
House bill one thirteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
Indian Affairs Committee says
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill one fourteen
introduced by representatives
Kate's Herndon at the Roybal
Caballero and act making
appropriation to support
apprenticeship programs pursuant
to the apprenticeship assistant
packed house bill one fourteen
introduced by representatives K.
Herndon and we will call you at
all house bill one fourteen
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house commerce and
economic development committee
this house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one fifteen
introduced by representatives K.
and Ferrari and act relating to
licensure requiring the New
Mexico home inspector licensing
examination to be psychometric
please sound house bill one
fifteen introduce my
representatives Kate's and
Ferrari.
House bill one fifteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee since
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill one sixteen
introduced by representative
Sarinana and Martinez.
Correction Allen Martinez an act
relating to military affairs
authorizing the adjutant general
to employ active duty members of
the New Mexico National Guard as
state employees house bill one
sixteen introduced by
representative Sarinana and
representative Allen Martinez.
House bill one sixteen.
Been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veteran and
military affairs committee this
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one seventeen
introduced by representatives
Rehm neighbor to and Hochman
Vigil an act relating to
property interests providing
electronic signatures of
insureds on powers of attorney
on documents used to transfer
title to an insurance company
house bill one seventeen
introduced by representatives
redeem nine Burt and Hochman
Vigil house bill one seventeen
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee is House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one eighteen
introduced by Representative
lane Dixon set up though and
Hernandez an act relating to
economic development creating
the office of entrepreneurship
within the economic development
division of the economic
development to the filament
Department specifying duties
requiring reports making
appropriation house bill one
eighteen introduced by
representatives lane Dixon
Serrato and Fernandes.
House bill one eighteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee presents
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one nineteen
introduced by Representative
Chandler an act relating to
taxation amending income tax
brackets pursuant to the income
tax act house bill one nineteen
Representative introduced by
Representative Chandler.
House bill one nineteen having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one twenty introduced
by the Representative Chandler
relating to taxation an act
relating to taxation limiting
the capital gains deduction from
net income.
House bill one twenty introduced
by Representative Chandler house
bill one twenty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one twenty one
introduced by Representative
Chandler and headed up and act
relating to water clear fighting
the clarifying that a lease of
water under water right and
subsequent use of that water
shall not take effect until
after the application has been
approved in accordance with the
law making a technical cross
reference correction providing a
July first twenty twenty five
effective date house bill one
twenty one introduced by
representatives Chandler and
have that house bill one twenty
one have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house energy and
natural resources committee
presents House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill one twenty two
introduced by Representative
McQueen and Sarinana.
And act relating to radioactive
waste amending the radioactive
and hazardous materials act
prohibiting the storage and
disposal of radioactive
materials transuranic
contaminated waste or low level
waste in a disposal facility
until the state has consented to
the creation of the disposal
facility prohibiting the
issuance or certification of a
permit for the construction or
operation of its disposal
facility for spent fuel or high
level waste unless the state has
consented to the creation of the
disposal facility and a
permanent repository is in
operation amending the
definition of disposal facility
amending the duties and
composition of the radioactive
waste consultation task force
declaring an emergency.
House bill one twenty two
introduced by representatives
McQueen and Sarnia.
House bill one twenty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house energy and natural
resources committee hands House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one twenty three
introduced by representatives
Thompson Ferrary how to meal
Kate's and Chasey.
And act relating to taxation
increasing the rate of the
cigarette tax increasing the
rate of tax on tobacco products
thank you increase including
nicotine regardless of the
source and the definition of
tobacco product in the tobacco
products tax act.
House bill one two three
introduced by representatives
Thompson Ferrari how to meal
Kate's and Chasey.
House bill one twenty three
introduced by representative
Thompson
has been.
Is ordered president for to the
house health and Human Services
Committee this house taxation
and revenue committee.
House bill one twenty four
introduce the representatives
Ferrari Thompson you Kate's and
Chasey.
An act relating to taxation
increasing the rate of tax on
tobacco products including
nicotine regardless of source in
the definition of tobacco
products and tobacco products
tax act.
House bill one twenty four
introduced by representatives
Friday Thompson how to meal
Kate's and she's house bill one
twenty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee this house taxation
and revenue committee.
House bill one twenty five
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
An act relating to public
education creating a dual credit
task force providing duties
requiring a final report house
bill one twenty five entities
by Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
But if the house bill one twenty
five been read twice by title.
Is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education
Committee.
When we get to one twenty seven
discussion.
House bill one twenty six and it
is Representative G. Andrés
Romero and Representative Lane
an act relating to public
schools changing graduation
requirements for students
entering ninth grade and the two
thousand twenty four two
thousand twenty five yes school
year.
House bill one twenty six
introduced by representatives G.
Andrés Romero and Representative
lane.
House bill one twenty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house commerce and economic
development committee thence the
house Education Committee.
House bill one twenty seven
introduced by representatives
headed a Baca Madrid Sariñana
and to PO.
An act relating to school
personnel increasing the minimum
salary for educational
assistance house bill one twenty
seven introduced by
Representative Hetta Baca Madrid
Sarinana and Trujillo.
House bill one twenty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house commerce and
economic development committee
then how's Education Committee.
House bill one twenty eight
introduced by Representative
Lord and block.
An act relating to criminal
sentencing sentencing providing
for chemical castration as a
condition of parole for certain
sex offenders providing
penalties house bill one twenty
eight entities for
representatives lord and block.
House bill one twenty eight been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee things House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill one twenty nine
introduced by representatives
lord and Vincent an act relating
to children requiring the
children youth and families
department of developmental and
supervision and monitoring
procedures for the homes of
children taken into custody on
grounds of abuse or neglect
providing a three month minimum
monitoring period upon the
release of a child from custody.
House bill one twenty nine
introduced by representatives
lord and Vincent.
House bill one twenty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee vans House
Judiciary Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Leader Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business see no objection it is
so ordered.
The gentleman from.
Rio Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
Rio Rancho Santa Fe San Juan for
an announcement thank you Mr
speaker good afternoon good
afternoon members your house
taxation and revenue committee
will meet next Wednesday at
eight thirty in the morning for
organizational meeting next
Wednesday eight thirty
organizational meeting thank you
Mr speaker.
Is our breakfast provided
gentleman.
Mr speaker and members there
will we'll find out but they
will likely be not any breakfast
that sounds like a yes thank you
Mr chair.
Gentle lady from.
Because my daughter would say
the house.
Mr speaker that would be I would
be a time C. to you.
You heard that right.
Mr speaker your rules
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee will
have an organizational meeting
on Tuesday at nine AM.
Thank you ladies.
Another else with from the
generated from McKinley is a one
Mr speaker colleagues and the
Indian Affairs state government
and elections committee I've
already changed our committee
meeting time we are now going to
meet on Monday eight thirty A.
M. in room three oh five thank
you the lady enquiring minds
want to know if there's a
breakfast or lunch.
There may be coffee and
breakfast burritos I'm coming to
meeting gentle lady.
The gentleman from going on
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
your house appropriations and
finance committee will be
meeting at one thirty PM today
from three zero seven we'll be
hearing from Dr Stein house Mr
Salim Mister Liu in director
Gwen Perea Warniment con in
public schools thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you.
And more Canadian announcements.
Dinners lunches Brett please
report this in the house.
Hey.
We believe it might be the
members birthday saw we'll we're
going to confirm that and and
then sing Happy Birthday the
lady from million a.
Thank you Mr speaker I don't
have a birthday but I haven't
announcement that consumer
public affairs committee will
meet next Tuesday Mrs of like
ten minutes after we leave the
floor.
Thank you ladies.
Any other knowledge mints.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation
similar objection it is so
ordered.
House bill one thirty entities
Representative Garrett and and
G. Andrés Romero.
An act relating to public school
finance creating the K. to
twelve plus program providing
additional program units for
public schools an increase the
number of instructional days
beyond one hundred eighty days
for a five day school week in
more than one hundred fifty five
days for four day school week
defining instructional hours and
professional hours repealing the
case to five plus Act and
extended learning time program
units yes house bill one thirty
entities by Representative
Garrett and Representative G.
Andrés Romero house bill one
thirty having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee this is the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one thirty one
introduced by representatives
Thompson and Kate's and act
relating to health care coverage
enacting new sections of the
health care purchasing Act The
New Mexico insurance code to
require coverage for expenses
related to prosthetics and
custom orthotic devices
requiring reporting house bill
one thirty one entities by
representatives Thompson's and
K. house bill one thirty one
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee of this house
health and Human Services
Committee.
The system to.
It just.
Never.
What a leader Harper a member
thing I just told you.
Twenty two.
House bill one thirty two
introduced by representative
Thompson an act relating to
health coverage and acting
sections of the health care
purchasing Act The New Mexico
insurance code the health
maintenance organization law the
nonprofit health care plan law
and the pharmacy benefits
manager regulation Act to
provide cover persons with
parity of access and payment
between participating in mail
order pharmacies participating
community pharmacies house bill
one thirty two entities by
representative Thompson.
House bill one thirty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee events House
Judiciary Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
The lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we got in that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business see
no objection it is so ordered.
All right members here is the
play for the rest of that.
I've been informed that the
Senate has passed house bill one
without amendments.
We need to be in open session in
order to receive the message.
Send it to enroll in an
engrossing.
Adopt the committee report said
that up to the governor.
In conversations with the
minority leadership.
We agreed to recess subject to
the call of the chair.
However all of you can start
your weekend early because what
we'll do is the members of the
minority leadership and members
of major leadership convene at
some point over the next hour
and a half or two.
To adopt a commitment to to
receive a message to send the
bill to enroll in an engrossing
to adopt the committee report
said that up to the governor and
that's the only business that
will be conducted it's all
procedural it's a process that
allows us to receive what the
Senate did.
Approve it send it up to the
governor for her signature.
So that everyone can get paid.
Especially our hard working
staff sold imitate that disorder
but he's clear we will recess
subject to the call of the
chair.
Minority and majority leadership
reconvene at some point over the
next two hours to receive the
message from the Senate.
Implementing goals in committee
report and sent house bill one
to the governor so that she
sciences and our hard working
staff can get paid that is the
only business we're gonna
conduct.
Can you get to sorry we can
early especially also be driving
far away.
All right.
Gentlelady from all of those
counties thank you Mr speaker
I'd like to announce that the
committee on agriculture a
second and
water resources will be meeting
on next Tuesday morning at eight
thirty see you all there.
Members taking notes any other
housemates.
Senator thank you Mr speaker
just a short the small tens of
plan B. that we're going to
recess we would meet about ten
minutes after we reasons for
organizational meetings and
labor and that earnings so we
can be on the road in about
twenty minutes thank you Mr
speaker.
Representative
any other aspects.
All right to say no.
We will stand in recess subject
to the call of the chair members
of the majority in thanks use me
major leadership in minority
leadership don't go far go enjoy
some lunch but stay near and
will will communicate Senator
ready to start.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
