And Representative Duncan was
telling me this joke, and he was
really
Oh, the mic is on. My bad.
Oh
Oh.
This is supposed to be off.
Oh
Ray Latta did what?
Roll calls closed. We have a
corner room, please rise for
today's implication led by the
generalator from Santa Fe, San
Lujan.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
to start my prayer, I reflect on
words of Nelson Mandela.
Do not judge me by my successes.
Judge me by how many times I
fell down and got back up again.
Today I pray that we reflect
upon 3.
Resiliency each of us carries
inside our hearts.
The resiliency reflected in our
values.
And the resiliency in our faith,
hope.
and love for each other.
Lord, the sheer reflection of
your image lives in each one of
us.
Let us carry that image every
day.
As we engaged in the work before
us.
And never doubt the grace of
your presence.
Mm.
Well, the gentleman from Chavez,
Murphy, lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
And the gentleman from early San
Garcia lead us in the pledge in
New Mexico flag.
I lady from Santa Fe.
Good afternoon Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Good afternoon members.
General lady from Donana Notero
with the announcement.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, and body,
um, I wanted to welcome my
shadow today.
Lily Hauserman, who's also my
stepdaughter, uh, Lily is in an
8th grader at Mesa Valley
Leadership Academy in Las
Cruces, and Lily enjoys reading
mystery books, uh, and hanging
out with friends and this past
weekend, Lily competed in
Destination imagination, a
challenge experience where teams
develop solutions to project
project based steam challenges
and then present their solutions
live at tournaments. Uh, the
tournament took place.
uh at Arisco Heritage Academy
High School, where her team took
first place, uh, and now qualify
for the global tournament in
Kansas City. So Lily was also
accepted in the Arrowhead Park
Early College High School, also
in Las Cruces and will be
starting her freshman year there
in the fall, um, so can folks
welcome Lily Hausman. Welcome to
the house.
Announcements, the gentleman
from Gran Hidalgo and Catherine
Representative Terasas. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
I just wanted to, to introduce
my son. He's sitting on the
rostrum, uh, his name is Luis
Terrazas.
He's, uh, he came up to visit
he, you know, just like our
family members, Mr. Speaker,
that, that when we're gone and
we're up here for a couple
months they take care of
business while we're home, uh,
my wife and my son, so he came
up here and left his mom over
there taking care of business.
What do you think, Mr. Speaker?
Well, some, um, somebody's got
to take care of business.
But he's up here today and I
really appreciate it. He's 27
years old and he's got a nice
looking beard, Mr. Speaker. Oh,
come on, you, you stole my line.
I was gonna say that.
Anyway, he's up here and, and,
and visiting for the first time
because he's always working Mr.
Speaker, so thank you for
welcoming, uh, chamber. I
appreciate it very much to the
house.
Gentlemen from Bernalillo de la
Cruz, you have a special
celebratory announcement. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Today is uh.
uh county day in the roundhouse,
so it is a big day indeed for,
for everyone because counties
all 33 play a critical role to
our governor, to our government,
and we really couldn't exist
without them, Mr. Speaker. We
have some guests, uh, in the
gallery and one person's uh,
particular, could you please
recognize him? Yeah, we've got
any Hogland Curry County clerk
and New Mexico County's board
president, welcome to the house.
Please rise to be recognized. We
don't see you. There you are,
welcome.
Mr. Speaker, I just, I know we
can't read the certificate, but
there are two sentences that I
would like to read from specific
to this.
Certificate and it is this.
Whereas New Mexico County
strives to be inclusive of all
persons and authorities in the
counties and to utilize
resources and best provide
services and whereas New Mexico
counties is a statewide voice
working to advance effective,
efficient and responsive local
government, Mr. Speaker, I was a
career government employee. I
spent
About 30 years, not to mention
two terms as county commissioner
will remain a little longer than
that. And so I have a special,
uh.
notion of what counties do and
Mr. Speaker, and folks up in the
gallery.
Really we couldn't function
effectively as a society if we
did not have counties and our 33
counties are dedicated to doing
a wonderful job for our
citizenry every single day
because when we say counties
we're saying people there are
people that make up those
counties, not only the
residents, Mr. Speaker, but also
all of those hardworking,
wonderful county employees and
our wonderful county elected
officials, so Mr. Speaker,
please help me welcome our
counties to the house.
Welcome to the house, New Mexico
counties.
All 33 of them.
Any other announcements?
gentlemen from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I
want to rise as a gentleman from
Berne Leo spoke about, uh, we're
very fortunate to have uh
members of our county here
today. I'm especially pleased,
Mr. Speaker, that uh we have our
new county manager, uh, Scott
Andrews, who is the Donana
County manager, Doctor Andrews,
uh, started just this past
October. Please give him a round
of applause.
Welcome to the house.
He brings over 21 years of
experience in the public sector,
including roles in economic
development and uh municipal
modernization. Mr. Speaker body,
he, uh, grew up in Tampa and so
came west to dry out, um, a
first generation uh US citizen
and college graduate, he's held
leadership positions in areas as
varied from Bakersfield,
California to Coventing,
Georgia, uh, he has advanced
degrees in business, public
administration.
and organizational leadership
speak very well to the kind of
capacity we not only have in
Donana County, but the type of
talent that we have in our
attracting here in New Mexico,
uh, I also wanna recognize
Jonathan Macias. He is our
deputy county manager, uh, give
Mr. Mascias a big round of
applause, please.
Uh, he was born in Sunland Park,
has been with the county for the
last 4 years. I can say
personally during that time, his
leadership, uh, his vision, his
attention to detail have
advanced county projects and
That, uh, comes at a time where
we have a lot of opportunity to
partners. So thank you to both
uh deputy county manager Macias,
uh, and county manager Andrews,
thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. Welcome to the house.
One more round of applause.
Welcome to Santa Fe.
The gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
would like to rise in support of
our counties as uh my friend
from Bern Leo talked about, um,
this is really where the rubber
meets the road. These are the
folks that get interrupted at
ball games at meals, at movies,
um, when they've made a bad
vote, uh, or when their
constituents aren't happy with
them because their road isn't.
Fixed, um, and so, Mr. Speaker,
um, these are the folks that
take the brunt of what we do in
this body.
When we pass a good bill when we
pass the necessary bill and when
we pass a bill that impacts them
directly. I invited them this
morning as I was speaking to
them, I invited them to come and
introduce themselves and to
educate every one of us in this
chamber that has not been around
counties that hasn't had an
elected position besides this
one to tell us exactly what
those bills do to them, good or
bad.
And so I hope they do that. I
hope they educate this body and,
and, and the impact that we play
on their lives sometimes is
great and the impact we play on
their lives sometimes is
horrible and so please keep
doing the work you're doing and
come and educate us and uh keep,
keep doing the fight. Thank you.
Further announcements, uh, the
gentle lady from Bernal Leo and
Seneval, Representative Kates.
Uh thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you. I to rise and and
acknowledge um our great county
workers, um, I, uh, apologize,
Madam Speaker. I, I didn't know
that I would have individuals I
knew about in the, in the
gallery, but our county
commissioners, our county fire
chief, um, I have county
commissioner Kathy Brook or or
here in the people's house
today.
uh doing the good work and
making sure that um we are
keeping the details of the
county needs in mind and not
just making big broad policy but
understand how that day to day
operations is a fact and so I
too shout out to um our county
workers and our county
commissioners here in Sandoval
County. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
The gentle lady.
Thank you Representative Kate,
the gentle lady from Valencia,
Representative Moya Mirabel
Moya.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Um, I
just wanted a quick point of
personal privilege, please.
To your point.
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker, I
would like for uh just a uh
announce, um something pretty
exciting, um, so to, to the
body, so Blen Fire Department
Lieutenant, um, Chris Martinez
and his wife Janae have just
become the new adoptive parents
of one year old Michael who was
placed a year ago on February
6th in the Safe Haven baby box
in Berlin, so that this, this
little child has a loving home
and it goes to show you the.
baby box baby boxes around this
uh state they work and they save
lives. So thank you.
Gentlemen from Sandoval
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Um, I
rise today.
To bring attention to our
Medical care system.
Um
I want to share the story of a
hardworking man.
A rancher provider, someone who
contributed to his community.
To our broken health care system
failed him.
The story of the nurse.
Practitioner that helped him.
Last year I treated a
hardworking rancher who suffered
a foot injury.
Not sure if it was a puncture
wound or a fracture. I don't
recall exactly.
What I do remember is the
following.
Like many in New Mexico, he
struggled to find a primary care
provider.
He moved here 3 years ago and
waited.
Long, a long time.
And these long waits kept him
from establishing care.
You as soon he was healthy, so
he kept working until his injury
sent him to the ER.
That's when doctors found the
real issue.
An undiagnosed hypertension and
diabetes situation.
These silent conditions had
damaged his body for years.
With with proper care, they
could have been managed.
Despite months of IV
antibiotics, the infection
spread.
His poor circulation worsened by
untreated diabetes and it
prevented the healing.
We could not save his foot. He
ended up losing his leg, his
job, because of this, he fell
into depression.
This didn't have to happen.
Had he been able to see a doctor
sooner, his conditions could
have been controlled. His foot,
his livelihood.
His quality of life could have
been saved.
Madam Speaker, we have patience
and peril today.
is the cost of our provider
shortage. This is what happens
when access to care is delayed.
Not by days or weeks, but months
and years.
These people are out there
losing limbs. People are losing
their livelihoods.
People are suffering needlessly
because our system isn't built
to help them until it's too
late.
Primary care shortages are so
severe that many patients don't
see a provider until they land
up in the emergency room or
preventable conditions have
already taken their toll.
This is not health care. This is
a system in failure.
We must act. We must rebuild a
system where people don't lose
their limbs, their jobs.
Their hopes simply because they
couldn't get a doctor's
appointment.
The Mexicans deserve better.
They deserve access to timely
quality care.
Before it's too late.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
seeing no further announcements,
let's go to the uh.
The representative, the gentle
lady from Donana Sierra and
Socorro, Representative Dao.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I
too wanted to take a moment to
just thank the folks from my
district, Donana. I see that
they've left, but the whole
hardworking folks in Donana who
have to cover so many
unincorporated areas. It's great
to have partners that, uh,
recognize, uh, the, the needs
outside of the metropolitan
area, but also here today from
Sierra County if you guys would
stand, we have um Amy Whitehead.
Amy Whitehead is the
newly elected county clerk, I
think she served as deputy clerk
for 8 years. Um, she grew up in
there, uh, raised 3 kids there.
They have a business, very
supportive of the local
community and um it's just great
to have her here today, um, and
also Teresa Sepkovac.
Did I say it almost right? She,
she's native Alaskan from
Spokane, Washington, who's been,
uh, the deputy clerk for a
couple of years now, so it's so
happy to have you guys here
today. Thank you so much for
being here and all that you do.
And and from Sakura, we have our
finance clerk and the
procurement officer talked about
two important jobs. Natalie Pa.
She loves living in Socorro, um,
and she loves the people around
it, just how friendly everyone
is. And Vanessa uh Munoz, who is
the procurement officer. She
loves the hiking trails and the
peaceful place that we have and
loves the chili and proud to
serve the people of Socorro
County. I asked their manager if
I was going to say something
about them, what could I say?
And he said, make sure to, you
know, say how nice Natalie is
and how she's always bringing
smiles and his favorite.
his favorite thing about Vanessa
is that she brings donuts on
Friday. So, thank you guys so
much for being here.
We rostrum guests.
Remembers, any further
announcements?
Seeing none, let's go to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Madam
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 426 has had it under
consideration report with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 426 do pass and it referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen Y
Gallego's chair.
We are on the adoption of an.
adoption, Madam Speaker.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on.
House Bill 426 but a favorable
committee report on the
committee substitute.
Um, the house and house commerce
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill 426.
All those in favor please
signify by saying I.
All those opposed, nay.
OK, the committee report is
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committed
to him has been referred Senate
Bill 72 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted during
Yao's chair.
Madam Speaker, move adoption.
We are in a favorable committee
report for Senate Bill 72. All
those in favor say aye. All
those oppose nay.
The eyes have it. Committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to him has been referred Senate
Bill 92 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Waigai's chair. Madam
Speaker, move adoption. We are
in a favorable committee report
for Senate Bill 92. All those in
favor please signify by saying
I.
All those opposed, nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
Economic Development Committee
to him has been referred Senate
Tax Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 175 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Dorian
Waig Gallego's chair. Madam
Speaker, move adoption. We are
on a favorable committee report
for Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee.
sub Senate Bill 175. All those
in favor say aye.
All those oppose me.
The eyes have it. The committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to has been
referred House Bill 7 has had it
under consideration reports and
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
We are on a favorable committee
report.
Oh, adoption Madam Speaker, move
adoption.
We are on a favorable committee
report for House Bill 7.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All those post me.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 21 has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan Sma chair.
Madam Speaker, move adoption.
We are on a, we are on adoption
of a favorable committee report,
House Bill 21. All those in
favor please signify by saying
I.
All those opposed nay?
The eyes have it committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 219 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair.
Madam Speaker, move adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 219, all those in
favor, please signify by saying
I.
All those opposed, nay.
The eyes have it the committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to him has
been referred House Bill 336 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Madam Speaker, with adoption.
We are on a favorable committee
report for House Bill 336. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
All those opposed, nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 444.
Has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 444 do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Madam Speaker, move
adoption.
We are on an unfavorable
committee report for House
government elections and Indian
affairs substitute House Bill
444, but a favorable committee
report for house appropriations
Finance Committee substitute for
house.
Government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 444.
All those in favor say aye.
All those, uh, posts, ne?
The eyes have it. The committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 78 has had it under
consideration in reports and
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but that a House
Judiciary can be substitute for
House Bill.
For House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 78 do
pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Um, Madam Speaker, move
adoption.
We are on an unfavorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
House Bill 78, but a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Substitute for House
Judiciary Substitute House Bill
78, all those in favor signify
by saying I.
All those opposed nay.
The ayes have it. The committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee's
substitute for House Bill 112.
Has had it under consideration
report some recommendation that
it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Miss Madam Speaker, move
adoption.
We're on the adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Commerce Economic
Development Committee substitute
House Bill 112. All those in
favor, please signify by saying
I.
I suppose nay.
None is the uh committee report
is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
house, consumer and Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 125 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Madam Speaker,
move adoption.
We are on
The adoption of a favorable
committee report for House
commerce. I'm sorry, house,
consumer and public affairs
substitute House Bill 125. All
those in favor, please signify
by saying I.
All those opposed, nay.
The ayes have it. The committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 131 has had it under
consideration. Reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 131 due pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Madam Speaker, move
adoption.
We are on the um adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House Bill 131, but a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 131. All those in
favor please signify by saying
I.
All those opposed, nay.
The I have at the committee
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 197 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendations that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Madam Speaker, move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 197. All those in
favor, please signify by saying
I.
All those supposed nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee's
substitute for House Bill 346.
Has had it under consideration,
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Madam Speaker, move
adoption.
We are on the adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Commerce Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 346. All those in
favor please signify by saying
I.
All those oppose nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 431 has had it under
consideration report and with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler. Madam Speaker,
adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 431. All those in
favor please signify by saying
I.
All those opposed, nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment and natural
resources Committee to has been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 21.
Has had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
We are on the adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute Senate Bill 21. All
those who are in favor say aye.
All those opposed, nay.
The committee report is adopted.
I
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
Resources Committee to him has
been referred Senate Joint
Memorial One as amended, has had
it under consideration reports
and with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair of
adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Joint Memorial One. All
those in favor please signify by
saying I.
All those opposed, nay.
The committee report is adopted.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Seeing no objection, it is so
ordered.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Joint Resolution
15 as amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Mohan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
Seeing no objections, it is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready on item 39?
Yes, Madam Speaker, will you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing a
house bill for 554 twice amended
on final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. This
is an effort to help us
understand where we need to
build in commercial areas and
allowing ADUs and with that, I
stand for questions. Seeing no
further debate, gentle lady to
close.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker. I
now move the House Bill 554 is
twice amended, do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 554 twice amended. The vote
is now open.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of.
50 in the affirmative and 10 in
the negative. House Bill 554,
twice amended has duly passed
the House.
Gentle lady from Bernalio.
Are you ready on
the supplement. Are you ready on
supplemental calendar item
number 3.
Uh, yes, Madam Speaker, will you
get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 457 twice amended on
final passage has now been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. Gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. House
Bill 457 clarifies the legal and
regulatory framework needed to
support New Mexico's effort to
seek primacy for Class 6 carbon
dioxide storage wells.
I'm joined by my experts, uh,
Doctor Robert Balch from New
Mexico Tech, who is an expert in
underground injection wells and
carbon storage and deputy
secretary Ben Shelton from
Energy Minerals and Natural
Resources.
Madam Speaker, today permitting
for class 6 wells is done by the
federal
federal EPA. However, states can
apply for primacy.
Currently 4 states have received
primacy 9 more have submitted
applications and another 23 as
well as the Navajo Nation.
have stated their intent to
pursue primacy.
Primacy allows us the
legislature to put in place
stricter state-led guidelines.
And it allows M nerd, our state
agency to administer, monitor,
and regulate this process rather
than leaving it to the federal
EPA in Washington DC or Dallas,
Texas.
Class 6 wells are already
subject to strict rules and
regulations, including site
evaluations that include
geologic capacity, porosity,
permeability, and natural
geographic barriers, financial
assurances approved monitoring,
reporting, and verification
procedures, emergency response
plans and protections for public
health and underground sources
of drinking water.
Madam Speaker, House Bill 457 is
a bipartisan bicameral piece of
legislation that provides
legislative guidance.
To our state agency that
provides additional requirements
on top of, in addition to what
is already required, including
tribal consultation, community
engagement and community benefit
plans. Madam Speaker, I will
stand for questions.
There is debate that gentleman
from Bernelio Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, uh the uh speaker.
What the gentle lady from Berna
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to, uh, the gentleman
from Bernna Leo.
Thank you, uh,
Um
You know, as to my speaker, I'm
I'm very concerned about this
legislation.
Um
I've done some research on this
matter for some years now.
Especially what kind of brought
that to light in terms of my
own.
Personal conviction to
researching.
This, uh, issue of carbon
sequestration, carbon capture.
I was when we were.
I
Uh,
Speaker was when we were
Trying to do
Uh
um
The hydrogen initiative.
Uh, in our state some years
back.
And uh
Madam Chair, um,
Generally from Bernardino, um.
Are you familiar with some of
these initiatives that have been
going
our country
Uh, that have proven.
Uh
that are proven carbon capture.
To be uh not a viable.
Uh, alternative.
Uh, a viable.
Um
Process in terms of
What you're trying to accomplish
with the legislation.
Uh, manager, which is
kind of
Dealing head on with the whole
issue of
Climate change and in this
particular case, uh,
The release of carbon into our
atmosphere.
Uh, are you familiar with some
of the
Cases that have.
Proving this technology.
be unworthy
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. In fact, I think
research shows quite the
contrary. Um, we have been
storing carbon dioxide in the
North Sea for over 50 years,
very successfully. Um, there are
over 100 wells.
Carbon dioxide wells in the
United States, um, oil and gas
has actually been securing CO2
by using um enhanced oil
recovery for the past decades,
So this is proven technology,
uh, it is.
Uh, it is well underway, and it
is a necessary component for
fighting climate change and
limiting global warming to 1.5
°C. We cannot, uh, achieve that
without carbon capture, and I'd
like to elaborate that carbon
capture and storage is not just
related to fossil fuel
industries. We know that the
world has exceeded our.
Carbon dioxide allocation, so
there is already too much CO2 in
the atmosphere. If we were to
stop doing everything today, we
would still have to remove
carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. The only effective
way to do that is through direct
air capture and carbon capture,
point source carbon capture. And
so in order to do that, we need
carbon storage and this bill
allows New Mexico to put
additional rules and.
regulations on that procedure.
OK, thank you, uh.
Um
Speaker, a gentle lady from
Bernalio.
Um
I contend the
The opposite as the speaker.
Uh
In 2009 under the American
Recovery.
And reinvestment Act.
3.4 billion.
For a carbon capture projects.
Um
was doled out
And
1 billion of that went unspent.
Estima
Speaker
And out of those 11 large scale
projects.
Uh, only 2 remained.
And some of these uh projects.
The speaker John from Berna Leo.
was the
Basin electric, these are all
the United States, Mr. Speaker.
The basin electric.
And Valley Project.
The American Electric.
Power on your project in West
Virginia.
As the my speaker 16 million.
was granted by the.
The only
That was essentially wasted.
The DOE was willing to shoulder.
$668 million for this project.
But the American taxpayers in
West Virginia.
Failed to put in the one half
match.
That project was a failure.
Mr. Speaker from Berne.
The future Gen 20.
our plant and future im 2.0
pipeline.
200 million was wasted.
Under that project
The project was canceled.
The last speaker.
The Southern company services.
Plant berry
Billy offered one half of 665
million.
For a project
But Southern
bailed out
For inability to do financial
due diligence on the project.
That's the my speaker.
Summit Texas Clean Energy.
DOE contributed 118 million.
But then sought to collect that
amount when summit.
Failed to fulfill its
guarantees.
That's the speaker.
Leukemia, Lake Charles.
$13 million from the DOE.
And uh, as to my speaker.
Before the project was canceled
in 2015.
And by 2022, this project was
Non-existent.
uh speaker from.
Southern company.
Kemper, Mississippi.
Awarded 700 million in federal
grants.
And
Federal credits
By 2015.
The project budget had
ballooned.
From 1.8 billion to 6.2 billion.
that went down the Mall of
flames.
the speaker.
Archer Daniels Midland.
We can ethanol, carbon capture
project.
The air products project.
The my speaker.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo.
What do these case studies.
Dallas
They tell us estimate bigger the
carbon capture.
Cannot be the centerpiece of any
serious climate plan.
And as the my speaker.
Or how carbon capture handouts.
Do nothing
To grow greenhouse gasses.
But actually enhance.
The extraction.
As the speaker.
My apologies, Representative but
to interrupt, uh, there's been a
request for people to remove
their jackets, and it is so
ordered.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor.
Thank you, Mr. Madam Speaker.
Do the um
I just want to sum up
Some of the
Keep going.
About, about carbon
sequestration failures, still
not a speaker generally from.
In the oil and gas industry.
For one is the Madam Speaker.
There's been technical
challenges.
Carbon capture technology, it
struggles.
To efficiently separate.
CO2
From other flu gasses.
So what is this? What does that
have to do?
With this process, well,
basically,
It, it leads to significant
emissions leakage.
And
Faulty capture rates.
Mr. Speaker.
Secondly, Madam Speaker John
from Ber Leo.
The storage concerns.
Once the CO2 is captured as to
on speaker.
Finding suitable underground
storage sites with minimal
storage leakage is difficult to
find.
Mr. Speaker.
And then the real kicker.
Uh
Mr. Speaker.
Is this enhanced oil recovery.
You
A significant portion of uh
Captured CO2.
It's often used for enhanced oil
recovery.
Which increases oil production.
When he, but, uh.
Negates the climate benefits of
carbon sequestration.
So if our objective assimma
speaker John from Broil.
is to capture the carbon.
From causing environmental
Devastations
A a portion, a part of Carbon
sequestration is also utilizing
CO2 for enhanced oil recovery,
more oil production.
speaker.
And lastly, project failures.
In the case studies that I
mentioned this to my speaker, in
other cases.
We see that many large scale.
Carbon capture projects.
I failed to meet
They're intended goals.
The sunbeam, with some projects
being abandoned due to.
Technical issues and.
cost
Overruns is the speaker.
So gentle lady from Brindley.
You know, I conclude that.
Hm
The carbon capture.
is a controversial climate.
Solution
With the history of poor
implementation.
I speaker.
And I heard the body
kindly vote against this
legislation. Thank you, Estiar
speaker.
lady from Berlin.
Thank you. There's debate. The
gentleman from Chavez.
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Um,
well, the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes,
so, uh, yield to the gentleman
from Chavez County. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Um, there seems
to be a number of misconceptions
um about uh where this uh CO2
will be stored and I note that
in your, um, legislation and
some of the briefing materials
you talk about poor space and um
poor space, um, I think might be
in the scientific community
referred to as porosity. I, I
assume that we're talking about
the same thing.
Is that correct, Madam Speaker,
and, uh, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
you are correct.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, I also note
that um poor space can be
thought of in many ways, um, and
exists in many forms. It can be
very, very small, um, almost at
the microscopic level, um, maybe
the head of a pen or even
smaller. It can also be, uh, uh,
due to, uh, fracturings, uh,
perhaps in a, in a hard
carbonate reservoir. So would
you agree that it exists in many
forms and uh and, and many
reservoirs.
Thank you,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes, that is correct.
So I take it, um, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady that
you're looking for reservoirs
that have adequate po space, um,
to store this material, the CO2,
and, uh, those reservoirs from
my understanding and experience
or what we would call sealed or
contained reservoirs. Would you
agree with that statement?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that is correct. And we know
that, uh, Madam Speaker, uh,
general, uh, lady, we know that
these reservoirs are, are
contained because we know they,
they contain things, things like
in some cases naturally
occurring CO2. In other cases,
uh, natural gas, oil, water, and
other gasses, uh helium, for
example, and were they not
contained, these elements would
not be in those reservoirs,
correct? They would have, have
percolated up through the earth
and into the atmosphere. Is that
fair?
presentation, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, yes, I think that
is a fair representation.
Thank you Madam Speaker and, and
gentle lady from uh Born Leo,
um, so we've now established
these are sealed contained
reservoirs that do contain space
within them.
And so I would presume that you
have to have enough vertical,
um, thickness to those
reservoirs and enough horizontal
extent to those reservoirs to
make storage economically and
mechanically feasible, um,
otherwise you couldn't store
enough material to make a
difference. Is that a reasonable
assumption?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
uh, that is a reasonable
assumption.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I also would like
to note that, um, there's been,
um, a long history of debate
about who owns that port space.
Um, my understanding of, uh, of
lis is that when you talk about
real property, you typically
talk about either real estate,
meaning typically the surface
and near surface and in other
cases you're talking about
mineral estate, um, be it gold
or silver or oil or gas or
helium or whatever the case may
be. So, uh, can you talk a
little bit about
Um, uh,
coming to the conclusion that
poor space is actually attached
to the surface and, and, and,
and how you got to that point
and why that makes sense. If you
could help me with that.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, that determination was
really the result of case law
here in New Mexico, um, and so
you're right that in this bill
and House Bill 457, we are
defining poor space, uh, poor
space ownership is separate from
the mineral estate resides with
the surface owner and maybe
severed from the surface estate,
um, and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, this is consistent
with a number of stakeholder
discussions.
That we had uh with landowners
with different operators, um,
and so this is, um, a definition
that we are very comfortable
with.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
from Bernal Leo, um, I've been
on the periphery of those
debates over the years, um, and
note that, um, there is a lot of
uh of uh legal uh input into
this because it does create a
new property right, but it also
seems to be one that all of the
stakeholders, uh, have come into
agreement on and are comfortable
with, um, is that a fair
statement?
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Yes.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady from Bernal Leo. I'd
also note that, um, in the bill,
you establish, or you maybe not
established, you, um, you build
upon long history of existing
and administrative law. These
are principles that have been,
uh, well litigated, um, and as
they certainly through the
administration process, um, be
an OCD, uh, and other
administrative authorities and
This is not going to be new to
them, I suspect.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
that is correct. This is not new
and is my um expert, uh, kindly
shared with me, uh, we
frequently refer to case law as
the American rule. So these are
very well established uh
concepts.
Uh, the other thing I know in
particular is, is that you set a
fairly high, Madam Speaker,
excuse me, and, and, uh, gentle
lady from Bern Leo, you, uh, you
set a pretty high standard for
um people um participating in
this, um, I know through um
areas in the oil and gas
industry when you put together
and what you would call in this
case, a sequestration project,
uh, what in my industry might
call a unit, um, and I think
there's they're similar. You
allow
um, people to voluntarily, um,
participate, and he set a very
high level uh for what would be
called force unitization, forced
communication, you can use force
utilization is probably the
right word. Can you talk about
that a little bit, the
difference between, uh, the
standard that's that we're sort
of used to and the standard that
you've set.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Thanks for
bringing that up. That's
actually, this is another reason
why it's really important that
New Mexico have control over
this process, uh, that New
Mexico rather than the EPA be in
charge of the rules and
regulations for this in this
legislation, what we're
proposing and, and remember this
proposal provides a legal
framework, a statutory framework
for the executive agencies.
as they go through this process,
so we are telling our energy,
minerals natural resources
department, what we as a body
want them to adhere to. And so
in response to your question, I
would say there are 3 things
that I'd like to highlight that
this bill does that I think is
different than oil and gas or
even different from how other
states and the federal
government might view this
number one, you mentioned
unitization so this.
bill does call for a very high
percentage, uh, 85%, and that is
higher than any other state that
has primacy that is, that means
that we are committed to
ensuring that the community is
engaged in this process. The
other thing that is different,
uh, Madam Speaker, and gentlemen
is under this scenario,
everybody who's who is a surface
owner, poor space owner.
compensated equally. There's no
different amount if you said yes
first or didn't say yes.
Everybody in this scenario
receives the very same benefit
that's something that we get to
determine by put by giving New
Mexico primacy over this
process. So thank you for asking
that question.
Thank you Madam Speaker gentle
lady from uh Bernal Leo, um, you
noted the financial benefits,
um, which will, um, due to the
poor space being owned by the
surface owner will will inure to
the benefit of the surface
owner, um, but you also have uh
some other financial benefits in
here as well if I recall. Can
you talk about um the tax
credits in the relation to the
federal tax credits and, and how
that might work.
Um, thank you, Mr. uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, the tax
credits, I think that you're
referring to the 45Q, those are
federal tax credits, so, uh, we,
we do not administer or, and
those don't aren't part of this
legislation. I'm, I'm sorry, I
misread my notes here, um, won't
we talk a little bit? You talked
about, about, well, before I go
into primacy, why don't you talk
about imminent domain a little
bit, and I know that was a
concern, but it appears from,
um, the, uh, my reading of the
Bill is that it does not expand
in eminent domain, excuse me,
uh, Madam Speaker and, and
gentle lady from Bern Leo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So to be clear,
um, in this bill right now,
there is um eminent domain is
not a part of this bill. So it
is not um something uh that I
think folks would need to worry
about.
Thank you. That was my reading
as well and I appreciate that
confirmation, um, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady from, um, from
Bernal Leo, um, so the, the, the
other thing that that I'd like
to get into a little bit and you
touched upon, I think in your
presentation, is the long
history of uh CO2 sequestration
throughout the world. Now,
obviously the activities here in
New Mexico, uh, will, will
benefit New Mexico, but they'll
benefit, um, society as a whole
and mankind as a whole, so.
Um, if you could speak a little
bit, you mentioned the North
Sea, you mentioned, I think 100
and something wells that had
been done, so, um, would you
agree that the sort of the
technology, the mechanics, the
physical processes, the
materials, all of these are well
understood and, and, and, and
well documented um processes and
uh and and materials.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
absolutely would. Um, this is
not new technology. This is
technology that in some cases
was developed and refined here
at our national laboratories,
um, companies in other countries
have been using this for 60
years, um.
So EOR, so enhanced oil
recovery, which, which we've
talked about has been in play
for over 60 years. And I do want
to clarify that this bill
doesn't actually affect enhanced
oil recovery. That is not a part
of this bill. So for those folks
that think that, um, by grant
getting classics primacy, we
would be, uh, supporting, uh,
the oil and gas industry by um
supporting EOR. That is not the
case, um, just to be clear.
Um, I believe that those are
class 2 wells. Uh, so for
clarification, um, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, um, in the North
Sea, yes, um, carbon dioxide has
been sequestered, uh, for
decades, and um here in New
Mexico, we also um have primacy
over, uh, is that class one?
Could
Class 2 wells.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and,
and gentle lady from Berna Leo,
um, I note that, uh, your expert
witness, so one of them is
Doctor Baltz from Mexico Tech.
Man, I'm very familiar with. Um,
one of the things that, uh,
Mexico Tech and, and all of our
research facilities here in the
state have been uh very well
known for are the development of
new technologies and as well
established as as this
technology is, um, but with the
amount of money going into it in
the, um, the focus of the
scientific and regulatory
community on it. I can see that,
uh, some new exciting things
could come out of this and um
I'm sure that's been some part
of the technical, uh, discussion
and, um, I'm wondering if you
see that same sort of
opportunity.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
absolutely. Uh, not only is New
Mexico one of the leaders um in
this technology, uh, for
instance, there was a, there's a
great company that recently
announced a spinoff from Los
Alamos that had received, uh.
100, well, millions of dollars
for their direct air capture
technology that will be pulling
CO2 directly out of the air. Um,
so we have the research going on
in the state. We have the
expertise from our history of
having a workforce that is
engaged in oil and gas because
those are very transferable
skills and additionally, these
jobs across the state in rural
communities.
uh,
are what they're very high
paying trades, skilled jobs.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady from uh Bern Leo,
um, I'd like to talk about and,
and I don't mean to re-plow
ground, but I'd like to talk
about the importance of primacy.
And uh why it's important to get
that into the state, um,
I, I would think there's,
there's sort of two compelling
reasons and see, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, if you agree
with me. One is, um, that it is
always better to have local
control. I think as a, as a, as
a principle, this, this body,
uh, um, if they don't always it
certainly endorse that concept
and, um, so would you agree that
having primacy, uh, 2000 miles
away is certainly not as good as
having primacy, uh, right here
in our own state.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
would 100% agree with that, and
we had a, a fascinating
discussion this morning, um,
in-hoy, uh, you were, were with
me where we discussed primacy
over some of the water issues.
And yes, New Mexico is a very
different state, uh, then let's
say Texas or Washington DC, um,
we have unique needs. We have
different communities and by
having primacy we are able to
make sure that the rules and
regulations support those.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
General A, I'm just about ready,
uh, to finish here, but I want
to expand on that primacy a
little bit and see by having
primacy here in the state and
you mentioned um the differences
in the areas. Um, I would
suspect, um,
that there are a number of known
reservoirs in this state that,
uh, would lend themselves to
this, um, not having dug into
those a lot, I would think that
a lot of those would be in the
northwest part of the
And, um, might benefit, uh, that
area tremendously from this
economic development activity.
Is that a reasonable assumption?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
that is a reasonable assumption.
I would also like to note that,
uh, Bravo Dome, uh, which was a
natural, uh, CO2 reservoir was
actually in the northeast part
of the state, um, and so the
Northeast part, uh, rural
communities, a lot of great
ranching, uh, and farming those
communities would benefit as
well.
Madam Speaker, generally, that's
an excellent, uh, that's an
excellent point. Bravo Dome is a
world-class natural CO2
reservoir, um, in the, in the
northeast part of the state. And
the last thing, um, related to.
Um, primacy is and this may just
be obvious to all, but I'd like
you to talk about a little bit
is it enables us to cut to sort
of tailor, um, things to
whichever part of the state that
we're working in, and I'll
conclude with that question.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
um, primacy allows New Mexico to
put in additional features like
ensuring tribal consultation
ensuring community engagement,
working with oil and gas
operators in the southeast part
of the state, yes. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
from uh Berna Leo.
There is further debate, uh,
gentle lady from Donana County,
a representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Madam Speaker, and will the
gentle lady from uh Burnley O
Yield.
Madam Speaker, yes, I will yield
to the gentle lady from Donana.
Thank you. Um, I, my concerns
are that even though we are
going to have new technologies
and to um do.
Ways to um have carbon
sequestration and um remove
emissions that really we can't
keep up with everything that is,
you know, uh, needing to be
stopped.
So,
Um, my concern is that um.
Like the um plant enchant that
was to build carbon capture and
sequestration in the San Juan
generating um station. Well, the
company convinced the city of
Farmington to invest in that and
but they couldn't prove the
technology and the economic
feasibility.
So with that they um ended up
closing the plant and because it
was just too expensive to run.
So if we're going to do this and
I know chant is pushing Navajo
Nation, um, enterprise entity
called ETech to attempt to
install um technology at the
Four Corners area, will that
make it so that.
They will be able to continue
with the emissions just because
they're going to have this um
way to um sequester the
emissions and not really reduced
by going ahead and closing that
plant.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. um,
thank you for asking that
question. I know that's a, a
concern for a number of people,
um, and so I wanna be clear that
there are two ways that we
capture carbon primarily direct
air capture, which as I
mentioned, is the air flowing
through filters where we capture
the carbon out of the air and
then point source carbon capture
which um, for instance, would be
on top of a smokestack. Um,
Additionally, the um the
issue within chant, um, I don't
want to get too far into that
because that's actually really
not what this bill is about, um,
but just as a point of
reference, my expert, um, tells
me that it wasn't a technical
problem. It was an investor
problem and that the four
corners um is on Navajo Nation
and so that would be dealt with
by the Navajo Nation, so we
don't have control over that.
That would be, um, on their
sovereign land. Um, but Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
The reason that we need carbon
storage.
Is because.
Based on all international
estimates, carbon capture is
gonna be 15%.
Of how we get to net zero in
2050. So that includes changing
our behaviors, um, reducing our
reliance on oil and gas, so out
of that 100%, 15% of that is
carbon storage, and here in the
United States alone, 30%.
So in the United States, 30% of
our greenhouse gas emissions are
industrial. They're from
industrial sources and Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, when I say
industrial sources, those are
things that aren't gonna change
overnight. That's our cement.
That's glass, that's steel, it's
paper manufacturing. It's food
and beverages. That's 30% of our
global greenhouse gas emissions
and so right now the only way
that we
can reduce those emissions is
with carbon carbon storage
either point source or direct
air capture, and as I mentioned,
uh, experts agree that there is
no way that we can reach that
1.5 degrees without utilizing
carbon storage.
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I'm not sure that
that really answers what I was
trying to get at. I'm concerned
that by having this, which I
agree with new technologies and
things like that, but also that
it might be um giving permission
for certain plants not to close
and um to continue um with their
uh carbon emissions, so, um,
thank you, Madam Chair. I mean,
Madam Speaker.
and Representative.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Lee County,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, does
the gentle lady from Mary.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, uh, yes, I will yield to
the, um, gentleman from Lee
County.
Thank you very much.
I found this an interesting bill
and uh
I actually learned about this
bill sitting uh behind you,
waiting to present my bill.
In-house energy. So.
I listened through this.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
if you could please.
In, in your introduction, you
talked about class 6 wealths.
Can you define what a
classicswell is and other wells
and how they all relate.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So a
classic swell is an underground
injection controlled well, uh,
for carbon dioxide storage.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
can you tell me what a class 2
well is.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, a class too
well, um, is similar, but for
industrial waste, uh, injection,
uh, or enhanced oil recovery.
Also, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, much lower
regulations.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady. I asked
some of these questions to be
able to make sure everybody
understands the definition and
and what you're doing, so.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
did y'all have the interim
committee meetings over the
summer that brought this up and
can you give me um kind of the
storyline that got you to House
Bill 457.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So, you
know, for this story, we
actually would need to begin
about a decade ago, uh, with
your colleagues represented, uh,
from the, uh, many counties of
Colfax, Curry Harding Quay, uh,
San Miguel and Union, uh, who
carried one of the very first
bills almost a decade ago, um.
This this bill, uh, is, I would
say a result of a lot of
conversations during the
interim, in fact, um, our
experts were in Farmington for
rural and economic development
and Ruidoso for, uh, water and
natural resources and.
So those were opportunities to
discuss with different
communities as well as for um us
to get feedback from different
groups that would have um a
stake in this. For instance, um,
some oil and gas, um,
associations are labor unions,
um, our cattle growers, all of
those folks have different
perspectives and so we have been
able to incorporate that
feedback.
Thank you for that, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. So if
We're in a high industrial zone
that has an industrial zone that
has a significant amount of CO2
emissions.
How would somebody go about
building a class 6 well.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
right now, um, if you wanted to
build a classic, well, you would
need to apply to the EPA, um,
remember they're in Dallas or
Washington DC, um, and probably
would take 3 to 5 years.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
so we go through that 3 to 5
year long process. How do we
drill one out? How do we
determine?
Where is the best place is to
drill that, that it's got the
proper shell above the top to
ensure that we don't have any,
any fractures that allow the CO2
to come back out. How do we
determine that?
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So there
is extensive uh research done
before, um, anything is actually
before that well is drilled. Um,
as I mentioned, uh, in my
opening remarks, um, some of the
things that have to happen are,
uh, you have to look at the
geologic capacity, the porosity
of the rock, permeability and
other natural geographic
barriers, so you've got to do,
you know, study the, um, the
area that you're looking at, and
then
there is also an extensive
monitoring process once you
begin.
Thank you
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
so
What would be an approximate
depth of of this well.
And I understand that would
change by the geo object um
The stratas inside there we 1
mile deep, or we 2 miles deep?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So over 1 mile
up to 3 miles.
Thank you very much, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady. So as
we would inject
CO2
Um, very much like other
monitoring.
Say we filled it up, we think
that we're at a capacity level
where we need to, to cap this,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
can you talk a little bit about
how the monitoring process would
go.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Thanks for
allowing me the time to visit
with my expert here, um, who has
been, uh, working on a number of
classic swells, uh, here in New
Mexico for, for a number of
years, uh, so the monitoring,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, starts before the well
begins while the operator is
injecting carbon dioxide and
after, so 50 years after, uh,
there's continuous monitoring.
And in addition, there was one
other thing that I wanted to add
and let's see.
So, um, when do you know that,
uh, you're almost at capacity.
Um, and that's through
monitoring the pressure.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and
Of
this with your experts, um,
How many of these capture wells
do we have in New Mexico right
now?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. So right now we
have 2 class 2 wells that are
designed exactly like class 6
wells.
For acid gas disposal.
Thank you. So I appreciate that
answer as well.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna move along
a little bit to the importance
of this bill.
In my opinion,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we are 20 years away from.
Uh, New Mexico's.
Version of carbon-free 2045.
Would you agree with that?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes, uh, I believe that our goal
is 2045 and it is currently
2025, uh, so that is 20 years.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and
I may be off on the percentages,
but we're somewhere the energy
we provide.
In New Mexico from non-oil and
gas related.
Uh, power
is about 9% right now, would you
agree? in New Mexico.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
could you, could you, uh,
rephrase the question.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
I'd be happy to let me change
that with respect to say, solar,
that provides about 9% of the
energy we have today in New
Mexico. Would you agree with
that?
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
actually do not know, uh, the
exact answer to that question.
Um, if we want to do a
hypothetical, uh, continue on.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
With respect to this, to, to
look at the different things
that, that we're looking at
specifically.
From an alternate
So
Um, power source we have at our
fingertips right now in some
version of, of, of um design and
capacity and capability we have
solar, we have wind turbines.
We are bio
And I can be a biofuel biomass
type thing and we have
geothermal and we're working on
different aspects of geothermal.
Would you agree with that?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
So, Madam Speaker, and, and
gentle lady, do you know what it
takes?
To how much, what temperature it
takes to, to build a windmill
arm.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I do
not know exactly, but I am
guessing it's over 11,000
degrees Celsius.
Madam Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, I'm an American, so, uh,
Fahrenheit works for me, 2300
°F.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that
is incredible. How do you get
heat that high?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
there's only a few ways to get
heat that high right now.
And for every aspect of what we
want from a generating
standpoint.
Be it solar
Be it when
The geothermal.
We all cap and and.
Availability to generate heat at
under 1000 °F.
And with
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
It takes.
3090 degrees.
To form glass.
For solar panels.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
it takes 2000 degrees for forges
still.
Aluminum is about 1200.
Carbon stills about a little
over 1400 in ceramics, which are
necessary for any of the things
that we're doing with
alternative fuels is over 2000
degrees.
And Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, I actually quoted it wrong
as 2700 °F, not 2300 °F for
windmill arm. Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, it's important to
To talk about those things
because to get to a carbon-free
point.
Our solution, New Mexico-based
solution for that.
is natural gas.
Would you, would you agree at
some point in time right now,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
that's the solution to help us
get through there.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that's a fair assessment
that right now there are not
other technologies that can
reach that heat, uh, that you're
speaking about, and certainly
not in an economically viable
way. I mean, when you're talking
about cement manufacturing, the
price of cement doesn't really
move. So if you're gonna, um,
add a new technology, um.
It's gonna increase your cost
and you may be priced out of the
market.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
the press of cement does move.
It just continues to go up and
up and up and up, and you're
talking to a guy that's been,
uh,
Usually
Any area around me within 200
miles of where I'm at, I'm
probably the expert when it
comes to concrete.
And, and so
But cement manufacturing
actually creating uh, taking
care of the clinker and turning
it into cement and then
ultimately turning that into
concrete. Once you've mixed it
with rock, sand and water.
And added a few things. It's one
of the things that we're gonna
need.
Very much so with respect to um
The, the targets that are set by
the ETA.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm not here to debate the ETA.
I'm not here to debate the
concepts of, of, of CO2 or
anything, what I am here to say
is without carbon capture.
We don't, uh, we hit, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, we can easily hit our
goals for 2030 with respect to
the ETA.
Getting the 2035 goals.
Without this system.
We're, we're out of luck.
Getting to 24 2045 goals.
With current technology, and I'm
not saying that current
technology is not moving fast,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady. I
think small nuclear reactors are
With current technology, and I'm
not saying that current
technology is not moving fast,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady. I
think small nuclear reactors or
the solution for everything, for
so many things, but once again,
that's not where we're at,
that's not what this bill is
about, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
Without this,
Carbon capture.
From what we do with respect to
natural gas, the energy, and,
and Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, let me just give you a few
examples.
how important this is.
Microsoft has has a $3 billion
data center that they're
building in Wisconsin.
That they've changed and the
whole power system for that's
going to be natural gas.
Nara has a 4 million square foot
data center.
Being built in Louis Louisiana
and the Louisiana Delta that
will be powered by natural gas.
Next er
The planned expansions.
This is a quote from their CEO.
We have got to find sites. We
have got to develop these sites
and we have got to get gas to
these sites.
Engine number one, which is a
progressive investment fund that
actually ousted three of
ExxonMobil's uh board members in
2021.
are now including natural gas as
a all of the above strategy.
And I could go on and, and give
more and more examples of this.
But to do this, we have to have
the CCS piece of this.
I appreciate you putting this
bill together.
Like I said, we've talked about
there are things of inside this
bill that I don't really agree
with, but the end result is.
Without carbon capture.
Y'all know he hit your targets
with respect to the ETA and I
say y'all because I wasn't here
to vote for that.
OK. So, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady,
I think this is the next step
for us. This is what we need to
be able to do, having primacy is
important so that we do, do not
have to deal with the federal
government with respect to how
we deal with this. I appreciate
the legislation and I will be
supporting it. Thank you.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernalio Sibola
McKinley Socorro, San Juan, and
Valencia, a representative of
Beta.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Does
the gentle lady from Berna Leo
yield?
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Yes, I will yield to the gentle
lady from all of those counties.
Thank you.
Madam Speaker and representative
or I'm sorry, gentle lady, can
you, I heard you talk about
tribal consultation, would you
please?
Explain to me what that means
from the state perspective.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. So in
the bill, we uh reference an
existing uh statute that
delineates uh tribal
consultation, and so it means
that for this process, um.
The agencies would have to
adhere to those.
The existing statute.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, can you please tell
me if that consultation process
was followed when there was a
discussion about this proposed
uh legislation.
Um,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, so
this legislation, um.
Provides a legal and regulatory
framework, uh, the rulemaking
process, um.
is where more of the public, uh,
engagement occurs. We've talked
about that, uh, in regard to
primacy with water, um, that a
lot of those are fleshed out.
Um, they're
I don't know if that if that
works, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I will go ahead and
ask in a different way.
During the year-long discussions
that were taking place about
this, and that's what I've heard
based on other questions and
debate. What tribes and what
communities were at the table in
the development of this
legislation. Thank you.
Um, thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Uh, so Navajo Nation and Hickory
Apache Nation were both, uh,
folks.
That we discussed this with.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
thank you gentle lady. Uh, my
next question then is gonna go
about when.
This is implemented.
Will the tribal consultation be
with communities that are
directly impacted, or will it go
just with the leader of that
tribal nation or Pueblo.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentle ladies. So, uh, the
consultation will go with, um,
communities that will be, could
be or.
Uh, are adjacent to, uh,
potential projects.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
gentle lady, and with this be
from a land-based geographical
perspective or would it include
the aquifers that could
potentially be impacted. Thank
you.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
um, the aquifer and the surface
are tied together, um, so it
would be both.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. So if the aquifers
are also included in that.
It were any of the pueblo
nation's consulted in this and,
and I'm asking because I'm, I'm
trying to get an understanding
of this area and the aquifer and
the communities that depend on
this. Thank you.
Um, Madam Speaker, um, gentle
lady, um, at this time there are
no potential storage locations,
um, near that aquifer or the
pueblos.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and.
Gentle lady, my next question is
how can we be certain that the
injected CO2 will remain.
Securely stored.
And for how long? Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. So a couple of
answers here, um, there's
extensive modeling that goes,
uh,
That takes place beforehand,
there is extensive monitoring
that takes before, during, and
after, uh, and after for 50
years, as we've discussed, and
then, um, part of the reason
that we want New Mexico to have
primacy is so that we can
actually have these
conversations, so that, uh, New
Mexico our, our energy, minerals
and natural resources department
can craft the rules in a way
that works for
all of our different communities
right now we do not have that
ability.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. So my next
question then, so.
We've, we've heard about
different types of contamination
that come up years later.
When or if that occurs with this
project, who will be responsible
for the remediation.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady. So during
operations, it is the operator,
um.
After operations, Madam Speaker,
that's outside the scope of this
bill, uh, that is addressed in
House Bill 458.
Thank you Madam Speaker thank
you Representative, um, I'm
still confused on that question
though. Is there any information
you can give me from that right
now?
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Yes,
House Bill 458 creates a
long-term stewardship fund, uh,
for monitoring and of the sites.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. So does that
mean the state will pay for
remediation?
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, that
is completely funded by the
operator and the tax.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, and my
last question wrapping up when
and if this is implemented, how
much water will be needed and
what type of water will be used.
Thank you.
Um,
thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. So it can be a
water neutral project, um,
generally industrial water
works, um, and
So in, in a nutshell, not very
much water.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I am
sorry I don't understand what,
how much that quantifies to.
Could you please help me
understand. Uh, Madam Speaker,
um, gentle lady, the process of
injection itself does not use
any water.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, no
water at all. I just want to
confirm that because a moment
ago it was not very much.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
so
Is your
To clarify your question. So for
injection and storage. It does
not use water. Different types
of carbon capture use varying
amounts of water, and so I
apologize. My first answer was
referring to the different types
of technology that could be
used, for instance, direct air
capture, point source carbon
capture, um, those technologies
do use differing amounts of
water. However, the classics
wells, which is what we are
talking.
about in this bill does not use
water for injection.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative or excuse me,
gentle lady that helps, uh, my
next question is, and it's gonna
piggyback off of that and it'll
be one of the last. Where would
that water source come from
then?
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady, uh, they
can use industrial sources, so
it does not need to be fresh
water or drinking water.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you gentle lady that helps
tremendously. I appreciate you
taking the time to answer my
questions.
There's further debate, the
gentleman from Otero
representative block.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Good
to see you in that chair again,
and I always, it's so difficult
to debate the gentle lady from
Bernna Leo, but would she still
yield since I have to look
behind me.
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Yes, I will yield to the
gentleman from Otero, and I
apologize, uh, is there another
county?
It's just the one.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Yes, I'll yield. Thank
you, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady. I just had a few questions
on this and I'll try to make it
brief.
Maybe, but Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, we talked a little bit
about, I think you said 1.5
degrees, we're trying to cool
the earth.
Can you tell me how that is
accomplished.
Um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
would love to engage in that
conversation. It's actually, it
is not within the scope of the
bill, but that was for, um,
keeping the global warming to
within that amount.
OK, I'm sorry, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I just heard that
in the debate from you and I
just wanted to bring that to
attention. I just didn't know
what we were talking about. So,
so, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
can you also tell me regarding
to this bill, do we have a
specific appropriation amount on
how much this is going to cost,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
this, um, the process for
applying for primacy, um, will
require uh staff time at Energy
Minerals Natural Resources
Department, and they do have the
resources for that.
Great. OK, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, and then,
uh, another question I had here.
I was reading through your bill
and I, I was on the amendments
in context.
Somewhere, it was on sections 5
to 7, I believe that was maybe
on page.
Page 8 of the amendments in
context, and Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I was seeing here
that it said,
That it allows for utilization
of land for CO2 sequestration of
85% of affected landowners
agree. I'm wondering, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, does
this mean that if an oil and gas
company owns 15% or less of the
land within a proposed
sequestration unit, they may be
forced to participate even if
they oppose.
Madam Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
yes, but without penalty, uh,
which is unlike, uh, how it
works in oil and gas.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I am, I'm not
the biggest oil and gas expert
either. I do like all, all
energies, including oil and gas
and nuclear, of course, which is
bay and of course we love all
other kinds of energy. So, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'm
wondering now when it comes to
the bill itself, we're talking
about CO2 qualified carbon
oxides. Is that just CO2? How do
we define that? Because
according to what I
was reading, it's something to
do with section 45Q of the
Internal Revenue Code. So could
you just go into that a little
bit for me, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Uh, we used the definition in
federal law to be consistent.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I guess I didn't quite get to
my.
Question, what does that mean in
federal law? I mean, what is
that defined as? Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. It means carbon
dioxide.
Got it. OK. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then
Let me see
Maybe I'm at the end of my
questions. I think that's all I
had, Madam Speaker. Thank you so
much, gentle lady from Bernalio.
Appreciate you.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernalia
Representative Roba Caballero.
Thank you Madam Speaker, and
with a gentle lady please yield.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uh,
yes, I will yield to my
colleague from Bernalillo
County.
Thank you and um I wanted to let
you know, gentle lady that I
read the material you shared
with me and as you recall, I
wanted to get more information
and um I not only read the
information, Madam Speaker, but
I did some research thanks to my
uh climate activist son who is
36 that keeps me informed on the
latest on these uh type of bills
and he routed me to some
sources.
So I'd like to get some clarity,
um, very quickly. I don't have
too many questions, but first,
before I begin, um, Madam
Speaker, I wanted to make sure
that I understood one of your
responses, um, that mentioned
that all stakeholders, um.
I guess had been engaged.
Uh, in the discussions leading
up to the formulation of these
bills so I just wanted to know
if you could give me an idea of
who those stakeholders uh were.
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I suppose if I use
the word all stakeholders, that
would be incorrect because uh
there would be 2 million plus
stakeholders, um, and certainly
did not engage with all of them.
Um, however, uh, beginning with
this bill, um, different groups
that have been, uh, that we've
talked with.
Include our
Labor unions, the New Mexico Oil
and Gas Association, the
Independent Petroleum
Association, the cattle growers
because frequently they're the
landowners, um, as I mentioned,
there were some tribes that had
have been interested in, um,
classic swells and so those
discussions had occurred, um,
there have been discussions with
national and local environmental
organizations, for instance,
Clean Air Task Force, um, has
expertise in um carbon storage.
So those are some.
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker and
thank you gentle lady, uh, that
gives me an idea so it goes on
to my um next.
Statement of concern, uh.
And then uh uh another question
as you know, um, Madam Speaker
and general lady.
I have a long history, uh,
involved in, uh, environmental
issues and what caused my.
Beginnings was.
Working as a community organizer
in very low income depressed
communities.
And in urban areas in particular
and then went on into rural
areas.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and this leads to why my concern
in reference to the next
questions.
Um, a lot of industries in the
19 late 60s, early 70s.
Due to urban renewal
urbanization, other types of
economic development.
Uh, that was going on in our
rural community I mean our urban
communities.
Uh
Forced
Well, I would say
Um
Led to the location of harmful
industries in these low income
neighborhoods and the reason
they were situated, Madam
Speaker and general lady, and
these communities with because
the poor people living in those
neighborhoods were unable to
flee.
The pollutants that were
associated with these industries
such as rubber plants, rubber
tire plants, uh, paper mills,
and I can go on and name a lot
of of of the stack industries.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
they were unable to leave as a
consequence.
Their neighborhoods and where
they lived were surrounded by
these industries under the
false.
Premise that these industries
would create jobs.
Well they did create jobs and
people didn't have to walk very
far to go to these rubber tire
plants or paper mills or other
stacked industries.
They didn't have to go very far.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
But generations of working in
these neighborhoods have
resulted in.
Abominable.
Results in terms of health care.
Um, there were sudden the
research has shown.
That there were sudden rises in
certain types of cancers.
Uh, blood disorders.
Uh, such as leukemia and others
and a number of other illnesses
associated with.
The families
Generations of families having
worked in these industries.
Part of my job, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady was to go in
there and help these
neighborhoods organized.
In order to be able to protect
their health and welfare protect
their current living uh housing
and so on and the reason I bring
this up, um.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady is
to voice my next.
Um, question and concern.
And that is that.
Discussions began decades ago,
generations ago.
About the effects of global
warming and.
Carbon dioxide about climate
change.
Um, and forecasts.
Back in the 60s, 70s and then
proceeded in.
In intensity in the 80s.
The forecast was not very um
hopeful madam Speaker and gentle
lady in terms of future
generations having and living in
clean air under clean air on
clean lands and with clean
water.
Thus I raised my son's age
because he's in the 36 age group
that his concern.
And um.
Subsequent activism in trying to
protect our planet.
I understood back then also as a
career community economic
developer business developer,
housing developer, and economic
developer.
That entertained many of these
industries, current industries
and new technologies.
In ways in which to be able to
combat the effects of global
warming and then all of the
subsequent issues concerned
around that.
I entertained some of these
industries and new technologies
with interest at the time.
And my interest was they were
saying back then these were all
industries associated with oil
and gas and all the other
industries that are associated
with um.
Contributing to our global
warming and um other concerns
around climate.
I maintaining a healthy climate.
And these industries and techno
uh introduced these new
technologies that they were
researching at the time, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
In order to convince us.
That these new technologies.
Would lead to
Cleaner, uh, emissions or less
emissions in cleaner air.
And um clean water and.
You name it, clean everything.
As a result, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady.
These industries.
Took a change developed uh
incorporated their new
technologies at the time in the
80s and 90s and continued to
unfold in the late 90s.
With no clear evidence that they
had.
Contributed to protecting our
health.
Uh, cancer rates in some of
these areas continue to grow and
I would say in the far um west
corner of our state where I
worked as a community economic
developer we uncovered many
residual effects negative
effects of the many industries
that have located in that area
because it was vast open and had
poor communities that could
provide uh jobs and so on.
Very little investment has been
made over the generations in the
research, madam Speaker and
gentle lady around renewable
energy as being viable options.
These are
Industries that.
Provided an alternative.
To all of these up and coming.
New industries that were meant
to help fill the gap.
Should
The climate
Crisis or climate.
Yeah, should there be a climate
crisis and, and the current
industries benefiting.
would have to change and adopt
or adapt to other.
New technologies, Madam Speaker
and gentle lady, I'm going
through all of this because it's
very important to me.
Very important to my son, very
important to my grandchildren
and their children to come.
Because I have to show through
my legacy of questions and
representation.
That I remain true.
To what they have requested of
me.
And that is to protect our
planet so my question is.
Coming to this, the economic
benefits associated.
With um.
House Bill 457 you mentioned
more jobs.
Um, I'm concerned about the
careers.
So if you could give me an
example of not just.
High paying jobs, but what are
the careers that these
communities.
Whereby these technologies might
end up relocating to or locating
to would be uh part of their
career pathways.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. So first, um,
Your experience, um,
And your family's experience in
New Mexico is one of the reasons
that we are pursuing classics
primacy.
If folks remember when we got a
new administration in Washington
DC. They eliminated Justice 40.
So
The EPA, when they are
permitting and regulating wells
do not need to take that into
account.
Our legislation requires that
there be additional consultation
and that there be community
benefit plans.
So that is in statute in rule
the agencies can be more
prescriptive.
But at a, at a minimum, we are
saying these are additional
things that New Mexico needs
before moving forward in terms
of jobs.
You know, I think the easiest,
um,
type of position to talk about
is our skilled trades.
Um, you know, these are gonna be
Great jobs, boilermakers, sheet
metal workers.
Carpenters, electrical workers,
these are all wonderful
positions and actually with the
investments that we have made
recently into a career technical
education in our high schools,
um, apprenticeship programs, the
community colleges, um, we are
setting folks up to have high
paying jobs where they can stay
and live and raise their
families in their communities.
Thank you Madam Speaker and, and
thank you gentle lady. It gets
to my final point and I thank
the gentle lady from all those
counties who raised the question
about consultation, especially
tribal consultation I think that
there's um a lot more that has
to be done other than the
classic outreach uh tools that
we use and that government or
agencies and departments tend to
try to keep grabbing on to.
My concern continues to be one
of.
The effects of carbon capture
and the science behind the
effects of carbon capture.
Because these very skilled job.
Uh, workers.
These very neighborhoods and
communities where these
industries will be locating.
Um, extracting or storing or
generating are the very
communities that will be exposed
to the lethal escape of carbon
dioxide from the sites.
The potential for displacement
um into the groundwater.
Um, the gentleman the other day
on the floor when I was
presenting geothermal brought up
seismic activity. This is truly
one area that is seismic
potential.
Um, also there is the danger,
uh, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady.
Of um
Underground leaks into
underground reservoirs all the
things that were brought up, um,
by my colleague, um,
representative earlier in the
beginning of the debate all of
the other concerns this is
exactly my point that I made,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
about the generation of families
that the first generation
weren't necessarily affected
that we know of health wise.
The 2nd generation could have
been affected working in these
plants, but we do know for a
fact that the 3rd and 4th
generations in those communities
and those neighborhoods that
were subjected to those lethal
rubber plants and paper mills
were subjected and do have and
are dying of cancers associated
with the work in these stack
industries, so I am concerned
for the workers. I am concerned
for the skilled labor uh
workers. I am concerned for um
all of the neighborhood.
and and communities that are
surrounding these locations
because of the potential of what
we have as a.
Scientific
Knowledge of how.
This carbon capture can be
harmful up to this point, but we
have yet to further explore
further seek um the results of
of uh technology I mean of uh
research based on.
Constant new technologies that
continue to provide our state,
our nation with false solutions
to trying to come up with
addressing the climate crisis
the only true solution, madam
Speaker and gentle lady, from my
perspective is that we invest.
And that we further develop the
whole arena of renewable energy
because in all of my research
and all of the research that's
available in the data, it points
to renewables being the only
clean source of renewable energy
and energy sources for our
future in order to protect the
health and well-being and health
and wellbeing and well care of
our families, our children, our
grandchildren and those to come
so respectfully, madam Speaker
and gentle lady after all.
this research and giving lots of
thoughtful uh consideration to
you, Bill. I will have to vote
no and I urge the body to vote
no.
Seeing for the debate, gentlemen
from Chavez, Eddie Lee County
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Will the
representative yield?
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam
Speaker, uh, yes, I will yield
to the gentleman.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, Representative, uh,
Sitting here listening to this.
The question, uh, represented
the question here is not whether
we're going to have carbon
capture, but who is going to
control it? Is that true? Thank
you, Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Yes, precisely. And
so all of the concerns that have
been brought up are precisely
exactly the reason that New
Mexico needs primacy for class 6
wells. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Speaker,
uh.
That's what I was getting from
the first of the deal it uh.
What uh
In order to be eligible
eligible for primacy, what will
the state of New Mexico have to
do?
Um, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So in
order to receive primacy, the
state will have to apply.
Um, and that will go through
MERD and in order to complete
that application, they will have
to go through an extensive
rule-making process
during which, um, there will be.
Extensive is clearly my word
right now. Extensive community
outreach and discussion.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you. uh.
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker.
Gentle lady, uh, what I read on
the deal.
The first rule on being privacy.
Uh, correct me if I'm wrong, is
we must
me or exceed the the existing
regulations on this technology.
Is that true, gentle lady?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, that is
correct. Uh, it's New Mexico
receives primacy, we can add
additional more strict, more
stringent rules and regulations.
Nothing can be less strict or
stringent.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker, that's all I
had.
Seeing further debate, the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddy in
Otero County, Representative
Henry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Does the gentle lady from
Bernard Leo Young.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
yes, I will yield to the
gentlemen from those counties.
Madam Speaker, I've just got a
couple of quick questions after
listening to all the debate with
the carbon capture and the
primacy which we heard as you
said earlier about the water.
If renewable energy was going to
be the energy.
Would we still need this?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Um, as I mentioned earlier, even
if the entire world were to stop
operations right now. We have
already exceeded our greenhouse
gas emissions, uh, that would be
required to keep the world under
1.5 °C, and so we have to remove
carbon one way or another.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady. I appreciate that
because I hear every time I hear
about renewable energy and
that's the only way to go, but
there are other factors that we
have to take in when we talk
about renewable energy, and I
think the carbon is going to
still be one of those factors,
so to me, I just wanted to make
sure that I understood that this
is still going to be a needed
industry within our state, um,
and it lies to your point, it
would be nice if we were able to
have that control. The second,
Madam Speaker, question that I
have, I've heard.
new technology a few times. Can
you help me understand is this
new technology.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, the
technology used, um, for class 6
wells is not new.
Um, as I mentioned, class 6
wells, um, we have been doing
carbon storage for decades. The
technology for the wells is not
new. I think the reference was
to, uh,
Dir direct air capture and
other.
technologies, so separate from
the bill.
Thank you Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, well, the, the one thing I
was looking at to your point, it
feels like carbon capture has
been around for quite a while,
doing some research, I would say
between 30 to 50 years. Does
that feel right?
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen, uh, 60 years,
yes.
Thank you Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, looking at some of the
other renewable energies that
we've talked about which I know
this isn't a renewable energy,
but it feels like that time
frame is probably about the same
for them. Is that probably
correct?
Minus wind energy, which the
ranchers might have used to pull
up water, but in in the context
of what we're talking about
today, would that be about
correct?
Um, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
um, yeah, 1950s.
Thank you Madam Speaker. So I
guess my point is, is, is when
we talk about new, new
technologies, there's a lot of
other technologies that we're
relying on quite heavily that
seemed to be the same time
frame, so just wanted to make
that point. Thank you.
Saying no further debate, the
general lady close.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Um, I
would just like to reiterate
that House bill.
457 as twice amended.
Provides New Mexico with the
opportunity to add.
Additional rules and regulations
to this already existing process
and so Madam Speaker, um, I move
that House Bill 457 as twice
amended do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 457
is twice amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 48 in the affirmative and 15
in the negative. House Bill 457
is twice amended as duly passed
the House.
gentle lady from Bernalillo, are
you ready on item number 42.
Yes, I am, Madam Speaker. Will
you get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Oh,
this house of preparations.
And finance committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 73.
On final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. I need to explain
the bill.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
thank everyone. I want to thank
everyone for hearing uh this
bill today, um, Madam Speaker,
we have in front of us House
Bill 73, which very specifically
addresses uh the civil statute
of limitations for childhood
sexual abuse and it's really
important for us to um get our
head into that particular
section of law, Madam Speaker,
um, because there's been a
little.
bit of confusion as to which
body of law this um particular
bill touches.
Um, Madam Speaker, this is not
our general statute of
limitations.
Um, this is not the Tort Claims
Act, which governs all of our
governmental entities.
This is also not the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act, which also
governs our governmental
entities.
Madam Speaker, in the state of
New Mexico we have a very
specific statute of limitations
for childhood sexual abuse.
And what this bill will do.
is it will open up that statute
of limitations for survivors
like the folks who have joined
me committee after committee,
Doctor Lex Garcia, who sits with
me today, um.
Ambrose Castellano, who is a
survivor of the Boys and Girls
Club, his mother, who's been
with him every step of the way,
Madam Speaker, it opens up the
statute of limitations for
childhood sexual assaults to the
age of 58 years old.
Uh, Madam Speaker, this is based
on data that we know, um.
Uh, exists for those who come
forward, the average age is 52
years old, Madam Speaker.
What it what this bill also does
is create a 3 year look back
window and what this look back
window will do, will allow 3
years for survivors of childhood
sexual abuse to come forward,
um, and seek justice.
And Madam Speaker, I am really
proud today to stand in
bipartisan support with one of
my co-sponsors, um, who I will,
uh, yield the floor to for her
intro as well, Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you so much. I am very
proud to be a co-sponsor on this
bill, um, as the gentle lady
stated childhood sexual abuse is
a deeply traumatic and life
changing crime and survivors
often spend years, even decades,
struggling to process what's
happening to them, um, many are
unable to come forward until
much later in life as they
battle shame as they get
behavioral health and lasting
psychological.
impacts of the abuse will go on
forever. Yet under the current
law, New Mexico survivors may be
denied the opportunity to seek
justice simply because too much
time has passed, even though we
know that time is often what
survivors truly need to be ready
to speak out. This bill would
remove this arbitrary deadline
for civil claims, giving
survivors the time and space
they need in order to come
forward, hold the.
perpetrators accountable and
seek the justice that they truly
deserve.
By supporting this bill, we are
saying to survivors, we believe
you.
We support your right to seek
justice on your timeline, not
the abusers. We will not protect
abusers by hiding behind
outdated statues of limitations.
This is about justice. It's
about accountability and it's
about healing for survivors.
Thank you and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I rest.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker,
um, we now stand for questions.
There is debate on the bill,
generally from Chavez, Curry,
and Roosevelt Counties,
Representative Reeve.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady from
Vernal Leo Yield, please. Yes,
Madam Speaker, I do yield. And
thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I, um, I'm
definitely gonna be supporting
your bill. Um, I, I like this,
uh, idea in my, my line of work
I know that victims do disclose
often years and years later, um,
and I think what I like is um I
believe Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, the goal of this bill is
justice for victims. Is that
the?
The goal of this bill, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Um yes,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
are correct.
All right, and so would this be,
uh, Mr. Speaker, General lady, a
civil cause of action.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, and thank you for asking
that. There's been a little bit
of confusion as to whether this
is on the criminal or the civil
side.
OK, and so, um,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle ladies,
so basically it would be a
private plaintiff's attorney
that would bring this cause of
action on behalf of uh an
alleged victim, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's how I understand this
works.
All right, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, I do have a
proposed amendment that I think
um would make uh.
The bill, um.
More focused on what the actual
goal is, which is justice for
the victims, so, um, I do have
an amendment that I think has
been brought up.
Yeah, no, yeah, it's coming up
now.
And I would ask for a roll call
vote.
The amendments online, we're
just waiting for it to get to
the amendments online. We're
just waiting for the
distribution.
Joan lady, it looks like the
amendment has been distributed
and it is online. Would you
mind, uh, reading the 231 number
please, Mr. Speaker, it's 231.
843.1.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady to explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Houselo
Amendment 1 to House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73, um, the
amendment is on page 2 between
lines 20 and 21 insert section
D, an attorney representing a
plaintiff in an action for
damages pursuant to subsection A
of the section shall not
contract for or collect a
contingency fee for such
representation and shall only be
entitled to a reasonable
attorney fees.
not to exceed the average hourly
wage of assistant district
attorneys statewide and number 2
is to re-letter the succeeding
subsection accordingly and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, just to
more explain the amendment if
the goal is for justice for the
victims. I, I wanna see every
dollar going into the pocket of
the victim and not into the
trial trial attorney's pocket,
um, because we're seeing so many
that our trial attorney bills um
with the potential to make large
sums of money and this taking
the hourly rate and I'm, I'm
actually embarrassed to say this
because I did this job for 25
years and the average hourly
wait for a prosecutor who would
prosecute a case like this in a
criminal matter with actually a
higher burden of proof is $53
right now is the average hourly
we a rate, and so I would love
to see every dollar.
That a victim rightfully
deserves under this bill go into
the pockets of our victims and
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that is the amendment.
lady from Berna Leo, is this a
friendly amendment?
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
have a couple of questions for
the gentle lady.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady, um, I
think we both share the value of
making sure that survivors are
able to seek justice, um, but a
couple of questions, gentle
lady, um, do you know how much,
um, an average cost is for one
of these types of cases.
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I contract them now
and if I were to contract a
let's say a very technical CSP
or CSC of a minor case, I might
charge, um, a one-time fee of
approximately $20,000.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, do you
know how many years it takes?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
can only speak for the criminal
realm, but it takes about 1 to 2
years for full uh for for a
criminal case from beginning to
end, but I cannot say
specifically what it would take
on a civil case, um, because
I've never handled a civil case,
misspeaker, gentle lady, I do
know it takes many, many years
sometimes for cases to not only
come forward, um, but also, um,
to have their day in court and
to have a judgment um at the
end.
end of the day. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, do you know how
many lawyers typically work on
cases like this?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when I do a case like this, it's
just me.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
my understanding is when it
comes to, especially some of the
more high profile cases, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, there's
actually a whole team of lawyers
who are working on cases like
this, and it could drag out any
number of years, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I know, um, you
know, when folks have their day
in court, um, a verdict is
reached, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, are you aware that
sometimes those verdicts are not
the actual
amount that victims and or their
attorneys get paid.
Um, yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I know a verdict can be
reached and that generally is
appealed in some type of
agreement is often negotiated
based on what that verdict was
in a civil case, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the reason I'm
asking these questions is
because um I know I'm the
district attorney side, um,
folks are paid per hour, um,
folks are actually paid per hour
as well on the civil side, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
one of the issues here is that
um, interestingly enough, um,
they're small businesses as
well. And so as opposed to a
district attorney, um, the
actual, um, attorneys on civil
cases are taking on a lot of
The financial burden. So in
civil cases, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, folks don't get
paid unless they win, anybody.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what happens then is you have um
attorneys who come forward
rightfully so, who are on the
side of victims who are saying,
yeah, I believe in your case. I
know we're gonna make it. They
end up fronting the money for
many of the experts, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, and to pay
folks $50 an hour, um, for,
Needing to front so many of the
speakers or I'm sorry, um, so
many of the experts that come
forward, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, it doesn't seem to
literally add up.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
can I respond to that? Um, I
don't know um how many experts
generally, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady you, but I think
generally there's just maybe a
psychologist or or one expert
that talks about those issues so
I don't think there's a ton of
experts that come forward, um,
or to testify in these cases,
but, but again I think that we
also, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
in the line of being an
attorney, we are.
and and somewhat required to do
pro bono work, um, that's where
we get asked every single year
on our licensing, how many pro
bono hours have you put in, um,
I always put my life as pro
bono. I'm a prosecutor, but um I
know that civil attorneys are
required to do pro bono work and
are asked to do pro bono work,
so I also think, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that this could be
something that um if we're
really about helping victims and
we really want every dollar to
go into their pocket.
We don't want a a judgment of
millions and millions of dollars
that just is another plaintiff's
way of, uh, plaintiff's
attorney's way of making money
off our victims, Madam Chair,
generally or Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Um, do
you know how much experts in
grooming specifically cost Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Madam
Chair, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, I'd say an average
expert in that area would
probably be anywhere around
5000.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
answer to that is about 30,000.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, you know, as, um, we
are gonna vote on this issue. I
asked that the body consider a
few things. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
If they were not high profile
cases and I will name some of
them, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, Larry Nassar.
The Boys and Girls Club, the Boy
Scouts, the Catholic Church,
Jeffrey Epstein.
If they were not these high
profile cases, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, there would be a
lot less justice for victims.
Part of what these damages also
encompass is making sure that.
Some kind of warning sign for
other people to know that these
are really bad actors and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my
understanding of the way that
the process works is not
necessarily that trial lawyers
or your victims for that matter,
go into court and say this is
how much money I want. It is my
understanding, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady of the judicial
process that everyday people who
are chosen to be on juries to
serve on juries, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady decide what that
verdict
It should be, and they usually
decide on what that verdict
should be based on the amount of
harm that they've caused. And
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, part
of, part of carrying this bill
has actually been incredibly eye
opening, um, because there's,
from my understanding, Mr.
Speaker and gentle, there is not
a lot that goes on on the
prevention side.
It doesn't matter where whether
we're talking about private
entities or public entities,
there's not a lot of literal
financial investment.
In making sure that we are
working on the prevention side.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
a lot of what happens is people
pay on the other side,
unfortunately.
And so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I kind of, um, see this
as a warning as well because as
we're talking about um capping
fees, the other thing that we're
doing simultaneously, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, is
we're also limiting liability
for people who are bad actors.
And to me, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, if you have an
organization that has either
been grooming children or has a
history of, I don't even say
wanna say not protecting
children because.
They're actively exploiting
children on a systematic basis,
then Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the public should know.
And so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, with that, I urge the body
to vote no on this amendment.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, this
is not a friendly amendment.
Thank you, John Lady. Is there a
debate on the amendment.
Representative from Bernalillo,
uh, Representative Hochman be
here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does,
uh, the gentle lady from
Harry Roosevelt Chavez Clay
Roosevelt Chavez County's view.
Yes, I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, gentle
lady, really quickly, I just for
the body and, and for the public
listening. Can you just define
what a contingency fee is,
please. Um, the contingency fee
fee to my understanding, again,
I, I don't do civil law, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
it's a contract that um a civil
attorney, a plaintiff's
attorney, a trial plaintiff's
attorney might go to, as in
this.
a victim and say if um whatever
amount of money you were
awarded.
Uh, we will take as a firm 30 to
40% generally. I don't know if
it's exactly 30, 40, but those
are the numbers I've always been
given that, uh, the firm or the
plaintiff's attorney makes off
the settlement or verdict, um,
that's my understanding, but I'm
sure you probably know better,
so you can correct me, uh,
gentle lady, if I'm wrong on
that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so, um, I can a
contingency fee is a way and for
lawyers to get paid if a client
does not have any money upfront
to say fund a client retainer
fee or uh does not have the
resources immediately available
to pay it by the billable hours.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
contingency fees are utilized
mostly in civil cases where uh
there is hope that there
Will be damages at the end of
the case and it allows uh
plaintiffs to seek justice, Mr.
Speaker and lady, in instances
in which they do not maybe have
the resources upfront, but still
deserve to pursue a case. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I,
I understand the spirit of your
amendment, um, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady,
Is maybe one of the reasons why
we're even talking about this
bill to eliminate a statute of
limitations, meaning these cases
may take many, many, many years
to complete.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't know if taking away the
statute of limitations makes
more years to complete. I can
correlate it to a criminal case
where these uh victims come
forward sometimes as, as stated
and I completely agree 20 you
know, 30 years later and I love
the part I mean know where
they've capped that, um, but I,
I don't necessarily know if it's
gonna take many, many, many
years to complete, um, and I do
understand, you know, the
lawyers take on the contingency
that the case.
may fail and they may may make
no money, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I get that, um, but
I, I'm concerned that if, if
this bill is really to protect
victims and get justice for
victims, uh, trial lawyers, I
guess I mean I could ask what
maybe what a trial lawyers
contingency fee might be uh uh
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady if they
were to contract with somebody
under this is it, am I correct
on it's 30 to 40% generally.
Mr. Speaker Ginellini, uh,
lawyers just like anybody else
have the ability to contract for
whatever fee percentage they
want contract for, um, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, you are
correct and that most lawyers
can and will accept cases pro
bono, however, they don't have
to and also Mr. Speaker Jelani,
um, sometimes the contingency
fees depend on whether or not
you're in what stage you are in
in that case, whether or not
it's pre-litigation or
litigation, so, uh, Mr.
Speakerimlini, I, I have some
question, uh, some questions
also on the language.
here of your amendment. So it
says, and she'll only be
entitled to reasonable attorney
fees not to exceed the average
hourly wage of assistant
district attorney statewide. So
my question, Mr. Speaker and
lady is let's say you have a
case and it takes 5 years and
you, uh, you are then asking our
plaintiffs to pay the average
hourly wage rate over a period
of 5 years. I mean, how, how is
this supposed to
Work
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
way I envision it working is um
whatever the average wages, um,
which right now I believe like I
said in this current age is $53
an hour, um, as the case goes
on, um, you would basically, uh,
be able to get your, um,
settlement or, or whatever it
might be, um.
Or trial verdict and then when
that comes out, um, at that
point, you'd be calculating your
hours, um, and you would take
that amount of money as your pay
and that way the majority of the
money earned by the victims who
are the ones that actually are
suffering, it will go in their
pocket and, and not in a
plaintiff's attorney's pocket.
OK, Mr. Speaker, general ladies,
so I think what you're trying to
say is, um,
Not that you want to eliminate
contingency fees so much as the
whatever contingent fee received
by a plaintiff.
In a case cannot exceed the
amount of $53 and some dollars
an hour when you add up the
total time spent on the case. Is
that correct?
Right, I think Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you'd have to
calculate your hours, um, and,
and figure it out of that and 11
of those reasons is, um, well, I
know these cases will be older
and harder to sometimes prove
they're also in a civil realm,
the burden is way, way lower
than a criminal realm, so they
in some sense aren't as hard to
prove, um, and depending on how
far and how much time has gone
by, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, you know, you may just have
your victim.
Um
From, you know, 20 years ago and
no other witnesses around so it
might be a pretty, pretty easy
settlement, um, when you only
have one side of the one side of
the party available to actually,
you know, have witnesses and be
be available so I don't
necessarily know that the work
on the civil side is going to be
any more complicated than it
would be on the criminal side
where the burden is so much
higher and so much harder to
prove, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So, um, I unders I
appreciate and I understand
your, your explanation. However,
um, Mr. Speaker Ginlii, this,
this amendment gives me great
reserve. And for a couple of, a
couple of reasons, so, um,
firstly, Mr. Speaker and lady,
um,
what we're basically telling
these victims is that um you are
Going to be
Forced to to take on an attorney
who one would be willing to take
on this limit in compensation,
and 2, I, I think that you would
also be kind of attacking the
contingency fee model, um, writ
large and so Mr. Speaker, lady,
my worry with that is that we
are essentially creating two
different uh types of plaintiffs
in these situations, those that
can one either.
Ford to pay these cases for an
unknown amount of time at a very
specific, very low billable
rate, or um you're, you're going
to be forcing these plaintiffs
to have attorneys that, you
know, may be overworked because
they're taking on a number of
these types of cases just to
make ends meet, or you, there
are attorneys who are just, you
know, taking it on pro bono, so
there's not really, there's not
really that fire or that
Heat to kind of keep these
attorneys, um, doing their best
and working their hardest on the
case. So Mr. Speaker,
generalladi, I understand, um,
and appreciate the spirit of the
amendment and that we want to
make sure that um all plaintiffs
in these types of cases take
home the most amount of money
they can, but, uh, Mr. Speaker,
Jalani, in reality, I think that
we're, we're creating two, we're
creating the haves and the have
nots.
Here and um I, I take great
issue with that and um with that
I would vote the, I would urge
the body to vote, uh, this
amendment down. Thank you.
There's further debate on the
amendment next on the list is
the general lady from earlier on
Torrance, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from 3 really cool
counties, please yield. Yes, I
will yield to the gentle lady.
So help me walk through this
because my only experience, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, has
been with a car accident and my
understanding is with trial
attorneys when they're doing
that, isn't it overall like they
advertise beyond an accident,
medical malpractice that you
don't pay anything unless
there's a settlement. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I, I see those same signs, um,
I, I don't believe that they pay
anything the the victims unless
there is some type of like.
positive outcome for them or
they they received money and
then the trial attorney takes
the big portion of that.
Right. That's when I was getting
my point, Mr. Speergen lady,
because if you're in this line
of work where you're standing up
for people who you believed are
wrong and you're waiting for a
settlement. Isn't it the normal
case, or maybe I'm wrong, that
there is a waiting period of we
will take our 33.3% out after
the victim wins their case. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's my
understanding. So they're
already taking on those expenses
and then if they don't win,
they, they lose those expenses
anyway, I guess my hope, Mr.
Speaker general.
lady is if if this is a bill
that it's really advocating for
these very, you know, vulnerable
victims and and victims that are
disclosing so later that these
attorneys are going to want to
do this for the right reason,
not to make money for
themselves, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but to make money for
their clients.
Or to have closure for their
clients, right, Mr. Speaker and
I understand the altruistic part
of that, right? You're trying to
do the right thing and the, the
board here recommends you do 50
hours of pro bono work per year.
I get all that, but I guess what
I'm trying to say is it doesn't
seem like there's gonna be a
huge variable in risk, meaning
I'm looking at probability and
statistics. You are not going to
get this huge increase, I don't
think. You're going to get some
increase. You have the right to
take the case or not, but
there's always a risk, right,
Mr. Speaker Delaney, you don't
know if that medical.
malpractice is gonna pay out.
You don't know if that car
insurance is gonna pay out,
isn't that correct? You don't
know for sure exactly, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
remember, um, my uncle's a
lawyer and he did the overtime
for the state police officers,
and I don't believe they were
necessarily successful in that
case, and they took on all the
expenses, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and lost money on that
case. They were trying to do the
right thing, but that is a risk
you take.
OK, Mr. Speakergen lady, so what
if from the opposite end? what
if let's say these cases, some
cases start to trickle in and
they start to become windfalls
when lawyers then want to do
those cases because they're
going to suddenly start making
extra money off those, Mr.
Speaker Daley. I hate to say it
that way, but it comes down to
money at the end of the day
besides altruism.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think when we're talking about
bills that um end up opening uh
that are beneficial, let's say
for plaintiffs attorneys, yes,
they can make a lot of money on
these, um, types of cases, and I
see that happening with a bill
like this. Well, I, I'm going to
support this bill. I, I love the
fact that we're trying to
protect sexual assault victims.
I really want them to get the
most benefit from whatever
reward they receive.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So at the end, because I
remember when I got an attorney
for a car accident. I was rather
surprised at how much it costs
me because, uh, Mr. Speaker De
Lady, it was a big chunk and
then they added in fees, copying
letters, sta all kinds of things
that I didn't see were going to
be in there. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if, if we don't put
a cap on this, that means at the
end of the day what you're
looking at is trying to make
sure that that victim receives
the most amount of money and not
to hurt.
uh, I was gonna say law
enforcement, not to hurt
lawyers, but to make sure that
that victim gets the maximum
amount of money returned to them
for closure and healing. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is my total um goal
and spirit of this amendment is
to help victims and put the most
dollars in their pocket, um,
whether that makes them whole
again or not, you know, that's
another, another thing, but, um,
I want victims to actually
receive the full benefit of of
the.
these lawsuits and not the trial
attorneys. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I understand
what you're trying to say. This
is what I was trying to get at.
There are lawyers are going to
pick up these cases. Some could
do a pro bono or not. Some could
decide they want to pick up the
case, they're gonna get paid at
the end. It's always a wash
because if they lose a case
there's a loss that balances out
with other cases, so I don't see
this having a huge effect on
whether the lawyers are going to
accept the cases or not,
especially if a few famous
attorneys and this were to go
through a few famous attorney.
when a few famous cases and they
start making a boatload of money
unfortunately, I would expect to
see more advertisement of have
you been a victim of this, Mr.
Speaker Delaney, I see actually
more people picking up these
cases, Mr. Speaker, gentleleti,
I think you will have a, a large
amount of people picking up
these types of cases and, and
you're right, I mean in a civil
case, all those experts, if
there's more than one expert
that law firm is paying for that
before the end of the case, so
it's not really changing
anything to say, you know, the
victim has to pay for it.
Um, they're just adding their
hours up and at the end they
will take their, their fee for
the average cost of what a
prosecutor who does these same
types of cases, but in a
criminal realm with a higher
burden, um, it would be more of
an equivalent fairness to that
aspect of the bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker
generally, that's why I support
this because I understand what
you're trying to do. You're
trying to make sure it's good to
me, it's all gonna be a wash
because they win some cases,
they lose some cases. I don't
see the uh.
I don't say huge change in the
data of their income or anything
like that. So, uh, Mr. Speaker,
I definitely support your bill
and I understand what you're
trying to get across.
Cross. Thank you.
There's further debate on the
amendment that generated from
Bernard Leo, representative on
Ornu.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Chavez Curry
and Roosevelt Yield. Yes, I
yield to my friend in the a
gentle lady rep representative
Anya Norney I'm getting it
better. I'm trying to say a lot.
Perfect, thank you very much,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, OK, so the amendment is
limited to attorneys
representing plaintiffs and of
course that makes sense to me,
um, but I'm looking at the piece
a little bit down below line 4.
Um,
only to be entitled to
reasonable attorneys' fees.
So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, isn't
it correct that you, that the
judiciary has like regulatory
rules to prevent abuse by
attorneys who like may want to
charge exorbitant fees.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
assume you're right on that. OK,
and it's also my understanding
that if an attorney is found to
be charging excessive fees that
that attorney is also subject to
suit. Is that, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
somebody reports them, yes. OK,
thank you, thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady for those
answers. So as I'm looking at
this amendment.
My worry really is that
The caps that you're proposing
would limit the availability of
attorneys to people who can only
like afford to pay that hourly
rate because as we've mentioned
several times, these cases,
especially civil cases can take
years and over the course of
those years, the attorneys, as
we've mentioned,
are paying out of pocket,
usually for experts of which
especially in these long ongoing
civil cases. There's definitely
usually more than one, so as I
read this amendment as it
stands, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, this kind of limits in my
view, the availability of
attorneys, um.
Again, to people who can afford
to pay, but it's really gonna
impact most negatively the
people who can't afford to pay,
who often need the attorneys the
most, like the elderly low
income families, people living
in like rural residential areas
because those attorneys knowing
that they're caps that they have
caps on these cases won't take
on cases for people who can't
afford to pay them hourly.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think it's more, it's not that
the.
client would be paying the $53
an hour, you would be charging
or you would be, you would be
charging $53 an hour at the end
of the case. So at that point
they wouldn't be out of pocket
anything you would basically.
Calculate your hours, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and at the
end you would log your hours as
I think any civil attorney's
billing hourly does and then at
the end of the case with
whatever settlement or verdict
came out of it, that is, is what
you would charge, um, as your
contingency fee, I guess, or
your hourly rate so it wouldn't
hurt the client.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, OK,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
uh, so that does bring up a
point again that these lawyers
don't get paid anything.
Unless they win or unless a
settlement has been reached.
Mr. Speaker Giannaleti, and
that's the case with every civil
case pretty much on a
contingency.
OK, so in that case then, if a
settlement is not reached or the
case is not one then that
attorney and therefore in many
cases the victims are in the
hole for whatever they spent on
experts tests, witnesses. No,
Mr. Speaker, General, you would
be in the hole, um, but that's
what the first civil case if you
don't win, um, you're taking on
a contingency basis, um, and so
if you don't win that case, then
you're sucking, you're taking
that chance and you're, you're
filing.
because you're assuming you're
going to win, you're hoping
you're going to win, but they
don't always win. So it's always
a gamble, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. OK. Well, thank you again
for that answer, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, and one of the
major differences with this bill
because this bill is limited
just to civil cases, correct?
OK, so, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when we're talking about
criminal cases.
It's a totally different world
because of prosecutor has lots
of different avenues to make
their case. They have like
police and sheriffs and you know
essentially an unlimited budget,
but we don't have that scenario
here, so the victims and their
lawyers are really
Out on the limb for often years
to create their case of
prosecution in these cases. Mr.
Speaker, generally, it's
somewhat disagree with that
because, well,
Prosecutors may have police
officers, a victim, often in a
civil case reports to a police
officer, just doesn't mean they
choose to prosecute it. They,
they have a right whether to
prosecute it or, or not
prosecute it. So sometimes, yes,
you would still have police
officers, um, unlimited amount
of experts that we, uh, to say
the DA's offices has unlimited
funds to, to get all these
experts is, is really not true
because we are unlimited budgets
and so we have to pick our
experts that are not probably.
the most expensive, um, so I, I,
I disagree with that. We may
have the support of a victim
advocate in the district
attorney's office, but that
really doesn't come down to cost
and I assume um you would have
an advocate if you were a
lawyer, someone that would be
talking your victim through the
process also in a silver silver
realm and civil realm. So yeah,
they are different, but I would
say that again in a criminal
matter, the burden of proof is
beyond a reasonable doubt. It is
a lot more difficult.
To prove
Beyond a reasonable doubt for
criminal sexual penetration and
criminal sexual uh criminal
sexual contact of a minor
because you have to have a
unanimous jury and it has to be
proven beyond a reasonable
doubt. I believe in a civil
case, Mr. Chair, and, uh, gentle
lady or Mr. Speaker, I apologize
in general later I think it's is
it 8 out of the 12 I think that
has to vote and it's, I believe,
preponderance of the evidence,
so the burden goes down to just
right above 50%, so I, I, I
disagree respect.
with you that you have less
resources or a, a harder time to
prove a case like this in the
district attorney's office
would, even though I get worth
talking two different realms,
Mr. Speaker. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I guess
we'll have to kind of agree to
disagree about the availability
of budget for prosecuting a
civil case versus a criminal
case, but ultimately what I'm,
I'm not understanding about this
amendment is that I don't see
how the bill provides.
for expanding access to justice
in a criminal case.
When the amendment that we're
proposing to include it, I still
believe would significantly
limit access to representation
for the victims, so
unfortunately for that reason,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
won't be able to support the
amendment.
There's further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Santa Fe in Sandoval.
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, tell lady, there's a
down lady yield. Mr. Speaker, to
the gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
Uh, as you know, I, I'm an
attorney. Um, I, I charge by the
hour. Uh, I've been an attorney
for over 30 years. I've never
had a contingent fee case, uh,
and the, the reason I charge by
the hour.
For the reason I can charge by
the hour perhaps it's because
I'm reasonably assured of
getting paid.
You know, I have clients, uh, I
perform a service. I, uh, I
asked for a um
Uh, deposit.
You know, and I can build them
monthly, you know, so even if I
have a project that goes on for
years, which sometimes they do.
I get paid every step of the
way.
Um
That's, uh, that's I think one
big difference.
That I know I'm gonna get paid
and so you're, you're saying
that, uh, in that case where
someone might not get paid, um.
They should just take the risk,
and I can't.
That doesn't work in my mind,
um.
I, I don't think attorneys will
take that case.
Well, Mr. Speaker General
secondly, um,
My
My billing rates?
is very different.
Then hourly rate wage.
Right? I work for myself.
I pay for my office.
I pay for my IT.
I pay for my phone, my office
supplies, everything.
What you're comparing an hourly
rate to is an employee.
Who has all that provided.
And then they make that hourly
rate sort of at the bottom. So
you know, a prosecutor who makes
$53 an hour.
Doesn't have to pay for their
office or their IT or their
supplies or anything like that.
And so it's, it's really, it's
just, it's just apples and
oranges, so the, the effect of
your amendment.
would be that these victims
could not hire an attorney.
There would not be attorneys
available to represent them.
Can I answer that Mr. Speaker,
if you'd like to respond to
that, I think your first
question was, you might build
yours hourly. I bill hourly too,
sometimes I do a flat fee and
my, my line of work, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but that
is not what all plaintiffs'
attorneys do, as we know, the
big plaintiff's attorneys
usually do, um, uh, one of the,
the situations where they get
paid at the other person gets
paid so I think every attorney
decides how they want to do it
and what risks they want to
take, um, Mr. Speaker
speaker gentleman, I, I, I
disagree there won't be
attorneys for them. I think
they're so many attorneys in the
plaintiff's world that are
always willing to try to get out
there and, you know, either
hopefully help victims in this
matter or make a buck, um, and
so plaintiff's attorneys, I, I
just don't want to open this
bill up to plaintiffs attorneys
making the money off our of
victims of the state, um, and
getting the majority of the
money that's awarded to them
because I honestly feel that.
It should go to their families
and it should go into their
pockets and well, I understand.
What you're saying, I don't
think everybody does it the way
you do it and while I understand
what you're saying with the
prosecutors having those
resources, um, what I did is
take somebody who prosecute the
average pay of a prosecutor who
yes may have support staff and
things of that nature, but I'll
tell you probably work way more
than 40 hours a week, um, and
they, uh, this is the average
amount they get to handle a case
that's probably gonna be more
difficult.
than what you would take on
civilly in a matter like this
because the witnesses are all
still present and when you do
these time limits, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, the case just
gets harder and harder for these
civil, the civil cases.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, um,
Your, your bill, your amendment,
excuse me, uh.
It overstates the availability
of attorneys. Uh, we actually
have a shortage of attorneys,
um, if, if this were to pass,
It would dry up. You would
effectively deny these victims.
Any recovery I.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I guarantee that. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker disagree.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House floor amendment number 1
to HAFC sub to HJC sub for House
Bill 73.
We are on a motion to table
house floor amendment number 1
to House appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Judiciary Committee
substitute.
For House Bill 73, a vote of yes
and the amendments tabled a vote
of no and we're back on the
amendment 32nd clock. The vote
is not open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 34 in the affirmative, 30 in
the negative.
House floor member number one to
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73 has been
tabled.
Gentle lady from Curry Roosevelt
and Chavez, back to you. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and, um,
gentle lady, I do want to say,
um, despite the amendment not
passing that I do love the part
of the bill that you are
allowing victims, as I said,
I've worked with criminal sexual
penetration and contact victims
my entire career and I
understand that they do not
report immediately and so I
think it's very important and I,
I do love how you did substitute
and take the recommendations
from judiciary.
and and put some type of cap on
the number of years, so I, I
totally appreciate that effort
and I will always support
victims of crime like this. I
just, I just wanted to see the
victims get their rightful
amount and what they deserve,
um, and so thank you for
bringing the bill and I
appreciate the debate on the
amendment and I'll yield, Mr.
Speaker. There is further
debate. The gentle lady from.
Sam Miguel and Torrens or of
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does my
friendly gentle lady yield?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I do. Um,
so getting back on to the merit
of the bill itself, um, I know
there was a lot of discussion of
Civil versus criminal, um,
Courts and, and how this bill
does. Um, can you maybe explain
to us that are not in judiciary
maybe that are used to the legal
system, uh, maybe the difference
between access to justice, about
maybe where a victim has between
a criminal court and a civil
court.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, I also
want to refocus the conversation
back on uh the victims
themselves, and I think this
might also speak to the
difference between civil and
criminal as well, um, because
Mr. Speaker, um, the victim
themselves has a lot more
control of how uh
how they want their case to go,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when you were on the criminal
side, that gets away from folks
a little bit because we have
folks who like district
attorneys who end up driving
some of what happens and how and
so Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
from my conversations, um, with
folks who have chosen a civil
side, uh, versus the criminal
side, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that is one of the biggest
differences for victims
themselves, um, another piece,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady that
I'll speak.
To, um, when it comes to uh the
civil versus uh the criminal
side is that um the criminal
side also has statutes of
limitations, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and so what we are
doing right now, at least on
this side, um, is opening it up
to make sure that more folks who
want to come forward and hold
these big institutions
accountable, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady are able to do so.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um,
What are maybe some of the
reasons or why might it take a
victim sometimes longer to
disclose their abuse, um, you
know, and why the need, um, for
this extension of the statute of
limitations. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Sure. uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I will say one of the most
beautiful things that has come
of this bill is hearing so many
people's stories, um, in
particular, um, many people in
this body and so, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I know we
heard from one of our
colleagues, um, during one of
the committee meetings that it
took her a very long time, uh,
to come forward about what
happened to her, and part of
these reasons vary, um, in some
cases you could have somebody
who's living with an abuser.
Um, in other cases it may be um
risking their life.
In other cases, some people may
just not remember, um, trauma
happens to the body and what we
know about trauma is that um.
You know, when people come
forward many, many years down
the road, they're just
discovering it. They may not
have known. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, these are just some
of the reasons, um, folks may
not disclose until much, much
later.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Um,
And again
Something like this spill, um,
maybe what can civil remedies,
will this help to prevent
possible future.
Child sexual violence. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Yes, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that was part
of what I was alluding to a bit
earlier, um, to me, part of what
happens in a civil case as well
is raising a flag for
institutions that are
perpetuated institutional harm
against children specifically
for child sexual abuse for many,
many years and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I know I named a
few cases, um, those are the
more high profile cases, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this could
happen.
within communities, um, it could
happen, uh, with somebody just
knowing that either they're, you
know, their neighbor or um one
of their family members is
somebody who has been
perpetrating that type of abuse
and violence toward children.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. I just
have one last and final
question, um.
Bringing this move forward, um,
does this bill allow for
remedies for victims of sexual
violence that occur when they
are adults. Can you clarify that
for me, please, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Thank you for
asking that question, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
this is only for childhood.
sexual abuse and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, just to clarify, if
a person comes forward as an
adult about the abuse that
happened to them as a child,
yes, however, if they were
already an adult, when the uh
sexual violence happened it this
uh does not apply.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady, for
those questions and that I yield
back my time.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from.
Bernard Leo and Torrance,
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady from, is
it Burnleyo County, please
yield? Yes, Burling County we
yield to time.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield.
So I think one thing I wanted to
make sure everybody understands
with sexual assault it's not.
Sometimes that is a repressed
memory, but more often than
that, it is more of a flashbulb
memory is memory people do
remember it, but that memory is
so traumatic that the brain will
do everything possible to hide
that, to suppress it, to not
deal with it because Mr. Speaker
Johnny, I would imagine that
those memories are quite
traumatizing, correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
I just, I say that because I
don't want everyone to think
this is just repressed memories
because it's not. It's, it's a
case where somebody.
Has had that sexual assault and
there's a ton of feelings,
there's different parts of the
brain that light up. There's
different parts of the brain
that keep the memories. There's
different parts of the brain
that try to hide the memory. So
it's very complicated. It's not
simple because people say well
why didn't they just bring it
up? It's not that easy. It's
like saying the same, um.
Insensitive thing was, why
doesn't somebody leave a
domestic violence situation.
There's, it's a lot more complex
than what people think, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, so
there's a lot of things that go
on. There's emotions, there's a
cortisol, there's a stressors,
there's all these kinds of
things that make it to where
somebody.
Who when they're sexually
assaulted, cannot bring it up,
especially with childhood,
right? Because how do you
process a sexual assault when
you're 6.
Especially if it's somebody
ancestral that that's happening
to, it makes it almost damn near
impossible, Mr. Speaker Delaney
to process information, and you
said that the average age was
54, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady 52.
It's go. So Mr. Speaker, young
lady, so when it comes to these
kind of situations, it's
somebody who
Has that
It happened at 6. You may not be
ready until you're 36 or 46 or
56 or whatever age or 504 to
deal with this.
And this is giving that victim
finally the opportunity in a
safe space to say this happened
to me and I am now ready.
Mr. Speaker and young lady, so
I, I completely support your
bill. I think the only thing I
wish that was still in there, I
think that if a.
Public entity should be held
responsible. I mean, private, I
think a public should. I think
anybody who it it.
It should be open to everyone
who, who should be in that for
consideration. So that's the
only thing I, I wish didn't get
changed on the bill, but other
than that, I do support it and I
just want to make a few stands
of why people may not understand
why it takes so long. It's
because the brain is very
complex. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Vernon Leo in
Sandoval, Representative Gates.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Kaine Sierrasto
Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Berlio
Yield. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady. Um, it looks like,
In the bill, uh, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
The public bodies were taken out
of the bill. Does this mean that
a victim.
Of, uh,
Childhood sexual abuse.
At a public school would not
have access to the same justice
as those victimized in a private
setting.
And um how many victims could
this exclude?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
actually share the sentiments
that you bring and the
sentiment, um, that
Representative Lord brought as
well, um, and the reason being,
um, is because if you look at
the different iterations of this
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and there were several, um,
there were several iterations of
this bill, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, part of the
reason I opened, um, with, um,
the statements that I did in the
opening is because, um,
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, the
Court Claims Act governs,
governs governmental bodies.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, this particular section of
law is actually very, very
specific here in New Mexico, um,
and it only deals with childhood
sexual abuse, um, on the civil
side and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, the Tort Claims Act
covers governmental entities and
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act,
um. So also covers governmental
entities and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, we would need
to, uh, dig into a different
section of law in order for that
to be.
Possible
Um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this is actually something
that I feel very passionately
about and um throughout the
process as I explained, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, there
were a lot of really um terrible
things that I'm learning about
what is happening across our
state both in public and private
institutions, um, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I will
say, um, I have told um not just
the survivors who are with me,
but, um, many of my colleagues
that I am absolutely coming back
for public institutions. I
believe that we have a real
problem.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, what I would really
like to do as well is work on
some of the preventative
measures, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because yes we can pay at
the back end, but I think one of
the most important things as
well is figuring out how we can
stop it, um, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I share your
sentiment, um, public
institutions were unfortunately
never a part of this, um, but if
you look at the iterations of,
uh, the changes in, um, the
amendments that we added in the
committee subs.
Um, it was to make very clear
that they were not a part of
this, um, to begin with Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm, I'm concerned,
um.
One of my, one of my questions,
my next question would be,
So who is held accountable? Who
are you actually?
What entity would you actually
be suing because we know, um,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady that
This seems to be happening a lot
in our school systems.
And so now that it's just for
the.
Private
Entities
Who, who would be, um, held
accountable, and then my second
part of that question is,
Um
At what point
Uh, madam, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
Is enough enough?
And, and who's being held
accountable and what happens to
the criminal aspect.
Of this.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, if
I forget one of your questions,
please remind me, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, if
you're asking about what types
of institutions would be held
accountable. Um, I know I named
a few, um, the one I would love
to just highlight is the boys
and Girls Club, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, because, um, one of
the survivors has been with us
throughout this process as well
and so that is one institution
that I would highlight, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it also
allows for action against an
individual as well if they're
acting in.
their private capacity, they
are, they would be held liable
under this, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, so that's another
option, and I believe your third
question, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, was about whether or
not, um, you could pursue
something on the criminal side
as well, and my understanding,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
that it would not prohibit
anyone from doing so.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, um, you know, uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, we have, um,
in the private sector, we people
take chances every day.
Um, with employees with payroll
with everything, and so I um I
understand and completely.
Um
Want this bill to pass.
My problem that I have with it
is that, you know, the trial
attorney portion, um, from the
amendment that was brought
forward earlier, uh, because in
the state where we seem to be
leaning that direction.
Um, to, to that and so Mr.
Speaker, uh, kind lady, so as
far as the public and the
private sector go, um, talk
about haves and have-nots.
We're, we're not allowing.
We're going after private.
And not holding public
accountable and we are the
public.
That are passing legislation, so
what's good for me is not good
for thee. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debates
generated from Bern Leo,
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentle lady from
Bernalia. So thank you Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and I
have family experience around
this. I, I, I've never, I'm not
sure I've ever told anyone this
story, but when I was about 13.
We as a family went to
Disneyland and my younger
brother and I kind of separated
from our parents to get a better
view and during that a man came
up behind me and pushed himself
against me for the whole parade
and, and it was, it was
definitely sexual in nature. I
was a naive young girl. I didn't
know what to do, so I froze. I
didn't stomp on his instep. I
didn't kick it.
in the, in
Anywhere, um, I just stood
there.
And, um, that, that haunts me to
this day.
That that I was so vulnerable
and yet so scared
I was, you know, amongst
thousands of people but I didn't
feel like I had them.
The capability, the strength,
whatever it took to do
something, so, so that happened
to me and then some years later
when I was in college, uh, I
went on a date, um, we went out
to dinner.
I went back to his apartment
complex to use the hot tub and
he told me that since he bought
me dinner, he deserves sex and
so he raped me.
violently raped me.
And I was a college student.
I didn't know what to do. I
just, I gathered myself and I
left and he, he followed me out
offering me money to not tell
anybody. I'll write you a check
right here. I'll write you a
check right here. And I didn't
take his money, but I also
didn't go to the police because
I knew that it looked bad that I
was at his apartment complex and
this was the day what was she
wearing? I was wearing a
swimming suit because we had
been in the hot tub. I, I, there
was not sexual at all. There was
nothing up.
To that point that was sexual
and so I, I never, I never did
anything with it, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and
I, I, it was in my brain. I knew
it happened, but whenever it
popped up, I just.
Went on to something else. I
didn't ever really process it
and so being in the legislature
has been the first time that
I've really processed this and I
wish that I would have gone to
the police or done something
civil against this guy because I
don't know if that was his
regular pattern, but I, I didn't
have money. I was a college
student and the thought of
paying for an attorney and
didn't even enter my mind
because that was, I mean, I was
struggling to get through daily
life. So Mr. Speaker, gently,
I'm telling.
telling you this because it
happens it happens to everybody.
I have 6 sisters, 5 have rape
stories.
And, and my brother who died at
age 49, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, from a heart attack partly
due to PTSD from being in the
Iraq war, but.
He was a year behind me in
school and when we were in high
school we got a new priest in
Crown Point.
And he was different. Um, he did
a lot with the boys. He, you
know, the girls were never
invited and my brother was an
altar boy and looking back I
have no doubt that he was if he
wasn't sexually assaulted, he
was being groomed to be sexually
assaulted and so this is very
personal to me and um and I am
in strong support of your bill
and I hope that people.
Understand that it's.
It's not an easy thing to do and
to have, you know, to try and go
shopping for an attorney who
will take $50 an hour, um, on
top of all the other trauma is
just is unthinkable to me so I
wanna thank you for bringing
this and thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's further debate,
gentlemen, from Sandoval,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll
make this as short as possible.
Because I know you all like to
hear my voice almost as much as
I do.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh.
Gentle lady from Bernal Leo.
Uh, do you yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
You know, I was on board with
this bill from the very
beginning, um.
Before I realized how many bills
I had signed on, I had actually.
Talk to you about signing on
this one, but I've watched the
bill.
Evolving a chipped and change.
Um
You said earlier in the debate
that the reason that the schools
are exempt because of.
tort claims.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, uh,
gentleman, yes, um, the, within
the Tort Claims Act, and I'm
happy to pull up the language
itself, but there is a phrase,
um, in particular in there that
says the Tort Claims Act shall
essentially universally govern,
uh, everything that happens with
governmental entities and it's
pretty, pretty darn clear, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, and I'm
happy to pull the language if
you'd like.
Speaker, that's not necessary,
but I have seen.
Different
Pors of statute get amended by
one.
Bill, why was that not done in
this case?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, we
were only focusing on this
portion of the law, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, as I said previously,
I would be happy to come back,
um, and make sure that we're
covering more survivors by
making sure that public
institutions are held
accountable.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want
to understand you clearly so you
never.
You never
Focused on changing the tort.
Claim Act.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
So
Why would schools included in
the first place then if only if
they were.
Just gonna be stripped away
during the process.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
public institutions were never
included in this bill, even if
in its original form before we
started working on it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, that's
shocking to me because
In my
One of my initial conversations
with you.
You talked about the abuse going
on in the churches and the
schools.
Um, and I
To be honest with you, just
assumed it was in there.
I'm, I was extremely touched by
this flyer that you put on my
desk.
Unfortunately this would do
absolutely nothing for this.
Person
Because we refuse to.
then the Tort Claims Act, I, I
just.
It frustrates me. I, I'm not.
said of true, I'm not
questioning you. It just
frustrates me because
We come to this place and we try
to do what's right and protect.
As many people as possible.
But then I read stories like
that and I'm like, why didn't we
just do the whole thing at once.
Um, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, um.
It's it's just.
With the amount of abuse going
on in the school systems and
then.
In different places where.
Both men and women take
advantage of the authority that
are entrusted in them.
This seems like just a small
piece if we pass this bill, it's
It's a very small piece of a
huge problem, and we should be
looking.
For universal solutions,
sometimes we need to step out
of.
Our comfort zone and am I going
to get this person mad or that
person mad. We're not here for
that person or this person.
We're here for the people who
sent us here.
Not, not.
Donors, not anybody else but.
This person right here.
Well, I'm not even sure if they
live in my district, but they're
from my town.
And I would want to do
everything I can to.
this person and do the right
thing.
Um
And I'm just a little frustrated
that we're going through this.
Long debate in this poor person
is not going to be able to.
Get healing from this.
Um, thank you for the, for the
time Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'd like to respond
to that. Um, not all healing
happens the same, Mister Speaker
and gentlemen, and it's, as
you've heard from the testimony
here
it's OK. I'm gonna allow her to
explain herself just like I did
earlier on the amendment, OK
Mr. lady, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, and I
actually allude to a lot of the
folks in this body. I feel like
we also ran for office because
we truly believe that we can
make change. We truly believe,
even if it's like incremental,
that it's something we can do.
And so Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, I say that because,
you know, representative
Thompson voting for this bill,
it's not gonna help her
situation.
Right? A lot of folks in this
body who it's happened to, it's
not gonna help their situation,
but they know that voting for
this bill is voting for
survivors, um, and a movement
for survivors, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and I say that
because I was also reflecting on
the debate itself and I don't
believe that this type of debate
that has been incredibly
supportive of survivors would
have happened a handful of years
ago, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I really believe that it is us
being in office trying to make
sure that we're.
and incremental change if we can
to get something across, um, I
really do believe Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that we are
changing what the movement looks
like for sexual assault
survivors.
There's further debate,
gentlemen, from San Juan,
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is
a gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, I do yield. Thank
you. Uh, you may have said at
the beginning of your
presentation.
What's the approximate
percentage of people that are
sexually assaulted in the state
of New Mexico, gentle lady.
Mister Speaker, gentle lady, let
me get that number.
Over 50%, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
contend it's higher.
I spent a career investigating
these and what we haven't heard
today is the importance of
understanding the process of
investigating these not just
criminally.
When you go after someone on a
civil process, Mr. Speaker.
You may not get that person.
Whether it be male or female.
What you're identifying is more
Potential victims.
People prey on people when
someone discloses.
Whether it be 5 years after the
crime or?
45 years after the crime.
Someone else sees they disclose.
Once they've disclosed.
Weeping can begin in law
enforcement to develop a
pattern.
So as we talk about.
Public places, schools,
Money
One, not one, we're forgetting.
We're trying to find the
predators.
Mr. Speaker, isn't, I wouldn't
that be fair to say, gentle
lady, this, we really have a, a,
a bigger picture than just a
settlement.
Mr. Speaker, and I absolutely
agree.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
support this bill wholeheartedly
as a retired FBI agent. I have
prosecuted hundreds of these
cases, not prosecuted,
investigated, pardon me.
And I will tell you that
They're extremely hard to make
criminally.
They're gonna be hard to make
civilly, you are going to
identify predators, and I use
this all the time when I've
talked about it. It's much like
DWI.
The first time someone's caught
DWI was not the first time they
drove while they were
intoxicated.
It's the same with predators.
So I urge the house.
The body of this house to look
at this on a bigger picture.
Maybe you'll come back and
attack it differently, but it is
incrementally.
That we go after these
predators, that we let them know
they're out there.
Sometimes
There's going to be civil
litigation that people aren't
going to agree with.
But what I think the big picture
is we're going to identify
More victims we're going to
identify predators.
There's not gazillions of
predators. What there is is
there's a large, fairly large
group of predators.
They have made a whole lot of
victims, so um with that, Mr.
Speaker,
I'm, I'm done. I just support
this bill. Thank you for the
debate to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I
move that House appropriations
and Finance Committee substitute
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 73 do
now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73. The vote is
not open.
What about clothes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 73 has duly pass
his house, gentlemen from Dona
Ana, are you ready?
An item number.
51.
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point that a necessary for
place in House Bill 469 as twice
amended our final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Hospital 469 is an important
step forward for New Mexico's
continued investment in its
border infrastructure and
economic development, building
upon the foundations of New
Mexico border Development Act
passed in 1991. The bill
introduces this bill introduces
key improvements to the New
Mexico Bor Authority by
expanding the board from 7 to 9
members and adjusting the
requirements for appointments.
Hospital 469 enhances the
authority's ability to
effectively guide and support
initiatives that drive growth
all along our state's vital port
of entry.
and with that I stand for
questions.
There is a gentleman from
Montero, Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind gentleman from Donna Anna,
please yield. I, I yield to the
kind gentleman.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I heard
A little bit about this bill and
I read the bill and I just had a
few questions, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, why are we expanding
the number of people on the
board.
Thank you gentlemen, and Mr.
Speaker, there the primary
reason is to, and I had
mentioned in my introduction,
the bill was introduced the the
original legislation was
introduced in 1991.
It's been since then since we've
updated the.
The, uh, the board, uh, as, as
we know, there's Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, there's been a lot of
changes in the economy of our
country and the workforce and
many other things having to do
with uh uh economic development
and so this proposes to.
Meek the board uh number one
more accountable because we are
adding two members of the
legislature.
Uh, 2, more professional, and
number 3, very much more
adaptable to the changing needs
at the border. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and so I guess I had
a question about the political
affiliations of each individual
on the board from the governor's
side, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
believe that was taken out that
there is, there must be certain
amounts of people from certain
political parties. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that's correct.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
theoretically,
In 2020
What is it, what year is it?
2026.
We get a new governor,
Republican governor.
Super hardcore on the border.
Every single one of the people
on that board now would be super
hardcore on the border per the
governor. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, was that something
that we
could see as a potential for
this to happen and how could
that, how could that change the
intent of this bill?
Uh, thank you gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, uh, there's a
possibility, but the, the, the
hope is that um having uh this
bill and, and the whole border
authority and and everything
having to do with the economic
development.
Uh, really.
It has a a focus on business and
investment as opposed to
something a little bit more
political um if I can if that if
that's a good explanation, um,
gentlemen and Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
is, it does, it does help me on
that, so I guess I just, I would
like to see a little more
diversity on the board, maybe, I
guess maybe I'm just a little.
I
I'm a little torn when it comes
to the previous law versus the
changes. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, also regarding the
actual border authority. Does it
make any changes to the staffers
who will be staffing that
office, which actually we've
all, we've all seen, or a few of
us have seen in the interim,
it's a very cool office, right,
right in front of the border.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
no, they will not make any
changes to the staffing. There
are requirements though for the
director position, uh, this in
no way will affect the current
person that is there. This is
only for a future, uh, directors
of the border authority, Mr. I
mean, gentleman and Mr. Speaker.
Perfect.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So then when it comes
to the actual director position,
can you tell me some of the
qualifications we're adding to
it. What does this person have
to have as a qualifications for
the job in the next opening for
the vacancy.
Thank you for that John and and
Mr. Speaker, so, uh, the, the
requirements in the bill would
have either uh the candidate
would either have to be uh a
jurist doctorate or a bachelor's
degree in accounting.
Agronomy business economic and
economic engineering or finance
and 4 years of professional
experience in business
management, economic or land
development or freight shipping
or supply or supply chain
logistics, including at least 2
years of experience in a
managerial capacity in the
policy making position.
In a business
Uh, in a business, these minimum
requirements are necessary to
ensure that the executive
director is well qualified and
positioned to lead the office.
Uh, and gentlemen and Mr.
Speaker, the, the person would
also, uh, uh, have to have some
experience or knowledge of the
Spanish language, of course, and
the workings of how our partners
in Mexico conduct business.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And, and so I guess
I'm a little confused when it
comes to the degree portion. So
it says a law degree or a degree
in accounting. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, would that be?
BA, could they have just a
bachelor's in accounting and not
an MBA, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, gentlemen, Mr. and Mr.
Speaker, yes, with, uh, any
relevant experience that they
may have regarding economic
development and uh the border.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I just find it kind
of interesting how we've like a
legal
Versus and that's like a
doctorate degree versus other
degrees like engineering or
maybe engineering is more of a
master's business, Agrina guany
that could maybe be a BA. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I just
had some questions about that
and then when it comes to the
Spanish language aspect is that
in the bill that it says they
must be a bilingual speaker, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Mr. Speaker,
men, it is not, but it's uh,
it's essential to conducting
business, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I completely agree
with you on that one. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when it
comes to these
These changes, will it require
any, any, uh,
amount of money to be expended
in addition, because I know if
we're adding people and if I
don't know if this has per diem
tied to it, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, would that increase
per diem amounts that we would
need.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I, I'm, I'm assuming that there
would be, but the border
authorities and enterprise
entity, so they're they generate
their own revenue so they would
be able to cover the cost. The,
uh, the travel isn't out of
state. It's not um it's not
somewhere where they have to go
far because the meetings are at
the border authority and we
usually, I think the furthest,
the, the, the participants that
participate in the in the board
are coming from would be Deming
or Luna County.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. And is there
any kind of current requirement
or maybe a change for where
these people lived, they have to
live in the borderland?
Area.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, they would have to live in
the borderland area. They would
have to have, uh, knowledge of
the of the economy at the border
they would have to have
knowledge of the of how the
systems of trade work as well.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. That, that
helped me on my questions and
thank you so much for answering
them, and I appreciate it. Thank
you gentlemen.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hall, the 2nd.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Donana Yil. I
yelled to the gentleman.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I have an
amendment.
I'd like to put forth on this.
We'll call roll call, please.
You've got a roll call. Sorry, I
didn't hear you. You've got a
real.
Did you move the amendment I
think it's already been brought
up there and just waiting for it
to be.
Put out. OK, gentlemen, moving
house floor amendment number one
to House Bill 469 is twice
amended. What is the number on
the bottom left?
I have 0.23185 1.1, Mr. Speaker,
it is going to get passed out.
And post it online while that
happens, we'll give it a second,
gentlemen, and then I'll come
back to you to explain the
amendment.
OK, the amendment has been
passed out and it is posted
online, gentlemen from San Juan
to explain the amendment.
Mr.
Speaker, the amendment was just
kind of going back to some of
the original languages in there.
I
It's spoken with the
representative after it was.
Uh, presented the first time and
just on it, it reads on page 5,
line 18 after of.
Strike the remainder of the line
and on line 19 strike members
and insert in lieu thereof.
Two statutory members and 7
appointed members as follows,
provided that no more than 3
appointed members shall be
registered members of the same
political party, and that's,
that's the basis of it. It's
just that that board would
Have a little more
representation.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen from
Donana.
Gentlemen from Donanez is a
friendly amendment, Mr. Speaker,
yes, this is a friendly
amendment.
All right, friendly member.
Is there a debate on the
amendment? Is there opposition
to adopting the amendment?
See none you have an amended
bill.
You remember from San Juan you
stay on the floor?
Mr. Speaker, I'm getting a lot
of help over here. I'm, would
you repeat what you said, sir?
I'm sorry. You still have the
floor, sir.
I, I yield the floor. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
Donana. Alright.
See you know for the debate,
gentlemen from Donana to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now
move that House Bill 469 do now
pass.
I'm, I'm sorry.
Hospital 469 that's thrice
amended do down past.
We are a final passage of House
Bill 469 as three times amended.
We're gonna try to do something
funny, but it's not gonna work
out. We'll do it next time. The
vote is now open.
What about clothes? The borders
are closed by a vote of 64 in
the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 469 as
three times amended has duly
passed this house.
lady from Catherine Sierrasor
Valencia Representative
Armstrong, are you ready on item
number?
28, um, um, is it 28 or
supplemental calendar item
number one.
House Bill 65. Are you ready on
that?
Yes
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point? The direct
reflect that election is placing
House Bill 65 with an emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken. It is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don't
know why my microphone's not
working very well, but anyway,
this is relating to public
schools, clarifying that local
school boards and governing
bodies of charter schools shall,
um, determine the number of
days, instructional days, and
with that I stand for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move that House Bill 65 with the
emergency clause do now pass. We
are on final passage of House
Bill 65 with an emergency
clause, the vote is not open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 65 with
an emergency clause as duly
passed his house.
He's a gentle lady from
Bernalillo, Representative Dixon
ready on item 50.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes,
would you get me to that point?
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
458 as twice amended on final
passage has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 458 is a bipartisan
bicameral piece of legislation
that establishes a long-term
stewardship fund for carbon
dioxide storage projects in New
Mexico. The fund collects a fee
from operators of no less than
10 cents per metric ton of CO2
injected throughout the entire
operating life of the project
usually over 30 years with that,
Mr. Speaker, I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
House bill, uh.
458, uh, I move, do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 458 as twice amended the
vote is now open.
Boat's about to close.
The boys aren't closed by a vote
of 51 in the affirmative, 11 in
the negative.
House Bill 458 is twice amended,
has duly passed this house.
We're gonna take a quick little
break to do some committee
reports and then we'll come back
to 3rd reading. General lady
from Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker, I
move we go to that order.
Business Committee reports. It
is so ordered.
Clerk Reed.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee,
Tom has been referred House Bill
97 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
substitute for House Bill 97 do
pass and then referred to the
commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted Art de la
Cruz, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report
files Bill 97, but a favorable
committee report and house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
substitute for House Bill 97.
All those in favors bay and I.
All the supposed nay, the ISR
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred Senate Bill
73 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted art de la
Cruz's chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
please
a favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 73. All those in
favor signify by saying I.
Although suppose me.
Eyes have it. Commit report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee team
has been referred Senate Joint
Memorial 2 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Linda
Sarato, chair.
of adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate
Joint Memorial to all those in
favor signify by saying I.
All those opposing
The IA community report adopted.
General lady from Bernillo, uh,
from Santa Fe, sorry.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
It is so ordered.
clerk to read.
are greeting.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 213.
Senate Finance Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 376
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhansson a chief
clerk.
Message will be entered. Message
from the Senate, Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 105.
Senate talks, business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 118.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
as amended.
Senate Bill 221 as amended and
requests the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhansson a chief
clerk.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation.
Young lady from San Miguel and
Torres, are you ready? An item
number 55.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point? the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing Howe's Joint Memorial 5
on final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
general A to explain the joint
memorial.
Um, this joint memorial supports
current protections for the
Upper Pecos watershed to
safeguard critical water
resources, the local economy,
the environment, and cultural
heritage.
There is to be gentlemen from
Otero or presenter block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind, gentle lady from
San Miguel and Torrance please
yield.
Mr. Speaker, I will yield to the
kind gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I was reading
through this bill earlier this
morning and I
I didn't have any coffee, so I
apologize. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, gentle lady.
Can you tell me a little bit
more about what, what
preservation efforts or
protections we're looking for
when it comes to the Peco's
watershed.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, with
this memorial, um, it just
Give support um to current
protections already in process,
um, federally and just the local
efforts locally to protect this
valuable watershed, um, the
efforts have been going on, um,
within as a community effort for
at least the past 6 years, um,
currently there is
Um, Federal administrative
action that is in process and
again just lending support on
behalf of my community and Upper
Pecos Watershed. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I appreciate this
and, and the reason why I wanted
to talk about this bill was
because I see here in my
analysis, it says in 91 Pecos
was contaminated by mining
activities in Teredo. That's
actually where my great
grandmother was from Terero, uh,
up near Pecos. So Mr. Speaker,
General lady, how far back has
the mining been
been contaminating these.
These waters because I know that
they've been doing it for many
years. I know that they've been
mining up there for decades and
decades. So could you just tell
me a little bit about that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I would like to take a minute to
introduce my expert witness, Mr.
Ralphy Hill. He is a local
farmer in Nairo from the area.
If you can just give me one
moment.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the waters have
Had contamination starting since
as far back traceable since
around the 1930s. Um, the
biggest incident was, of course,
in 1991, um, during that
incident, um, that killed um
thousands of fish in the
waterway resulting in over 28
million in reparations, um, and
continues to impact that
waterway to this day. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and thank
you for the, the history on
that. I was just wondering
because I, I know that they've
been doing it for years, like so
many years. I don't even know
when they were up there. Uh, I
think my great grandfather
probably was working in the
mines up there and they got
married in El Macho Church up
there in Tereto. So I, I'm very
familiar with the area, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
tell me?
When it comes to the
protections that we're trying
to, to put in what concrete
steps are we asking for when it
comes to
Cleaning up the watershed, what
kind of things can we do to help
Um, Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen,
um, right now there is um
current action, um.
You get here my dates here. Um,
in 2023, there was legislation
introduced to the Peco Watershed
Protection Act in Congress, um,
since then, it has been making
its way through Congress, um,
federally it has gained support,
um, just right now it has
stalled out, um.
There is current efforts to have
these lands um as as a
withdrawal, um, so right now and
again local community efforts on
this memorial is supported by a
multitude and a slew of
community resources. It is right
now supported by the counties of
Santa Fe, counties of San
Miguel, Pueblo of Gene, Pablo of
Tesuque, to name a few, um,
there are already local
ordinances around all of the
area of the Pecos wilderness to
put in local protections, so as
a
com b in ed effort between local
um and.
again in process for these
federal protections just as a
community we have put this
memorial in place just to stand
in support with protection of
this very vital waterway. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
I appreciate that and you know,
it's a brand new Congress that
just started like, I don't know,
January, so.
Yeah, they have a little more
time than we do. They have a
little more than 60 days, so I'm
sure that we can, we can start
on that, call your congressman,
call your congresswoman and so
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, last
question. I see here in my
analysis it says Mexico is a
Colorado-based subsidiary of an
Australian mining company they
acquired, the mining claims near
Tereto and applied for permits
to conduct exploratory drilling
for gold, copper, and silver. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, does
this bill in any way
Try to stop any kind of more
explored territory drilling for
gold, copper, lead, silver, and
these mines.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, know
this bill is just a memorial.
This bill just supports the area
as a vital waterway and uh and
valuable resource for our
community. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I don't mean to
grill you or anything on, on the
memorial, but I find it very
interesting and I, you learn
something new every day. So
thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you so much, gentle lady
from uh San Miguel and Torrance.
See no further debate, generally
to close.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
the Pecos River is one of New
Mexico's most vital waterways.
It sustains a secchio's
traditional agriculture or land
grounds in our local communities
on the Pecos Valley and beyond.
The Pecos is irreplaceable. It's
mountains, rivers, watershed,
mesas, and forests belong to the
people of New Mexico and with
that, uh.
Move that House Memorial 5. Do
now pass. final passage of House
Joint Memorial 5 the Void is not
open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 52 in the affirmative, 9 in
the negative. How Memorial 5 has
passed his house.
Gentle lady from Bern Leibo
McKinley San Juan Socorro and
Valencia, are you ready on item
number 61. Thank you, Speaker.
Yes, I am. Would you please help
me get to that point? The record
reflects that all action
necessary for placing house
Memorial 37 on final passage has
been taken. It is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the.
Memorial. Thank you, speaker for
countless generations, Mount
Taylor has been a place of
prayer, ceremony, and spiritual
connection. We can all agree
that the mountain's resources
have helped sustain life cycles
for our flora, fauna, and
people. Unfortunately, the
mountain is now facing a renewed
threat from uranium mining
proposals that could devastate
both sacred sites, critical
water, and the resources that
our plants, animals and people
rely on.
Speaker, this House memorial has
the support of the people of San
Fidel, San Mateo, letters from
Richard Begay, the Navajo Nation
Heritage and Historic
Preservation department manager,
the all Pueblo Council of
Governors, the New Mexico State
Land Commissioner Stephanie
Garcia Richard, the Pueblo of
Zuni and the pueblo of Hamus.
I'd like to quickly clarify that
this House memorial protecting
Mount Taylor's traditional
cultural property does not
include protections.
on private land or land grants
and with that speaker I stand
for questions. There's debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hall.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from all those
counties yield.
I yield to my friend in San
Juan.
Um
Can you tell me, is Mount
Taylor, it's considered one of
the sacred mountains of the
Navajo Nation, is it not?
Speaker, gentleman from San
Juan, yes it is, and our
traditional name for Mount
Taylor for the Navajo people is
so this.
Mr. Speaker, I know I can't
pronounce that, but is it not
also considered by sacred by
several other tribes.
Speaker and gentleman from San
Juan, yes, it is. It's
considered sacred to many tribes
in the Southwest region.
Thank you. I yield, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Otero
Representative block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Megan,
uh, Mr. Speaker, with a kind
gentle lady from all those
beautiful counties, please
yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
Navajo brother from Otero
County. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so I.
In committee, I told you why I
voted against this bill or this
memorial, and I like the intent.
Of the memorial. I certainly do,
and I think Mount Taylor is a
beautiful place and I definitely
wanna
Go there, visit it, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I did not
like some of the, the verbiage
in the bill or the memorial,
pardon me, relating to uranium
mining because Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
When it comes to uranium mining,
it's over the years it's become
such a safe and needed resource
for many people for energy, for
just to keep the lights on, etc.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I.
I just don't necessarily agree
with some of the portions of the
bill or the memorial, and I do
have hopefully a friendly house
floor amendment, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, will you kindly read
the number on the bottom left.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd be
happy to. It's 0.231838.2. Let's
get this passed out and post it
online and we'll come back to
you to explain the amendment.
Gentlemen, I believe the
amendment has been passed out
and it is posted online, the
gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
So this amendment, it, you don't
really know what it does until I
explain it to you because it's
striking some language. So I'm
just gonna go to the memorial
where it's starting. So on page
2 from line 19 through 25 were
striking that, and that pretty
much says uranium mining creates
environmental hazards is bad for
transport, storage, or and it
increases risk of contamination
of land, water, air, resources,
and.
Since Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, or
gentle lady, I think that
actually it's the opposite
because uranium has been in the
world for over 60 years, mind.
It's helped with national
security, it's helped when it
comes to isolating isotopes for
medical research and so I
believe that it, it is not some
really scary evil thing, and
then Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it also goes to the bottom here
of page 2 to the next page
online on.
Line 1 through 4 on page 3, and
it strikes out whereas the
ongoing legacy of uranium mining
in New Mexico results in long
term environmental
contamination, etc. So I think
this would, this memorial would
be benefited by this change by
instead of in my opinion, kind
of pushing down an industry that
has been so vital to this state
and to the country to instead
focus more on Mount Taylor,
which is exactly what I hope the
memorials about, Mr.
r
Gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment?
Speaker, no, this is not.
OK, is there a debate on the
amendment?
The gentle lady from Berlio and
Torrens, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from Otero County,
please yield. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I gladly yield to the
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen that
highly recommend you go to Mount
Taylor. It's beautiful and it
also has a ton of elk hunting
just in case anybody wanted to
know that. Don't ask me how I
know. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, can you explain to me
because I
I had looked through this before
and you're asking that on page 5
and I'm trying to look it up on
here.
So we're staying on page, page
2, Mr. Speaker.
OK, am I, am I looking at the
wrong one? is this hold on Mr.
Speaker Delaney.
Mine says on page 50, that was
the last one, sorry, I have so
many amendments on my desk, it's
swarming with amendments, Mr.
Speaker Delay.
Uh, gentlemen, so Mr. Speaker,
on page 2 strike 19 through 25,
so can you go into a little bit
more detail? What is it you're
trying to get to by amending,
uh, this memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So looking at the the
language on the bill.
Or the memorial, rather it's.
In my opinion, it's very strong
when it comes to opposition to
just using uranium, mining
uranium, even the benefits of
uranium like it's, it's very in
my opinion, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, very, uh, strict.
In its language, and I find that
to be a little, I don't think
that's as generous as we could
be, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I would just like that to be
taken out because I, I feel like
this memorial is very good, uh,
I like.
Mount Taylor a lot, but
I don't want to also be talking.
Maybe not as good things about a
certain industry.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
can you explain to me, uh, when
we talk about Mount Taylor, do
you know what we mean? Do we
mean just the mountain parts of
it, the whole thing, 5 miles
around it, Mr. Speaker, you may
not know because it's not your
bill, but do you know what the
definition is of in this
memorial from Mount Taylor
because I don't see it and maybe
I missed it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I do not actually, but I
do know that there is a lot of
communities around Mount Taylor
that may also be affected by
this. I know that there's grants
Milan, San Mateo, uh,
Beboiboetta, and a few others.
Mr. Speaker Dolman, uh, I also
love Bebo. It's an amazing place
and one of the best green chili
cheeseburgers ever out there, an
amazing history, uh, so what I
find, I think most concerned
about this is I don't know what
the definition is of Mount
Taylor. Usually it'll say from
this landmark to that landmarker
to this to that. I don't see
that in there. So Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um,
Then on page 3 we're striking
lines through 4. Can you explain
that just a little bit more so I
understand what you're trying to
get at.
Of course. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I
believe your previous question
may potentially be answered by
on page.
To
Line 5, it starts in a landmark
2014 decision affirming the
validity of Mount Taylor's
traditional culture, maybe they
in that decision said something
about that, but it's not really
in, in the memorial, but on page
3, I guess it's kind of more
reaffirmation of the
And I hate to be like so like
mean about this, but like bad
language about uranium mining in
general. So when it comes to
what it says on page 3.
Well, from page 2 it says
ongoing legacy of mining in New
Mexico, uranium mining has
resulted in long-term
environmental contamination and
poisoned people, aquifers,
negative health effects, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So when
we're talking about uranium in
the previous.
The previous uh
Line that we struck out, it just
pretty much said all uranium
mining is scary essentially
creates environmental havoc and
it's bad. So then we're also
saying here's why it's bad, but
we're only using in the context
of specific places in New Mexico
and not necessarily looking at
new research, new technologies,
and how this uranium mining in
general currently is actually
very safe, especially in places
like Canada, which are doing
a lot more renovations now with
uh ventilations in their minds,
etc. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so that is why that was stricken
out.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you for
explaining that because it made
no sense when I looked at the
previous amendment of why you
wanted to add 3 appointed
members, but now I understand
what you're trying to get at
with your moment and and Mount
Taylor is absolutely beautiful
place and I recommend anyone who
hasn't been out there to get out
there. It is a stunningly
beautiful. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr. and Mr. Speaker, before we
go to the next speaker, could I
request a roll call vote on
this. I believe I have failed to
do that prior. You did, and I
was already thinking about doing
the voice vote.
I'm glad I caught you, Mr.
Speaker.
Tough on the road, as they say,
gentlemen from Lee San
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Montero County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I was
struggling with this memorial
because of this very language.
And um
Much like the previous joint
memorial.
I had I had struggles with the
language on the inside of the
memorial.
And plus with discussions, so
that we had.
But very specifically, I, I
appreciate your attempt to do
this, striking line 19 through
25 on page 2 and then 1 through
4 on page 3. I very much
appreciate the attempt.
That would have made this
memorial something that I could
stand behind.
I do believe in it being a uh.
Uh, a site for for the tribes up
there and protecting it from
that standpoint, but to put the
negative language in there was
unnecessary.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate your attempts.
To live from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez on the
amendment.
They you, Mr. Speaker, does the
gentleman from Otero County
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from San
Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen.
Um
When you come, Mr. Speaker.
When, when anybody comes to the
To our tribal communities.
Um
It's always customary.
To, uh
Sit down with with with our
elders.
Mr. Speaker and.
And uh let them talk.
Mr. Speaker, when
When you listen to
Our elders.
And they talked about.
Um
The industry that the uranium
industry.
Yes, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, it did provide jobs,
yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
It was uh an economy.
In the buildup of
World War II, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I, I
believe what we're
Talking about is the legacy.
Of the industry.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
I'm, I'm, I'm not gonna get into
the
Future economy of it, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, but I, I, I,
I just want to bring to
attention.
Um, we're, we're, with the
gentleman be willing to come.
To my community and sit down
with my elders to hear the
stories about the impacts of the
uranium industry, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
I'm gonna stop right there. I
think that it's a fair point to
make, uh, but we are on the
amendment, so, um, if you have
any more questions on the
amendments or statements on the
amendment, please go ahead and
make them at this point.
OK
So sorry Mrs. It gets, uh,
emotional, you know, and uh I'm
trying to like focus, focus on
the amendment and not, Mr.
Speaker, and not not get
sidetracked. um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
looking at your, your amendment,
you want to strike out, um, the
Uh, these sections of, of the
memorial.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I, I think it's important that
as we um honored this memorial
that we tell the
Story of the legacy of the
impacts that this industry has
had for not just uh one
community, but
All, all communities in Mexico,
Mr. Speaker, and
I
It's, it's critical that, that
we
We, we, we keep that reminder
there, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, are, are, are you
familiar with the legacy of, of
the industry, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, good question. I can
answer that one. Yes, I am. And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Like you said, it has provided
jobs, but of course, back in the
day when it was a very
rudimentary mining operation,
there definitely were many
people who were exposed and that
that also can be due to more
cancerous, uh, practices such as
smoking in the mines, etc. and
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
absolutely, there are many, many
factors that we need to look at
when it comes to the history of
this particular.
Mining operation in the state,
however, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
the language that I'm stripping
out
most of it, actually, Mr.
Speaker, is in present tense. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it says
uranium mining operations create
environmental hazards. They
didn't say they created.
Back when we didn't have
regulation back when we did not
have the knowledge that we do
now, which unfortunately I wish
we did back then. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that is the
crux of this amendment.
And um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, you,
you mentioned that um that the
technology is, um,
Has been advanced than it was
before, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I, uh.
Judy
Mr. Speaker, can, can you, um,
Uh, uh, is, is, is there, is
there
Is there an interest, uh, to,
to.
To continue, uh, mining this
resource in our state or is it,
is it happening anywhere else?
gentlemen, I'm not sure of any
pending current mining, uh, and
you may correct me if I'm wrong,
but I do know when it comes to
the current technology, there
are many minds across the, the
world that are using new
technologies such as I believe
it's dust suppression in extreme
cases, uh, handling techniques
are, are added in in the
ventilation systems that I was
talking about prior, Mr.
Speaker, there are many minds I
can list a few of them cigar.
Lake, uh, the Olympic Dam,
Rossing, Sam, 4 mile, South
Incai, and a few others, many of
them are in Canada to our north,
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
when it comes to current
Surveying of potential mining in
the state. I, I have not spoken
to all the mining, uh, experts
around the country, if they're
looking at our state. However,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I would
be inclined to say that.
It is a lot safer today than it
was 60 years ago, and I will
stand by those words, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, uh, um.
Today
We, we are facing uh
contamination from
From these resources, can, can
you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle,
are you talking about past
contamination from past mining.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
there's the in, in Bluewater
community. Mr. Speaker gentleman
in the real San Jose Basin.
Close, close to uh a lot of
communities, actually a lot of
families speak a gentleman,
there's
Wells. Wells that uh are
communities cannot use.
There's, um, because of, of
this.
Contamination, are you familiar
with, uh,
These, uh, communities, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, yes, I am
actually. I, I've, I sat on the
Indian Affairs Committee for the
last 2 years, and we've traveled
across the state and, and we
have actually spoken to some
people who've had these lived
experiences and these stories,
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that, that absolutely is
something that's happening and
This has everything to do with
current mining operations, not
trying to stigmatize an entire
industry based upon 60 year old
mining that did not follow
current and and good regulation
to protect human health and
safety, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are, are
you aware of the term, uh,
Superfund sites that are uh and,
and are you familiar that there
are uranium, abandoned uranium
sites classified as a Superfund
site, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, according to the
Environmental Protection Agency,
yes, there are Superfund sites.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um,
Around Mount Taylor, there are
numerous uh Superfund sites. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, and, uh,
Uh, striking the language out.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen would
Um
Would not do justice to the
families that have been
impacted.
By the legacy and Mr. Speaker,
I, I just wanna
Uh, closed by addressing that
there are health issues.
Public health problems that
exist because of the industry
and I yield back. Uh, I, I asked
the body to
To um not support this amendment
and a yield the floor back.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment, the gentle lady from
Eddie and Lee, Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Otero please
yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I um.
I appreciate your amendment, um.
I will start by saying that I
had a bill some years ago in my
early years here in the
legislature to uh use state
funds to start cleaning up
uranium mine sites, and I could
not get hardly any support from
anywhere in the chamber.
Uh, so, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you alluded to.
Some of the historic problems
from decades ago where mining
was done in, in not a very safe
fashion.
Uh, but Mr. um Speaker and
gentleman, you also mentioned
that there are better ways now
of um.
Of mining for uranium, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, with some of
that include
Just better practices in
general, the use of respirators,
the use of PPE just basically
doing things very differently.
Would that be accurate, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, that would be
accurate.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
Is it true as far as you know
that uranium is a very valuable
mineral that is in short supply
in the United States right now,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, it is. Currently in a
very short supply, but it does
have many benefits, as I'm sure
you and I could talk all day
about all the cool things that
are happening with uranium, and
it's not just nuclear energy,
it's also, uh, when it comes to
medical research and also so
many other things.
Very good, thank you very much,
gentlemen, uh, Mr. Speaker.
So, um,
A a high percentage of the
United States energy comes
through commercial nuclear power
plants and uh we're seeing
reports coming out, uh, daily
that the US is in a bit of a um
A straight because we're just,
we have these reactors that need
this for fuel and we're
depending on places like the
Soviet Union, Russia, to to
supply what we need and we know
that's not the best dependence
to have. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is it true that
uranium is a mineral that
severed.
From the ground and that the
state collects uh royalties on
that and those proceeds go into
severance tax fund, which helps
fund our schools, for example,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, it is something that
is severed, so yes, it's subject
to the severance taxes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so,
you know, it serves a valuable
purpose that way and that it
does help pay for for much of
our, uh, state operations and uh
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is it
true that under modern mining
practices that one of the things
that has to be done before
there's any ground disturbances.
There have to be very extensive
field surveys and uh looking at
water tables and things like
that, would that be accurate,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, that's correct, and I
was, I was researching this last
night and there's some really
interesting information from
what's called the World Nuclear
Association, and it talks about
all the things that are needed
when it comes to just worldwide
and then also on the state or
the national level on trying to
find the safest, best ways to
continue looking into uranium
mining and yes, they need to do
surveys, they need to look at
water sources, they also need to
look at all kinds of other
environment
environmental impacts as well as
economic impacts around the
communities.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I,
I, I see your amendment as
accomplishing, preserving.
The mining and use of a very
valuable mineral that would
actually um
Positively affect our um our
state finances and so it it
seems to me it's not necessarily
a wise move to call it out by
name and say we won't allow for
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
you think we can do both things
at once, and by that I mean.
Protect uh what needs to be
protected there archaeological
sites and things like that and
responsibly mined for uranium.
Do you think we can do both, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I do, I believe we do, and
we could. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when we're talking about
this particular area, I believe,
and someone sent me this, these
statistics. They're about 400,
400 or 400, pardon me, PPM in
some wells and there are also in
the same areas, uh, very good
deposits of thorium, which is
also used for better modern
reactors. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when we're taking
out this language, it's very
broad.
relating to mining, I think it
would be potentially very, very
good for the communities
beneficially if there are going
to be companies that come in, do
these very detailed surveys to
make sure it's safe and
everything that they're doing is
done properly as well as
bringing some of these
communities, many of them are
very impoverished currently.
For many reasons, but these very
impoverished communities, some
of them don't even have running
water. It might actually bring a
resource to them if they did
indeed want to start looking at
uranium mining, so I believe we
can walk in and chew gum at the
same time, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree with you. I think we can
do both. Thank you very much.
debate on the amendment, the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, and
gentlemen from Montero is a
gentleman yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I appreciate, uh.
This amendment, which by the
way, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I'm not sure I've
ever seen.
A memorial.
Amended. I'm not even sure if
you've seen a memorial attempt
to be amended, so I think you
might hold some sort of a
record.
Uh, I'm, I'm not sure. I, I'm
not the uh historian here, but
uh that being said, this is a
An an interesting situation to
have.
On the House floor and attempt
to amend a memorial.
Mr. Speaker and gentleman, I,
and I understand the purpose of
the original memorial. I
understand.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
being from San Juan County, um,
the, the legacy.
And that has uh uh that we have
in our history of
Uh, uranium and the mines being
left behind and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, just to give a, just
a brief history lesson before I
go into these questions here.
It's, it's on the, it's on.
It's as long as it's on the
amendment on the less in a way.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
When, uh
During World War II when there
was a push for a need for
uranium.
Uh, while we were
Nationally trying to
Uh, defeat an evil empire.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
there were very bad practices
that were put in place.
In an effort to get a mineral
that was very needed.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I, the, the state of New
Mexico and the Navajo people in
particular have suffered because
of what was.
Uh, the federal government's mad
dash.
To go and collect and needed.
Commodity
For, for, I mean we, we have
folks that represent Los Alamos
Laboratories and that is
directly related to, uh, the
mining of uranium, and that is
still there today and it's still
a very important, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, very important
part of our national defense,
but Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
it's not just part of our
national defense, but it is part
of our national, uh, energy
supply.
Um, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I understand.
Uh, the efforts
On behalf of some to, to put
this memorial forward.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand the, uh, the emotion,
I think that's tied to it in
part because of the legacy mines
that we're still dealing with
today.
All of that to be said, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
This is a very, very important
mineral.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
not just uranium but the
thorium.
As well, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that and that's the,
the, the real opportunity may be
going forward is thorium because
it doesn't have the same.
nuclear waste proportions.
And the explosive nature of
uranium.
So this, that I believe is going
to be Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
in the future, very, very
necessary for our nation for
energy supply.
And the Speaker and gentlemen,
God forbid that we need.
Uh, uranium in in large
quantities again, but to declare
something completely.
Unavailable for extraction is,
is something that probably
something we should not do.
Um, so I, I appreciate, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, the Mount
Taylor means more than just.
Um
What it means, uh, concerning.
Uranium mining, it is one of the
four sacred mountains.
Of the Navajo people and so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I, uh,
with your amendment, I can
support.
The
Memorial, but without your
amendment, I, I don't know how I
can.
And so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
Just, just briefly, uh,
Representative Brown.
Uh, mentioned.
That the processes have changed.
So Miss Speaker and gentlemen,
even in New Mexico.
Um
The process is to be able to go
and get a mining permit.
To go and uh provide uh a
surety, financial a surety to
make sure that we do not end up
with legacy mines again that
there will not be, and then the
what it would take to be able to
go and mine whether it's uranium
or thorium or anything else that
happens to be in Mount Taylor.
Um
Your amendment would
Uh, I, I would imagine knowing
how you study, you looked into
all of this and, and you
understand that.
What, what would happen today in
mining is not what has happened
in years past. Would, would that
be a fair statement, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, yes, that's
correct. So currently there are
heaps of regulations and
probably too many in my opinion,
but they're there. So we have
the
Environment department we have
energy, minerals, and natural
resources department on the
state level. We have other
regulatory boards that look, I'm
sure that there are some local
ones as well when it comes to
zoning, planning, etc. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that as well
as the federal regulations
because that tops everything
else. You have to follow the
federal regulations, then the
state regulations and then
local. So when it comes to
opening in mind, we're not just
gonna start blasting into a
mountain and start mining, we
are going to have to do these
geological.
surveys, we're gonna have to do
all the things that are needed
to ensure that we can be safe,
protect the workers when it
comes to actually mining, and so
I don't even know currently if
there's pending projects in the
area when it comes to uranium or
thorium mining, but I will say,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
today is not the 1940s, it's not
the 1930s, and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we do not have the
same regulatory burdens that
they had then which were 0
pretty much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So currently we do have a lot of
regulations for better or for
worse, and they're here to
protect people and I think that
currently the mining industry is
very safe.
doing a very good job and I
don't want to stigmatize them or
push them down in any way
because they are fueling the
economy of our state in many
ways, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I'm, I'm not gonna go
on much longer here. Um, the
industry of the past, the
industry of the 1940s, uh, yeah,
they deserve the reputation they
have in New Mexico and it is a
long legacy of uh of uh coming
and getting what was needed at
the time.
And then leaving behind a mess
for for the state of New Mexico
in particular to deal with,
which we've still not dealt
with, so, um, I appreciate, uh,
the, the, the, the bills, the,
the, the memorial sponsor and
What
I, I believe is, is, uh,
associated with a lot of this,
but Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think it's a mistake.
To try and, and, and.
Preempt
A potential mining.
Of what can be very, very
important, not just for, uh, not
just for energy, um, New Mexico
is on the receiving end of, uh,
a lot of uh electricity from the
Pa Verde mine in Arizona nuclear
mine that P&M owns, uh, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, I
mentioned our national labs here
in New Mexico, uh, but the
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, what
I did not mention is our, our
naval fleet.
Completely is reliant upon
nuclear power, and Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, do not want to be
reliant on Russia to be
supplying uranium to us, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate your amendment
because I believe that we can
mine in a safe fashion. I, I'm a
32 year coal miner, so I know
how safe mining is today.
And uh I, I, uh, probably will
support your amendment to a
memorial which is unprecedented.
Thank you. There is further
debate on the amendment the
general lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. The gentleman from
Otero, uh, yield. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I'd gladly yield to my
friend from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
I just would like to say by, uh,
start by saying the purpose of a
memorial, uh, for me is to
memorialize.
To honor, to provide support and
help with loss, grief and
suffering and give recognition
to those things.
And I would
I would argue that, or for that
that's what this memorial does,
would you agree on that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, in many places except the
place I'm trying to amend, yes,
it does. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So in this specific
section that you are um trying
to amend, uh, you have mentioned
through the our debate today
that it's because of the past.
Um
Ways of mining in the past.
That you have a uh an issue with
the language that we see in this
memorial. Is that true?
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so
I have no problem with
addressing the past in any way,
and I hope that didn't come
across in the debate. What I did
have a problem with, and there
are actually many other sections
in this memorial that I, I could
have asked to take out, which I
probably should have, but this
was mostly about specific
current.
Mining in the industry on a
general level that it said in
the memorial. So when it talks
about mining, it says uranium
mining is environmentally
hazardous and it's horrible when
it comes to transport and
storage of uranium ore, these
things are, in my opinion,
blatantly false.
And they are currently
stigmatizing a current industry
that could potentially come to
the state, maybe not at Mount
Taylor, maybe some somewhere
else, but I don't want to be
telling people you're not
welcome here in New Mexico. We
don't want you here. If they're
an industry that could create
jobs and create economic
development for people across
our state that helps every
single one of us legislators and
constituents alike. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you for that
clarification.
I would argue back to say that
this is.
Significant to what this
memorial is memorializing.
Because we don't want to erase.
The past and understanding even
the present.
With this element uranium.
Because it is a radioactive.
Elements and in and of itself is
one of the most dangerous
elements.
That exists, would you agree to
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I would not, I'm not an
expert on the.
Amount of nuclear power each ore
of uranium has, so I would hate
to give a definitive answer to
that, but what I would say is
current practices, especially I
would say to our neighbor in
Canada, which I would look to
when it comes to the safety
aspects of this uranium ore
mining are very safe. They are
not hurting people, they are
actually helping communities and
they are doing a very good job
currently. So Mr. Speaker,
General Wati, I couldn't tell
you because I am not a
specialist.
on that, but I would say, yes,
it's very important to nuclear
energy, and it can indeed create
nuclear energy, so I'm sure it's
powerful and I think power is a
good thing, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you're
speaking of energy that's
created from using uranium.
Which is so uranium is the
element that is used to create
the um.
nuclear energy of which you
were, uh, mentioning that's not
disputable. What's what, what it
also is not disputable, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is that when
it says here on line 19 on page
2 where I was hearing a mining
operations create environmental
hazards to the transport and
storage of uranium ore,
increasing the risk, increasing
the risk of contamination of
land, air, and water resources
and exacerbating the health
threats are
faced by Indian and non-Indian
communities alike and whereas
the ongoing legacy of uranium
mining in New Mexico has
resulted in long term
environment contamination.
Such as poison aquifers and
negative health impacts on
Indian nations, tribes and
pueblos and local communities
highlighting the need for
stronger ecological protections
for Mount Taylor and all the
state's natural resources, so I
would argue, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that through this
language, there is consensus to
move to better and safer
practices.
And that's what you're trying to
mend out of this, this memorial,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
We want to this this language
shows that there is progression,
but also memorializes.
What has happened in our past
here in New Mexico.
And that there is real life.
Threats. There are things that
have happened and could
potentially happen. It's not
saying anything against the
industry which I hear you're
trying to protect, but I don't
feel like this, this memorial is
a threat to Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I feel like this is
how we memorialize our history
of what has happened in our
state in order to progress in
order to move forward. And I
think by you asking us to remove
this language, then it takes out
that.
Potential, Mr. Speaker
gentleman, would you agree or
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I would disagree that
we're, we're trying to
I guess the way I, I heard your
question was we're trying to
kind of take away the history of
uranium mining, which we're not,
and Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think through this debate we've
actually
Spoken about that, we do not
want to erase what's happened in
the past. What happened in the
past was terrible, and we need
to learn from it and we also
need to learn that there are
safe technologies out there and
I just got this sent for you,
Mr. Speaker, generally, to
answer your previous question,
so.
The most dangerous elements are
man-made elements actually and
all major mining sites from that
era are are pretty much
contaminated previously, so
unfortunately the the mining
sites from then are
contaminated, but current mining
requires you invest in a
contingency fund for cleanup.
So waste like, like what
happened previously, uh, is no
longer gonna happen so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
say that also uh radioactivity
is merely a measure of decay and
almost all elements decay,
Mister Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, do you
know the the the half-life of
uranium?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
sure, I'm sure I could find it
for you in a moment if you Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it's, it's 4
well, specifically for uranium,
uh, is it 2:38, it's 4.5 billion
years.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
That means that
The Half-Life, the, the life of
the this is older than.
What has been told to us in our
uh.
Science books, the the life of
the Earth.
We are not trying to argue is in
this.
Um, portion of this memorial
that there is anything damaging
to to the industry that which
you're you're trying to say we
need to evolve and understand I
don't believe that that is in
this language here. What is in
this language is to memorialize
what the effects of this sub
this uh elements are, and it's
not and when you talk about
man-made elements, those
man-made elements are have been
created or.
Um
Made from other radioactive
elements, so when you say those
are the most um
Uh, or the, uh,
The harshest elements, you're
correct.
That is, that is true. So I
would, I would just trying to
argue here that we are not doing
what, uh, I'm trying to say,
we're not trying to come down on
the industry other than what has
happened to memorialize that, to
ask for better practices to
ensure that our water, land,
air, and our communities are
protected, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I would respectfully
disagree with you, just from
reading the memorial. I will
read it again.
Mining operations from uranium
create.
Present tense, environmental
hazards through the transport
and storage of uranium ore
increasing, that's another
present term word. The risk of
contamination of land, air, and
water resources, and
exacerbating another present
tense word.
The health threats already faced
by Indian and non-Indian
communities alike. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
That is all present tense. It's
saying the current.
State
Of uranium mining is per this
memorial.
Environmentally hazardous.
Risky
To contaminate land.
And exacerbates health threats,
which is not, just not correct,
Mr. Speaker, General Lati. So,
uh, yes, it is absolutely trying
to take out current language
that's saying the current
industry.
is unsafe, which it is not. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we're going
to disagree on that just simply
based on the these current areas
that are still the, the
contaminations.
Uh, it's still active.
Based upon the the simple
science of the half-life of this
element, there's still exposure.
There are still the water.
Because of the previous mining
uh practices has been
contaminated. The land has been
contaminated the the those that
live in these areas in our
communities have not.
Um, and I get emotional because
they have not even, we have the
the federal government, the
government has not done anything
to help them and to support
them.
In what all the losses that they
have had, and that's why this
language is significant. This
isn't about the future of this
industry. This is about the
present, like you said, and
presently, this is what this is
what is occurring in our own
state.
We have just this year.
Put in our budget an effort to
try to repair some of those
damages. When we talk about fun
sites we, we had those those
those uh conversations we're
finally addressing this issue.
That is why this is important.
It is not to argue or to
condemned the future and it is
simply asking that we have those
protections and that we
acknowledge that we are
currently in the state, in our
state and our people in the
state are still suffering, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's what
this language is about. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
On the amendment, is there
further debate? The gentle lady
from Donana Sierra Socorro,
Representative Dao. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you Representative from
Otero County. Leave it to you to
amend a memorial.
Mr. Speaker, um, does the
gentleman yield?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from all
those beautiful counties. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Um, but I'm, I'm
actually kind of, I mean, I, I
would, I wouldn't have done it.
We usually just vote for or
against, but um when I was
looking at the memorial, I had
felt that I, I had no
alternative but to vote no,
which makes me feel sad because
I want to respect sovereign
nations. I want to respect,
respect my Taylor, and I want to
respect the community and what
they're asking for. But my
The reason that I was going to
vote no is because on page 2, on
line 23, so I'm respecting.
Governmental sovereignty.
And what they're asking for and
acknowledging as um
Representative Lujan has said
the history and that we need to
do better and that we need to
make people right who have been
wronged, and I want to support
that until I'm 23 when it,
you've talked a lot about it,
exasperating the health threats
already faced by Indian and
non-Indian communities alike.
Now we're speaking on behalf of
none, um, sovereign nations, and
then, you know, on the, on page
3 on line 4, and all the state's
natural resources. All the
state's natural resources, and
there are other areas that, you
know, that
There's a, there's a lot of,
there's a lot more in this
memorial. If they want to deny
permits, it's further resolve
the House of Representatives
will urge federal and state
agencies, including the United
States and these different
agencies.
To, to, um, deny permits and
authorization for you and mining
projects within the Mount Taylor
traditional cultural property
boundaries. I don't know what
those boundaries are, but then
further resolve that they look
at different mining acts and
that letters be sent to all
these federal agencies, the
delegations, the governor and
all these folks, that's now
asking us.
We, we as a body, Mr. Speaker,
and Representative, you know,
we've sent some letters to some
administration signed by members
of our caucus. Maybe not even
all the members of our caucus
because even within our caucus,
not all members agree.
Mr. Speaker, and, and
Representative, how often do you
see memorials that declare these
types of, of um requests and
have us sign our name to a
letters to this nature without
legislation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I think it's rare. I
don't know if it's never
happened, but I know it's super
rare and it's also rare that
someone amends a memorial, even
though like you said, there are
so many other horrible places
that I could have stricken from
the bill, like, like what you
just referenced. Let's, let's
tell these people just deny
permits. I don't think that's
OK, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
When it comes to a statement
made by an entire body.
Saying something very poignant,
something that is very
In my opinion, very provocative.
And not in a good way, Mr.
Speaker, gentle waiting, I find
it to be offensive to the great
people of this state because
we're speaking on behalf of them
and what we're saying to those
people is we do not want these
kinds of industries, and we may
have constituents who they work
and they currently they
currently work in the mining
industry. They are miners and
are we going to try to
stigmatize those people because
I don't think that's a good
policy to do in the state,
whether it be a memorial, a
bill, a house joint resolution.
House joint Memorial, whatever
it is, I don't think any
legislation in this body should
say we don't want you here, get
out. That's essentially what
this bill said, this memorial
says, that's why I'm trying to
amend it, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
You know, I'm, I am a freshman,
but I'm a returning freshman and
during my last tenure here in
this body, there were bills that
were introduced bills, not
memorials, bills that were
introduced that no one from my
region in a five county region
would touch with a 10 ft pole
because it didn't reflect our
values, our culture, our
beliefs, and they had to be
carried from people outside my
area.
And so I, I want to acknowledge
and affirm something that
members of this body bring
forward and say represents their
people, their heritage and
culture. And I don't, I know
what it feels like when someone
comes and imposes on your
territory and try or your area,
your region of the state, and
tries to do something contrary
to the value and the culture and
the industry of the people in
your area doesn't feel good. It
doesn't feel good at all. So
it's hard to say no when folks
from an area are bringing forth
something and you want to
respect them, but when you
in non-Indian communities and
all of our state's natural
resources, it goes, that's,
that's all 33 counties and then
it's going beyond a memorial of
intent that I would like to
support or wouldn't mind
supporting for a, a positive
acclamation for a targeted area.
Um, so I
You know, I had never thought of
amending a memorial, but had the
language changed a little bit,
it would be something that would
let me be able to support it and
support my friends.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Bria Riva, Sandoval and San
Juan, Representative Lente.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Good
afternoon. Good afternoon, Mr.
uh, with the gentleman from
Otero County, please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to the chairman of tax.
Thank you gentlemen. I a quick
comment, no questions, but
certainly given the legacy of
unreclaimed lands in and around,
uh, not only just tribal lands,
but in New Mexico, that is, that
is devastated the, the people,
the land.
The air and the water.
He would be unconscionable to
strip the intent of this
memorial with your amended and
so with that being said, I urge
the body to vote no on the
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. There's debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Chavez Edan Lee, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from Otero County
Yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend.
Thank you
gentlemen, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Uh
I too
I like to support, you know, the
intent of the memorial is good.
We all want to.
Preserve our, our religious and
national treasures.
But I too
I'm afraid the language in this
thing will tend to prevent.
The future development of some
of our resources.
Is that, is that true,
gentlemen?
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, in my opinion it is
according to what we've just
read earlier and what we're
taking out and then what we, we
want to keep in the memorial
and, and like we said that I
don't like everything in the
memorial currently with this
stripped out, but it would be
something that I could choke
down and vote for. Otherwise,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
this does indeed stigmatize a
very good industry that is very
lucrative, very.
Beneficial when it comes to
jobs. And yes, there's a,
there's a sordid history
unfortunately in this state with
this industry, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm not gonna let the
past keep us from moving into
the future and having safe,
clean, and environmentally
friendly.
Uranium mining in the state of
New Mexico. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, absolutely it does
push down an industry and I do
not like it.
Thank you, uh,
Gentlemen and Mr. Speaker.
Uh,
is it true that
I come from Southeast New Mexico
and the oil and gas country.
And uh
If you go in the back in the
history of the oil and gas
Company in the 30s and 40s. It
was a pretty terrible industry.
Would you agree to that?
Mr. Gentleman
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen, yes, I would, I would
say so, especially when we're
talking about safety concerns.
Absolutely.
Uh, thank you, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, not on, not only safety
concerns, but, I mean,
They, they are still cleaning
up.
Sites in
Southeastern New Mexico, where
they dumped whatever, whenever
there was no rules or
regulations on it.
those days. So they did whatever
they wanted to do or they had a
spill.
Not that they wanted to spill it
because there was money, but
they, uh, there was no
regulations or
Oh
Any laws that required them to
go in there and clean up the
sites.
to that, Mr. Speaker. I mean,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, I would agree
with that.
Uh
You know, the uh uranium
industry.
I do believe it.
The way of our future.
You know, we, we in New Mexico
have
Mr. General, we, we have several
entities that
We require uranium or, or labs
which are a major, major
contributor to our economy in
New Mexico with sites all over
the state.
With our military facilities in
White Sands Missile Range.
in, in, down in my country.
Of course we have
Whip, which is where we store
all the refuge from the
mining deals that was thought
that it's turned out to be a
very safe facility when you
agree to that.
Mr. gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, and I, I would
say when it comes to your
previous comment about the need
for uranium when it comes to
specifically the nuclear
industry, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when we're talking
about hitting targets,
especially 2035, 2050 for the
ETA.
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there's no way to hit
that without nuclear power,
without nuclear energy, and
actually the the former
administration on the federal
level agreed with that and their
climate platform. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I would say
the nuclear industry is
something that is necessary for
Just national security and just
energy in general when it comes
to producing enough to power our
homes and keep the lights on,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, uh, also in Southeast
New Mexico, we have a company
called Uenco USA, which enriches
this uranium.
And uh if you've never seen
pictures or seen it, it is a
amazing facility.
You can eat eggs off the parking
lot in that place, you know.
It is very clean, they're very
conscious, they follow all the
rules and regulations
but the base of my, I guess.
Problem with this bill is
The fact that we are
And, and worded to this and I'm,
I'm like you, uh, gentlemen, on
page 3 that we want to write
letters is even worse. I wish
you had included that in this.
But
if we could change this language
I could.
Well,
maybe swallow it down and
support it. I mean, I, I don't
want to sound like I'm not in
favor of the
cultural and uh
Of this uh Mount Taylor and it
is a beautiful place.
But I,
but we're not giving out
permits.
I just don't want to prevent at
some point in the future.
Denying the possibility of, of
having minds in this area that
follow the rules and regulations
given to them by the state of
New Mexico. Thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Is for the bid on the
amendments. The general lady
from
Tonyana Hidalgo and Luna
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd
gladly yield to my friend.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I have a a.
A perspective on this that's
kind of emotional too, and I
feel very protective about this,
this, um, piece of legislation
here because of what my district
has recently been through with
what I feel like is federal
overreach and and your amendment
here about mining, I, I think,
um, a representative from
another representative from
Donanata pointed out that there
was other language on page 3 and
I'd like for you to look at
that, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that it says
that there should be no it would
deny permits for authorizations
for uranium mining projects
within the Mount Taylor
traditional cultural property
boundaries first of all, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you know
what those boundaries are? I
don't think that was ever
determined. The boundaries of
Mount Taylor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I do not know specifically
coordinate wise where it starts,
where it ends, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I will say it
potentially could be in
The previous section, I believe
I said.
Where is it?
Talking about the landmark 2014
decision affirming the validity
of its traditional cultural
property designation that
potentially could have
referenced it, but it does not
specifically say where it
starts, where it ends in the
memorial.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do think that's
really important when we're
talking about the memorial for
Mount Taylor. We need to
identify what that is but that's
kind of a different subject
right now, but I think that
language about uranium uranium
mining and denying permits sets
a precedent.
It sets a precedent for future
mining in general, um, we've
seen that as Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there is a movement
across the West to.
Not permit for mining and to
take large areas of land under
the guise of um protection
protection I, I'm, I'm
protective about that word
protection because we don't know
exactly what that means and so
I'm protective of Mount Taylor
and the people that live in
Mount Taylor who love Mount
Taylor because it's a very
similar situation uh happened to
in my district where there's an
effort to designate all of our.
Mountains in Luna County 245,000
acres of land and cease
permitting for all future
mining, um, um, decreased cattle
grazing and.
And um
And take away most of all, take
away local control from the
people we love our mountains.
People not Taylor love their
mountain.
And we want to maintain that
local control and so I, I do,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I do
support your amendment, but kind
of for different reasons. It's
not so much the uranium
necessarily it's mining kind of
in general and what I believe is
a precedent set here Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that would,
would um would take away the,
the decision making, um, and,
and even the protection and
access.
Um, multi-use access for the
people that live near and love
Mount Taylor. I recognize, I
acknowledge Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the um the emotion
involved here for the spiritual,
the cultural aspects of Mount
Taylor in fact.
I get to tell just about 30
seconds of the story because um
Mount Taylor, I don't know we
haven't talked about this, but
it is the highest point on the
continental Divide Trail which
travel which comes from the boot
heel in my district all the way
up to Colorado all the way up to
Canada, but it is the highest
point and um I got to hike it. I
got to backpack it not too long
ago. I love Mount Taylor and,
and I'm protective of of access
to it for everyone, but also for
decision making for the local
people.
And having them control that,
so, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Do you know if there's been any,
um, and maybe this isn't the
amendment, maybe this is on the
bill. I don't know. I'm, I can't
quite decide, but I'll ask you
if that's OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, do you know if
there's been any effort to have
reclamation, um, in some other
art to address reclamation in
some other way.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I believe there's been
many different ways. I think
there's been state legislation
like the good representative
from Lee said previously
regarding uranium cleanup. I
know that on the federal level
there's something that I've been
very supportive of the RICA
expansion and that affects my
district as well because we we
were the blowback after the bomb
hit where they tested the bomb.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
yes, I believe there's many
avenues that.
we could approach on this, and I
think there's actually vast
bipartisan support for it in
Congress, but since it was
mainly the federal government's
fault, I think it would be the
federal government's
responsibility to clean it up,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, um, gentlemen and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um.
Responsible mining is something
that we do today and I'm sure
that responsible mining will
become even more so in the
future. Do you know, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, when the
Bureau of Land Management was
formed.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I am not, do you know? I
do, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
Bureau of Land Management was
formed in 1946, and I believe
I'm not sure exactly the
timeline of when that the uh
mining was being done. I think
there was uranium mining maybe
up into the 70s or so. Is that
correct, Mr. Gentleman or Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady from my very
elementary education on this
topic, I believe.
That's correct.
Well, they might have been a
little slow, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on, um,
On managing the land, but now
the BLM is very much involved in
managing mining. There's there
are years and years of economic
um oh well of impact studies,
environmental impact studies,
EIS um studies that are done on
the land, um, and they can go on
for years to make sure that the,
the land is managed properly.
That was the, the um purpose of
forming the BLM back in 1946 to
manage public lands for
multiple use while conserving
natural resources, so moving on
into the future, I feel sure
that that will happen more and
more often, and I've seen that
happen in my own district. It's
not easy to do any mining, and
it has to be good for the
environment, so.
I, um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
just want to say like, like I
mentioned in the beginning that
I feel protective. It's a very
different argument that I have,
um.
I think this, this, this
memorial addresses to aspects
here. It's, it could be two
different, two different things.
It is acknowledging the
spiritual, the cultural, the
beauty, the connection that the
people have with the land,
acknowledging that I will do
that, absolutely, um.
But then the mining aspects, the
lack of local control, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, can't
support that, but I do support
your amendment. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Santa Fe
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House for Amendment number 1 to
House Memorial 37.
We are on a motion to table
House Floor Amendment number 1,
20 Memorial 37, a vote of yes
and the amendment would have
been tabled they would have
nowhere back in the amendment.
32nd book clock.
The vote is now open.
Well it's about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 38 in the
affirmative, 23 in the negative.
House floor remember number 12
House Memorial 37 has been
tabled.
gentleman from Montero, you
still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I
guess this was an interesting uh
approach to trying to amend a
memorial, I guess it's happened
and it didn't happen actually,
but Mr. Speaker, I would say
when it comes to this memorial.
There are many other reasons why
I cannot support the memorial
now because I have continued to
read it and for me, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm not, I'm not
supportive of.
The
Approach to kind of, in my
opinion kind of bully people
into not giving permits. I'm not
a fan of continually talking bad
about a specific industry that
is literally the only way that
we can get to net zero, which is
the goal of certain people of
this chamber and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Can you tell me why we, we added
the language in here that would
attempt to
Tell people not to permit
certain projects and then also.
Why did we continue to add
certain language that would
indeed
Kind of stigmatize the industry.
Thank you, Speaker and thank you
gentlemen from Otero. Before I
proceed, I'd like to formally
introduce my experts sitting on
the floor with me to the right,
Mr. Aaron Sims, who's in Acma
tribal member and general
counsel for the Pueblo of
Vacama.
uh, speaker and gentleman to
answer your question about the
um.
The extension, um, that you're
you're alluding to, um, I'd like
to assure you that this House
memorial is just for the Mount
Taylor area. It does not reach
beyond that and our hope and
goal is that the state will
reiterate their support as they
have done when it was done in
2009 through the formal TCP and
then again in 2014 with the
Supreme Court.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so do we know if
those decisions from the Supreme
Court.
Said
in definite terms that uranium
mining is, and I quote,
environmentally hazardous.
Increasing the risk of
contamination of land, air,
water, and exacerbating the
health.
Threats
about the current industry as
your memorial states.
Speaker and gentleman from
Otero, the Supreme Court order
talks specifically to Mount
Taylor as cultural property.
It's included in here in my
memorial because of the
historical historical context
and also because and it's
written in the current text and
present tense because right now
with House Bill 333, we're still
actively doing cleanup in these
areas that are on state land.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies. So
yes, so those did indeed
specifically talk about the
areas. So can you tell me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Can you give me a definition of
the Mount Taylor area and does
it include the plateau of San
Mateo.
Thank you, Speaker, and uh.
Represent gentleman from Otero
for the patience while I speak
with my expert, the Mount Taylor
as cultural property Memorial
only addresses.
The Mount Taylor TCP designated
area. It does not include
private land, and it does not
include land grants.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So can you give me
a little more information on
what the actual TCP designated
area is.
When it comes to this, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I guess
I'm just wondering, does it
include areas that are being
developed. I know there's like
some wind farms out there. I'm
just wondering, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, where, where do
the boundaries end.
Thank you, Speaker and thank you
gentlemen from Otero, the Mount
Taylor traditional cultural
property boundaries go from all
the bases.
Mess of Mount Taylor all the way
up to the peak.
But they exclude private land.
And land grants.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. That, that
did help me when it came to what
the actual site looks like, OK,
Mr. Speaker, general lady, and
then I also see in the memorial.
Where I probably should have
tried to amend out it says
proposed uranium mining
projects. I'm on page 2.
poses significant threats to
Mount Taylor and the surrounding
environment by physically
degrading the landscape and
cultural sites, and then also at
the bottom where I did try to
take it out, it did say the
ongoing legacy.
etc
Relating to
Protection from Mount Taylor and
all of this site, the state's
natural resources. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
tell me what you mean by all the
state's natural resources and
can you tell me what specific
threats, the current mountain is
facing based upon.
The
quote unquote proposed uranium
mining that may deplete and
contaminate the aquifer because
I like that because this is in
May. It doesn't say, it doesn't
say it does. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, could you just
answer that for me?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
Otero, yes, and as you recall in
committee when we initially
discussed this, there was no
opposition or position made by
the uranium lobbyist who was
present, but to further expand
on that specific section, what
we're talking about are all the
natural resources and I'm sure
there are hunters in this room,
so this would go towards the
wildlife. I'm sure that there
are medicinal plant gatherers
this would go to protect those
plants. This
would go to the firewood that so
many citizens in that district
request permits for and haul
back to their home to keep their
families warm during the colder
months or to even use that wood
during ceremony. All of these
are protected and included in
that.
Scope of natural resources.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then one of my
last questions. Could you tell
me?
More about why you didn't also
include thorium mining.
Would that be allowed? I mean,
would, would you not be lobbying
against thorium mining because
it's not included in the
memorial.
Thank you, Speaker and thank
thank you gentlemen from Otero.
At this time we are only looking
at Mount Taylor as cultural
property and the reaffirmation
of support in regard to uranium.
All right, no further questions,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
There is further debate
generated from representative
Real Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and will
the gentle lady.
From and I like to mention all
the um.
Counties, so, uh, Bernalillo
Simela McKinley, San Juan
Socorro, and Valencia please
yield.
The speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalio.
Thank you so gentle lady, I
rise.
Um, to speak a little bit about
my relationship.
To the area which I think is um
had significant impact.
On not only my work, my career.
But my indigenous uh beliefs as
well as with what I was tasked
to do in Cibala.
And McKinley Counties and um so
I have a few questions, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady along
those lines.
Excuse me, and I think um your
expert witness for being here
because of the Pueblo vacama
signifies one of the major um.
Reasons why this area is of
particular um.
Had such a significant impact on
my on my livelihood first I'll
begin Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady with um the tricks that my
grandfather would take.
To visit his cousins.
Uh, and join in on the annual
and biennial celebrations and
commemorations and ceremonies
most importantly the ceremonies.
He would take um he would jump
the train.
Somewhere around um.
Airy dairy
He would walk from um.
Either the village in Tortugas
or wherever he happened to be to
jump the train so that he could
have a train ride up to Grant's.
And in grants, um, that meant
that he would join with his
cousins.
In ceremonial um cele and
ceremonies, but he also.
Um, talk to me at great I was
his oldest grandchild, so he
talked to me at length and a lot
of detail.
That was permissible for him to
talk to me about, um, and one of
the things Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that he spoke
greatly about was the.
Um, allowance by all of his
cousins in the area to be able
to bring back with him the
medicinal plants from the area,
all of the plants that were
known as and still known as
Acoma Acoma plants, they, there
are a number of, of healing, um.
Elements in all of the plants in
that area basically uh my
grandfather would bring home.
And make them into tinctures and
this was his way of healing.
Uh, the many people that would
come and visit him for healing,
physical healing and other
healing, so.
When I was asked, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady to take on the
responsibility of the uh
economic development office
director of that office, I
visited um with not he he had
already passed, but with my
father to verify.
A lot of the stories because I
wanted to make sure that when I
did meet the elders of Ama, the
public of Acuma, that I would
be, uh, appropriately, um,
addressing them and um didn't
wanna ever um.
Overstep my bounds either. So he
verified everything, all the
stories that my grandfather
would tell me he verified, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
So this area had.
Really, um, significant
importance to me and I welcomed
and accepted the position.
It was a um.
Very difficult position because
uh grant Siba and McKinley were
known as the.
Um
What is it boom and bust?
Communities and I was sat down
and told about all of the boom
and bust.
Um, and as part of my briefing,
not by the local governments,
but.
When I asked to visit with
everyone that I would be working
with.
That included my first stops
were with every single tribe.
That was um.
My responsibility under my
responsibility and so that
included the Pueblo vacama
Laguna.
Excuse me, I visited with Rayma.
Uh, I went to Pine Hill. I
visited with a number of chapter
houses and the list can go on
first and foremost, because Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I
wanted to understand.
The importance of the booms and
the busts of the area.
Because my job.
Um
If you kept to traditional
economic development um.
Work
Would be to look at industry.
And
Other types of industrial
developments in that area.
However, I had heard stories
from my grandfather and others
about the impact.
Of all the industries that have
been there but particularly the
uranium.
Industry
And the impact that it had Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
On um on the communities, not
from a financial perspective
although that was.
A major impact.
But another major impact, Mr.
Speaker and general lady was
health.
I learned
And to this day it pains me, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, to
recount.
The number of stories that were
told to me.
About the number of generations.
Of families who were
experiencing.
Cancers
All these different types of
cancers.
Um, but they all circled back.
To cancers related to autoimmune
disorders primarily skin cancers
were high on the list.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
And um
Then I was told by the elders of
the communities that I visited.
That um
The contaminants were still
alive.
The contaminants were still
visible.
That all I had to do was look at
how the water water gathered,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
And ponder
After rains or as the rains.
came down
And the snow melted from Mount
Taylor.
And other areas and they would
say just look at the water and
how it, what color it turns.
And um so Mr. Speaker and and
gentle lady, I decided that I
would first study the area.
Steady the area both
scientifically.
And, um, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, from my own.
Visual perspective.
So I um enlisted.
The help of aerial views aerial
shots.
I enlisted the help of a
helicopter, um, taking me to
remote areas of where um the
mining companies had um.
Had uh left their open tailings
I guess that's how you would
refer to them.
And the vast exposure.
Of
Having been
Designated Superfund sites but
yet.
In the early 2000s.
After 40+ years or more,
probably 50 at that point of.
Having
Been mandated to clean up the
sites there were still open
sites.
Which
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
exposed the air.
Exposed the land.
And expose the water to these
contaminants.
I saw them firsthand, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
But one of the most impactful
visits I made.
And I say impactful because it
brings me back to my grandfather
was.
When I ask permission.
If I could visit.
Um, as much as I could of Mount
Mount Taylor.
Because I knew that it was a
very sacred site.
And I wanted to see how close
the contaminants.
We in the surrounding areas to
the sacred site.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady and
so um.
I won't go into detail about
what I found.
I won't go into detail about.
How it um my site visit.
Affected me
But I will tell you.
What I did encounter.
And that I found.
The one of the most spiritual
encounters I've had in my life,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
When I reached a certain point.
And I and only I made the walk.
Because no one else was allowed,
only I.
I made, I walked up to a certain
point.
And I'm looking around.
And lo and behold, what do I
see?
Not one family of elk, but two
family of elk.
And we stood still.
Iying each other.
From a distance.
And Mr. Speaker and general
lady, one thing I learned from
my grandfather was to respect.
And listen.
And look
Into the eyes.
Of our
Beautiful creatures.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
was not afraid. I did not run. I
did not go anywhere. I stood
there.
And the elk families and I
visited.
That may not make sense to a
great number of my our
colleagues here but I know it
makes sense to you.
And to um my indigenous brothers
and sisters and families.
I stood there
And um we communicated for a
while and from a distance.
The county manager and others
were freaking out, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady because they
thought for sure they were gonna
have to answer to my family or
call in a medical crew or
whatever to rescue me from the
elk.
And all they could do was look
through their binoculars and
watch.
The Ek families and I.
Just looking at each other and
having a silent.
Conversation
I say that and I convey that at
this moment. I've shared that
with very few.
Other than within my own
indigenous families and circles.
But I share that because of the
significance of your memorial.
So my first question, I don't
have too many, but I have a few
clarifying questions, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
I want if can you tell me?
How many uranium projects are
currently being proposed at this
time.
In what I would call.
The entire amount Taylor, um.
Area of.
Importance
Thank you, Speaker and thank you
gentle lady. There are 3
currently pending.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady.
Can you
Gentle lady, tell me.
How many sites?
Superfund sites are still
active?
Speaker and thank you for that
question, speaker and gentle
lady. One of them is Home steak.
And there are many others that
are proposed as legacy.
Management sites.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I had all of them
listed and I just wiped out my
uh.
My page just accidentally but
thank you for that there are
several others and you did
mention, um, a few.
Gentle lady and um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if.
Those are still active sites.
And they were
Given their status.
Some, like, you know, each site
had different, um, clean up.
Um,
designations and timelines and
so on, but I would venture to
say 40, 50 years in the.
As recent as just recently
there's still sites.
And yet we're have.
Proposed sites.
Then Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I get no assurance.
In
The cleanup effort.
And then we have proposed new
sites and what that might look
like.
In terms of continued exposure
to contaminating our air, our
water and our land.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's sorry I was gonna start
with a question, but I had to
make that statement. I have no
assurance.
That anything will change.
Gent uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that's why your memorial
is so critically important.
Because
I had another question and I had
related to.
What the federal trust
responsibilities are to our
tribes in terms of.
Protections and preserving, can
you speak?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
just briefly about the federal
trust obligations to us.
Thank you Speaker and thank you
gentle lady for that question,
uh, the Federal trust
responsibility would expand to
the work that they're doing
under NEPA with the tribes.
As well as the National Historic
Preservation.
Act.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady. This is really
important because we have had.
Generations of um.
Trust responsibilities.
That
Many times have gone.
Um
As they should
But many more times.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady lady
they've.
Chosen to close their eyes.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
In the case of a traditional
cultural property, would you
say?
That to protect.
Our traditional cultural
property that is local control.
or excuse me, speaker and gentle
lady, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
wholeheartedly agree with you.
Tribal sovereignty.
Goes beyond local control.
Um
Local control state control.
Um, almost all control defers to
tribal sovereignty in my view.
Particularly Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady when it comes to
traditional cultural property.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
have the right.
To self govern to self control
to self determine.
And to protect
Well, we deem and only we deem
our traditional cultural
properties, would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker general.
Speaker and gentle lady, thank
you, yes.
Thank you.
So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
although I heard our debate
being called emotional?
I learned a long time ago as a
woman breaking grounds in a male
dominated world.
That one of the
Terminologies, one of the lang
the language that was used, oh
in the board rooms where where
we're male dominated was, oh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, you're
getting too emotional.
You shouldn't get emotional.
For many years, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, this was used.
To help keep us women in our
place.
I'm hoping Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that when we talk
about.
Traditional cultural property.
And our right to self determine
our right to tribal sovereignty.
That the word emotional would be
removed.
And be replaced by it is our
right.
And our responsibility, so.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
thank you so, so very much.
For bringing this memorial
forward.
For all the reasons that I stood
up in support of your memorial.
I thank you.
And I ask and urge.
This house.
To join me in and you and
respect.
Our right to protect our
traditional cultural properties
by voting in favor of this
memorial. Thank you.
There is further debate, young
lady from Berley and Torrens,
Representative Lord.
You, Mr. Speaker, will the
gentle lady from some beautiful
counties, please yield your
time.
m ak er I absolutely yield to my
beautiful friend from Berna Leo
in Torrance. Thank you. Um, so I
did have some questions about
Mount Taylor itself. So I'm
gonna ask specific questions
when you talk about Mount
Taylor, are you talking about a
certain amount of acres, what,
what exactly are you talking
about when it comes to um pres
the preservation of of Mount
Taylor itself.
Speaker and thank you speaker
and thank you gentle lady. When
we talk about Mount Taylor
traditional cultural property
we're only talking about the
designated areas that I had
mentioned before, um, which
exclude private land and land
grants.
OK, Mr. Speaker, but, um,
serious question, um, we're
speaking generally, is there
like 10 amount of um.
Miles X amount of acres. I know
you're excluding land grants in
private, but are there X amount
of acreage for that from Mount
Taylor.
Thank you, Speaker and thank you
gentle lady. The exact acreage
which I unfortunately do not
have with me, um, is stated in
the.
Cultural, um, let's see, in the
New Mexico State Register of
Cultural Properties document. I
apologize for not having that
readily available, but I could
get that for you. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to
know if you knew it offhand
because I did see that on the
and also I have a question
because I was looking, um, from
Mount Taylor and I did not know
this that it was a volcano at
one point, it's a dormant
volcano is loose as far as I
know, Mr. Deli, do you know
where
the name Mount Taylor came from.
Thank you, Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Yes, actually it
was originally Blue Mountain and
then it was later renamed for
President United States
President uh Taylor, I believe
in the late um.
1800s, but I could get that
exact.
Date and era for you, but it was
renamed for him, but it's also
known to indigenous communities
as this
Date and era for you, but it was
renamed for him, but it's also
known to indigenous communities
that exist
and Koshtima.
And other names as well. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and generally
that's what I was trying to get
to. What was the original name
and what was because I, I, for
lack of a better word, it sounds
like a very Caucasian name, so I
was wondering what the name was
before that. So, Mr. Speaker,
and um,
Gentle lady, um,
I had another question on that
and mostly it was when we talk
about the.
Preservation of this land.
And it excludes a chunk of
private land and land grants.
Because I'm in a lot of the land
grant committees, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, does the land
grant, have you reached out to
the people that have the land
grant in there and what are
their thoughts and feelings on
this?
Thank you Speaker and thank you
gentle lady. Yes, and this
actually became very evident to
me when we had aseass and land
grant days and growing up,
gentle lady I speaker and gentle
lady, I can recall all the
beautiful stories that my
grandmother shared with me
through that area and all my
neighboring indigenous
communities also shared uh
through different ceremonies and
different dinners that we were a
part of and I even um
I was surprised that during this
session as um.
A legislator, I was still
learning about the historical
value, the traditional value
from the members of the land
grants and the Asequis in that
area, which I thought was very
beautiful and they were in full
support of this memorial and
very excited about it, in fact.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, that's most of the
things that I have the questions
on, it's just um.
You know, when we look at it,
New Mexico is such an incredibly
rich history, right? And so much
overlapping history that it just
had those questions how it ended
up with that name and I was kind
of looking up some of the
information on the area, um.
And the main thing, like I know
that it, it is a beautiful area
and like I said, there are quite
a bit of elk out there in that
area. Um, and Mr. Speaker John
Lady, this memorial would not
affect any elk hunting, is that
correct?
Uh thank you speaker and thank
you gentle lady. This would not
impact elk hunting except to
make sure that the quality of
what you are hunting, um, is to
the best standards and safe for
you to take home to your family
and feed your children.
OK, Mr. Speaker, the only thing
I'm gonna say, this is the only
I'm gonna say about that this is
political, um, it's unfortunate
because I was in radioactive and
hazardous waste and uh as far as
the clean up that has been a
huge problem with the uranium
and unfortunately, I believe the
name of the company was Trinox.
They were sued and it was $1
trillion for the clean up and
it's been an incredibly slow
process with that cleanup and
the only thing that I would ever
like to see is that we make sure
That that cleanup does happen in
that area because it's been, I
think 4 years, 5 years maybe
since that settlement and it's
just it's not happening, um.
And I think there's also some
conflict on what to do with it
and I'm gonna say something may
be controversial. I think
sometimes it might be better to
keep it there and seal it
because what's happening is it's
taken an incredibly long time
now to go through a completely
different avenue to move it out
of the area because the process
of digging it up and the process
of moving it out of the state.
Anyways, that was the only thing
Politico was going to say in
that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate, lady
from Sibolo McKinley,
Representative Garcia.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and uh representative,
uh, well the.
Gentlemen, gentle lady, uh, ill.
Thank you, Speaker. I yield to
the gentle lady from Sibela and
McKinley.
Uh, thank you very much. You
would have to excuse me, this is
the first time that I'm speaking
before you and I might not
follow the house protocol and
rules, but you can help me.
I have been involved in uh.
The development of the
traditional
Property, cultural property of
Mount Taylor for some time now.
Uh, I work with my elders at the
time and now I'm an elder
myself, so the stories and
everything I've heard is not
only during the time that I was,
uh, working with our elders, but
it's the stories that I've heard
growing up.
Uh, a long, long time ago. And
um
And it has always been, uh,
Ingrained in
Many of us that this is a
property that's sacred.
It's uh our southern sacred
mountain.
It represents the blue.
Uh, color, the sky, the and uh
the blue corn, all these and the
songs follow those and that's
how we grew up with that. And
one of the things that we were
told was, um, you take care of
the land,
OK.
take care of your lamb.
Because, um, if you do, you're
the steward of the land. Take
care of it and it will take care
of you. And that's so true. And
they said if you don't take care
of it, there's gonna be
repercussion from that.
Something's going to happen and
I'm seeing that now we haven't
been taking care of the land
like we should have. Look at the
climate change that we're
talking about. That's as a
result of what uh the elders
have seen and have, uh, uh
talk to us about
And then looking at the.
Just looking at the cultural
property of Mount Taylor is not
only looking at the mountain,
the tip of the mountain, and
what's surrounding it. No, the
stories behind that for example
you, you mentioned the, the
volcano.
We have stories about that.
When the volcanoes were flowing,
my people have seen it. My
ancestors have seen it and they
call it the blood of the giant.
And that's how they identified
it.
So that's how, how long ago that
it was, they were there, they
were there, uh, seeing all this
and that's why uh the stories
behind that uh and why we have
to protect the land that we are
on and where we're in so it
doesn't just cover Mark Taylor,
it covers a huge area, so when
you look at that.
We don't put acres of mileage or
Whatever, uh, that we're trying
to do here. If you have to think
beyond that. It's, it's a, a
long wide range of what we're
supposed to protect and when you
look at that, they say our
protection different things the
bears.
It's right there, you can see it
there the protecting that. You
can see um the snake that's
there and all these others, and
I'm sure all my uh relatives,
the pueblos Laguna and Ecuma
have those same stories why we
should protect that and it's
something that we all have to
do. I really respect the debate
that has been going on about the
uranium, and I have been through
that myself as a.
commissioner, what do we do? But
it's the effect that after
effect that that really brought
out.
Uh, why, uh, we should not go
back down that direction. We
lost so many people and we're
still losing people my age and
older that are, are dying off
because of.
Uh, them working in the, uh, the
mines at the time and it's
really sad that that had
happened. But
Going forward.
Someone's going to have to say
it's safe, it's clean, it's like
this, but they have to prove it
in order to do it so that our
people, if they ever go back
into that, well, be fully
protected and they will not
suffer as their grandfathers,
their fathers did. So those are
the things that has to be taken
into consideration. You can tell
me it's clean, it's OK, um.
Almost like telling me this is
safe, drink it and then later I
die from it. So that's what we
need to to look for, look at in
order to go forward, but at this
time because we have seen the
impact of it. Not only right in
that area. I have a story to
tell a family from my area which
is about maybe 40, 50 miles
away, took the timber from from
the mine and.
Build a home with it.
That family died of cancer
slowly, the youngest one was
about maybe 20 years ago, and he
was only 19 years old.
So the impact of that is what
they found out that they were
living in this homemade of
timber that came from the mine,
uh, from, uh, one of the mines
there in Grant's area and then
as a county commissioner, we
have people moving away from
where they used to live in Milan
because of the water that's been
contaminated and, and not only
that, it's slowly seeping.
It's just getting bigger and
bigger, spreading. And then you
see the reclamation that has
happened, is happening, it has
happened. It's supposed to be
safe, but when the wind blows,
all that dirt is just blowing
off the.
Reclamation area and I don't
know when um it's like it says
it's gonna take billions of
years just to make it safe.
Or it would go away. So those
are the things that we have to
deal with. We live right there.
It's no longer just in
somebody's backyard. It's in my
backyard, and I don't want that
to continue.
So therefore, uh, as I stand
here before you, I ask that you
vote for.
Uh, for the protection of Mount
Taylor as well as any other
natural resources that are out
there that doesn't uh doesn't
have any hazardous or anything
that would be a dangerous to our
health, to our environment,
whatever, because those are
there those are have been some
that have been helpful to us in
other areas where we have mining
areas and, and people are still
able to enjoy the economics of
that. So based on
I thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlewomen for allowing me to
speak. Thank you.
Thank you gentle ladyena for the
debate. The gentle lady to
close.
Thank you, Speaker and thank you
to all my brothers and sisters
in this house for giving this
house memorial a thorough
debate. Again, I am honored to
carry this for the citizens of
New Mexico who have cultural
ties to Sooshima, Blue Mountain,
Mount Taylor. Mount Taylor
Cultural Property runs deep for
my constituents, the citizens of
New Mexico, me, my family, and
my children who always say, Mom,
look, there's our mountain.
every time we come home from a
trip.
And Speaker, I thank you for
this opportunity and I move that
House Memorial 37 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Memorial 37. The vote is now
open.
Boat's about to close.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 23 in
the negative house memorial, 37
has duly passed this house.
Members have an announcement.
And she is not at her seat, but
the gentle lady from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom, has
Hosted, provided, I don't know
what the word is.
Blake's Loeberger for all the
members. It's in the lounge and
I believe it has arrived.
So don't all run out there at
once, otherwise I'll start
passing some bills.
But not seriously, Blake
Sloudberger in the lounge for
the members courtesy of the
general from a leader of
Lindstrom.
Thank you, us from this. Give a
round of applause.
Right y'all can go now so I
could pass some bills.
Mo
Gentlemen from Curry debaca
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel Representative Samoa, are
you ready? On item number 12,
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point? reflected all action
necessary for replacing House
Bill 155 on final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 155
enact.
To changing the employment
qualifications for executive
director of the gaming control
board removing the limit of
annual salary for the executive
director of the gaming control
board. With that, we stand for
questions, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Will you still
have to make a motion.
I now move that a House Bill 155
do pass on final passage of
House Bill 155. The vote is now
open.
What what about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative. House Bill 155 has
duly passed this house.
gentleman from Donana, are you
ready? supplemental calendar
item number 2. I am Mr. Speaker,
would you give me that point?
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill 295 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 295 clarifies the tax code
for the renewable energy
transmission Authority helping
build clean energy in New
Mexico. With that, I stand for
questions from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentlemen, uh,
Let me have a chance to speak,
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you for yielding. I've got a
couple of questions. Can you
explain to the body what Rita
is, if you would please. Yes,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen from San
Juan, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
from San Juan, Rita stands for
the renewable Energy
Transmission Authority, uh, it's
a public entity, uh,
quasi-governmental formed in
2007 to help build transmission
in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, does Rita own
anything?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, and I'm, I'm here uh joined
by Jeremy Turner, uh, who is
with pattern, also has worked
with uh Rita, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is my expert.
The under
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, Rita
owns the underlying real estate,
uh, and on which, uh, the
transmission lines are built or
being built.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So is that state land
we're talking about?
When
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
can be on various land, um, land
jurisdictions, land status,
including state land.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um, does Rita
negotiate on behalf of school
districts, hospitals, colleges,
county, cities.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Rita
is most focused on building the
transmission lines and is really
sort of a project partner for
the transmission itself.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Can you tell me what
fractional parties?
R
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
also, I'm joined by the gentle
lady from Berna Leo who's also
on the legislation, um, she may
have additional information, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that the
fractional interest is something
less than the entire interest.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Are any of these
fractional interests paying
anything to schools, colleges,
hospitals, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in some
cases transmission lines are
entering into voluntary
community benefit agreements
with local communities in which
case payments are uh can be
made, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
transmission, uh, has to happen
and then you get generation, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, in the
generation.
is absolutely paying into uh a
wide range of local services
including schools, hospitals,
counties, and others.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Can we talk a little
bit more about those community
agreements they're entering
into. Can you tell me, um, are
they making uh the uh school
districts whole are they making
the college hole? Are they
making the hospital's hole when
it comes to the amount of tax
that would have been paid had an
entity come in and, and built
that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
in this case, uh, going back to
the underlying purpose and what
really is renewable energy
Transmission Authority as a
public entity, Rita is not
subject to those, uh, to that
property tax, for example, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So then who, who owns
those lines again?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
Rita does. Rita owns the, the
transmission lines, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so when this debt is
paid off, who owns those
transmission lines, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, at the end of that,
uh, lease period in which
they're leasing back the lines
to be operated, then uh uh after
a private owner will uh be in
control of those lines. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
would that be the gentleman
that's your expert?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in some
cases, pattern energy is one of
the large wind developers uh in
transmission developers as well,
but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're actually fortunate in New
Mexico that there's a number of
other uh developers both of
transmission and generation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So let's talk about
the payments that are made. Can
you tell me specifically how
much, um, the schools are
receiving.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, going to the generation
Sorry, I've got it here on my
phone. Um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, in
some cases, uh, this is, uh, an
example, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, Corona Public schools is
getting $41 million
a little over $41.1 million
through 2052, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Again, that's mainly
for the wind energy, the
generation of energy that's
unlocked because Rita developed
the
mission.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So that's a 30-year
uh debt window, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So can you tell me if
the school district was made
whole.
Uh
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're uh sort of mixing a couple
of things. This is related
specifically to the tax code HB
295. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think you're also referring to a
different statute and sort of
area in New Mexico, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, which is the
industrial revenue bond or the
IRB um statutes and body sort of
body of law, body of uh rules
and regulations, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, according to so and
we're not talking.
about IRBs here. That's not part
of the subject of, of the bill
that the gentle lady and I bring
today in the IRBs, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, those, uh, districts
are receiving a significant
amount of funding, oftentimes
in much more funding than they
uh would, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if the wind projects
weren't going in in those
counties.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I do understand that,
but my question is Rita.
Owns those lines right now and
the cost of those, can you tell
me how much in Corona School
District that cost was to build
that line?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, my
expert and I don't have that
cost right offhand.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so that's my point. I
would suspect that's either in
the hundreds of millions of
dollars.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
being told by my expert that
that in that specific example,
it would be a very big number is
specifically because that's
where I'm being told, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, a converter
station is, so, uh, I think it's
safe to say that the actual
transmission lines over much of
the course of that area are not
that, um, there's not that level
of investment in this case
because there's extra capital.
It is a very large investment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and what I'm trying
to figure out is, and I
understand IRBs a little bit,
um.
As a county commissioner we gave
several of them, but what I'm
trying to figure out is, are the
are the school districts
specifically where that
investment is, are they being
paid their taxes every year that
they rely upon to take care of
the schools.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
based upon my understanding,
they're getting more, uh, annual
funding and that number that I
just noted for Corona schools,
that again is based on the, the
generation, so not the subject
of the bill, not the
transmission, but on the
generation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, but they are, uh,
getting a far more money than
they would get if we didn't have
the transmission lines that then
uh support the generation that's
built in that area.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I, I agree with you
there. I mean, any investment in
our rural parts of the state
are, are a great investment or
for that matter, uh, in our
urban areas as well.
Um, can you tell me where this
electricity goes?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in
uh there's a few different
lines, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
one, for instance, the Western
Spirit line, that line, um, it
delivers energy to Facebook and
some of the areas there in Los
Lunas, uh, and so, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's used
internally. Speaker, gentlemen,
another example, Sunzia, which
is under construction now that
energy, uh, for the first phase
of that at least is dedicated to
states to the west of us, both
to California.
or excuse me, the Arizona and
California. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, more transmission
means more uh reliable, uh,
affordable, clean energy, and so
we have some examples where that
energy is used in state. Some
examples where that energy is
headed out of state, and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, with the
transmission that Rita, uh, uh,
is helping create, we'll have a
lot more opportunities for both
energy in and out of state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I, I have no doubt
that that what you're saying is
correct and right. My problem is
we're giving a tax break to
these folks, private industry to
ship electricity out of state.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
again in this case, because
renewable energy transmission
authority owns that transmission
line and owns that underlying
real estate. They are not
subject to that property tax.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
would sort of look at it a
different way, which is that the
communities where, uh, the wind
generation is in some of the
transmission are, are getting
money over a 30-year period that
would simply not exist if Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we didn't
have those transmission.
lines which Rita has helped
create.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that.
And I've said to this body more
than once, we are picking
winners and losers, and we are
picking a winner and we are
leaving money on the table that
school districts, hospitals,
colleges may need and so that's,
that's the point of my
discussion here, um.
Can you tell me, and you may not
know this, uh, gentlemen, can
you tell me what the impact of
the school, um, has been or
maybe your expert might be able
to tell me, um, what we've left
on the table or what the schools
didn't collect from what they
may have collected.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't have that answer, um, but
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
um, as a public entity, uh, Rita
is subject to the laws that
govern that public entity in
there. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I don't have that
answer, but they're not subject
to that taxation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen. Uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, for that reason,
I have a uh an amendment. I'd
like to present.
And I'd like a roll call vote.
It's a very friendly amendment.
You've got a roll call. Bring
the amendment down.
To the clerk.
Gentlemen, I just got a paper
cut, but can you read the, uh.
number on the bottom left.
I'm sorry about that, Mr.
Speaker. 231-892-89829.3.
I'm sorry about that, Mr.
Speaker.
231-892-89829.3.231829.3.
Yes, sir. All right, we'll get
this passed out. We'll get it
posted online and then we'll
come back to you to explain.
The 30-page amendment.
Must be extra friendly with all
those pages.
All right gentlemen, I believe
the amendment has been passed
out.
And it is on.
Gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All this
does, it states the authorities
shall not acquire a project
unless the authority, the person
proposing the project, the Board
of Education of a school
district and a county or
municipality as applicable in
which a project is located
negotiate and determine the
amount of an annual in lie tax
payment to be made in the same
proportion as property tax
revenues are normally
distributed to any school
district, county, and
municipality by the person
proposing the project for the
project that the authority owns
or leases the project.
Provided that such approval
shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
Joma from Donana? Is this a
friendly amendment?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, uh, this is a friendly
sponsor of an amendment.
But Mr. Mr. Speaker, a
gentlemen, uh, unfortunately,
it's not a friendly amendment
and I'm happy to explain a few
reasons why. That would be
great, gentlemen, please explain
away. Uh, great. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Um, the, the amendment is
unfriendly for a couple of
reasons. I'd start, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, because, um, the,
uh, statue that my that our bill
uh is changing, is not the
subject of the amendment
statute, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
Amendment goes back to, uh, the,
uh, uh, it refers to an entirely
different statue in an area, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's been
settled by this body, uh, over
the last few years, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, school districts
are receiving tens if not scores
of millions of new dollars from
wind generation that is allow
that is brought in by
Rita-driven projects. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the second
reason, first, it's a different
bill.
You're seeking to amend a bill
that I'm not bringing to the
body, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Second, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
school districts, uh, where wind
generation is being constructed,
are benefiting significantly
after a lot of work from this
legislature, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, 3rd, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Rita as a public
entity is simply not subject to
those property taxes. In this
case for the transmission lines,
um, that's a very
right of way, very little land
is being taken off of the
property rolls and the benefit
to schools from the wind
generation projects that is not
in my bill but is allowed
through this bill, uh, would be
harm. So for all of those
reasons, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
it is an unfriendly amendment,
uh, respectfully.
Thank you gentlemen. Is there a
debate on the amendment? The
gentleman from Valencia,
Representative Baca. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, does the gentleman
from, uh, San Juan you.
Yes sir. Yes, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen from San Juan.
In addition to the to the public
schools, what else is impacted
or would be impacted.
through this loss of revenue.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, um, so when we, um,
um, you know, look at our taxing
authority in the county, for
example, we look at our
hospitals, we look at our
college and we look at our
schools and we want to make sure
that they're fully funded.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, uh, gentlemen, and I think
that's an important point is we
want to say is that, you know,
as far as for me, this, the
schools are important, but also
we understand is that for many
of these counties, I think there
was 5 that were.
Uh, mention in the bill or in
the analysis, these are kind of
rural counties and so the, the
county and the uh.
Local governing body is uh could
be reliant on that. Would you
say that's the case, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
absolutely, and that's one of
the reasons, you know, I, I, I
ask about the money, I ask about
what was left on the table, many
of these schools that these are
going through our rural parts of
the state.
And thank you Mr. Speaker and
thank you and then, and again.
This is, I, I do see this as,
you know, um,
In one of the analysis, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they talked
about the Constitutionality.
Of this kind of proposed
legislation.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
can you kind of address that and
also Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
talk about the role of the state
land office and how that plays
into this and how this was
initially set up, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I, I don't know a lot
about it, but I'll take a stab
at it, um, as I understand it,
the land office is used um they
uh generate funds and those
funds go to schools.
Um, and then what was your other
question?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my other
question was about that in part
of the analysis.
There was some concern that was
brought up about the
Constitutionality.
That this would if if it if
passed and, and put into law.
It could cause some
constitutionality, uh, it could
be seen as unconstitutional
based upon that.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm not a lawyer and I'm not
even gonna pretend to even think
about that, but um if that's
what it said, then I, I can
agree with that.
And Mr. Speaker and uh gentleman
from San Juan, I guess from,
from my
From my perspective, and again,
I'm not a tax guy, but Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, when we're
talking about.
The revenues that many of these
districts.
School districts and local
entities.
I do have concern of the
unintentional impact of this
legislation, how it would.
Negatively impact the bo's
ability to fund roads and fund
hospitals.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. One of the concerns I
have is, so Rita owns these
transmission lines for the next
30 years. In 30 years they're
depreciated out and there's
absolutely nothing to tax left
at that point in time unless
improvements have been made and
that's my concern is that for 30
years they'll get a payment and
and we don't know exactly what
that payment is, uh, that
payment uh maybe that may not be
near enough. Um, I don't know.
We don't know the answer to
that, and that's one of the
things we're trying to find out.
And, and thank you Mr. Speaker
and thank you gentlemen and uh I
guess that is a something that
was brought up there is we do
not know and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I did hear uh
Chairman, uh, talk about rona
specifically that was receiving
this and so I, I don't know if
that's the case all the way, but
I, I definitely respect.
You know, the, uh, the chairman
for bringing this forward, but
I, I do have some questions
about this, and I do think that
you're amendment is an attempt
to solve or fill in some of
those gaps. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker, thank you, gentlemen.
There's further the debate on
the amendment the young lady
from Berlin was there but.
Does the gentleman from my from.
From San Juan County yield. Mr.
Speaker, gladly.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um,
I'm very interested in this
amendment, um, I mean, I do see
how it, it could relate to
taxation, although this is a
separate, um, it does appear to
me to be a separate section, uh,
Mr. Speaker, and, um, gentlemen.
Is is there a reason why you've
brought it into this section?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Yeah, we're amending your
bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh, I
don't know if that was a good
faith answer, but I will take
it. This is not part of my bill,
as a matter of fact, this is a
different statute, um, but I'll
rest my case with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um, do
you know, Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen, how
Rita acquires land.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. We're amending the
RIA Act, so I should have been a
little more, um, um, directing
what I was saying there, um, no,
I do not know how they acquire
land. I assume that some of this
is state land, uh, private land
I don't know and I don't know
what the payments are made to
private owners either, so I
don't know that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
it, it, it's my understanding
and you know I'm, I'm new to
understanding this piece as
well, um, but I do have an
expert today with me, uh, Lynn.
A must seller and uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, she is
the um executive director of the
of this uh organization of Rita
and um she tells me they, they
actually acquire the right of
way, um, so Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, do you, does this uh
is this related to the right of
way?
Speaker, gentle lady, um, this,
uh, might, might be um involved
in the right way. It might be
it, it's also involved in the
equipment that's placed on there
right away?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
a gentleman, uh, the, you know,
I, I, I see how you're trying to
ensure that we're uh making
these negotiations, um, but
there the issue I have here with
this amendment is that it states
that um the same proportion as
property tax revenues that are
normally distributed, and Mr.
Speaker, and uh gentlemen.
We aren't currently removing any
property tax base like these,
um, currently these right of
ways are not being taxed. It's
state land, um, so Mr. Speaker
and um gentlemen, I'm not sure
how there would be uh how that
would compare to a normal
distribution, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, could you explain
that piece, the normal
distribute distribution piece.
Uh thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, so if, if, uh,
part of this corona, um, like
our chairman had mentioned
earlier, if part of that was on
private property, would that be
taxed? And, and the improvements
to state property, would that be
taxed?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
if it's right away the
underlying property is still
taxed.
OK.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
this amendment, I think it, it,
um, I think it has a good
intention. I think my concern
here, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
is that, um, one, it would be
really hard to determine this um
proportion and uh I know our,
our colleague has mentioned the
constitutionality aspect and the
enforceability aspect, um, and
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen,
I'm happy to get into the the
legal piece of why uh we think
here in this.
it, it, the county assessors,
although they may try to assess
this, would not be able to
assess this. Therefore, I'm not
sure, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that they would have a point of
comparison, um, in order to
determine what that pilt uh
would be, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, does that make sense?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Yes, it does make sense
and that's precisely why I'm
trying to amend the REI Act
because perhaps assessors may
not have been involved in the uh
in these discussions when we set
up, when this, this was set up
by this body and so as a result
of that perhaps our counties
were um short chains and maybe
quite a bit.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
Uh, again, you know, I, I, I
appreciate the, the intent and
the desire to incorporate. I
think there still is that
possibility, um, however, I'm
not sure that this amending this
Rita section necessarily aligns
with uh the bill that has been
brought, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from.
Curry quay Harding, San Miguel.
Union
And Colfax. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Nice job.
So, uh
Mr. Speaker, I just wanna talk a
little bit about some mileage.
There
There's a gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll gladly
yield.
Sometime probably.
5 years ago.
Uh, actually put in a a power
line.
Down past Mascaro to a huge
compression plant.
They built the line, they got
the right of way, and then they
donated it to a co op.
The co op, historically.
If you owned a little ranch in
the co op, built a line to your
ranch and you donated it back to
the co op, then you would not
have to pay tax on your little
leg of that line. So that kept
Rural people from having to pay
tax on some big power line that
was built by a co op over to
their ranch.
So actually
built the line they donated it
to the co op, but this my line
was probably
70 miles long.
And it was quite valuable.
Uh, is a, is a major line, those
big compressors use a lot of
electricity and, and that only
used about 50% of the capacity
for that line.
So they did not do an IRB with
our school.
And they did not pay taxes on it
and uh
When we question them about it,
they said they had donated it
back to the co op.
So we brought it took him to
court.
Uh, the court ruled.
That they did have to pay taxes
on that line.
And uh
So there was a group of folks
from the co op came here.
And they got a law passed that
said they did not have to pay
taxes on that, that line which
they they wound up having to pay
taxes, back taxes, uh, for the
years before the law was passed,
and that's, that's been a few
years ago. I'm not sure how
long.
Um
So historically, the schools
Have the right to tax.
Any type of infrastructure like
that.
And they wouldn't negotiate an
IRB which made it a little
lighter tax at the beginning and
heavier tax at the end until the
school was made hold on that
type of project.
Um
So I'm not sure if this, these
Rita projects fall under that
same law. I know they're,
they're transmission lines just
like.
The ones that uh that I'm
talking about only a much
larger.
So
I guess my question is,
In in that context, what does
the amendment do?
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, all this, uh,
amendment does is it makes it to
where the school district has a
seat at the table and they can
negotiate with the city, the
municipality or the county.
And I think they should have a
seat at the table, and I think
they should negotiate.
Uh
I'm not sure
Um
How this bill fits into that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and that's, that's
the concern that I have with
this. They're not at the table.
We are donating a line that
They, the individuals who are
using it, uh, entered into a
public-private partnership and
at the end of 30 years, they're
going to get that for free.
And the school gets.
Well, according to our chairman,
they get something, but we don't
know if that's making them half
whole, a third whole, we don't
know. They, the school that is
in the county where the wind
generate turbines are, or the
solar project, get money from
that project.
It is my belief that the
School districts that the line
goes through, get nothing, so.
Uh, I would give you guys a
little more time to debate and
set me straight on that.
Thank you, Mr.
Speaker on the lady from Donna
Anna Hidalgo and Luna,
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Madam Speaker, and does the
gentleman yield?
Bradley.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
I'm
Very curious about this since
the transmission line goes all
the way through my district.
Um, I understand that you're.
Your amendment gives schools a
seat at the table, you say.
I, uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
are there other entities that
you considered.
Having a seat at the table as
well.
Thank you Madam Speaker and and
gentle lady, yes, I mean if you,
if there's a municipality that's
close by, if there's a county
close by, um, the county then
can negotiate for in schools,
the county can then negotiate
for their hospitals, um, and so
all of those have a seat at the
table now. Thank you, Madam
Speaker. This is hard, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, so,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
So you chose schools, but you're
saying that this hospitals as
well as a Southern entities. OK,
great, um, and currently I'm
assuming you, you ran this
amendment because that's not
taking place. OK.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, that's not taking place
right now.
OK, thank you. That's all I
have.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment, gentlemen from
Chavez, Ed and Otero
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does
the gentleman from San Juan?
Gladly.
Thank you Madam Speaker. I just
have a couple more questions,
um, I think this is, I'm gonna
call it 3.5, so this is, uh,
almost the 4th or 5th time I've
heard this.
Legislation and each time I hear
it, it gets a little more
confusing to me, so with the
transfer lines that
representative Chatfield was
just talking about, but are
there also because some of the
discussion I heard over time is
there's also transfer station.
Is that your understanding, uh,
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, yes, they're, um, I
think the chairman said that
there was um
I'm not sure windmills and
whatever else was there.
Thank you Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I think that's where
I get really concerned because
as, as we've heard in in prior
debate, and I know they say IRB
isn't really part of this
legislation.
Now being a county commissioner
as well as yourself has been a
county commissioner. I've been a
part of a number of IRBs, and it
was always taken into
consideration if there was a
major project, not a transfer
line, but a transfer station
that should have been taken into
consideration because not only
schools are being left out, but
hospital districts are being
left out. Is that your
understanding, Madam Speaker,
Mr. Chairman?
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, in this case, it
certainly could have been.
So Madam Speaker, gentlemen from
San Juan, I, I think that's a
really important piece that,
that these counties are missing
out on because now they have no
say in what's happening and I
know as a county commissioner
one of the first questions that
was always asked to me by my
constituents was, did you make
sure your schools were held hold
and did you make sure your
hospitals were held hold and if
I didn't answer yes to either
one of those, I probably
wouldn't have been a county
commissioner a second time. Is,
is that, is that the way you
look at that?
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, yes, absolutely,
those are the two questions we
always get asked.
So Madam Speaker, gentlemen from
San Juan, I'm, I love this
amendment because that's one I,
I've got a lot of other issues
with this bill, um, but this at
least clears up some of the mud
for me, because I think we leave
some big pieces out and not
making sure our school districts
in these smaller areas are held
hold. I think that's a big
missed opportunity.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I think, I mean if,
if there wasn't a problem with
this bill, and I don't quite
understand it if there wasn't a
problem with this bill, it
wouldn't have been run. So what
problem is we're trying to take
care of or in my case, what
problem is the school not aware
of that's about to happen to
them or the county or hospitals.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen that, that's yes when
we get back to debating the
bill. I have a whole lot of
other problems because I, I'm
very confused on what we're
trying to solve here, um, so
I'll look forward to future
debate, but thank you for the
amendment. I will be supporting
the uh, gentle lady from
Bernali, Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Will
the gentleman from San Juan
yield?
Thank you, Madam Speaker, yes,
gladly.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, so I, uh,
didn't hear this bill, um, in a
previous committee. And so you.
Learning about the bill and, uh,
your proposed amendment, um.
Just to start though, Madam
Speaker, um, and gentlemen.
Mm
Schools and counties.
Receive money from taxes on.
The wind
That is generated, is that
correct?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
I don't know that.
Mr. Madam Speaker, gentle,
gentlemen, sorry. So if a, if a
wind farm.
Goes into a county in a school
district. The county and school
district do receive funding.
Property they received money
from taxes. Is that correct?
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, they get
property taxes.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen. So they, they get
property taxes. Now, one of the
big questions is how do we move
the energy generated from wind
to the markets on the east or
west.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
through transmission lines.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, and can we export
our energy any other way?
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
not that I'm aware of.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. So we need the
transmission in order to export
the wind energy that's being
generated, and the wind energy
that's being generated does
provide the counties and school
districts with, uh, funding via
taxes. Is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, that's what I'm
trying to find out here and
figure out if they're made
whole, or if they're a third of
the taxes were paid or 20%.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
The
My understanding from the amount
of taxes paid from
I believe that this is just one,
Project is that 22 projects,
sorry, Western Spirit and.
And Sunzia, uh, for instance,
uh, looking at Lincoln County,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
between now and 20.
2052, um, Lincoln County, uh, is
set to generate an additional
revenue $122 million.
Madam Speaker, um, gentlemen,
and that's just from, you know,
as a result of having that
energy available to export.
Madam Speaker and then lady, was
that through an IRB that that
was funded?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Madam Speaker, and lady, we're
not talking about our IRBs here,
but we're talking about.
The amendment
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think my point though is that
this funding is coming in as a
result of having the
transmission lines available to
those communities for the export
of that energy. And without
that, there would be nothing.
And so, in my opinion, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, they are
whole.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
so but do we know if, if, for
example, PNM owns one of these
lines as well and are they
paying property taxes?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
uh, Rita is not because they're
a government entity, but PNM as
a private entity is.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
and that's, that's my point here
precisely. If this were good for
private industry, private
industry would have built those
lines themselves and come and
done this, and instead we are
now subsidizing green energy and
in doing so.
Schools, hospitals, counties are
being, um, shortchanged in my
opinion.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think that I disagree with
whether or not the lines would
have been built, um, were some
government entity not able to
step in. Um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I think that what
we're seeing in this, um, time
period of between now and 2050
is a concerted effort, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, by
governments around the world to
provide funding, uh, for
projects, uh, to get energy to
electrify our.
red. Um, so, uh, I suppose
that's going a little bit
afield, but that's just my
perspective for the entire, uh,
conversation. So, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I appreciate the
time. Not sure that I'm any
closer on this, but, um, I
appreciate it. Thank you.
There is further debate on the
amendment, gentlemen from San
Juan, Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Does a
gentleman from San Juan County
Yield.
Yes, Madam Speaker, I gladly
yield.
So, um
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
The reality is we, we kind of
created a problem here a few
years ago, um, the Speaker and
Madam Speaker and gen gentlemen,
what we did when we created
Rita.
was we benefited
An individual company.
However, at the beginning, Mr.
Speaker, Madam Speaker, and
gentlemen, what happened was
there were initial IRBs.
That agreements that went into
play with all of the counties
where there were transmission
lines that were built.
But Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
where we run into trouble.
Is
Well we're making these changes.
This talks in here about where
fractional interests.
Uh
Uh, are, are part of this.
Agreement
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that's where the problem comes.
Is
Prior to this.
There were IRBs. There were
agreements that that um were had
with local communities, but
since this is a
Governmental a
quasi-governmental body, Rita.
Now what they're saying is that
any
Future improvements are tax
exempt.
But Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
the problem with that is
The benefit is not going to
Rita. We're not making money
from this.
Pattern energy is making money
from this.
So the reality is what we're
what we're doing here and why,
and this is why I believe, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, why the
Attorney General's opinion.
Stated, and I believe it's also
the opinion of the of.
Uh, New Mexico, um, uh, tax and
rev, at least initially, the,
the, the issue is now that
there's new improvements and
that the way this reads the,
the, the change section of this
law, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentleman says.
That improvements including
leasehold interest.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
you're a former.
You're a former realtor.
A leasehold interest is a
property.
Is it not, Miss Speaker, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, yes, it is.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen
are not lease payments.
Potentially part of agreements.
Uh, whenever there's a, a lease
or not taxes potentially part of
those uh lease agreements, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, at
least you'd hope they would be.
Um, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, if, if somebody were
to lease a property and it was a
triple net. What would that
triple net mean? That what Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, that
would include the payment, uh,
the taxes and the utilities.
So thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, so excuse me,
gentlemen, um, insurance, not
utilities.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, but that's usually
part of a lease agreement,
correct? Someone is paying.
For the uh taxes because taxes
generally have to be paid on, on
a leased property, especially
when it's a commercial interest,
is that correct, Madam Speaker,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, sir, it is.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
If we then
Are to then.
Because of a this being a
quasi-governmental entity, we
say that any improvements that
they do that that that is passed
on the benefit of that is passed
on to that private company is
that not?
Consideration
Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
Ma, Madam, uh, speaker and
gentlemen, yes, as a town of,
um, as the mayor of a town in
New Mexico when we, um, decided
to put a sewer line across a
very, very small section of
state property we have to pay
that every year. That is paid.
And so those those funds are
generated and so yes uh if it's
across private property or state
property, it has to be paid.
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that is as the city.
Uh, or the township of Kirtland
being a government entity.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
what we're talking about here is
A private company that is, that
is.
Essentially in a lease
agreement.
With this quasi-governmental
entity.
Let's change the scenario, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen. If there
was uh uh some
Building that was owned by the
city.
Or the township of Kirtland and
then you entered into some sort
of leasehold agreement with
them.
Would there not need to be taxes
paid on that, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
even though
The township of Kirtland is a
government entity.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, we pay taxes.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
if you were to then uh not pay
taxes on that or you would not
require that.
Uh, those, would that not uh be
consideration to that to that
Antony and would that not then
be.
Uh, in violation of the
anti-Donation clause.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, we
would probably be in trouble
with the entity, um, state.
be in trouble with the state,
um, and, uh, the anti-donation.
I'm not sure, but if, if you
are, then I'll take your word
for it.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, and
that's, that's why, uh, the.
Uh, attorney general's office is
stating that.
Believes this is a problem and
that is why um what was
referenced.
Um, madam, uh, speaker and
gentleman in the FIRs that we
saw was that the Supreme Court
had ruled when there's a
fractional interest.
Anything that would be excluded
taxes or whatever, that would
be.
Uh, a violation of the
anti-Donation clause. So, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, your,
your amendment doesn't really
deal with that. What it does
deal with, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, is.
Taking the logical step to
saying we don't want to give
away that tax base because we,
as if we vote on this today as
is, Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
We as state legislators will be
giving away the pri the taxing
authority of local government
entities, hospitals, counties,
school districts, uh, colleges,
is that correct, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, that's exactly what, um,
we, I haven't been able to
figure out exactly how much has
been paid to the school
districts to the county, um, to
the hospitals, and so that's the
questionnaire, how much are we
gonna leave on the table if we
give this to a quasi-government
entity who then gives it to a
private individual or company.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, and I don't know
that we'll know what those are
because those were, those were
negotiated through IRBs with
local communities counties and
school districts.
But what this, what, what the
way this is written.
The way the, the, the, the, the
bill is written before us today
says that any improvements if
they go and put, uh, it says
here transmission.
Interconnected storage facility,
so along with wind, if they come
and put an equal size amount of
battery storage there.
Then we would be giving away
The county, the hospital, the
schools, we would be giving away
that ability to go in and
negotiate for an IRB.
On those, so, so whatever
millions of dollars
That they are currently getting,
we potentially would be giving
millions of dollars.
Of taxable valuable property,
uh to those uh from those local,
uh, community. So, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen,
To
Now to your amendment, your
amendment basically just says,
We're not going to give that
away.
We're, we're going to make sure,
madam, uh, speaker and gentleman
that the local communities will
still have the ability.
To negotiate for IRBs because
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
Uh, after, after, uh, the
project is completed because
there will be GRT generated
during that time, there will be
taxes paid during that time.
But Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
the permanent property, the only
thing of value left.
To tax in those communities is
the improved property.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen.
The way your amendment is
written.
Yet
Does it
Just leave in place what we
would expect to happen now is
any improvements going on there
that those local communities
could still go and
Get into a contract, give IRBs
or, or not.
And, and if they decide not to,
they could tax it at real value.
Is that correct, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
yes.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I know that was a
little amendment and this is a
little bill, but the reality is
that it's a very complex issue.
And I, I just.
Think
That what we're doing is kind of
in in reverse of a of a of an
unfunded mandate generally,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
what we do kind of uh in this
body a lot of times is we tell
local communities, you're gonna
go do this and we're not, we
don't care how much it costs
you.
To some degree we're doing that
with tax dollars here.
We're saying we're going to give
this away because this is a
value we have at the state.
But we don't care that your
schools will be hurt, that your
hospitals be hurt, your colleges
will be hurt, your local, uh,
um, community whether it's uh
the county or the city, whoever
it would be that would benefit
from that, we're saying we don't
care what it costs.
We're going to give this
breakaway break this tax break
away to someone because.
Because we just want to. So I'm
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, I,
I support your amendment and I
think that we owe it.
To our constituents, we owe it
to the communities to make sure
that that we don't give away
their taxable income.
And I think as well I think uh
if, if this is something we
really want to do, um, I
wouldn't want to do it before we
make sure that we're not doing
this in violation of the
anti-Donation clause because I,
I believe that is exactly what
we're doing. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Gentlemen from Katherine Grant
in Hidalgo Representative
Trazas. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, with the gentleman from
San Juan Yil.
Madam Speaker, yes, gladly.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You
know, uh, oh, excuse me, Madam
Speaker, uh, I think the problem
with this is.
Have you guys ever seen Mexican
bread pudding. It's called
Capirutada.
And it's messy.
It's looks crazy. That's what
this this and I'm not calling
this bill that, you know, but
it's very, very complicated.
And so for all the members in
the body, uh, madam speaker, um,
it took me a minute to get this
because it's complicated.
Um, it's, it's got a lot of,
it's got a 10 page um.
If IR so it's not something
you're just gonna read a couple
of lines and get you, get, get
it real quick and through your
mind, so I think uh I'm not
gonna go back and forth with you
a lot I think, uh, uh, Madam
Speaker, uh.
Representative uh.
He did a great job of kind of
explaining things.
In general, um,
You're just trying to make sure,
Madam Speaker, uh,
representative of that.
School district, the school
districts are not kept out of
the community benefit agreement
which is basically to ensure
that that money is there in the
future, um, and we just, it's,
it's been a bit muddy to
understand, you know, what, what
do they really stand? I mean, if
you read the FIR for those uh
members here in the body, Madam
Speaker, on page 3, it explains
a little bit about it, um, you
know, and it, and it states
here.
Um
Currently taxes are abated for
school district districts too.
However, the project developer
has not stated that they offered
any CBAs which are community
benefit uh uh agreements to
school districts so and then if
we keep going page after page
then you got some quotes from
the state land office. You've
got some other, uh, and you keep
going, uh, and you look at the
uh.
Uh, Mexico attorney general and
both of them agree that it's
it's unconstitutional, so it's
just it it is all has to do with
those fractional agreements, uh,
that, or excuse me, the fractual
interest that they own, uh,
Madam Speaker, uh,
representative, and so it it it
really is.
Bit difficult to understand, um,
but basically the way I get it
is these are lines that.
the body to understand and
please correct me if I'm wrong.
These were lines that were built
by P&M at one time and they paid
taxes and everything else the
way this is structured, it's
abating taxes.
And at the end of the day what's
scary is there's no more taxes
for for those counties that the
transmission lines go through so
once it's built, I mean they've
got they've got an agreement to
pay so much per per per mile,
but after that it's done, it's
over and school districts will
have kids year after year after
year, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
and the thing is we wanna make
sure that those school districts
like you said and other entities
like our like our hospitals and
so forth.
are are
Held where they can they'll have
that funding that they'll need
in the future, the end of the
day these transmission lines are
providing power.
Outside of our state.
And I think that's where, where,
um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, it just took me
a minute to kind of get this all
work because I this is.
Kind of like an IRB I'm gonna
call it like a prima of an IRB,
but it's really not an IRB and
so it's, it's very complicated,
so, um, madam speaker,
representative, I understand
what you're doing. I'm gonna
support your amendment because
in the intent that it has, um,
is to just make sure that we're
protecting the schools and and
other entities so and and that's
all I'll I'll wait to debate on
the bill. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I moved to Table
House for Amendment number 1 to
House Bill 295.
We are on a tabling motion on
the amendment, a vote of yes.
The amendment will have been
tabled. A vote of no, and we are
still on the amendment.
Vote
is now open.
All right, the vote is closed by
a vote of 38 in the positive, 25
in the negative. The amendment
has been tabled, gentlemen from
San Juan, you still have the
floor.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, you know, I,
I, I'm concerned.
This body passes bills and
passes laws that we have to,
that we as a local community we
force on them. I wasn't at the
table when Rita was, was, um,
Or the origination of the Rita.
I don't know if you ever invited
assessors to that, uh, to those
meetings uh or the counties to
those meetings. My concern is it
still the same thing we are
picking winners and losers here
if this were a PNM line, they'd
be paying taxes. It's not and so
these gentlemen are getting
something for free and they will
for the next 30 years regardless
if they put um fiber lines on
there or whatever the battery,
um, somewhere along the line
there.
We will not get anything from
them and as a result of that,
um, I worry about those
communities because as was
mentioned, um, if there wasn't
something there those lines
transmission lines wouldn't go
through, but that was a business
decision and they wouldn't have
done that had the state not
given them money and, and done
things that made it profitable
for them. None of us in here
that own a business ever do
things with the intent of losing
money and so I, I understand
the, the business, uh.
Uh, profile on this and, and uh
but I still think that we need
to be very careful when we're
talking about bills that impact
counties, schools, hospitals, so
thank you for the friendly
debate. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We're back on the bill,
gentlemen from Catherine Grant
and Hidalgo, Representative
Tarazas.
Thank you, Madam Speaker of the
gentleman you Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from
Katcher and Irago.
Thank you, my friend. I don't
know what's going on with my
voice. I think I just need to.
Drink something, um.
Madam Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
I, I was, I, I was looking at
this and, and with all due
respect, I, I meant what I said
when I said it was.
Messy because it's, it's not
easy. Would you agree with that,
Mr. Speaker, excuse me, Madam
Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, respectfully, I
would disagree, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, this clarifies for uh
the state entity Farita, uh,
their responsibilities, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, this,
uh, operating under this set of
assumptions and approach,
there's uh well over
Um, uh, you know, probably 200+
million dollars that are heading
to rural areas,
including Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, money to the West
Las Vegas School District, the
Estancia School District, uh,
Moriarty Mountaineer, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, all of
those things are made possible
because of the renewable energy
transmission authority and their
ability to develop transmission,
which is very difficult, um, and
so, Madam Speaker.
gentlemen,
respectfully, I don't think this
is complicated. It's just
clarifying their tax
responsibilities in order for
them to continue, uh, building
re supporting transmission so
that we get more generation that
supports rural communities. And
so Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
When you, you're saying that
they're gonna get some.
Financial relief or give some
money is that through a CBA? Is
that through, uh, a community
benefit agreement. Uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
community benefit agreements
are, uh, related to some of the,
the transmission. That's right,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, as we
discussed earlier, the, um, the
largest investment is through
the generation, through the
elect the generation of
electricity. And Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, without
the transmission that our bill
is gonna keep uh is gonna allow
to keep being built, you're not
gonna see the, the generation
get built. And Madam Speaker,
uh, gentlemen, the, uh, money in
this case, the hundreds of
millions of dollars flows to
these rural communities because
they're able to build that
renewable energy generation
that's served by the
transmission lines.
So, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I, I wanna first start out. I'm
not against them building the
lights.
I just, I, I want to make that
clear, Madam Speaker, the, the
purpose of me debating this is
not so much that I'm against
that. I think it's, we need, we
need to, we need to, I would
agree that we need to upgrade
our infrastructure have no
problem with that whatsoever, so
I wanna get that clear. I think
my.
My the issue that I that that I
have is is the clarity, uh,
there's some constitutional
issues according to certain
entities, but I think what's
scary is in in all continue
where I left off with uh uh
Madam Speaker with
Representative Duncan where this
once it's, you know, the and and
we didn't really finish my last
deal. I know you said that you
were gonna that there was some
money going to the school
district. How are they getting
that funds? Let me, let me start
there before I keep going on.
Sure.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, they're getting those funds
through, uh, agreements, uh,
with, uh, over the course of an
industrial revenue bond, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, so
agreements that are made, uh,
that send a certain percentage
of funding to uh school
districts, other entities, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, like for
instance, the, um, just to pick
one here, the Hondo Valley
Schools, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, in Riodoso schools.
each gets $6.718 million over
the 30 year life in this case,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
And Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
that's $6 million if you looked
at what.
In lieu of the taxes they would
have received, what would that
be the difference? Uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I don't
have that, uh, right offhand,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that's
the whole point of an industrial
revenue bond is communities can
negotiate, but Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, without the renewable
energy transmission Authority
without Rita, you don't, none of
that gets built. You get 0,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
would contend that those
communities get 0 of 0 because
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Until we build those
transmission lines until those
transmission lines get built,
there is no reason and no way
for that generation to be built
for that money to flow to these
rural communities. Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, that's the
beauty and the benefit of the,
of Rita, of the renewal
renewable Energy Transmission
Authority. One example, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I'd like to
give is, um, the Western Spirit
line that's now owned by PNM
after originally being
developed.
developed by Rita, it was sold
to PNM. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm told that that
was the first new line since
like the 9 mid 1980s since 1986,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, without Rita and the way
that they've approached this
since their inception in 2007,
none of the wind gets built.
None of the money flows to local
communities.
speaker gentlemen, I, it, I
think it's again I think the
confusion is in the FIR when
you, you read it in here and the
state land office is saying that
it's unconstitutional, um, and
let me find it exactly because
my phone cleared here.
Um
Give me a second, Mr. Madam
Speaker.
It is the
The state land office does not
believe it's it's
constitutionally permissible to
tax a state owned property
including state owned
improvements under article and
it goes on to say because
because.
Of the state constitution
because the earnings from leases
of the state uh trust lands
directly benefit the public. I
so it's, it's confusing and it
says the money earned by these
the state land office is money
that goes to tax that taxpayers
do not need to come up with or
support public schools,
universities.
It's just very confusing and
they keep using the word
unconstitutional several times
and that's that's that I think
that's what's causing some of
the heartburn, um, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, and then the
New Mexico, uh, attorney
general, uh, also has language
there that uh it says.
When a non-exempt entity owns a
fractional interest in real
property of an exempt entity,
the fractional interest is
exempt from property taxation
except for improvements that are
owned or leased by a non-exempt
entity.
Um
Fractional interests with such
improvements on or leased by
non-exempt entity are subject to
property taxes.
And that's where, where we're
all kind of caught up.
And I hope you understand again
I'm not Madam Speaker, against
the the the building of the
transmission lines. I think it's
great to improve our
infrastructure.
And I think the the main
purpose, I think the main.
He or heartburn that we had was
in committee we went through Mr.
Speaker, this back and forth,
um, we're
Throughout the the the course of
this bill, it was, um.
It, it was rolled at one point
we had a nice discussion and
then it was tabled because we
had a tie vote and it was
reconsidered and brought back
and it was because of the.
These, these topics that we're
talking about, Mr. Speaker, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, and
so, you know, I think what we
want to just make sure is that.
Through the that we're not
hurting. I think the biggest
problem that we have is just
making sure that that these
entities, the hospitals, the
schools are gonna have money.
And we're not going to have a
negative impact. I think that's
the scariest part of the whole
thing. The second thing is, is
it constitutional or
unconstitutional to two
entities, and I could keep
reading, um, and I had my notes
but it cleared out, um.
We're saying that it's
unconstitutional and that I
think that's what's causing a
little bit of heartburn, um.
And so it gives us the the.
The feeling, Madam Speaker, that
Bills here to kind of clarify
that and uh and challenge these
officers that are saying it's
unconstitutional and and move
forward.
I understand, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that they are gonna
get some money as it's being as
it's being built as you, as
you're building something, you
can get a little bit of tax
revenue there, right? Gro seats
and so forth, you can have a few
people that are gonna come in
that are going to work probably
not from New Mexico. They're
probably going to be from
another area because that's a
very specific job, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, but at
the same time, um, one of the
one of the things in this robust
debate or discussion that we had
in.
in committee was um.
was $150 million.
Tax
hit to the counties I I just
remember that sticking in my
mind that scared me.
And then, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, the other thing was I
wanted to know which counties
were gonna be affected. Where
are all these transmission lines
going to be in the out of the 33
counties in New Mexico. Uh,
thank you, Madam Speaker, uh,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, first,
let me go back to the state land
office. Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, the state land office
is actually saying it would be
unconstitutional to tax Rita,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so
agreeing with Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, our bill in the
clarification.
provided in the bill, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I've got
my, uh, little
Uh, we've got a fresh copy,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
transmission and generation goes
through a number of different
counties, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, so as I mentioned,
um,
For two of the projects, uh, the
gene so, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, yeah, I, I think
you're looking from counties
including Union, Harding, uh,
San Miguel, Santa Fe, over to
San Juan. That's Madam Speaker,
gentleman, so it's uh generally
referred to as the North Path uh
line, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
to counties uh like from
Roosevelt Lee to Eddie, uh, in
the Southeast, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, but I think going
back to that point.
the state land office, uh, the
updated tax and taxation and
revenue Department analysis sees
the point that we're bringing,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
sees that, uh, clarification of
the constitutional
responsibilities and benefits of
Rita, uh, as clarified in the
bill are appropriate and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um,
The, like we talked, this is the
way to build that transmission.
I appreciate deeply, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, the support
for transmission and would note,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, that
renewable energy transmission
Authority has been the way,
frankly the only way to build
new generation in New Mexico,
um, and so, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, yeah.
Mr. Speaker, I mean, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I agree
that's a, it's a huge investment
financially and you're right, I,
when my, my phone was dying and
it cleared my screens and and I
read the one and that was the
actually what I was reading is
both state land office and the
and New Mexico Attorney general
were in contradiction of each
other and that was why we're
we're going, wait a minute, is
this constitutional or
unconstitutional and they're
contradicting each other, I
think that would you agree with
that, Mr. Speak uh Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Madam Speaker and gentleman, um,
there are diff uh, there, I
think I would agree that there's
some differences in some of the
interpretation, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, when it comes to
the state land office though,
what I think is we can both
agree on is that they're getting
money from these leases right
now, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
that goes back to their
beneficiaries and so Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, when those
leases, uh, in that generation
goes through state land. I think
we can both agree that they're
getting funding for that for
for the state.
In the beneficiaries.
Again, thank, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I think you
know this, that's what's causing
the controversy, right? The, the
difference of opinions and you
just go through all these uh
different rulings so Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, so are
you telling me with good
certainty here that, um, the
developer has made uh these uh
community benefit agreements to
help all these schools and
hospitals with good assurity
that we're not gonna have any
shortfalls. We're not going to
get.
passes, uh, uh, some of these
counties calling us back and I
think, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I think there was
another transmission line that
we might have missed over that's
going to southwest New Mexico.
What what counties is that going
through? Uh, thank you, uh,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen, uh, to that question,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, there
are 2 that go through Socorro,
Sierra, Luna, and Hidalgo and
Grant.
Thank you Madam Speaker and,
and, and, and that's why I'm
concerned, right? It goes
through my neck of the woods. I
mean, I care about the whole
state, but.
I don't want to get hung. Teras
you, uh, Madam Speaker, Razas,
you voted on this and you heard
us, uh, you know, we, we lost
some, some revenue and that's, I
think that's what what worries
me a little bit, uh, and I hope
you can understand that, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I think
you're you you're a kind
gentleman, you're a good friend
of mine. I don't again, I think
we do need to upgrade our our
our transmission lines. I also
agree, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
that we, um, that it takes a
tremendous amount of funds to
build this.
And, and that being said,
sometimes we have to work as as
a as a state government.
And private entity to come and
make these things possible all
of that we agree on, um, I think
my my only and biggest issue is
the question that I had are
these uh community benefit
agreements.
Have they been made for all
these counties to benefit so
where there's not a negative
impact on those counties because
I had heard that there was a
negative impact of $150 million.
That's what scares me.
Is that a question, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen? Yes, sir,
you can form that into a
question answer gentlemen,
Madam Speaker, thank you, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen. Um, the, uh,
there, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
they're not losing any revenue,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
Rita is not subject to, uh,
taxation, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um,
There could be a scenario if we
were to not pass this, if we
were to make it more difficult
to build transmission where
communities that have generation
for power, uh, they have a lot
of potential for wind wind or
solar, and particularly as we go
into our sunny uh part of the
state into the sunny South
Central and Southwest. If the
transmission lines don't get
built, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
then I would and because Rita
isn't able to help build them I
would contend then, Madam
Speaker.
gentlemen, that they would lose
revenue that otherwise they
would get through the building,
uh, of the transmission lines.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
but just to emphasize their
currently this is not like a
payment for, let's take West,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
let's take Sunzia. That's
currently a transmission line
that's been developed, uh, in
partnership with Rita, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, there's no
revenue flowing to the counties
right now that this bill passing
this bill would change.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
creation of Sunzia is allowing
the hundreds of millions of
dollars that are flowing to some
of the counties, the tens of
millions that are flowing to the
school districts. It is allowing
that money to flow, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, the
future, um, uh, lines like the
real soul, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, where we would be
developing, uh, say, uh, solar
down in maybe some of the more
southern parts of the state, uh,
that would generate funding.
for those local communities, but
that's dependent on the
transmission.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen.
Would you agree that this body
has been very, very generous in
working with um.
Renewable the renewable energy
sector in trying to make
Uh, uh, developments in in New
Mexico.
Through all sorts of whether
it's tax credits or investment,
would you, would you explain
that a little bit what this body
has done in the last uh 5-6
years, maybe longer. Uh, sure,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I think, uh,
we are taking steps forward to
develop energy, including
renewable energy, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I think one of the
biggest areas is making some of
the transmission projects and
other energy storage projects
eligible for uh industrial
revenue bonds, Madam Speaker.
gentleman, and we've seen a
development of a lot more clean
energy resources. We have the
largest onshore wind farm that's
going in in North America in our
state, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the southeast part of the state
is seeing a great deal, uh, of
new, um, renewable energy in
some cases powering conventional
energy production. So, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I think
we're doing a better job and
we're seeing uh a lot of new
investment in the state as a
result.
And Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
and that's been done because the
legislature has through IRBs
giving tax abatement and other,
other forms of, of incentives
right to build these these
transmission lines and
infrastructure, would you agree
with that, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I would agree that's
one of the reasons, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I think, um,
there are other reasons foremost
is sort of the resource that we
have the man speaker gentleman,
I think it's very true. There
are other parts of the West.
Uh, including neighbors to the
north that have pretty darn good
resources as well. We've done a
better job, I think, helping
develop the resources here and
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
numbers that we've gone through
a little bit, um, that focus on
the benefits that are coming to
school districts, to counties,
uh, you know, cities like
Estancia, Corona, others like
that, I think are flowing as a
result of some of the work we've
done. Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the assets that you think that
you're saying that.
New Mexico has, would that be
the sun that burns the paint on
our nice cars and the, and the,
and the winds that blow faster
than normal in certain times of
the year.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, those
are two of the resources that we
have a whole lot of, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, there's
other states also that have
pretty strong resources, but
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, when
you have a good resource and you
work uh in partnership to help
develop it. I think that's when
we see some of the benefits.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I, and
I, and I just, I'm gonna close
with this. I, I, I think it's, I
mean, I am glad that we're doing
new infrastructure. I'm glad
that we're we're we're moving
in, in, in that direction in
some.
aspects
And I'm glad that, you know,
this, that we see that as a
priority as as as state
legislature again my our biggest
issue for us for me is I don't
want to vote for something
that's unconstitutional. Number
2, I don't want to hurt any of
those entities in local
government that that need the
funds and and from what I'm
hearing from you today is that
that's gonna they're gonna be
made whole and there's not gonna
be a problem, um, I want this
body, um, Madam Speaker, I, and
I'm gonna pay it a bit.
To have the same consideration,
I think for, uh, oil and gas and
mining.
I think it is our cash cow, so
we, we're able to pay for all
this, pays for the enormous part
the budget that you put
together, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
And I think um I, I'd love for
us this body to do this, give
the same regards to, to.
To oil and gas.
In New Mexico.
You know I'm gonna say produces
the cleanest barrel of oil, and
we've had this great
conversation, Madam Speaker, uh,
uh, Chairman.
Creates a
The cleanest barrel of oil, I
would say in the world. I would
challenge somebody find better
environmental standards in New
Mexico and that comes for a
cost, the cost that we kind of
we balance right with um saying
hey we have higher environmental
standards, but we work with them
a little bit in taxes and some
other, some other things. I just
like to see this body.
Remember, um,
Who, who, who, who takes care of
business here in New Mexico and
we need to uh support them the
same and so I appreciate the
debate you're you're always a
gentleman with me and I
appreciate that, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you gentlemen.
there is for the debate,
gentlemen from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero Representative Henry.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Does
the gentleman from Donana Yi
Madam Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Chavez,
Eddie, and Otero.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen just got a couple
of quick questions that I wanna
make sure I, I continue to
understand a little bit more,
uh, in here you've said that.
Because Reid is a state-owned
property, they're exempt from
taxes. That's what the state
land office, is that correct?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, so in
in the FIR I think one of the
things that we, we've had
discussion with is I think
that's absolutely correct, but
if you look at 7-36-4. It says,
except 4.
And that except for I think is
where we really have some issues
is except for the improvements
that are owned or leased by a
non-exempt entity fractional
interest in such improvements,
owned or leased by a non-exempt
entity are subject to property
taxes. Would that be correct,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the, that's, uh, that is there
in the statute, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, I think there is
uh a very clear and
understanding going back to when
Rita was formed that Rita was
that exempt entity, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, and this
is helping to clarify that. I
know my colleague, uh, if, if my
colleague with uh uh Ms.
Mosteler wants to clarify
anything, uh, able to, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, I'd also
point out that there are
other exceptions in here, uh,
related to, uh, potash mineral
property, low income housing,
uh, authorized under municipal
housing law and other exceptions
that uh that are also in the
statute as well.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, yes, it is true that perhaps
um the county assessors may try
to assess this based on the
statute, um, but from the
analysis from tax and Rev, if
you read that, um, they will not
actually be able to collect
because the line, the real
property is owned by the state.
So matter, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady and gentlemen, both feel, I
guess whoever wants to answer.
I'm still very confused because
in the bill that's that's where
the big hangup is, is fractional
ownership. What does fractional
ownership mean?
Sexual ownership as defined in
the beginning of um our bill is
it's it and it's really
fractional interest, um, which I
think is that what you're
talking about, um, gentlemen.
Uh, let's see here, it says
fractional, sure, fractional
interest fractional interest,
um, so if you look on the first
page of the bill forual interest
means a tangible interest in
real property except for mineral
property is defined the
exemptions, um, but it, it, it
essentially means, um, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, Madam
Speaker, and, um, gentlemen,
it's that you're leasing a part
of the line.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's, that's still gonna
be my my question that I, I
still don't understand if, if a
private entity owns a fractional
interest.
How are we exempting them from
property tax if they don't, if
it's not the state.
Now we're exempting a private
entity because they own a
fractional interest.
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, what we are talking about
here in this bill is the leasing
of that fractional interest, uh,
which is how this is defined and
um and so for the lines since
the line is owned by the state,
um, the ownership aspect is what
allows tax and revenue to
collect.
And so in this scenario, what
you're talking about is um
someone is owning a part or
leasing a part of the land, uh,
Thaksin Rev would go to the
owner to collect, and they would
find that the owner is the state
and so they would not be able to
collect um per the Constitution
since the the Constitution does
say that um state property is
exempt from property tax.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess, uh.
You're saying this bill is going
to clear up, but I think it's
pretty clear. I mean, as a local
government as a commissioner,
I've always understood if the
government owns the property.
It is not subject to property
tax.
But you're saying we need this
bill because then further on in
the FIR it says HB 295 proposes,
so you're adding language to it,
um, to identify one situation
where a non-exempt fractional
ownership in an improvement to
land owned by Rita is exempt. Is
that correct?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
what we are trying to do here is
clarify how Thaksin Rev has
already operated and, um, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I must
admit I too was confused when I
was reading this statue in the
beginning because I like you
thought it seems very clear,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
as I learned more, however, I
learned that a lot of these
deals were made, um, because and
as I said here in the analysis
that
There were letters that that uh
many of the that read have
received that ensured that
Thaksin Rev said, um, you know,
it is not possible to tax state
land, um, and state real
property, so, um, Madam Chair
and gentlemen, uh, what we are
trying to do here in this
statute is to clarify um what is
already occurring.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
really, I don't understand why
we have to clarify something
that's a law.
Like any time, I, I don't know.
Give me an example. If the speed
limit is 55, I don't need the
police officer to write
something different to clarify
the speed limit was 55. If the,
if it's in statute.
That
State property or
Property, um,
A state entity, it cannot be
taxed. Why do we have to clarify
and why are we proposing
language changes, uh, to 7-36-4.
Uh, Madam Speaker, and, um,
gentlemen.
It is really to ensure that
these transmission lines are
able to be built, uh, Madam
Chair and um gentlemen, these
projects are billions of
dollars, um, so far I think
what's been mentioned is $13
billion of investments have been
made here in the state, uh, we
have a few lines built, um, 3, I
believe, um, one that's
currently being constructed, but
there are many, many more that
we will build out and um.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, if
we aren't able to clarify this,
um, we, it, it, it unless you
know if we are not able to
clarify this, it would be very
hard to pencil out those
projects.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, to
clarify, why would we not get a
court ruling?
Madam Speaker, and um gentlemen,
also my question um that I had
for uh Rita and there is quite a
bit of case law actually in on
this, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, if you were to read
the analysis, for instance, that
tax and revenue did, I think
they did an excellent job laying
out uh the case law that exists,
um, however, some of that case
law is convoluted and Madam
Speaker and um gentlemen, it is
really our intention that we
want to clarify the legislative
hint of what this statute is
meant to bring.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady or
gentleman, I'm not sure who will
take this one. The next big
question I have is, is I believe
y'all said one of these
transmission lines that have
already been built.
We're sold. Is that correct?
Uh thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. I'll, uh,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, Western spirit has been
built, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, there was a
financing for one other. It's
known as high lonesome, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, and as we
speak, uh, the sunzia is under
construction, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen. Um,
So those 3.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
were any of those sold to like
P&M? Uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, great question. Uh,
one was, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, Western Spirit was
sold to PNM.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, uh, do
they pay taxes on it now?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
they do, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that's just like,
that's uh accelerated scenario
of where one of these leases
concludes, and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, that private entity
is the full owner, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
are we incentivizing these
transition lines by not letting
them by not making a pay
property taxes.
And then in 30 years when this
contract is up, they're able to
sell those and make money. Is
that correct?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, in
this case, uh, Rita sold that to
PNM, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
so, uh, the state was the
beneficiary both of the economic
development that the power
helped create with Facebook,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
state was the beneficiary, in
particular the local communities
where the beneficiary of the
wind power that was um built in,
and is benefiting the lessees
there in that area. So Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, thinking
in both of those sce
o s the new uh investment was
made possible because uh Rita
helped to build that
transmission line and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, as the
gentle lady referred to with,
you know, 3 or 4, of these
additional lines that are sort
of being um worked on in various
stages, we could very well see
the next 15 to 20 years filled
with new transmission,
therefore, uh, new generation
and more money flowing into.
the state as a result.
So Madam speaker, gentlemen, if
a private entity, one of the
other electric company wants to
build a transition line. Is it
exempt?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
if, if that, uh, private
electric company, uh, builds
that themselves, then no.
I think Madam Speaker, gentleman
that goes back to a prior
discussion, it really does feel
like we're picking winners and
losers, especially if after the
life of this contract, that
company is then allowed to sell
it for a profit.
Um, that, that feels very weird
to me.
Uh, and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I think my
understanding and clarifying
with my expert, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, Rita, the state
entity is the owner of that. So
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, Rita,
the state entity is the one
selling the line at the
conclusion of that lease and
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, is the
one that's recouping whatever
the sale is.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um.
Help me understand because I
know in prior debate, you've
said a lot of these transition
lines, a lot of the wind power
that we're generating is going
to California, I correct me am I
right on that? Uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, so far we've
got, uh, say 22 lines we'll
focus on, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, one of those lines,
Western spirit, all of that
power is coming here in New
Mexico. It's supporting jobs
there at Facebook primarily and
the build out of manufacturing
outside of Los Luna, Madam.
Speaker, gentlemen, right close
to where I went to high school,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
another line, the um
The uh Sunzia, uh, while that is
been bringing all the money and
the hundreds of millions of
dollars to local communities,
the 3, you know, the 12+ billion
dollars total investment, that
power is destined to go out of
state, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the future lines, I mean, I
would characterize sort of as a
mixture of both. We're gonna see
more power that's generated,
that's available in state, uh,
including from.
Um, the, the alternating current
AC lines, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, we're also gonna see
some more power that will head
out of state. But Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I, I would just say
so far sort of half and half, at
least one project, all the power
here, another project sending it
out. The future is gonna be
mixed and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, more transmission
lines and the the ability to
connect those is gonna create a
lot more opportunities for us to
utilize that power in.
In state. Uh, uh, sorry, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, in, in the
southeast part of the state, um,
a line that Rita's helped, uh,
developing uh that, that would
all be power that's working with
SPP but that would be power
that's in state.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that's great. I'm still curious
how much power that from our win
how much actually stays in the
state and how much goes out.
It's 50 you said 50% stays in
the state. I don't feel like
that's right. I think I heard a
different number at one point,
but yeah, no, ma'am speaker,
gentlemen, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, in terms of the two
projects, Western Spirit, um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I,
there, there is far more wind
that's being developed as part
of uh the suns.
transmission line, I believe
it's something on the order of
3,515 megawatts, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, 3.5 gigawatts of
power, um,
And that power is going out of
state. That's the majority of
the win that's the largest
onshore wind farm in North
America that is currently headed
out of state.
So it matters, Madam Speaker and
or gentleman that 70%, I, I
think that's the number I've
operated on, and I think that's
a number that was set in
committee. The 70% of the power
we generate go to California or
that direction. Does that sound
right? I know megawatts, but I'm
trying to break it down for the,
the live audience that's
probably watching us and and
make sure they understand it as
well.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
think as we stand now that that
roughly that 70% sounds right,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the,
uh, I would look at it that
we're much like in other energy,
conventional energy, uh, much of
what we produce, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, is exported out
of state and paid for, uh, in
the, the benefits come back to
the state.
So Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
as it's traveling across the
country to California do other
states do the same type, or do
they, do they get rid of
property taxes as it crosses. I
don't know what it does.
Arizona, Nevada, whatever
direction they go.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
there are other states that have
a state transmission authority
that to help build out
transmission, uh, although it,
it can vary state to state. Some
states do, some states don't,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, the
states that are more successful
building new transmission lines
here in the West, absolutely do
have a state authority that's
because otherwise, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, it is
exceedingly hard to develop new
large scale transmission.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
out of the states that you say
are successful with it. How many
states actually don't charge
property taxes through their
authority.
find
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't know, uh, I don't have
that information right here
offhand.
But man, yeah.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I'd be
really interested in that to see
how many other states are giving
all everything away if that's
why we're the most successful,
uh, because we, we get rid of
property taxes. We have all
these huge incentives if that's
the reasoning why, why we, we
think we're more successful, um,
California obviously needs a ton
of wind and, and solar. Uh, why
are they not building it? Why
are they making us do it? What,
what's, what's the difference?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
that we're, we're building a new
winds and new energy and the
trans well, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, we need new
transmission to unlock the wind
power. Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
I still very much remember back
to when I was first elected, uh,
farmers from the rural northeast
part of the state said we need
you to support Rita because
that's what's gonna unlock wind
that's gonna help us.
because those wind turbines are
gonna go in on our deeded land,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um,
so, madam speaker, gentlemen,
the, uh, California other uh
other states are also building
renewable energy, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, there the
potential to interconnect more
states is something that will
lower costs and um I think has a
whole lot of different benefits
sort of whatever perspective we
might bring.
more interconnected grid is
going to lower the cost of
energy, make that energy
cleaner, uh, and help get it
where it needs to go, uh, more
quickly.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I've
got 2 more quick questions, uh,
one of the prior debaters kind
of mentioned this, but I'm
interested. Let's call it a gas
line, a natural gas line that
that a lot of the uh some of our
state needs for heating, uh, not
cooling, heating, uh, their
homes and quite a bit of use out
of that. Why have those never
been looked at? Because I
believe natural gasses, they
cross state land, not only pay
taxes but I think they also pay
a lease. So what's the
difference in that type of
energy and us making this
completely.
almost free, um, for this type
of energy. Help me understand
the how we're not picking
winners here.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
the Rita statute refers only to
electricity, so that's why we're
only talking about electricity.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I'd
also point out that the Rita
statute only requires, I believe
it's 30% of the energy that's
transported on those lines, uh,
be, uh, renewable energy. So,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
reason we're only talking about
electricity is just because
that's the Rita statue and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, it's, uh,
not just limited to one form of
energy.
degeneration.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, now I
understand that we're only
talking about electricity right
now because of Rita. My
question, I guess, was, and I
don't really need an answer
anymore, but if, if this type of
electricity is so important,
energy.
Why was it, why have we never
looked at any other sources of
energy within our state to get
the same kind of benefit, um,
when it benefits the state,
probably much more right now
than this wind energy in the
sense of 70% of this is going to
California, but the only other
question I have is right now.
Does Rita already do this?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
yes.
So Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
Rita already does this, which is
good because it is on their
website that their tax
incentives are property, grocery
receipts, and compensation tax,
so they already, uh, advertise
that for however long this
website is, I guess for over a
year now. So is that why we, we
need to do this now as clarify
something that
To y'all say is clarified
because it's on state land I
think the part that I'm just not
gonna be able to accept this is
that.
percent interest that is owned.
By a private entity and and with
that I yield.
Thank you, gentle lady from Dona
Anna Hidalgo and Luna,
Representative Jones. Thank you,
Madam Speaker and uh gentlemen.
Um, do you yield? Madam Speaker,
I gladly yield to the lady from
uh Hidalgo, Donana and Luna.
Thank you very much. So, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, a lot of
my questions have been answered.
I understand it a lot better
after the debate, um, but Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, just to be
sure, um, I think we both know
this applies very much to my
district, which has two
transmission lines being built
across Luna and Hidalgo
Counties, correct?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, those are two of the, yeah,
2 lines.
Thank you. And so Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um.
Are the
Are the owners of those
transmission lines getting what
would be thought of as other tax
breaks and maybe I'm not wording
that correctly now. Would, would
you agree with that or do you
have anything to say about other
tax breaks? Madam Speaker, and,
and gentle lady, um, the, the,
the um folks who are investing
in building those lines, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, are
investing as we, we all
acknowledge and know a vast
amount of money, billions of
dollars.
in the construction of those
lines, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, um, there in there may be
some, there are, I think some
other, excuse me, tax benefits,
but Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
sort of, as with any extremely
large, uh, infrastructure
project. I think that's in our
interest. We need to, uh, build
some of these really large
infrastructure projects in order
to both better serve New
Mexicans, supply energy where
it's in high demand.
And Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
to develop that energy here, uh,
in New Mexico and Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, the potential
should communities be interested
in developing, say, solar,
potentially even wind energy as
you go further south into some
of the communities that we come
from those, uh, could be of
great benefit to local
communities and particularly
rural communities if they
choose.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I'm not sure if
you're aware of this, but there
was a lot of resistance to the
projects that have been
developed, the transmission
lines, the solar fields, the
wind turbines, a lot of
resistance in in my communities
about that and uh I think a part
of that was, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, the it's an eyesore
on the, on the land, you know,
and, and we love our beautiful
mountains and open deserts and
so that was difficult. There's
uh probably some property values
that drop because of these uh
transmission lines, Madam
Speaker, um, gentlemen.
A lot of people gave up property
or right of way to to uh have
these fields and these uh
transmission lines built and to
make it even worse, none of the
power that that's trans, you
know, that's um um.
As a result of their
Bright sun and you know, lots of
wind, none of that would be in
our district it would all go to
California. So there was a lot
of um resistance because of
those things so that's why I
wanna make sure I'm getting this
right because I don't like, you
know, others have said, I don't
want to go back to my district,
which is right in the middle of
all of this and say I didn't do
the right thing by getting
answers, so, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, um, can you tell me?
Is a community benefit agreement
is that, is that also called an
IRB?
thing, Madam Speaker, thank you,
gentle lady and IRB is, is, so
no, I would say they're
different. My expert saying
they're different, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
OK, could you clear that up for
me then and tell me the
difference between those two
things.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, uh, uh, the, the community
benefits agreements is a um uh
my expert is describing it as a
voluntary agreement,
specifically related to um the
uh.
The developing of the
transmission.
OK, thank you, uh, gentlemen so
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
are these two transmission lines
that are being built in my
district, um, Senzio, which is
now Rio Soul I believe and then
I don't remember the name of the
other one.
Can you tell me the name of the
other.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, to the two
separate, well, you had them
right. One is sunzia, the other
is Rio soul. Oh, OK, thank you,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, um.
So are those two being built
with an IRB agreement?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
no.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
I, I, I guess I, I think there
is an agreement. I've been
talking to um my county manager.
Um, county manager, I think
there is an agreement, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, 20,
possibly 30 year agreement.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I think that's the, the
community benefit agreement, uh,
specifically, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, so there is an
agreement that's, uh, generating
funding for the local
communities, but that's a
community benefit agreement,
not, uh, an industrial revenue
bond.
OK, thank you very much, um,
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I know
we had discussed industrial
revenue bonds when the project
was starting, so, um, I
appreciate that, um, knowing the
difference, so uh is it a 20
year agreement?
Uh, got, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I think, um, it
seems like it's more of sort of
a front end agreement sort of in
the, the lead up to development
and then the construction, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, not
necessarily for 20 or 30 years
so.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
But there isn't and there is an
agreed upon time when that the
benefits from the project to the
community and correct? Madam
Speaker, lady, yes.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, at
the end of that period of time,
what effect will this bill, if
we pass it, have on the.
Um, benefit.
Tax benefit to our communities.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, my experts tell me that it
won't change the benefit
agreement that you have
negotiated that benefit
agreement isn't sort of the tax
because Rita is not subject to
it, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
but it is the payment that is
negotiated under that benefit
will stay in place.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, are
you talking about at the end of
the agreement, I, I'm looking
forward to the future after the
agreement has ended, whether
it's 20 years or 30 years, what
effect does this bill have on a
relationship um tax relationship
or and benefit from those
transition line. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. Thank you for clarifying
apologies on my end. Madam
Speaker, gentle lady at the
conclusion of the lease term
when that.
Um, when that transmission line,
the least concludes with
renewable energy transmission
authority, uh, then the reader
will own that line if they
choose to sell that line to say
a private entity, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, then that private
entity would be assessed tax,
uh, at the conclusion of the,
uh, of the lease agreement.
Thank you, um, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen.
I'm not sure how to put this,
but would, do you, do you, um,
was this bill discussed with
The, the people who will be
affected, the county, the
schools, the hospital.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
the
As we've sort of talked about
through a really good
conversation and debate, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, this keeps
in place the approach that has
been in place up until now.
There have been some questions
raised about, um, uh, as the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
talked about maybe some
different cases, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, so this
doesn't change anything, uh,
that's in place now. It affirms
that and puts it more clearly in
the statute.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, does this take
away any future negotiations for
community benefits or IRBs on
other projects or that would be
related to the transmission
lines.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh, my
expert and I after talking,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
community benefit agreement
approach for transmission that's
sort of in place, uh, it seems
like down in some of the
communities you represent that
would continue to be an approach
that would be welcome, and I
think worked just fine for new
projects, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, the IRB is the industrial
revenue bonds are generally uh
have
been used for the for a
generation, uh, projects for
whether it's the wind or the
solar or another source of
energy that would stay the same
also.
Thank you very much and Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I heard
someone mention a a transfer
station, um, let's just say
there's another transfer station
built within the district or,
you know, within this project
how does this bill affect that?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
because it sort of under the
current regime and moving
forward with this bill, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, because
Rita would own that transfer
station, um, and then lease it
back for operation, Madam
Speaker, General, gentle lady,
uh, that would not be subject to
that property tax.
OK, thank you. So I guess you
know there's probably still a
lot. I don't fully understand
about this. I'm not a tax expert
by any means and, and these
projects are huge, but I guess
my last question to you would
be, um,
Are there winners and losers
here?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for the question, uh,
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, from my
perspective and I think for many
of the communities that won't
get uh generation built that are
generally very rural, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
that this bill creates uh
winners for the state, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, there are
costs and benefits to
transmission and as an outdoor
enthusiast, I feel that, but
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, with
Without Rita, it is very
difficult to build the
transmission lines and Madam
Speaker, gentle lady without the
transmission lines, none of the
power generation that is
supporting local communities now
and will generate tens of
millions for schools, hundreds
of millions for other rural
parts of the state, none of that
will get built, so.
Men's, uh, speaker, gentle lady
in sort of respectfully from my
end, I see the new um
transmission lines that Rita is
allowing to be built in our
state and helping get built as a
very much a winner for the
state, um.
Respectfully, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you. I thought I was done,
but I'm not.
May not be a question, but I
have to say I, I hear what
you're saying.
And I feel like in my district
anyway, we've given up a lot
like I said, I gave you a list
of things for a, a possible
future benefit and I know that
there, I'm sure there have been
some agreements which have
benefited our schools and so
forth, but when that's done.
Unless something changes my
district, it kind of looks like
my district doesn't benefit.
I'm willing to look at the whole
state, you know, and the nation
and so forth and I think a lot
of us have in my district, Madam
Speaker, gentlemen, but, um, you
know, our property values are
lower. We do have transmission
lines and, and, um, projects of
all kinds of over the landscape
now and get none of that energy.
And when I bring that has done.
Incentivizing, incentivizing
wind and solar is a good thing
overall, but I'm not seeing that
that's really a benefit for my
district.
And I wish that I could, but
thank you very much for
answering my questions. I
appreciate it very much. Thank
you very much, gentle lady.
Gentle lady from Donana Sierra
and Socorro, Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, um, does the
gentleman know? Madam Speaker, I
gladly yield to the gentle lady
from Donana Socorro, and Sierra.
Thank you. Um, I'm just
wondering, um, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, once the transmission
lines are built out, um, then
this is to give us clean energy,
right? To comply with the energy
Transition Act.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
in this case, no, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, the Rita statue,
uh, as we've talked about
briefly the requirement is that
30% of the power that goes on to
a Rita sponsored project or Rita
owned project, 30% of that needs
to be clean energy, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and thank you,
gentle ladies. So once these
communities have the
transmission line go through.
I'm just curious, how many acres
of solar panels are needed to
come to that 30%.
how many windmills or what are
you envisioning as the mix?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
the, that 30% mix is related
specifically to the capacity of
that line and Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, that capacity is
going to vary, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, um,
You know, the one, I think what
we talked about with Sunzia,
that's.
3.5 gigawatts of power that's
going on to those lines, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
being served by
100.
Or
916 wind turbines, but Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, that's not
sort of the, the minimum. The
minimum would say be 30% of that
power minimum would have to be
uh renewable generated either by
solar or wind.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Speaker, and thank you,
gentlemen. And these, these 90,
the 90 windmills.
Or 916 windmills represents 10%,
20%, 30%. What does that
represent? Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
And
In that case, that represents
100% of the capacity for that
for Sunzia transmission lines.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
they only need 30% and they're
going to have a 100%?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
in order to qualify as a reader
project, yes, they just have so
much, uh, good wind capacity,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady that
they're building that out and
they're filling that with, uh,
with all wind and Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, one of the cool
features about that is that
there uh the first, I think like
1000 turbines, so components are
all coming from Arcosa from the
wind manufacturer that's located
there basically in Berlin, a
little bit south of where I.
Grew up from 3rd grade on.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, because I see,
um, when I'm in Las Cruces down
in our neck of the woods, uh,
the, the parts for the
windmills, I, uh, the wind
turbines. I see them on I-25 far
south of Berlin, where are those
coming from?
Uh
Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Great
question. Um, those are the
blades, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, those are, uh, they're
just being shipped from Santa
Teresa, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, they're being assembled
some in Mexico for the blades,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, the
blades that are going on the um
the turbines, the big towers,
um, the, the first, uh, the 1st
300 towers are essentially being
made at our cos there in Berlin.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady
like you.
I see the turbines going north
quite frequently, um, and, and
that's the, that's where they're
coming from, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, the, those turbine,
the, or the towers, excuse me,
those are being built there in
Berlin. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Speaker, and thank you
gentlemen. And then and then is
this, are all of these
transmission lines only going to
have wind or will they also have
solar?
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
great question, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I think is more of
them come on the first ones have
been wind, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I think we're gonna start
to see more solar, um, so I
think it'll be a mix going
forward, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, and I mean,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, and
how far away could the solar
gardens, these, these acreages,
I think they're like rear Rancho
has how many?
20,000 acres of solar panels for
Rio Rancho. How far away can
those solar gardens be, um, from
the transmission lines.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
great question, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady talking with my
expert, as long as they're trans
a transmission line would need
to go directly to where the, the
solar panels are, but that sort
of connection line could connect
back into one of the larger, um,
transmission lines from as far
away as, as we wanted. There,
there has to be a connection
like with any power using the
poles and wires, but it could be
located very far. And so, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I could
see a point where power that we
generate in the southern part of
the state supports, um, you
know, it would just, this is a
hypothetical to be clear, but
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
power that we generate in one
part of the southern part of the
state could go up to the
spaceport, could go to other
areas, uh, that, that could
definitely happen, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
Madam Speaker, and, and thank
yous representative. I, I guess
what I'm just thinking about is
this.
What some
Some folks consider a mine an
intrusion.
Some folks consider, um, any
extraction or even queries and
intrusion. Um, and so I'm just,
I'm just processing all this,
how much the transmission lines
cost, and then what sort of
obstructions are going to be on
the surface of the ground to
generate this clean energy and
how many acres it takes. I read
a article in High Country last,
they might have been last year,
maybe longer now, that said that
um that in the western states,
they needed
22 million acres of surface
ground covered in solar panels,
and I'm wondering if folks have
thought this through, especially
when they have to have these 8
ft fences around them and they
don't have wildlife corridors if
we've really thought this
through, um, and I, I guess, Mr.
Speaker, and, and gentlemen, I'm
just trying to think about what
this really cost the taxpayers
and the price that we are going
to pay for our federal and state
lands, the surface use of our
state lands. Um, I'm thinking
about
We're going to bury these
things. It's not gonna be at
Mount Taylor, um, but I'm
thinking about where these
things might be buried and, um,
I, it just, it seems like a lot,
and it seems like the folks
whose counties that you
mentioned, they're not on the
bill, and I didn't know that a
bill was come up tonight, that
would be a perfect example of
other bills that have been
imposed on my community, um,
And Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I know your heart is in the
right place. I know you believe
that this is the right thing to
do. Um, I just think the folks
in our neck of the woods where
there these obstructions are,
don't all agree. So thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you,
gentle.
Seeing no further debate,
gentlemen, to close. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. Thank you, buddy.
Madam Speaker, uh, body, I'm
really excited, uh, and I
appreciate very much the
conversation we've had here
today, Madam Speaker, Bonny, um,
we have seen hundreds of
millions of dollars flow to
local communities, uh, scores of
millions, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, go to schools from Riidoso
to Las Vegas, uh, to, um,
Carrizozo, many places in
between.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
we've just started to scratch
the surface, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, Rita is a very
important part of that, and it's
true. There are costs and
benefits to transmission, and I
think, Madam Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, our body, we have to work
with that. We have to
acknowledge those costs, but we
also see the immense benefit the
billions of dollars that are
being invested in the state, the
clean energy that's supplying uh
projects here and projects in
other states.
and
we are, uh, immensely fortunate
to be able to do that. And so
with that, Madam Speaker, I move
that House Bill 295 do now pass.
The vote's about to close.
Missed it by that much.
How would you like to vote,
Representative?
by a vote of 38 in the positive,
27 in a negative. House Bill 295
has duly passed this house.
It's a gentle lady from Ber Lee
Torres Velazquez ready on
supplemental calendar item
number 4, Mr. Speaker, I am
ready.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 487 on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution that generally to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker.
House Bill 487, the protection
of Hispanic education is to
strengthen the impact of the
Hispanic Education Act.
Um
It adds the language, protects
and preserves New Mexico's
heritage Spanish language and
culture and provides a per diem
for the advisory council and
with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand
for questions from Sandoval,
Martinez. Mr. Speaker, will the
kind lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from
Sandoval County.
See, Mr. Speaker, I still have
friends.
I have uh just a couple of
questions.
Um,
when the title of the bill is
protection of Hispanic
education.
Why are we having to protect
Hispanic education.
Um, Mr. Speaker, there are a few
reasons. One, as Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentleman from Sandoval
County, there are a few very
important reasons why we need to
protect Hispanic education. One
is Hispanic students in New
Mexico are the majority
population and if Hispanic
students don't succeed, we all
don't succeed. Also, Mr.
Speaker, we have an
Hispanication Act and an
advisory council and to bring
parity to the act we need to
have per diem provided to.
That council, it is the only
council that has had no per diem
provided um in any shape or form
and so council members come in
from across the state on their
own pocket to these meetings,
um, in addition, Mr. Speaker and
gentle friend from Sandoval
County, um, the Hispanic
Education Act is one of the acts
that the Martinez lawsuit
included in its lawsuit against
the state in Martinez.
Versus state of New Mexico and
it's an active lawsuit and we
need to address those acts
directly in order to um remedy
uh the pieces that were provided
by the court.
You Mister Speaker, kind lady.
I, I knew I had read this bill
earlier and I couldn't.
Remember what it was that caught
my eye, so we're really not.
Protecting Hispanic education
what we're doing is adding
language.
Um
That requires the payment.
Of a per diem to.
Uh, members of, of the.
commission
Uh, to attend the biennial
Hispanic education summit.
Um, and other meetings that are
required is that?
I mean is that, is that the only
changes we're making to this
bill?
Well, um, Mr. Speaker, and uh
gentle friend from Sandoval
County. It goes a little deeper
than that.
Um
Our
Constitution actually provides
for protection of the Spanish
language, but.
In talking to other legislators
who have really cared about this
issue, the argument they get
back is that it's not written
into the bill.
And so we are writing it into
the bill and I might defer to uh
one of my colleagues
co-sponsor Tanya Mirabal Moya.
Um, it, it's something that's
very important to her, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
The lady from Valencia, Mirabal
Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, um,
and gentlemen from Sandoval, um,
yes, uh, the, it, it not only
it, it, it, uh, includes parity
for it is the only advisory
council that does not get paid a
per diem, uh, but one of the
most important things that,
that, uh, I wanted to make sure
was in there because um in
education committee when I
questioned um
The amount of money and the
difference in the amount of
money that was given to the
Indian Education Act versus the
Hispanic Education Act, uh,
being that most of our, uh, a
good majority I should say, um,
I think it's uh 60% of our
students are Hispanic.
Um, and, and it was it was.
All we got this year what I
believe that was input in the
budget was 500,000 where other
ones were tens of millions.
Um, so when I questioned why and
why wasn't there equity. I was
given uh the answer of that's
what the act says or and, and,
and we're doing what the act
says so that's why one of the
things we put in there was
protecting the Spanish heritage
language and culture.
And that's native New Mexican
Spanish, uh, and we did hear
from a lot of native New
Mexicans are the ones that have
been here for uh their families
like mine that has been here for
several hundreds of years and um
there's a lot of native New
Mexican families that feel that
their language, which is
different than what is being
taught in schools is being lost
and and and native New Mexican
culture is also being lost, so
that is why this.
Hispanic Education Act is now um
this advisory council, uh, which
is right now in the process of
even creating a curriculum for
the heritage language.
Um, for, uh, for those school
districts that that choose to
teach it, so now they are
mandated in order to be able to
do that. So then hopefully we
can open up some more funding
for this act, um, right now
they're, they're doing so much
on peanuts, and when we can open
up uh them to be able to get
more funding we might be able to
do a whole heck of a lot more.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady from Valencia, so the good
majority is.
Basically getting nothing.
So what's the bad majority
getting?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
could you repeat that question?
I'm sorry, I couldn't hear you
on this end.
I said the majority is not
getting any money.
I was just wondering what the
bad majority was getting.
I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, what that means.
Can you clarify for me?
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, that was a bad joke.
Gentlemen from Catherine Grant
Hidalgo on the bill represent
Terazas.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, with
the gentleman, a gentle lady
please yield, and I can't see.
Oh, there she is.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Capture and Grant in
Hidalgo counties.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and so
I, I, a couple of questions
first.
I would say a couple of
questions, Mr. Speaker. It
always ends up being 10, uh,
how, how, how many people are on
the council, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, by law,
they are able to bring in up to
23 members of the Hispanic into
the Hispanic Advisory Council.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
they already is this council
already existing? It it seems
like it is it is in my
understanding that right?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle person
from
Catherine Grant in Hidalgo
Counties, um, the council has
actually existed from 2011.
However, there are terms for
members and so they are not the
same council that they were 5
years ago or 10 years ago, um,
they do exist and they have
existed and they operate fully,
um, but they changed and rotate
positions just as we do in the
legislature, Mr. Speaker, gentle
representative.
And Mr. Mr. Speaker, generally,
you, do you mean that their
terms expire and new members
come on and and so forth and
they probably have, I would
imagine, um, Mr. Speaker,
General lady a staggered, uh, is
it, is it by election is it by
appointment and if it's my
appointment, who appoints these
council members, Madam Speaker,
Mr. Speaker Mr. Speaker, uh,
representative, these council
members are appointed by the
secretary and I can tell you
that when I serve
served as the liaison in 2010, I
helped the secretary identify
members from every geographical
region of New Mexico and from
both parties and from every
occupation that is listed in the
act.
Mr. Speaker, generally you kind
of, you were going in the
direction that I wanted to go in
in that they're from all
geographic parts so I would, I'm
gonna break it up in quadrants
northwest, southwest, east and
southwest east east west east
southeast. I'm getting tired
Southeast and Southwest.
Is so is there a balanced
approach for all the areas are
being um uh represented and how
long are their terms and are
there any vacancies? I'm trying
to do it quick so that we don't
go back and forth 50 times, Mr.
Speaker, generally.
Um, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, I believe there
are 3 vacancies that current
and, um, terms have varied, um,
as we've had various
secretaries, um, in terms of how
long members have stayed and the
contributions that they have
made to the committee and their
ability sometimes we have
teachers on the council who
maybe cannot stay for as many
years as they'd like, so they
leave when they are ready and
so.
um, terms try to they try to
have staggered terms so that not
everybody is replaced at the
same time and that's never
really happened, but um there's
a lot of equity built into the
way that the council members are
selected and appointed.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I was
kind of just reading here it
said, you know, I see that you.
Added certain things to your
bill and you um.
some of those things are protect
and preserve in Mexico's
heritage Spanish language and
culture.
Does that mean, and I'm not
trying to please don't take
this, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I want to make this into a
controversial debate because
that's not what I wanna do. It
sounds to me like you just wanna
the from what I'm understanding
to preserve our heritage.
It would that be accurate, Mr.
Speaker, General lady?
Mr. Speaker and representative
the idea is to preserve the
Spanish language and maybe I
should say languages of New
Mexico because the language that
has existed in New Mexico for
hundreds of years is
disappearing and so there have
been numerous research studies
conducted. There are specialists
at multiple universities who
have or are documenting that
language.
for preservation and there are
researchers and in fact the
Hispanic Cultural Center is
working with some of those uh
researchers to strengthen and
maintain and protect um the
Spanish languages of this area,
in fact, of the northern part of
New Mexico and.
As you probably are aware, you
will find that um the Spanish of
immigrants will depend on what
country they are coming from,
um, the Spanish, uh, families
who have been here for
generations will depend on how
long they have been here, um,
but in our constitution, if you
look at section 12, uh, I'm
sorry, Article 12, Section 8,
there has long been since 1973,
the opinion that the
Constitution.
protects the Spanish language
and so we're simply putting that
into the bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what
you're talking about there's my
accent.
Where sometimes I struggle with
certain words and then there's
El Nortenola
it would that be accurate, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and uh
representative.
Part of what we're trying to do
is honor all Spanish dialects
that we have existing currently
in New Mexico and make sure that
they survive and live on into
future generations.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think it's beautiful. I've got
friends in in El Norte, uh, in
Chamai and other places in Taos,
and they had they they sing a
little bit they're a little,
yeah, the way they talk and
maybe they say I don't know how
they uh describe us but we have
our our Spanish is a little bit
different. Sometimes our slang
is a little bit different.
Sometimes the culture of being,
depending on where you came from
is a little different and uh we
express always differently and,
and.
I was saying this and what I,
what I meant is that I wanna
make this controversial. I think
it's important is history.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I think that's what you're
trying to do and, and this is
what I mean by controversial. I
know.
Wasn't that long ago that we um
Some of the schools were
changing their name and statues
were coming down and, and to me
although.
There is some history there or
some past that is.
Hard to hear.
And, and, and take in.
We, I always believe in in
knowing what and where we come
from.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
because it tells us where where
we were sometimes wasn't good
and sometimes it was beautiful
and we learned from history
because it tends to repeat
itself, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and so does this council
in any way, shape or form
preserve history even when it's
kinda, you know, can be
sometimes seen by controversial
in only to preserve.
History in the way in in the way
of learning, learning from
learning from our mistakes and,
and becoming always a better
culture is that something that
the council does, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, um, let me just,
uh, proceed by introducing my
expert witness who is deputy
secretary at the PED, um, Doctor
Candace Castillo, she's in
charge of student support
services and let me consult with
her for a moment.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and
representative.
Um, the council's main
Task is to um
Advised the secretary.
And the council, because they do
come from the members do come
from various areas of the
geographical regions, they
represent those regions and the
ideas and the thoughts can vary
from one part of the state to
the other, so what the council
does at its best is come
together and have those
discussions and represent the
various opinions, the various
facts, the various histories of
the different parts of our
state.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, and,
and thank you for that. I, I'm
pleased I, I wasn't really
trying to make this any
controversial. It was just I was
trying to understand what we're
doing because you know we've
seen uh that in recent times
we've had a little bit of a of a
disagreement with certain people
and certain situations and to me
just history is so important. I,
I really think it's important
even here in the history because
we hear history Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady in, in general.
Whether it's a World War 12,
Vietnam, whatever it is, or
different things that happened
throughout the throughout the
world's existence, including the
Bible, it's, that's what it is
all history, so it's, it's
important to learn. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, the uh
couple last questions you guys
have a summit, did I understand
a summit, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and you have it
biannually, and where is that
because you're you're talking
about traveling here because
you're asking for per diem.
And so this this uh this travel
is it to the same place all the
time? Do you guys travel
different areas, kind of like
the legislature does where we
visit and and and I'm not trying
to insinuate for you to do this,
but I think it'd be kind of neat
if they go to different areas of
New Mexico so that they can
learn about it and learn and
understand because it's one
thing to talk about it. It's
another to live it and
experience it and I think what
what this legislature has done
for me, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it's, uh, it's made.
me go to certain areas and not
just eat the the green chili or
the red chili or or go see a
landmark but to actually hear
and understand and learn their
culture, learn their what that
what that particular the needs
of that particular area are, so
is that roughly what you're
doing, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
you nailed it. Um, there are two
required meetings of the
advisory council each year and
the idea is to combine those
with summits so that not only is
the council meeting, but people
from the community are coming in
to share what is happening in
that area. So last year there
were at least 2 meetings of the
council, one in Albuquerque and
some of the schools came in to
demonstrate some of the things.
that they were learning on some
of the projects sponsored by the
um by the office of Hispanic
Education.
And then they also had a meeting
in Las Cruces and we were
blessed to have Representative
Lara be a guest presenter among
other representation from the
Las Cruces and Gadsden areas.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I just want to commend you on
your work.
Thank you for doing this and you
know if if this is how we can
better serve our uh our state in
preserving the heritage, the
history. I'm gonna use the
history and the different lingos
that we have that are still
Spanish, right, but depending on
where you live, how we talk and
how we our dialect is just a
little bit different. I
appreciate what you're doing.
I'm absolutely gonna support
this. I just wanted to
understand and and show the body
what you, what this really means
to New Mexico. Thank you, ma'am,
Mr. Speaker.
originally. There's further
debate, young lady from Burley
and Torrens, Representative
Lord. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, will the gentle
lady from
Berlio?
County please yield? Is it
Berlio?
Yes, OK, thank you, um, will you
yield, please?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
my friend from Bernlio in
Torrance Counties. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Speaker. Oh, thank you,
um, Mr. Speaker Delay, so.
There was something that ended
up in PED a while ago I think it
was about 4 years ago that I
found very upsetting because I
don't think we, we always want
to remember our history, right?
But the way that this was worded
was very troublesome and I was
very upset about it and it was
on page 57.
Section 16 talking about
history.
I think it was like 6.2911 15
section and it was uh to be
taught in schools to our
children about the destruction
of America by Spaniards. Are you
familiar with that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker and
representative, I don't think
you're talking about something
in the bill, are you?
I don't think you are a gentle
lady either, Mr. Speaker lady, I
am gonna get to that. The reason
that I'm asking, would that
summit be looking at something
like that if the point of this
bill is education, protection of
our heritage Spanish language,
the elements would that be
something that would be taken
into consideration of looking
what is already in place and
possibly making some changes to
the wording or actually looking
to see what that is teaching our
children since since the.
is all about Hispanic education
and preservation.
Um, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, it's hard to
know without knowing the source
of where that's coming from, um,
because in and of itself
teaching Hispanic culture is not
a dangerous thing.
Oh, I agree that I was very
upset about the reason I was
upset, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I don't like the wording
of it. I don't think at any
point we should ever say
destruction of anything by a
certain culture. I, I took great
offense to that and when I the
reason I'm asking is because
we're talking about education
advisory board and I would like
this to be something that the
advisory board would take up to
look to see what PED put in
there in that section.
And to find out exactly what
they're teaching, Mr. Speaker
DeA, so it does actually have to
do with the bill. Would that be
something that the council would
consider moving forward into
what language is being used and
how it's being presented in the
school system, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and
Representative again without a
full reference, I have no idea
where that's coming from with
the context was, who might have
stated that who might have
written it, where it was
written, so it's really hard to
give any kind of answer, but we
are not about destruction and um
throughout this, uh, my guest
expert who is deputy secretary
is in full agreement that you
know we are not about
destruction, we're about
building and cooperating, um, so
I
Please share more with me and
I'm happy to look into that.
Thank you. We can talk about
offline, Mr. Speaker Deli. I, I
want to bring it up because when
it did happen, I came, I believe
was an interim committee. I was
very upset about just the
wording. I don't think we should
be using any wording. Please
look into that on PED. I can
give you the reference of where
it's at page 57, where it is in
the histo historical part we're
talking about history in the
exact word except screenshots of
it and actually have the PED
document, Mr. Speaker, young
lady. So moving on from there
that that I will speaker general
lady, I appreciate you bringing
that to our attention.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That's
all that I was looking if we're
gonna be moving forward with
this and I'll talk to you about
this afterwards speaking to the
lady about this wording. I don't
know what the class is, but to
me the wording was very
offensive, at least I thought,
Mr. Speaker Delaney. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, when I
look at the FIR.
When, OK, so it says in the FIR
it's saying it's non-recurring
but is there gonna be because
they estimate that the.
Regional education cooperatives
are gonna need about $30,000. So
there is that gonna be a
reoccurring fund for the summit
every 2 years, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, I don't believe that is a
reoccurring fund for the
summits, um, I think it has more
to do with working with that
center.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, when we look at this,
It is asking for.
$1 million in non-recurring
appropriation and maybe you can
expand a little bit about this.
I mean, I don't need any
explanation on bureau operations
other than the 349,000.
Is that gonna be to set up.
What this bill entails like this
is gonna be setting up the
space, like an office space or
can you tell me what the bureau
operations would be for for that
price, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and Representative
that 300,000 is for two
positions that are paid through
as the office staff, the
director and the staff.
OK, Miss. Thank you for
explaining that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, the second part
about Hispanic arts and music
grants at self-explanatory.
And then it talks about there's
two things that might be tied
together. I'm gonna ask the 1st
1, 145,000 for family engagement
infrastructure and program
design, Mr. Speaker Dela, can
you explain to me about the
family engagement because I'm
wondering if that ties into the
37,000 for the Hispanic
educational materials which I
just glanced at briefly which is
equity in school parent
partnerships, which are ways to
get parents more involved in the
school or is that something
different on the family
engagement infrastructure.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker and
Representative, um, the funds
incorporate fund monies for
books that are bought for the
families to support their
education and those books are
part of an institute that has
been developed that is given for
families for student support and
student success.
OK, Mr. Speaker, so is that, uh,
gentle lady, is that different
from the 37,000 for Hispanic
education including the
distribution of the equity in
school parent partnerships. Is
that something different, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
It's, it's part of a package
that comes together, it's
comprehensive. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and Representative.
You, I'm sorry.
I was just, I thought they might
be tied together, um, Cam's, um,
teachers sides, so Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, can I hold on
one second.
Sorry I got a little louder
there Mr. Speaker, gen lady, um.
What is it says 48,000 for REC
services, what does that entail,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
And Mr. Speaker and
Representative, um, that is
something of an extension cost
when working with communities
and families and they, the
office employees, um, people
from the REC to um complete that
work and to reach out to
families in their region.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
I just saw something that caught
my eye, encourage and foster
parental, OK, we talked about
the involvement I thought may
have something to do with, uh,
foster care and involvement.
Uh, I think that's all the
questions I had, but I'll come
talk to you about that issue
because I didn't like the
wording at all to say anything
about destruction, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, thank you. Mr.
Speaker, Representative, thank
you.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I move.
Well, hold on, hold on, there's
more to it, gentlemen from San
Juan Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, does
the generally yield?
Um, yes, uh, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan County.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so, um.
So just so I understand this,
this act already exists. Is that
correct, Madam Speaker, and
generally, you're just making
changes to the act. Mr. Speaker
and Representative, that is
correct.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Do you know when this act?
came into being.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
was passed in the session and
that was held in 2010.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. OK.
So, um,
The changes to the act.
In this bill are essentially
Um, on page.
On page 2, their minimal
changing uh language at the top.
And then item B on page 2 line
4.
protection, uh, protect and
preserve.
New Mexico's heritage.
Spanish language and culture,
that's, that's new, is that
correct, Madam Speaker, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that is correct, that is new
language.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then also it
looks like we're adding in
Uh
Higher education department.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, um, the original act
included pre-K to post-secondary
but did not name higher
education and the higher
education department is very
interested in working with us
has resources and is eager to
work with the council and also
with families.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but uh, but the,
um, secretary of PED.
is the one that really controls
this council.
Is that correct? um Madam, uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, minister, uh, Speaker and
representative when this bill
was first passed in 2010, it
functioned using a funds, if you
can remember those funds way
back then and there was a
discussion about where to house
one liaison.
And the decision was made for
convenience sake to house that
person in the PED with the
recognition that they were
looking at the needs of pre-K
through post-secondary education
and so, um, for that reason,
higher ed has been involved off
and on throughout the years, but
it's very interested now in
taking its full position as part
of this act.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I, I see that maybe
we're inviting them to the
party, but if, if I look on page
3,
Um, on line 5 through line 13.
Talking about the secretary of
PED that the Secretary shall
appoint.
No more than 23 members to the
council, and then it gives her
we can get those 23 people and
then on line 13 it says members
shall serve at the pleasure of
the secretary.
So Miss Speaker and gentle lady
appears that the, the secretary
of PED gets to choose all 23
members and then
If the secretary decides that
doesn't want that member on
there anymore or that the
secretary can
Get rid of the um one of the
members.
And then reappoint.
Is that correct? I'm just trying
to understand the act, uh, Mr.
Speaker and general, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, it has
never really, um, been that way,
um, once the secretary appoints
a member to the council. It also
goes to the governor's desk and
it's not that the governor has
appointed them, but it has the
governor's approval and so when
that happens, um, there, there,
it usually is the other way
around. It usually is a
commitment that comes up for the
council member and they can no
longer.
Served and there has never been
a point where one of the council
members was removed for any
reason. These are outstanding
citizens sometimes even um
former legislators who um have
great significance in their
communities, so no, they would
not be removed.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
generally, I was just
Reading the plain language of
it, so it was concerning to me,
um, and then Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, the last provision
is
Is to allow for uh to to to pay
folks to be able to attend per
diem and mileage and that type
of thing. Mr. Speaker,
Representative, that is correct.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um,
In reading through
The act and then reading through
your changes.
Um, yeah, it's probably a good
thing to pay folks if we're
asking them to serve, uh, pay
them to get to wherever they
need to be at, um, really.
I'd be interested, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, getting
some sort of report.
As to
How this is working, how this,
how this, uh,
committee
is interacting with PED, um, but
I, I like this new provision.
On
On page 2.
Uh, item B, uh, the new item B
on online for to protect and
preserve New Mexico's heritage
Spanish language and culture.
I'm very interested in that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady,
because, uh, over the last
few years we've
Kind of worked at odds with
that, um, Mister Speaker and
gentle lady, a couple years ago,
uh, uh, we even removed.
Uh, New Mexico history as part
of uh the curriculum mandatory
to graduate New Mexico, um, so
I'm, I'm glad to see that we're
adding back in, uh, New Mexico
history. It's very, very, uh,
New Mexico's history is pretty
outstanding, um, what, uh, Santa
Fe being the longest, uh,
capital, uh, longest standing
capital, uh, in the nation, uh,
predates.
Uh, anything in the 13 colonies
on the east coast.
Um, uh, Santa Fe being the
highest elevation of a capital
of any state in the nation.
Um, just our, our makeup, how
long, uh, folks and, uh, have
been here in New Mexico and,
and, and I'm very happy to see
this added back in, um.
But
I would like to get a report.
If, if there's a report, I'd
like to have it.
Because I, I am concerned that
that we've not done enough.
To protect and preserve New
Mexico's heritage.
We've not done enough, I think,
to protect, uh, the Spanish
language and the culture of New
Mexico, um, I'm very interested
in that, uh, Miss Speaker and
gentle lady in the, in the last
several years we've seen statues
and monuments, uh, torn down
across the state. I, I think
whether, whether history
It is always flattering or not.
Uh, holding on to history
instead of forgetting it is the
best way to make sure we don't
repeat history, so I, I'm, I'm
very happy to see that, but
Madam Speaker, in, in Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, one of
the things that I
That I, I really want to see and
in particular I'm glad that
you're inviting that the that
the secretary of higher ed is
going to be involved.
Um, Miss Speaker and gentle
lady, in the last.
2 or 3 years as I've traveled
around and been at several of
our higher education
institutions.
Um
The, the, the term to describe
the Hispanics in New Mexico that
has been the most common term
has been Latin X.
And Miss Speaker and gentle
lady, that, that to most New
Mexicans who have been here a
long time is
Is, is offensive. It's uh it's
something that undermines the
very language, uh, our language
is very interesting because even
inanimate objects in Spanish.
are usually uh male or female,
and it's not, it's not, it's not
a political statement at all.
That's just uh the language and
the history of the language.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I would love to be
involved.
With this board and I don't know
how to get involved. That is
something that I would love to
participate in because Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I, I
think our, our history.
Has, has been.
Abused a little bit and and I'd
like to see, uh, I'd like to see
that, um.
Uh, come back to a focal point
for us here in New Mexico and
the last thing, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Um, I am a little concerned that
we have to do this.
Um, uh, uh, it states on here
that because one of the one of
the changes in language on page
2 is
Well, beginning on page one,
provide for the, uh, the study
development and implementation
of educational systems that
affect the
That this is the new word change
academic success of Hispanic
students.
And to increase graduation rates
and ensure lifelong success. I
think that is laudable. I think
that is what we need to do. But
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I think the way we do that
because Hispanics are the
majority in New Mexico uh over
60%.
Uh, uh, of our population as
minority with 53% Hispanic.
In New Mexico, a very, very
interesting blend of Hispanic
and Native American and most of
us.
our intermarried, that, that,
that's a very interesting
culture in in America what is in
New Mexico, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I think when
we're struggling at 50% in
education, I think the most
important thing we can do for
Hispanic education is to see
succeed at education.
And so Mr. Speaker, generally,
I'm, I'm gonna support your,
your changes to this, uh, I, I
think they're important. I think
in particular.
Refocusing on the traditions.
That, uh that that we all grew
up with here.
And uh and the culture, so I, I
support that, uh, Mr. Speaker,
generally just two things I, I,
I would love to get a report.
As to where we think we are, and
secondly, I would love to be
involved.
Going forward. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady lady to
close.
I, Mr. Speaker.
I now move.
Um,
house bill 487 do now pass. We
are on final passage of House
Bill
uattro. The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
gas.
La.
It's a.
No, we don't clap.
We don't clap
No, no, no. No, it's not her
first bill. She's sunk Selena. I
remember.
I remember, you remember.
You remember
George Lopez, come on guys.
Gentle lady from Ber Leo or
Senator Hawk maybe here. Are you
ready on item number 11? Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will you take
me to that point that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
87 as amended and final passage
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate onend or
substitution generated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Bill 87 amends
the definition of criminal
sexual contact to include
nonconsensual touching of both
clothed and unclothed body
parts, and for that I stand with
and with with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, I now
move that House Bill 87 as
amended do now pass. We are on
final passage of the House bill.
87 as amended, the vote is now
open.
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 1 in
the.
you press the wrong button.
I mean you never vote yes, so I,
I, I pushed the yes button, but
I don't know that
that's gonna change the vote.
Open it up.
When you're aiming for the one
in the middle?
By a vote of 66 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 87 as amended Auli
pros this house.
Generated from Bur or son of
Garrett, are you ready on item
number 10. Yes, I am, Mr.
Speaker. Please get me to the
point that all action necessary
for place in I 67 on final
passage has been taken and it is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution generally to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 67
reasonable assurance for higher
education employees makes a very
important, but, uh, technical
fix to the unemployment system
for adjunct and contingent
faculty, they now have a list of
5 eligibility factors to be met
in order to conclude that
they've been given a reasonable
assurance that we hire and are
thus ineligible for.
bits with that I stand for
questions from San Juan Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
uh gentle ladies, is a gentle
lady, uh, yield.
Mr. Speaker, yes, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I did not see
this bill, but I, I, in any of
my committees, but I, I noticed
in the first committee there
were 4 no votes.
But in the next committee.
It looks like there were, there
were 0 no votes. Was there some
changes that took place.
Uh, between 1st and 2nd
committee.
Mr. Speaker, um, this and kind
from San Juan, the 2nd committee
was House Education where there
are no Democrats or Republicans,
we are all educators who
understand education.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh maybe, maybe for those who
are in the uh not educators,
maybe you can explain what.
Uh, uh, what, um, maybe some of
the concerns were.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, what the bill does is
instead of having kind of an
ambiguous uh reason for why
people can or can't get
unemployment when they're, um,
Adjunct professors, it creates a
five-part eligibility test so
that both the employee and the
employer have a clear
understanding of reasonable
assurance of uh re-employment
and it has 5 points, the
educational institution has made
a written oral or implied offer
of employment for the following
academic year term, the offer of
employment was made by an
individual with actual authority
to make an offer. The offered
employment is substantially the
same position or a higher
position than the previous
employment, the consideration
for the offered employment is at
least 90% of what the claimant
earned and the offer employment
is not contingent on factors
within the institution's
control, such as course
programming allocation of
funding, final course offerings
and so, uh, workforce.
Solutions notes that the
proposed language removes the
less well defined factors of the
statue and replaces them with
definite criteria to be used in
determining reasonable
assurance.
OK, thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, uh, how, how
big of an issue has this been,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, in
the past that we needed to, to
bring this forward.
Mr. Speaker, and kind gentlemen,
it's one of those annoying
little things that has happened
at institutions post-secondary
institutions and this fixes it.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So this is just to
make sure in layman's terms that
And an offer is made to someone
they pick up.
And move, maybe even across the
country to take a job. This is
just to
Uh, make it a little bit more.
Sure
That there is a job there
waiting for them. Is that
correct or is that?
Or my way off base, Mr. Speaker
Speaker and kind gentlemen, this
has to do at somebody working at
one institution within the state
of New Mexico.
OK, so this is taking a
different position, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
this er er just specifies more
clearly the eligibility points
so that there's no ambiguity,
ambiguity.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, as I think as a
non-educator, maybe I don't
understand this, but I'm being
assured here by one of my
colleagues that, that this is
good policy, so I'm gonna, I'm
gonna follow my, my neighbor's
lead on this one and.
And I hope that I'm not being
led astray. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
This further bit, gentlemen from
Catherine Grant Hidalgo,
Representative Terazo. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the gentle
lady, please yield.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I yield to the
kind gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I know you didn't mean
that when we were in labor that
I was being a.
Partisan
Political voter. I, I think what
happened, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is for some universities
there and, and please explain
this to me this is for adjuncts.
Which are basically part time or
hired as needed and so what
you're built can you explain
what this bill does.
This passes
In comparison to what is going
on now before it passes so what
we're where we're at now and
what happens if this passes, Mr.
Speaker, General. Mr. Speaker
and kind gentlemen, sometimes
two people look at the facts
differently by providing precise
5, eligibility factors, um, it's
very clear what's been agreed on
and whether they qualify for
unemployment or not.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they're, they're hired as needed
because of the uncertainties in
course enrollment so basically
when they and, and please
correct me if I'm wrong, the
conversation that we've had and
I've had with the universities
um that that struggle with this
if they want to be full time
employees, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, they would get these uh uh
these benefits, but these are
part time or at at need uh um
positions that get hired Mr.
Speakergen lady with the
understanding that this course
could be canceled if there's not
enough um participation in the
class or other uh other factors,
um.
And now I want to make it clear
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady that
adjuncts are are very, very uh
important to higher education,
um, because they do have to a
lot of universities have to
depend on those, but they do at
times or not at times when they
come they they decide to do this
it's usually sometimes a side
job or moonlighting, would you
agree with that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
this has to do.
With the employer and the
employee having 5 clear factors,
so there's no confusion on the
expectation.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yeah, I, I, I, we went through
this and that, that was why I
had concerns about it, um, uh,
mostly because, uh.
Because of, because of the
factor that they're they're part
time and they're as needed there
it's a, it's a contract between
them and sometimes unless I'm
understanding I missed
something, can you just give me
one word please quick
explanation, Madam Speaker. Mr.
Speaker and kind gentlemen again
this spill clarifies the
definition of reasonable
insurance and it's related to
the unemployment compensation
law in um our statutes and so,
uh, some employees are
s ab ba t ical So if you have a
sabbatical, uh, you're not going
to be employed during the
sabbatical employees who are
unemployed between 2 academic
years or terms, if there's a
reasonable assurance that they
will perform the services for uh
educational institution in the
second of such academic years or
terms that it refers to that. So
someone like is hired to do the
fall semester and there's a
Reasonable assurance that
they're going to also teach in
the spring semester. This refers
to that kind of work they would
not get unemployment in the
summer necessarily.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and,
and the reasons that that they
sometimes higher education uh or
universities cancel classes
depend on on participation maybe
they don't fill the whole class,
uh, something like that happens,
is that correct?
Hold on.
Um.
It's a contract is for future
employment and the employer is
claiming that it's an offer of
employment, that's reasonable
insurance, but the whole point
It is rather than having things
be ambiguous. The 5 elig
eligibility factors in the
bill's definition would
supersede uh the institutional
contract.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, it's late. I don't wanna go
on round and round a bit, but
basically reasonable assurance
can be given only within the
circumstances of need, not a
condition of guarantee and so
unfortunately for adjuncts this
is a fiscal reality for uh for
higher education institutions,
um, even though they value them.
Adjunct teaching, um.
Uh
And you know, they, they have
raised the adjunct pay and
compensation the um the
university it's hard for a
universities to guarantee that
that class is going to be um and
uh given for sure the following
semester so I understand what
you're trying to do and that
that's really what, where my
heartburn was with it is is the
is the assurance that we're
gonna have that class when
sometimes it doesn't, it doesn't
get filled the class doesn't get
filled.
And that's why they don't, uh,
they don't perform that class.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker generally
see no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
ask for a due pass on House Bill
67.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 67, the vote is now open.
What what cause? The votes are
closed by a vote of 47 in the
affirmative, 18 in the negative.
House Bill 67 as Uli passed his
house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez, are
you ready and item number 28.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point?
Where is your coat?
Wait, was, was, was permission
given? I don't, I wasn't.
It was OK. You can keep it off.
I was just wondering.
And why is there a bow tie?
Is it Thursday?
It's bow tie Tuesday.
Uh
Mr. Speaker, I wear a bow tie
every day.
Where are you guys wing? That's
true. I mean, I agree.
Let the record reflect that
actually necessary for placing
the house with 368 on final
passage has been taken.
And it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentlemen.
to explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, House Bill 368
changes the calendar for a
threshold job to the same
rolling calendar as a high wage
eligible job within the high
wage job tax credit, gentlemen.
Oh, there is a debate, gentlemen
from Otero from same block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the kind
gentleman from Sandoval, please
yield.
I don't want to, but I will.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. So, I
read your bill, but I don't
really know what a threshold job
is. Could you just tell me what
that means? Absolutely. So in
the high wage job tax credit you
have um income levels to apply
for the or to be able to get the
high wage jobs tax credit, um,
over a certain number which I
don't remember off the top of my
head is the high wage job tax
credit, um, then there is 60,000
to whatever that number is, uh,
which is a threshold job they're
both kind of required.
Um, the tax and rev changed the
high wage job tax credit to a
rolling year so that you don't
only have to hire within the 1st
59 days of the year, um, the 44
weeks of requirement starts the,
uh, it's 44 weeks from whenever
you hire, uh, but they didn't
fix the one for the threshold
job. So that one you can only
apply or you can only qualify
for if you hire within the 1st
50.
9 days of the year.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. I think that
cleared up my question. I don't
think I have any more for you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
No floor amendment?
Seeing no.
Further debate.
close.
Mr. Speaker, I.
Ask that House Bill 368 do now
pass. We are a final passage of
House Bill 368. The vote is now
open.
was about to close.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 368
Azuli Paz's house.
Gentlemen from Colfax Mona Ria
Riva San Miguel and Tas
representative Sanchez, are you
ready, will you get me to that
point?
On item number 38 that the
director of the let the record
reflect that all action is
necessary for place in House
Bill 532 on final passage has
been taken.
And is subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentlemen, to explain
the bill Mr. Speaker, 532, also
known as Lalorona bill.
Requires that uh schools.
Developer adopt guidance for
student water safety, and I now
stand for questions.
Well, there's no debate on that
one,
seeing no.
To be.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
Mr. Speaker, does it, does my
neighbor yield my office
neighbor.
Mr. Speaker, I ye to my Tokayo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
I grew up with my abuella, Mr.
Speaker.
And um
We were always told that.
The origin.
was along the Arkansas River.
Mr. Speaker.
I,
uh, Mr. Speaker.
Student safety is really
important to uh to us.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Um
We would students be
Walking near the river at night,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, not in Alcalde.
Like you, Mr. Speaker, that
concludes my questions.
I yield back.
See no further debate that
generated the general.
The gentlemen to close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 532 do not pass. You have
to say I mean sequels or
something like that.
Come on, do it.
Can I say I miss.
Amy seahorse.
I'm Mijos.
We're, we're a final passage of
housing 532. The vote is not
open.
What about clothes?
The border is now closed by a
vote of 65 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative. How's Bill 532
Hauli Paz his house.
Gentle lady from Catherine
Secorro Valencia.
And another amazing county. Are
you ready on item number 35.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
actually necessary for replacing
house for.
For placing Housesville, 413 on
final passage has been taken. It
is not subject to Tibet or
substitution generally to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. This is relating to
intergovernmental agreements
enacting the physician's
assistant licensure Interstate
compact. With that, I stand for
questions from San Juan Duncan.
See no debate generally to
close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now
move that House Bill 413 do now
pass passage of House 413. The
vote is not open.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 65 the infirmative 0 in the
negative. House Bill 413 Azuli
pass this house.
German from Sandoval, are you
ready on item number 37.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Can you
please get me to that point that
all action for place in House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 402 on final passage
has been taken.
And it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um.
The
house government sub for House
Bill 402 adds dentists to the 30
day requirement for insurance
credentialing and with that I
stand for questions.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that the
House government elections and
Indian affairs Committee sub for
House Bill 402 do now pass.
We're on final passage of
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 402. The vote is now
open.
What it's about to close.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for hou for
House Bill 402.
Hauli Paz's house.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
See no objection. It is so
ordered.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Bernal Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How's
Health and Human Services will
meet at 8:30 tomorrow in 307.emb
signal did the Lobos play today?
They play Thursday, Mr.
Speaker.s take note at what
time?
1 p.m.
Oh, we'll be here. Perfect.
Members say no, young lady from
San Juan and McKinley. Thank you
so.
I
Elections
And in years.
Say what? Your house state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee meeting will
start tomorrow at 8:30. Thank
you.
No, gentlemen from Donana Mr.
Speaker. House Appropriations
and Finance will meet tonight at
9:30. We'll be briefed, Mr.
Speaker.
We do have experts who are here
for important bills, which is
why we're doing it tonight.
Thank you
Mr. Speaker, we believe so, but
we'll see.
Time will tell.
German from Berlio. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Your education
committee will meet at 8:30
tomorrow, room 309.
saying, no, gentle
men from San Juan, Sandoval Ri
Riva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, your
house taxation and revenue
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning at 8:30.
Is your breakfast.
There will not be breakfast.
Boo.
I'm sorry you feel that way.
Announcements
Gentle lady from
Burnleyresentative Roel
Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
Labor Veterans and Military
Affairs will not be meeting this
evening.
Until further notice, no, I'm
only kidding till next Thursday.
Wait, next Thursday, like a week
from this Thursday? No.
Only kidding since everybody's
on a kidding mode today anyway
we will not be meeting this
evening, but we will be meeting
Thursday of this week take note.
Announcements.
All right, she's gonna hate me
for this, but we have a birthday
in the house.
Our very own Megan Dorsey is
celebrating a birthday.
It's a very special birthday.
gentle lady from Berlio, Anaya,
to sing.
To you. Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, dear Megan
happy.
I sit up all night and baked a
cake.
For Megan Dorsey.
Take care of my staff.
Any other announcements?
Any other birthdays?
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker,
I can't take my dog to the duck
pond that UNM anymore.
I guess that's what I get for
having a purebred dog.
Mm.
boon
that was
that was bad.
Mr. Speaker, that may have been
only for you and alumni.
That's pretty good.
lady from Bern Leo.
Speaker, what is more powerful
than La Llorona.
What is gentle lady?
The United States government
takes parents away.
I don't, I'm not sure I got that
one.
Oh, do you remember from
Sandoval for the same.
What do you call an alligator in
a vest.
What gentlemen?
An investigator.
And the prize for the joke of
the night goes to the Germaner
from Sandoval.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
Thank you members for a very,
very productive day. The house
was sending res until 10:30
tomorrow morning.
