Representative Hochman Vigil is
here Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson is here
Representative lane
Representative Lane is here
Representative Lara.
Representative Lara is here
Representative Monday
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lord
Representative Lord is here
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lujan.
Here Representative Lujan is
here Representative Lundstrom
Representative Lundstrom is here
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid is here
Representative Maestas.
Representative my S. this is
here Representative Martinez
here Representative Martinez is
here Representative Matthews.
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Rod Montoya
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
here Representative Nyberg.
Representative Nibert is here
Representative Ortez Here
Representative Ortez is here
Representative Pettigrew
Representative Pettigrew is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here Representative ream.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative Andrea Romero.
Present under amero is here
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
is here Representative Roybal
Caballero presented
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Representative Rubio is here
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sarinana is here
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative Serrato.
Representative small.
Representative small is here
Representative Strickler
Representative Strickler is here
Representative Sweetser.
Representative Sweetser is here
Representative says
Representative **** is here
Representative Thompson.
Representative Thomson is here
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend is here
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo is here
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora is here
speaker egolf.
I'm here speaker Egolf is here.
The gentleman Bernalillo
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker by ask
unanimous consent that the
proclamation of the governor
calling that there's special
session of the fifty fifth
legislature been read before the
house and entered into the
journal objections ordered click
to read.
State of New Mexico executive
office Santa Fe New Mexico
proclamation we're at the
ongoing Russian invasion and war
against Ukraine has contributed
to Bala tile volatility in the
global oil market.
We're as the price of gasoline
groceries and other goods has
substantially increased around
the country in recent months.
Whereas I vetoed Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill forty eight as amended
commonly known as the junior
bill enacted by the fifty fifth
legislature second session
twenty twenty two out of concern
for its enactment outside of the
traditional budget process
whereas some of the expenditures
and Senate bill forty eight also
appear to violate article nine
section fourteen of the New
Mexico constitution commonly
commonly known as the anti
donation clause whereas
carefully reassessing the
expenditures and Senate bill
forty eight to really dress
concerns such as providing full
funding for projects in
compliance with the anti
donation clause will ensure that
these expenditures are a wise
and law.
That will benefit all New
