If you
want.
A little trouble occurs to the
sitting here right now for
Representative Group One goal.
Your legislation.
With with.
Thank you Mr chair your refers
to yes is required.
I
your agency for which I would
like to do that Mr chair I have
the secretary to be able to
close this morning.
Reviews will remember your well.
Potential life saving program
for Mexico highways and
roadways.
This whole vision zero is a
program that started actually in
Europe number of years ago and
has come to send faxes the bill
for kids recently adopted for
its business for roads.
A couple of paragraphs from the
vision for that vision zero
network presented will summarize
it pretty well and all of the
comments and.
Question.
Version zero recognizes that
people sometimes make mistakes
on the road system and related
policies should be designed to
ensure that those inevitable
mistakes do not result in severe
injuries or fatalities this
means that system designers and
policy makers are expected to
approve the roadway environment
policies such as speed
management and other related
systems to improve security of
questions this is zero is the
multi disciplinary approach
rural together diverse and
necessary stakeholders to
address this complex problem.
Past meaningful cross
disciplinary collaboration among
local traffic patterns and
engineers policy makers and
public health professionals has
not been the nor vision zero and
all these years many factors
contribute to state mobility
include.
Sign speaks.
Here's the knowledge G. and
policies and sets clear goals to
achieve a shared goal zero
calories your injuries.
Forty two thousand people died
nationally over.
Over the course of the year.
New Mexico over the last five
years we've lost approximately a
little over four thousand people
Mexico all.
We by the way.
You
for all of our.
InventHelp will we'll.
You just.
We have an extra copy of.
Thank you Mr chairman.
There's a little history of.
And and members.
The number of people that are
there for own name rose four
people that died and I have to
reiterate.
This committee Mr Joe that it's
it's something that makes sense
all the time the what
We'll run council covers
governments ask you to consider
killing this bill and I.
See what happens in Albuquerque
alone not to mention Mexico with
more than happy to carry this
bill.
And this this particular vision
zero and all the zeros tend to
be.
Work for their state the we work
for what is individual and
specific to to roll in the state
of the oral that you see before
you this bill was a
collaboration with the secretary
and his staff
one of the key elements of the
bill is that it will it will
create physician that can be
absorbed already in the budget
with you to have a person that
works only on vision zero and
if.
This position will work to
review existing role raised new
construction protect our with
users just one single is and
motorists insurance discover
press the secretary wants to add
anything to our drawing said
recent question.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee you know we we learned
about this this CEO Christie is
one of fifty two cities across
the nation race.
And what we will do the research
is that typically the notion of
this is that often I do
disabilities local.
The New Mexico why would you go
about doing this at statewide is
to really establish the policy
research type of activities in
the leadership fellow Health
repair the tool kits for mobile
implementation across the state
of New Mexico that's that would
be arcade on our forces how we
set statewide policy legislative
research across the communities
to really implement this in
multiple communities.
So as you all know the
department of transportation is
already responsible for a number
of things in that influencing
the that includes any of the one
being distracted by the time the
claim thank you.
We support local law enforcement
on why efforts actuation.
We've been oversee driver's
education programs across the
state well we would be looking
at here is understanding how
between what we do in the plan
the design and construction of
roads you need to across the
state the activities of the
regions of greater fatalities
and that coordination includes
stable
introduce law enforcement public
health systems and even patients
systems so that we can
ultimately find a way to see the
patient the that reducing
greater so I would appreciate
Representative for people loving
us to you know to kind of
understand user there's a
nationwide network obviously
that provides resources and
support for implementing this as
you mentioned we believe that we
can improve the cost of this you
knew after within.
Of thank you for that at any
funding the audience favor of
the station.
Go ahead.
Mr chairman Alexander and the
chair of the transportation
working group of the
environmental justice to this
and we still love this bill.
Presentation to this stream
doesn't really twenty eight
percent since COVID started
including in New Mexico last
year the state route for the
first time in six years from the
state with the most pedestrian
deaths per hundred thousand
people to the second most just I
agree one hundred four point.
This may be attributed to the
fact that Albuquerque has of.
Your plan since late twenty
nineteen however because of the
our state he's not able to
enforce the ban on the.
As a result is our inter.
For the for avid auto related
deaths take place in rural areas
of the state having a statewide
office will help to bring this
to an end this is a major reason
why they should not be seen as a
local issue reasons are worse
after only four years old okay
traffic deaths at the time were
yes we're on the right
everywhere around the country
finally I had the great pleasure
of talking to dozens of city
county planners around the state
there's some of the brightest
people this tool allow them to
work their wonders please.
Mexico to the front of the
nation and road users and
support this bill thank you.
You will not.
For.
Will anybody of both the.
The bottom line both.
members.
Remember.
Sure.
Okay thank you Mr chair also
reluctant this morning it looks
like Representative thank you
for this bill Mr Chairman are.
I think every time we set a
goal.
That's a good thing
some goals can be
unrealistically high and
sometimes we set that anyway
feeling that we're going to fall
short.
We're trying to get this to
budget or state of Mr Chairman
representative high I was very
start when I said I can tell
it's transportation committee
Senators ago I think this is my
year I was actually shocked to
realize that for the department
of transportation here sets a
goal of certain number of the
counties and tries to stay below
that best number nine this year
in house bill two Mr chairman
these numbers weren't secure
again appear in languages
actually performance measures.
And it says the outcome we're
seeking is number of traffic
fatalities four hundred.
And then the out another outcome
is the number of alcohol related
traffic fatalities hundred
forty.
Yeah I found that just amazing
that were even saying that's
acceptable.
Mr Chairman
we would like to see zero deaths
on the highways but these
interrupts the secretary can
help me here numbers that the in
a D. O. T. Mr Chairman
determines are probably
realistic Mr chair Mr secretary
your dress up for school sure.
Chair representative the the
majority of the funding that
will be used to provide
education where it is some
furnitures two fatalities come
from the feds and therefore they
come with performance measures
that we must but we must leave
otherwise we're in the process
of developing corrective action
funds to shoppers so sensually
kind of performance measures
thank you Mr chairman
Senator thank you for that.
So
The the vision zero plan if if
it's very appealing just even
hear the words spoken.
R. Mr chairman and
Representative I.
I think that there's a lot to
this
We will just never get there
because honestly we can't stop
some people from drinking and
driving.
And I think the the solution Mr
chairman is to make sure that R.
N. M. D. O. T. has enough
funding to fix that
Senator elector shoulders
potholes okay all the things
that that you all know about
that's were I think the six is
and Mr Chairman representative I
think some of this really makes
sense for metro areas but for
the part of the state where I
live of this this doesn't really
fit
Our system down there and a few
of our smaller well they're not
metro areas there there's
Townsend said little cities
they're doing everything they
can to make things safe as well
right now and Mr Chairman
representative we do have a
traffic safety bureau lot of
respect for of the men and women
who work in that I think they
are trying every day to make our
road system safer so that we
don't have fatalities.
so Mr chair representative I I
know for the southeast corner of
New Mexico.
We've been crying out for years
for road improvements there are
times when the road the just the
even the if there's a fraction
someone is.
At the time.
We can do to get the office of
the medical examiner to get
there within a reasonable time
to even assess the situation and
so to me the answer is let's
build better roads and let's do
that over the state is not just
New Mexico and my my area that
needs it it's everywhere really
but it's pretty it's.
down where I live so.
hi I think some good things can
come out of this because it it
it requires Mr chair a little
more thinking about things but
again I believe the traffic
safety bureau right now is
already doing this and
I just a little skeptical Mr
chair that that this will really
change things statewide
again will help in some metro
areas for sure thank you Mr
Jeff.
To.
In response
Representative Brown so
Representative Brown.
Is that the operative word is
vision zero we talked about Agen
Commission
that's that's where does but if
you don't start first by
envisioning that and we can do
better than the fourth we
always to your phone and get the
same outcome.
So I think when you're service
addition and then sent forward
to try to address a number of.
Why any of the issues.
Right and and and this is the
situation we will dedicated
position specifically to work on
this all so it's I think it
would be fine described review
to think that we.
Begin with vision zero two more
regional facilities it's it's
not realistic goals and starts
to move us forward I think
that's that's important to
consider and you know just Mr
Chairman just briefly once one
time American industry was very
satisfied with the one percent
or two percent rejection rate of
drugs that was really four
percent to percent that turned
out to be millions of defective
products.
The one percent of the plans and
got up in the sky fell down to
the back.
And so this is kind of like that
you right now we the state well
we're okay with one percent two
percent and restarting dialogue
when we talk about the and the
secretary was asked about you
know you accept a certain number
right that's that's the same as
industry saying go over okay
with one percent two percent
we're not okay we're not okay
we're right now and this will
trying was a move for the former
thank you Mr.
Reserve but.
Thank you Mr chair.
thank you representative bill.
No the for the close my eyes
during the last few for this and
settled for the
because I don't want anything
that state come across in a in a
negative way
Mr chairman and representative.
You know in industry.
There's there's a couple things
the the just in mind.
Position and what I've done over
four years my career.
give quality and safety.
The the difference.
But we look at right now from
and into industry standpoint and
in this provision is that we and
industry can control that
because those people report to
us.
And so if Mr Chairman
representative.
in those cases.
In people have have don't act in
the proper way with respect to
either safety or quality we can
correct those that choose not to
correct those and they choose
not to be employed anymore.
You know those are personal
choices of those who for more.
Mr Chairman representative on on
this.
We can't control yes we can put
more police officers out there
yes we can do for thank.
Mr chair and representative part
of this bill.
Kind of insult.
Growth or what one of the main
things that I do for a living.
What I look at the criteria the
DOT's places down to civil
engineer geotechnical engineers
construction all of those pieces
everything that you mentioned
was for care are the in your
opening statement is what they
are you require of state.
We're taking that as far as we
can.
If they find.
So there's not a single aspect
Mr Chairman representative that
that you brought up the we know
more because.
And I look at this and and Mr
chair representative.
This this.
This piece of legislation would
require that we.
Create a position.
Which we already have within
the.
Every project manager out there
this is part of the
responsibility are ready.
Is to make sure that we're
meeting with the guidelines and
exceeding the guidelines where
we.
And so.
I.
Reducing traffic fatalities is a
very on first and goal we want
to do that.
But in the opening statement we
talked Mr chair.
Representative asked Justin for
people's state.
Mr Chairman representative we
can't control.
One.
A handful.
Once a mass in the actuaries
will turn this.
What we're trying to achieve
from this point.
Very offices as
well the manager of toppings and
tell you they're not in that.
Proportion of.
It is.
I Mr chairman of our look at
this and.
this is something that curfews.
To break workforce the sound
like a really good deal for
animal use empty and I'll.
But it is very frustrating Mr
Chairman representative of that
we continue to push.
Down to the local levels.
Somebody else's vision.
No on the house floor outside
our presenters rules this year
that no we're not gonna do that
we're a takeover low flow
control and it kind of depends
on the size of the filter on on
whether or not making love
taking over local control makes
sense or not.
And so.
Well I appreciate the I
appreciate the discussion.
Mr Chairman representative
Thank the gentleman sitting to
your to your right and the
people sitting behind him
support him of my kids.
The the the.
Personally is on the leader
with.
Doesn't already do this.
I consent council.
And I am but I appreciate the
bills thank.
Thank you one.
You know the advantages of
being.
Things.
By echo seven thousand right.
And I imagine than many of the
engineers of that time we've
sent.
But somebody said you know maybe
we should have for leasing
meetings at wider shoulders.
If when I was a kid you probably
agree with Albuquerque on I.
forty.
The bridge is completely open.
So if you wanted to also rock if
you could.
No there's chain link fence at
such a way that makes it pretty
difficult if somebody really
wants to get over the fence much
of the.
If we take the idea of the
notion that we're as good as we
can.
And there's more room for
improvement because because he's
doing a fantastic job.
The local municipalities are all
doing a good job analysis
focused on doing making sure
that there's no protected
bikeways and other things and
I'm not an engineer and I don't
know what was that well known
for ten thank you.
Committee members Mr chairman if
we stop right now we see we can
do better I think we're in a lot
of trouble and I think we can do
that I think that we have a
vision and the position that
simply.
This issue we better but if we
don't try
to continue to do the same thing
John Mr chair and and I
appreciate your response but if
the beauty of the of the of the
rules secretary city to the
right I think you just turn
around to those guys as for the.
Needs.
In need.
Mr chair one of the the.
With with our licenses we have a
responsibility.
And and my dad taught me this
early on
he actually left.
A role as a county engineer
surveyor because the the
counting
fourth commissioners at the time
wanted them to build a road that
was on site and the total number
they said no you're going to the
furnace and now you're gonna
find somebody else.
Mr Chairman representative.
Back in nineteen ninety I did
the same thing with a certain
water engineer drainage engineer
with state of New Mexico he
asked me make some changes on
the side of funds until now
Senator going to make the
changes I am of the plants and
this is a ninety five percent PS
maybe.
I have been in the plans of the
state you can find someone else
to sell these plans.
That's our responsibility we
have a professional standard of
care.
This to date with out this
legislation.
All actors have their by an arm
and a very much the sitting to
the right of this inspectors are
it's kind of behind the scenes
sitting here right all has to do
is I say yes.
We're putting this implies
with that piece of legislation
without being told to do that.
Thank you Mr chairman well the
reason we.
Got just for I think this is
important to chair if you want
to build me for just a minute.
Yes you're absolutely right
Representative Pettigrew that
human nature should be such that
everybody does the right thing.
And if your license and to just
a certain aspect of working you
yeah we all want that we don't
want that I support the
secretary I support the staff as
far as I can tell it's a
fantastic job but Mr Chairman
she Representative but more.
Don't have such a good secretary
tomorrow.
And this river chordify what we
would like to happen not vision
could teach regardless the
secretary is normal more cameras
over all of its Kasher boxes
because people should be honest
and number still a committee.
Capital in this trying to
codify.
So that we can continue move
forward regardless of whether
we're here or this secretaries
here the staff behind here C.
Shannon.
Thank you anymore questions from
committee members.
You know I have a few questions
in all of our representatives
all of and.
Well we already have fifty two.
In place you know and you know
in my part of the country's
western New Mexico.
That will be one of the most
dentists now Cimarex or we we
had a new date seems like a
more.
You know I've been in the toy
business for forty years in the
last two three years I mean it
just got a whole you know and
what this is going to cost to
fund.
What we really need to look at
who.
The.
You know I respect what you're
going to do because every human
life is valuable.
At the end of the day we really
need to look at the bigger
picture of southern Michigan
Mexico western New Mexico you
know we have the most
appropriate thinking probably
the United States coming to a
three forty now we really need
to address those issues.
Everything we address you know
and love Representative approval
to sit what if we don't have a
secretary but this point is a
good one you know what it is and
we were you know.
We don't know what what what
more rings.
But the reality of things what
I'm seeing on our interstates
right now it's real what if it's
there he'll lose my comments and
well with that if you want to
respond to that.
Should should Mr cherry just
quick quick story because you
know I mean you don't want to
see this this is an emergency
bill and working with
Representative on this and
learning and understanding the
import for us so you know
If you're a state employee
there's a program that will help
you get healthier if you so
choose is a preventative measure
right if you if you're healthier
you lose weight and lower
cholesterol and blood pressure
than.
Will be less above the all
financial liabilities to us
because you all wheel drive.
So there's program right and you
get hooked up with the coach of
the sensuous scale the sensual
cosigner to check your blood
pressure and they walk you
through the process of just
being a healthier person okay.
And so imagine if you do that
right and you lose ten or
fifteen pounds and then it gets
warm outside and you realize I'm
gonna start writing.
And every morning you wake up
and you also you start writing
your body and one day a.
This year and you think have had
I just been lazy.
Like I was before.
Never happened okay.
You know and that's why I
exercise.
from with.
about four months ago right we
got a call from the jungle state
representative we since the law
office wrote that you build
coming into the all state of the
road you're building going out
of this.
But I'll tell you what one of
the affects is of you building
this road so.
Riders are driving into this
town faster than the.
Quite frankly the solution to
what's happening to our state
all right the solution to why I
would be getting hit by a car
isn't because by design and by
history standards that road
is a technically sound.
That's the reason that's the
costs of why drivers for driving
faster.
And so what we see often times
as we mature as an industry as
you grow in what we can do from
a technical design and planning
perspective that it influences
driver.
And not all the time does it
influence them to be more state.
And so to be sure this team that
that I walk around with and the
folks that work for them and the
contractors that we work with do
a phenomenal maam for to ensure
that from a technical
perspective there are solutions
that help drivers feel better on
the roads and actually and see
for a.
There are components that that
adds to the we should like my
hoping to lose weight getting on
I keep getting out there getting
yeah.
The issue right well as the
health and be the outcome of
that rate is increased like.
And so we have those we have
some opportunities to make sure
to table Representative brown's
community is doing alright.
This is an imposition as much as
it is is something working
impact community that perhaps
working in this community is
something working in this
municipalities are working here
that we could replicate in other
areas organized efforts that
says this community reminds me a
whole lot of yes because when we
were talking with the state of
you know W. secretary services
for clients me of course
happened here how do we somehow
think that practice can bring it
right here.
And sometimes those are
technical fixes and sometimes
there are some times are
thousand sometimes of behavioral
sometimes there's a balance but
I think generally speaking the
notion that you want to get
better what we do we want six
lanes on forty one we know with
that will come minimum speed
signs if you're driving slower
than this you've got to go over
here which means everybody over
here we know what's going yes.
And so there's no question that
you're going to Arizona eighty
twenty two year and four years
from now you're probably not
going to get to seventy five for
longer than two miles of the
town what we we fix that role to
be the rules that we want and
need for it to be seventy five
miles an hour will be a
minimums.
For travelers on that road and
with that comes someone about
getting healthier right and so
that's been my perspective in
sitting alongside Representative
is that the better we get at
something.
Sometimes the more liability.
Right with that outcome so I I I
do believe that we need to do a
better job of finding pockets of
success in using data to
identify where we need to have
better success rate because one
is too in and if we don't for
the that kind of effort the
truly you know where we're not
asking if we could be but by no
means do we see this as a as a
measure to impose to this CD
here is a tool kit to saving
lives do it as much as it is
what are you doing that working
in are you interested strategies
that could help you advance your
already schools and so those are
just kind of going close remarks
understanding that you know we
we sometimes get dealt cards
legislation that we surely will
make the best.
Thank you.
Thank you of.
Okay.
We and that we had sure.
Can I have a motion from twenty.
Senator I move to table the
house consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three twenty eight.
I would second that.
Brown.
What yes to table and provided I
don't want to take.
Representative delivers he
noted.
Representative Jones yes to
table.
Representative Madrid.
Yes the table.
Luggage for.
Representative.
Yes to table with cemex function
differs.
Representative program no.
Representative Garcia no.
Representative Hochman Vigil
number.
Two three two three.
So the the table fits the motion
to fails Services Representative
Brown thank you our manager
For the reasons I stated I am
you of calf with this yes this
morning that I
I believe that the department of
transportation here to Mexico
because it does have a traffic
safety bureau it is on the job
of trying to make things better
for New Mexico drivers and just
to keep our fatality rates lower
lower in so in that respect I
think we will get better and and
that that is what we're seeking
so I think that also
the department can move along
with whatever concepts and we
can learn from other states what
they're doing but we don't need
legislation getting put in
statute that we're going to do
this so for that reason I voted
hi a request to table the bill
thank you.
Representative Madrid.
thank you Representative the I
always like to do it to the
table because of
joint venture with the stated in
my time to see the importance of
what we're trying to manage it
and if we get to a level we say
this over and over we might fund
of million dollars worth of
projects but we still have a
billion dollars worth of
outstanding projects it's really
multi modal in our economic
development.
That has to those of four four
because of state when we talk
about going to New Orleans we
need to be on the bill it says
stuff and that's a concern that
I see I think the to use
tremendous of whatever to accept
this this levels
imitation that's a better
accommodations of moving to that
direction simultaneously
otherwise rescue for allocation
to start so that it's almost
like its own industry to.
Or to coincide and doing lots of
to these years of the funding
mechanisms.
The real factor this so it's a
it's it's it's a good discussion
of what it's worth that.
Even of you know for four so
it's gonna make it still more on
board session.
I hope that with.
Of the associate promote the
wash of positive with the
legislative session.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair for the opportunity
to provide us
I talked to several those pieces
one one I feel like this is
something that's already done in
house.
With with without adding the
position and
I would like to go back to my
earlier comment this this is
something that is being done in
Albuquerque Albuquerque
Within Albuquerque itself the we
we should look at this as an
opportunity for NMO you between
the D. O. T..
And let's let's look at it again
the year two.
The minutes are it will I will
entertain another motion.
To pass the recommendation okay.
This.
Second.
This.
No.
Representative Cadena
Representative Cruz yes
Representative Harper
Representative Jones no.
Representative Lundstrom
Representative Madrid No.
Representative Parker no.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Garcia is.
How can the health yes be taken.
Okay so at this point
Representative I think we we we
can come back or we can do some
work on the bill and and see if
you can with some more support
for it later we'll leave that to
you but right now thank you so
much for the presentations and
it's a fascinating concept.
You madam chair vice chair
members.
Right.
Seventy two.
Thank you Mr chairman we were
wondering why you hear that.
Thank you.
As you might not know.
You know inside my brain.
After.
Thank you madam chair I hear on
behalf of Senator Stewart.
Just the seventy two.
Relates to the wildlife quarters
act that we passed in twenty
nine.
In the all the call that statute
required the development of
action plans for the New Mexico
filed.
For.
That.
He was placed on New Mexico.
Protection as well as Mexico
location came and act in fact
happens and just for fun.
The.
So so this is a House seventy
two then to complement to our
bill in that if creates a fund
to help implement these areas
identified.
Or.
Hello.
it is in house bill two five
billion dollars has been placing
House Bill to and so The
appropriation in there with.
So that's the essence of the
bill.
Yeah stand for questions.
It is that he is with the
wildland plants Network.
Would you like to say anything
of it has sure and Jarrell
members of the committee
as the representative said on
this would provide funding
projects that use the engagement
this have already identified
their number of programs
including one that students
later this month to fund these
kind of projects that require
twenty percent match so two
eighty.
this pretty darn good meeting R.
five million dollars leveraging
additional twenty million
dollars this is not only about
three hundred safe wildlife but
making roads safer for drivers
not sure the four of you if you
have a hit here or not yourself
you composed for you have a
family member that that has all
these are incredibly traumatic
in currently expensive duty
estimates that these conclusions
costs the state twenty year and
medical costs and lost work time
in hospital bills and all these
kinds of things and so you know
from both a wildlife perspective
as well as to perspective
we want to be able to make sure
DOT has the money to implement
the projects is already at I and
I believe you all heard interim
presentation
back in December
that
the deeper into their for five
to seven hundred page report
it's an impressive body work and
I think it's better for we are
ahead of many other states as
far as identifying these
projects and Galle going through
an objective process included
stakeholders and now we are.
For.
From passage thank you very much
so it looks like we're just here
to go over language for you
today I have anybody here in the
US stance in support of SB
seventy two.
Right let's start over here.
If you want to speak you don't
have to if you don't want to be
happy to.
We have a lot of this I just
want to mention if you live in
an area of rural area there's a
lot of traffic the move on here.
On it at us and are there on the
roads.
For food and so forth there's
some sentences years up to
seventeen animals being hit of
per year in seventeen miles
secretary that's a huge number.
There are there certain parts
for state where it absolutely is
imperative that we get some
crossings for these animals they
are being we're we're fragmented
and of I think the
prioritization process they've
gone through.
identifies funds for the here
and now crossing are just spot
on so the money will be less
than and you can save tons of by
the rules but also for years.
Thank you very much listening in
the Baxter of the committee just
your executive director New
Mexico wildlife federation I'd
like to start by committee heard
public transportation in New
Mexico department of game into
work tirelessly for these
wildlife corridors action plan
it's it's a wonderful piece of
work over seven hundred pages
and it's absolutely I find
necessary to start implementing
that plan so please both the
pass on this really important
piece of legislation thank you
so much thank you so much next.
Madam chair members of the
committee growth Peters senior
policy advocate for conservation
orders New Mexico years and
strong supporter SB seven two
is timely well planned to this
legislation offer both public
safety and protection of our
wildlife of these reasons
already appropriations I need a
sponsor expert increased users
appears at the house thank you
thank you so much next.
Thank you madam chair good
morning vice chair members of
the committee reviewed the
executive director of the
department transportation for
many is the same reason that
you've already heard and I know
we've already presented a real
in depth kind of plans of at
this summer Intel's interim
constitution committee of New we
obviously know that the last
process is part of our
transportation network so we
look for and we support this
bill chair thank you.
Transaction.
That it's overcast cost one
million dollars early of traffic
that it's crossing so right
there earlier I think maybe it's
the six lines so those are yeah
definitely big projects there
are this is also there's
emerging technology where
they're making pre fab arch
coverts that could be put over
the road on four four overpasses
but I'm sure some of the need to
experts here to give a more
technical and
the medication resigned just
that question is because.
In my part of the country we
have the Monday to rezone side.
Do you rate on the other side.
I have a very good here online
lot of a lot of your and you
know it happens quite often.
Happen more than once we get
the.
Concern all of this bill
alright.
Madam chair representative I
believe the plan yes hello and I
don't know if it's being has
been addresses eight hundred
page twenty.
For indicate I don't know
address that particular issue
Madam chair representative
according to the twenty two
legislation the that
the plan will should be updated
every ten years of and thanks to
some other funding coming
through federal sources that are
doing a lot more GPS collaring
so we have a better idea of
where hello dear prong horn the
specially under their continue
the efforts to track about
months doctors as well so as new
data becomes available including
vehicle collision data the time
we updated to incorporate that
data and there are during the
training process there's an
opportunity for tribes to submit
data as well be considered so
I'm not sure of the areas that
you're talking about are you
follow or act of love on if if
those are the areas where you're
talking about seeing animals
getting hit I'm not sure what
sort of data they have but more
data that we have always gives
us better answers.
Thank you and we were able to
figure out the zoom issue so
Brian bird can you speak now.
Yes can you hear me we can hear
you right thank you very much my
name is Bryce bird I am the
southwest program director for
defenders of wildlife you're in
Santa Fe Representative about
eight thousand members and
sports across the state I just
want to speak in support of this
bill we've been working hard
with idea T. and Department
gamefish on the plan and we
really think this is a important
moment in time to match federal
funds has been talked about
today to make our highways safe
for people and wildlife thank
you very much for fixing the
problem thank you very much
grants next really gonna go we
are going to go to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative for the
bill can you.
Provide me the top five
projects.
I
thank you for.
Jr.
Madam chair representative so
they were top projects on there
I based on what you're
explosions there's five based on
had sent to the needs so for
example of Representative Jones
district I tenants steins right
near the border there it's time
now there too are slated
populations of bighorn sheep
that are not able to cross the
highway there so you're not
gonna get any vehicle collision
data because they're not even
attempting to cross but they're
dealing but there's a need for
more of a to the standpoint the
number one project that the
department has this issue work
on right now zoom US five fifty
north of Cuba so right where few
expected to takes a big western
fan yes they're both the of and
hickory land as of there last
week and saw it here and all
that there the
complex of roads around Silver
City US one eighty New Mexico
ninety US seventy New Mexico
forty eight outside of the
windows are I twenty five around
Lori and pass you just seventy
again at the end so where that
all come down our towns during
during the fall winter
there's a complex of roads
tracking of USC for two year
chair Andrea to Chama in the
north of the border on CYFD for
US two eighty five at San
Antonio mountain so kind of on
the tell us but to those who
purchase orders there then with
the department has called the P.
problem form trying to go which
is a five twenty five complete
count to Maxwell and included
some of the of the federal and
state road to the west of I
twenty five there the balance
the amount projects and
mentioned on the I. twenty five
years five fifty read on for the
project and then finally
of the New Mexico thirty eight
from cluster of river which that
projects kind.
The whole is meant to facilitate
pastor bighorn sheep which are
all off right on that stretch of
road because of the disease
big horn sheep population the
Rio Grande gamefish has just of
that project not receive
enrollment until this issue has
been resolved.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative of the
Specifically project on highway
forty eight three eighty were
those two located at.
In the within the report and
structure locations what pagers.
so it's divided into chapters
and when you go when you
download the the PDF DOT's
website it is actually very
convenient on the loss of our
it's in chapter six is where
they have all priority projects
I forget where that one is is
mentioned specifically but it
makes it much easier to find it
that way rather than
than just a straight page
numbers.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that answer on highway forty
eight what's the approximate
location and the same for with
respect three.
Madam chair representative on
the state
I I don't see a three eighty but
for so the US of the New Mexico
forty eight hundred so I would
defer to DHS for.
Committee with patients.
Madam chair of our program
managers are here for taking
part of all of the for them to
have.
And your Representative we
that's the area right in Rita's
which is very high population
program here's very complicated
situation to deal with is not a
opportunity for fencing
underpasses and overpasses but
we still identify within within
the report because it is very hi
one of the vehicle collision
check.
Thank you for.
Thank
you very much Jim the other
members of the committee.
Representative thank you madam
chair Representative you
mentioned that Eisenstein's area
and and I'm trying to get a
picture of what this would be
live there no there's no
crossings take place of the
sheet so what what is it you
plan to do to make that
situation better.
so the of Madam chair
representative the the and again
I central for two overpasses
three hundred passes I do know
that that is a particularly
object because of the railroad
as well so there's been
conversation out you know what a
what a project with the past
spanned both the real road and
the highway board just just
highway there are the under
passes there in my organization
just wrapped up a three year
study that showed very little
usage system action is the
javelina jackrabbits conceded
maybe one bobcat we we
demonstrated passing
but he noted here and of the
hardship that within one half
mile of the highway
I think the point she's
especially the relatively small
populations that would Christian
reading there's also concerns
about higher education from
outlines of the State Farm chief
in the region and so the more
this population
that the federal but I I would I
you know because yeah I believe
that project is further down the
list because of the logistical
constraints as well as the
expense and the because there's
not as much of a human safety
aspect.
That's why I was curious if
there if there is to to sticks
and accidents Representative.
I'm looking at it on the map
that is right on the edges of
their supporters yeah thank you
for that thank you Madam thank
you very much because of any
body else committee motion.
Will prove.
Okay the second thank.
is there anybody in opposition.
Okay Madam chair representative
have yourself a approved thank
you very much thank you so much
the state office.
Bob.
Gonna go to HB for forty three.
Representative is waiting on.
One one she's the last
minute outcomes he's.
Would you like for us to wait
until it comes back.
Thank you very much
Representative so I understand
with we're coming back to us
with the committee substitutes
We need to pass it out one
second.
The second to the twenty seventh
two.
I know.
Five six one point one okay.
Have a motion to adopt a
committee substitute for.
The second.
Thousand amended committee
substitute
At this point Representative I'm
going to we're not going to be
more public testimony because
I've done not I'm gonna see if
we have any additional questions
or comments from the committee.
Hey can I have a motion moved to
table madam chair thank you.
The second here the.
Some of.
Those that.
Three months ago.
Representative Brown no.
Representative Cadena
Representative Cruz yes.
Representative Representative
Jones no.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes.
Representative Madrid.
This.
Representative.
No to table.
Senator ma'am yes.
Representative Garcia
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
table.
Passes by three.
Thank you very much for the.
Yes really about next year.
The New.
laughs going to the house
memorial forty five.
Have anybody working someone
text Representative border
Representative consent.
The one.
It.
Your business.
Sure.
Representative there.
Your members of the committee
House were forty five.
You can ask you.
May not be that ever again
is it was he was
of Madam chair representative
this is simply a memorial to
recognize any of twenty twenty
motorcycles.
We're sorry the very popular in
New Mexico and just want to
remind people to respect road.
That we would be safe so that
is.
I think we might we might about
to have a listen to.
I was there anybody favor this.
