This
is.
So I think we're going to do
everyone is for house bill fifty
six I've already explained that
to our the the bill's sponsors
because there is a committee
substitutes that we did not the
committee did not receive it
within the twenty four hour rule
we're just gonna have a
discussion of the bill and the
committee substitute and we're
going to suspend any action on
on the bill Intel we've had our
analysts in the with enough time
to actually analyze substitute
and get us in a position where
we can vote so
leader Chasey and Representative
Rehm you want to just get
started
thank you madam chair the
committee members to you
During this today off
Representative Rehm is we
sponsored conference wanted to
introduce new products from the
Albuquerque metrically in
senators and real time prices
and he's in charge of
technology so he can answer
questions.
Yeah.
Chair members of the committee.
Of there's a lot of resistance
to having license plates for
frankly.
I think there's a lot of
misconceptions so let's talk
about why we need from Weiss
plates we go to our retailers or
retailers are tell us that was
the you know for the DA is a
fixture of the individual
shoplifted and the future of the
license plate so that they can
tie into the face not all the
times or the faces very distinct
employers so it is solved that
issue for retailers for law
enforcement.
We have license plate readers
now what they're looking for is
for stolen vehicles and so it's
been my experience as a police
officer that people would steal
cars change the rear plate but
don't always change the front
for.
And therefore the police is
certain driving down the street
these license plate readers are
continually scanning looking for
stolen vehicle.
But he that it comes up on the
computer with the dating and a
description of the vehicle and
then an officer looks for that
well now that would be able to
get the vehicles not only in
front of them for the rear plate
but those coming towards them
for the front plate.
Let's talk about traffic
crashes.
Your goals run into each other
the little the state of the each
other in for soft profile in the
job.
You could literally sit on right
back together.
Well that's the force the front
plate many times will be here
image stamped into that vehicle.
When we look at our vehicle.
What you actually see that you
believe is a proper is really
just the bumper cover.
The bumper is beyond that in
plastic cover is not real fast
so really times it falls off
right at this think of so exit
using well now it would fall off
and it would have the front
plate so if you're more run
driver the lecture plate at the
C. so that is send them I'm
gonna ask you then Taurus if you
study for the staff to that.
Yes so what chair members of the
committee thanks for having me
getting what I want to ask also
is is.
Most of our most recent in the
state of New Mexico other than
Albuquerque we we have singling
roads so as our officers are on
patrol in the area for the next
now this is this offers you an
on coming vehicle gives us the
ability one year if you have a I
will be on the lookout for an
individual that's either wanted
or access committed a crime in
any of our communities it now we
do is driving down on every
course they of our business now
we have that license plate to
see if we're we put out those
three digits with one numbers
and is passing us now we can say
you know instinctively that
vehicle we just we just
encountered a reporter over the
radio now we can start figuring
out how we're going to do with
the law enforcement so it's not
just my technology that I'm
looking for I'm actually looking
for the the good old have you
seen aspect it gives us just
another method to identify a
potential criminal or even a
missing person for
and of some sort right now all
from facing vehicle on law
enforcement all we're going is
on make and model and as you
guys know with keyless and
Hyundai's and Hondas they're all
looking the same these days so
the plate would be additional.
I madam chair and committee
members I was a sponsor of this
bill when we houses we eighteen
out of the house and made away
over the Senate finance but ran
of time but it was our other
colleague for years HB right
thank you all right
Representative off and then I
was a supporter of it having
grown up we're in the state with
replacement now currently they
don't have it's if there is a
lot
It seems to me that our
technology has improved even
more so and they are the law
enforcement is able to get more
use out the front plate and they
did four years out and it seems
like one of the things we can do
to help our communities safer in
our college Judiciary two years
ago we had a.
Bill about I think it was
wanting to create a crime.
I don't know but it was that's a
huge issue in the Russell areas
eight simple what the trucks
back up into the gross and then
they shake the tree down and
fill it out if they have front
please I remember thinking at
the time.
Is really comprehended that the
much sooner but we did some
research on the states that hot
front faces and Joe and started
thinking about this terrible
tragedy in Idaho where the
students were.
brutally murders last fall.
I hope requires both plates
Washington state where the
accused fled both plates.
But the kids came from
Pennsylvania that requires just
that.
So
Instigation arguably could have
been officials from the office
if they did have the vehicle.
Two years looked into this
further.
Five days after the murder the
all of the accused.
What place from Washington state
so he as a criminology student
knew that there was a greater
risk to keep in place they had.
Without the front plate and so
he changed those plates and
there's a gag order
Representative we we can't ask
any questions of law
enforcement.
How this might have to sell it
to their destination.
I I have talked to an overview
and others kind of this story
actions sometimes to changing
something like this.
As the chair noted we have.
I think fairly.
Change to non to try to better
define the
stand for collector cars and I
think that's what the difference
is that we're not.
Litigator Committee plenty time
to look at it
But it was a conversation with
the vice chair yesterday and if
there are any other ideas that
you have.
Make this work possible for
maybe folks on very limited
income this or senior citizens
if you could suggest that to us
today and we'll try to help the
the New South in front of you or
in three analysts tomorrow
morning so that you can act on
Saturday.
And you know one other thing
Albuquerque actually just
knowing the cameras at the
intersections in so if we look
at the of father and son who
were run over by the of razor
that was the off road vehicle
you know at the of yes the so
what yes the down here.
They actually follow the format
cameras almost all the way to
its location where once if.
R. as a Representative Chasey is
we have cameras everywhere and
so when you have a front plate
we get a picture of the vehicle
but with the front plate we can
actually go to the FBI have
technology to incipient answer
quality that photo ID be able to
that the heritage the roll of
what we're trying to do with the
heritage the if you have a
the old vehicle that slide
thirty years older than you only
need to verify many people have
those and are doing and what
shows.
A lot of people are complaining
that they the the it's the car
was me for the for life well yes
what's of the bracket usually is
in the wrong because of the word
of the user or the dealer
usually puts is of advertisement
on the front.
But if you don't have the
bracket if you've got a Ms on
this for about ten Bucks you can
buy a new front plate rack.
Course I said that plastic
cover there's two little
indentations where the plate
would go he just used to sheet
metal screens to put it on.
Please madam chair and members
of the committee thing I would
ask is or tell you is is in my
experience over the last eight
years in in dealing with
extensive be just part of.
The state of New Mexico or those
that don't have coverage and
this would give law enforcement
of the higher the the percentage
of being able to recover their
car where they don't have
coverage by the Russians they
they once that car stolen in.
We can't law enforcement cannot
recover it they they are the
true victims of this crime they
they have no other recourse so I
know that there is on the back
and to get on the funding to get
a second place what I would say
my hope and and running all the
technology at the in AP is that
that would increase our ability
to recover that vehicle and get
back to them prior to them to be
coming to the.
Some I have a question for
commander torrez so you're
saying people with just
collision coverage and.
Comprehensive auto insurance
they can't get their
cover with foil stolen but if
they have for front plate will
I think that it would increase
law enforcement's ability to
recover it prior to the and to
me to be disappearing and being
vandalized Services.
From
ready for questions.
Okay we're gonna just take will
really quickly now that we have
a quorum.
Representative Brown here
Representative and then.
Representative Saylor Kris your
Representative Harper here
Representative jumps here
Representative Lundstrom here
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew your
Representative Romero
Representative Garcia your
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Here.
Thank you okay now let's go to
the audience how many in the
audience on a stand in support
of this bill and I'm going to
we came going to look to my vice
chair.
To help me call people thank you
madam chair we'll start over
here on the left the business
get the buckle first and then
thank you a good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee impact locked rooms
store lobbyist for Walmart we
have supported this bill in the
past we want to make sure that
the committee someone from this
before as of your case you said
so we've had time to refine the
bill address some of the
shortcomings and hopefully get
something that is more workable
from.
we feel like it is going to
enhance our efforts working with
law enforcement partners during.
Especially on the organized
retail crime site we do a lot of
things one more step to take to
build a better package of are
all thank you.
Next.
That chair members of the
committee ruled by
Representative New Mexico
throwing markers for the
convenience store people and as
you can imagine this but a crime
being in store and the way we we
we support this bill because we
can now look into our parking
lot and see front license plate
says with a part we can help
identify problems before they
happen or even after that
happened so for that reason we
support this.
You will not grow.
Mr chair representative Jason
Weaks receive this with
allergies and.
This Madam is in support of this
legislation thanks to sponsors
for bringing it it will provide
an important gesture to crime
and when crime does occur if
these tracking individuals are
using the vehicle solutions
thank you.
What I chairman members of the
committee discussed with the
presidency of New Mexico Rizal
Association seven struck for
legislation this is what you
know talk about sort of
organized retail theft we all
know this big issue we've been
partnering with law enforcement
a lot of our members sure no
data of footage to it's a really
affects the ability having fun
and license plates is really to
double the chances the taxes for
bill so we still constructs for.
Miss madam chair members of the
committee my name is Vanessa
Representative Mexico
independent auto dealers
association that's used cars in
the state of New Mexico we've
been working with a sponsor for
multiple years actually on this
piece of legislation we status
strong support and I will just
say it too identical are
definitely better.
But thank you madam chair Mr co
chair and members of the
committee money aside for a
small business owner Mexicans
tractors recovery team at four
locations throughout the state
and we partner with local law
enforcement humor system
whatever crimes occur on us and
this would be a great tool for
them to be able to make sure
those things don't happen.
In favor.
Just to.
Sure.
If any of them.
Chelsea.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea hit
Canada and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
H. B. fifty six and thank the
sponsors for bring it forward
public safety plays a critical
role in supporting economic
growth and vitality by reducing
the costs of crime and enhancing
the desirability of communities
as places to live and locate
businesses we're only one of two
states in the west that do not
have for and what since plates
this measure gives law
enforcement another tool to do
their jobs at wells them twice
as many chances to catch
criminals it also gives more
visibility to this is like our
retail members to assist law
enforcement and stopping
criminal behavior our members
have been impacted by increasing
violent organized retail crime
and this would be another step
in stopping this behaviour we
appreciate the leadership of
Representative read on the smart
public policy perfect proposal
thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay is there anybody standing
in opposition to this bill madam
chair we're still working on
that support this bill I'm sorry
about that.
Can you hear me yes.
Okay thank you R. hi madam
chairman of the committee this
is JD Boeing's and speaking on
behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
which has been a strong
supporter of using new tools and
technology to fight crime things
like license plate readers got
shot detection systems and data
analysis the lakes regional
networks to weapons and a crime
scene but sometimes there are
really simple things we can do
to help police out requiring
license plates on the front a
motor vehicles officers will
more easily be able to identify
the ownership and the like video
cameras and I witnesses being
able to capture useful
information will go up this bill
will help with everything from
catching those who are running
red lights those who engage in
retail fast the violent crimes
like drive by shootings and it
will help make our roads and
communities safer and the
chamber urges Committee support
thank you.
Madam chair.
I think we have one more room.
Is it might amount yes Sir.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is sergeant I.
X. I'm representing Bernalillo
county sheriff's department we
support this bill and some of
the reasons we supported is that
it's an additional identifier
for us on the street with our
patrolmen and women who.
in use this this front plate to
you have a tactical advantage
and not have to get behind the
vehicle these plates would also
help us and our community as
additional layer of protection
on some of the bad guys are
starting to manipulate plates
and and use up the manipulation
of paper tags so this will just
help us to.
increase our law enforcement
capability as well as maybe call
upon the resources that are
monitoring these types of our
license plates through those
cameras I think that this is
definitely a good bill and we
strongly supported thank you.
Thank you very much it looks
like we have one more on the
zoom.
David.
Yes good morning madam chair
members my name so David being a
summer thirty resident
Albuquerque and I am strongly
opposed to HB fifty six.
Personally I don't not believe
that the benefits outweigh the
costs in fact the FY are the
some of the dishes costs but
there are other costs to
consider as well.
Many others in New Mexico I have
a classic car but that's not the
does not have a space for a
front license plate I sent a
picture to a sponsor with simple
my car it is not as simple as
was present at that across the
board well at a that after and
put up record on there it's the
card is not well given the
option to put on a front plate
for use later I'm not about to a
poll my car that could cost a
considerable money to fixed on
the road to place was the best
option why don't why don't all
fifty states required to place
what what place states might be
and we just find in the force of
the tropic Loncin industries
issuing citations look at the F.
R. your even if our could not
specify any specific benefits
for this legislation and so I
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you very much.
Okay I guess that brings a
center opposition of the bill
anyone interested in opposition.
Madam we have one but what Sir.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm embarrassed to say
no one's paying me to appear
here.
My name is my name is John I'm a
resident of Santa Fe.
I I generally agree with Mr
Vance and that there are actual
costs inconveniences and
expenses of this bill and if
those costs and inconveniences
were outweighed by benefits.
They have I would not stand in
opposition but I listen to this
commander Torrez and to the
representatives speaking of this
bill there are lots of
theoretical concepts where is to
actually possible their front
end license plate might aid law
enforcement in some way and I
understand that law enforcement
would like to have any potential
however.
The financial impact statement
pointed out that no one has
suggested actual benefit from
this bill commander Torrez is
the technology guy for a PED if
anyone could present us with
actual facts with actual
statistics from states that have
two license plates as
distinguished from states that
have one believe me commander
don't just strikes me as
exceedingly capable person and
he would have those facts and
tell actual benefit and I'm
talking about.
Numbers talking about statistics
and tell actual benefit can be
presented to the committee I
suggest that there are real
costs and expenses not
understand three M. company that
sells license plates really
wants this bill that you know
there are Minnesota come.
Speaking only as this is.
The state because in fairness.
I drive to motor cars where it
is not as easy to affects the
front and flight as you might
believe and there be something
so costs I think we got along
fine without them and tell I
hear actual facts and statistics
on how this with a law
enforcement I will point out
that the murder the alleged
murder either.
Is in jail awaiting trial thank
you.
Thank you Sir anybody else.
Okay let's go to the committee
members member committee what
part we're just hearing we're
just hearing this bill for half
an hour and so we've got about
eight minutes left so we'll
start with committee members
will are we come back from the
bill.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for for bringing the bill
forward I I'm looking at the
cases to not just have really
one question on page two.
Session this is the section
where.
I think there are some changes
recently try to understand that
I where we are saying which
vehicles do not require from
play this correctly.
We've got some.
vehicles registered pursuant to
sections here I'm assuming.
historic vehicles trailers semi
trailers pull trailers
manufactured homes school buses
I guess.
Not from previous
But state government vehicles
are listed here as vehicles that
would not require a second place
we understand that.
Madam chair representative
Parker we noted the government
vehicles have a lot of them
fires you know on the side of
the dorms it says what agency
they were from and so I feel
that they needed to have the
second point.
Cajun.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that does this include
police state police vehicles
madam chair and representative
are for yes.
Okay that's interesting.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay Mexico to Representative LA
Cruz.
Thank you madam chair so I'm
curious to of police vehicles
currently have front license
plate readers.
Gives yes this is on madam chair
members of the committee.
Need help Turkey we we are
running multiple vehicle mounted
and they do have the ability to
meet upon coming so so the way
they are mounted now in their
uses it for writing a parking
lot and everybody's part in
those in the the license plate
would be out as we drive by it
is still a position and able to
read.
Thirty degree angle that ran on
in the week was coming at still
have to read thank you madam
chairs what about other law
enforcement entities around the
state chair of departments
etcetera do they have them or
see them getting them.
madam chair members of the
committee it's my understanding
that of funding Jan walk in New
Mexico state police some
agencies down in Las Cruces and
Albuquerque we have the same
system and we are able to share
information statewide.
Thank you madam chair and so if
if somebody buys a new vehicle
and the reason we need to get a
paper tag for time will the law
office dress having one in front
of.
Madam chair representative they
would cruise on the paper tags
but of what will happen if the
numbers are only good for thirty
days so at the end of thirty
days you're gonna have to
realize what.
Thank you madam chair just kind
of a a last statement I I can
appreciate the logic of
absolutely the only thing that
gives me a little are burning
from some of the emails that
I've gotten a couple phone calls
are gonna regarding this
particular bill is concerned
that as always it always seems
of a law abiding citizen always
has to pay a lecture thank you
Madam.
Thank you very much
Representative huh Cruz I have a
few questions for the Sanchez
I I I guess I want to start off
by saying I appreciate the I
appreciate the bill appreciate
were the sponsors are coming
from with the bill but after
doing quite a bit of research
myself I have some serious
concerns with this first and
foremost we have the technology
there's a reason why a Tesla
model three doesn't have a front
license plate holder and that's
because there are sensors that
are within the bumper of that
car that allow it to use it
utilize its own autonomous
technology it's a safety issue
we also have a phenomenon with a
lot of cars with a front camera
in their pocket printers are
bumper and that if those cameras
are blocked at a specific angle
you actually can't see small
things like children who are
crawling in front of you so the
license plate might actually
impede that car's ability to
utilize its safety mechanisms
and stop before something really
bad happens I also think that
this I think this is a tax I
think that this bill is actually
a tax on those New Mexicans who
can afford it the least it's not
as easy as just buying a license
plate bracket holder and
drilling into your bumper I can
tell you for two of the vehicles
that I have sure I can do that
but that would actually take
quite a bit of value out of the
vehicle that I have much I'm I'm
not quite willing to do and
again I have sensors on the
front bumper of my car that
would this would interfere with
also when asked the
The
This expert but Sir I know you
have front license plate readers
but don't you also have the same
type of readers that stickers
within like if we were to were
to use stickers and front
windows with the be able to read
the same information as they
would if they were on the front
of license plate madam chair
members of the committee that
the camera technology does exist
as a player and sometimes a
change of some of the factory
windows that they're not as
accurate and it's not clean we
so the technology is there but
he has not been intends to the
ability to where we could reach
up four five five sticker that
would be placed on a window and
you remember that in every field
has an arch in it so that some
distortion so all front license
plate is flat and it's generally
in the front of the vehicle
right stuff that is so it's.
Enhances the ability for the
most accurate we.
Okay.
Madam chair I would also add
that about half of the country
has to whites and so they're not
interfering with the cameras and
sensors
that that operate the vehicles I
federal law it has not if each
of those also are you talking
about the costs the cost is two
dollars per year over four year
period so it's eighty dollars
total cost increase.
You madam chair and thank you
Representative that I I just
simply think that's not true I
mean I've been doing and she's
about a research on this and
even though there may not be
laws city they can't interfere
we have our national
transportation highway safety
data that tells us otherwise.
And so putting a license plate
in front of these sensors are in
front of these cameras is simply
going to have a huge effect on
that car's ability to utilize
that safety technology what I'm
saying is I'm not against this
crime fighting I as a crime
fighting tool but I I think
we're looking at this the wrong
way representatives I think that
this is a twentieth century
solution twenty twenty four
twenty first century problem I
think that we can be utilizing
the window stickers we can
actually pass a lot the same
time it would that prevent
window tinting for our
windshields I also think that
again it's not as easy as just
putting a bracket on your car
Representative it's just not for
instance if I were to put one on
line are you know and and an
actual bumper the bumper that
would allow the license plate to
sit the way it was supposed to
it would cost me over twelve
hundred dollars.
And so I'm not willing and I
think there's a lot of New
Mexicans that are not willing to
simply drill into the bumper of
a car and then also up with the
safety of those safety
mechanisms on sensors at risk
there again yes I I invite you
to look at all the studies that
include yes autonomous driving
they do not they very much for
for not having a front license
plates because it has a severe
effect on that car's ability to
utilize the sensors that it was
that it was designed to have so
you know I we're we're out of
time here I know I promise we're
not gonna take any action on
this bill we still need to look
at for a substitute maybe some
of the financial
the financial effects will be
better if we look at the new FIR
the committee substitute but I
do have to say representatives I
I appreciate the bill very much
but I I think that this is this
solution is not what we're
looking for I think it might
cause more problems in the end
and not than what we were trying
to
What we're trying to
A complete so it looks like I
actually have one more person
speak Mr vice chair.
Thank you madam chair together
with other office Representative
have questions so this amount to
the hi.
You know this committee
representative the other hand
up.
The some of the stuff issues
Madam.
I'm sorry I didn't hear you
Representative Garcia can you
say that again chair.
Google Representative the have
questions no okay you want to
have you know to.
After the hour but.
You know it's a.
There still has to be addressed
in real brief the Medicare.
Absolutely let's let's ask that
let's look representatives asked
for questions and then we should
actually adopt the committee
some so that we can get an
analysis on analysis on it as
well.
Representative Representative
dot com.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for for bringing the bills.
Reports about this I don't want
from a personal standpoint I
think that the way it is on the
front title is the other side of
that.
in my personal life the I have
nothing to do with the house
Wall fortunately two things and
it's it's the.
With that help them I would
would support that.
Madam chair and then presenters
with respect to the some of
reached out to some of the rural
communities the shares of Philip
and my shares and
there.
Not really in favor.
Of this so between now and
Saturday I think it would be
good chair and representatives
to have that conversation with
the.
The other side from my
standpoint is I had for the last
two and a half years as I'm
going through this I watch.
Legislation that comes down
place on us tax payers.
And the state needs to prove
walk ons.
And that frustrates me we've had
a whole lot of things happened
so the last two years where as
taxpayers were asked.
And the state is excluded from.
And so with that I think madam
chair and representative maybe
we should look at that we should
have the phones Business
standpoint we should have some
some some equality there seems
to be a fun word and equity
seems to be.
The phone were used for when we
do that stuff at the end of the
day
I'm not opposed to the bill like
I said my personal feelings are
gonna play into this I do think
it would be good to have some
conversation with with.
Rural law enforcement not just
from Albuquerque as a thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Mister vice
chairman.
So I too am going to react to
little bit to the exemption for
state government vehicles what
about city vehicles without
County poll
it just seems that the state
would be getting preferable or
preferential treatment on this
and so I I imagine the costs
madam chair of
doing this to a whole fleet of
vehicles would be is for some
some are governments at least an
for businesses that matters will
also also just point out madam
chair representative is that
other smart criminals in their
down from our.
The smart ones will go to block
off the fact later maybe removed
temporarily if they're going to
you know the dumb ones may
forget that it's there but our
people find ways to get around
things so I I will also let you
know my final comment madam
chair members is is that my
my email is running against this
bill and people who commented
have sued the Soviet made more
may not change their minds but
I'm paying attention to what my
constituents are six out thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
do we want to move up for the
committee set up now.
Chair LESC questions.
Yes Sir.
My concern to this piece of
legislation in.
People.
The other half of people New
Mexico gov on property and this
will be an added expense to them
that they do not need
that just let the could not
going to be just two dollars
before you you know if you have
to do three months later
buffers.
Is going to be a big expense to
be all.
One more question madam chair
when the New Mexico will single
plate when you're.
We.
Would I please you madam chair
and Representative five percent
I don't remember exactly when
they will well the madam chair
New Mexico with a single play in
nineteen sixty one.
The new weather double plated
legislative prior to that yeah
I'm just brought that up
because.
You know it is it is an
expensive the rule here we're
both need more more on people
Representative profit the state
getting off Scot free and
everybody else being that
looking for people with a
criminal that we should be able.
That just might be madam chair
the last time.
Okay anybody else we want to go
to the committee substitute now
to somebody when I move it.
Roger I will we adopt the
percentage may substitute
second.
Okay and a discussion.
Okay I think at this point
representatives were going to
cut the discussion short here I
will bring you back to our
committee wants our analysts
have had a little bit more time
to consider the committee seven
we have an FIR on it I think
we've had a great discussion
today thank you for coming and
and thanks for being on the
information to us it's been of
an extremely interesting
conversations so thank you and
we'll let you know
when it's time to come back in
the committee.
Thank you Mr thank you members
thank you madam chair.
It's
a now we're going to go to house
bill three seventy eight.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee.
Morning hearing you it sounds
like you're feeling better in
the last.
I am I'm almost at the tail end
of this thing at home with the
let me on a COVID jail tomorrow
depending on what my tested
that's how to Representative
Sarinana to.
madam chair I agree to
House Bill three seventy eight
the economists vehicles with
human operators bill it is a
simple bill that allows.
This bill that allows the
timeliness.
To be operated with the.
One or two people in the vehicle
to ensure safety issues and just
as this technology advances
which I think is right two of
Representative round with.
Without having to drive a car
the vehicle it would be great
you're still on the glitches in
the technology and with this
bill is doing is simply trying
to find of.
You
will gharials guardrails to that
at this point in time as
technology moves forward better
safety on the road and safety
for the operators of the
vehicles and madam chair I have
to expert witnesses of course to
my right is Mr Tracy McCarty.
And to my that this Tracy he
trust coach Travis cut line
Travis.
Up to to give you more expertise
on the bill thank you madam
chair we step questions.
Is there anybody in the audience
stands in favor of this bill.
We have one of sure.
Thank you madam chair members of
the John that shoots with the
New Mexico federation of labor
we thank the sponsor for rate
fell in all the honest you know
I I definitely understand there
are quite a few mixed feelings
about this legislation as the
sponsored stated in the letter
from our experts this is about
safety you know we are dealing
with new technology that is
unproven and I would say I and I
hope you all agree that you know
human intuition is always going
to be are necessary for
certainly helpful when dealing
with new technology and
automation and whether it's
operation of trucks were a high
that will always be helpful
however I do want to bring up
and and the thank yous about
bringing this up in that in the
past but I do want to this is
also the jobs and the economy
that is really just all know
that you know see if this is the
primary are concerned by there's
no doubt automation is coming
you know artificial intelligence
is coming jobs are going to
start to the pier and this is
that you tell all this is not
just bad for our workers is bad
for New Mexico as a whole and
you know could be a potential
threat down the road for our
country I I think we can come up
with plans we could help
mitigate this and help draw it
out a little bit more over time
so for your both of these
reasons for safety for jobs for
that health and welfare of our
state I sincerely hope that you
really look at this this effort
thank you approve it I if you
don't if you do not agree with
that I really really hope you
have a plan about what to do in
the future because.
There will be problems the the
fifty problems economic problems
coming in our near future and
there needs to be something done
about that so thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you very much Mr Lipschutz
it looks like we have Juliana
clue who's online want to speak
in favor of the bill.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Julie on
a coop and I represent the New
Mexico trial lawyers association
trial trial lawyers fight with
patients consumers and workers
to seek justice when they've
been harmed and I just want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward this is a
consumer safety issue families
we support this bill we just
learned about the bill and I was
thrilled to see it so thank you
Representative Trujillo.
Okay great now isn't anybody in
opposition to the bill.
We have one madam chair.
But
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is mark was
all this and I have two friends
who I would like to speak up for
against this bill one is to keep
the county to county is working
hard to invest in its plans for
economic development in a time
this vehicle stations that of
the test of time times vehicles
there was a bill that many
members of this committee voted
for just two years ago he says
have additional really takes the
from much of the work department
transportation has done to make
sure that Thomas your goals can
operate safely on our roads that
are consistent with federal
staff.
so that's one issue and of.
Really affects us in a negative
economic way from our plants and
can be county to develop that
facility on the second issue I
also represent Tesla and Tesla
stands opposed to this bill you
know when the automobile K. mass
produced for example there are
fears it jeopardize jobs the
jobs of for years and society
continued legislative point
offices of the mass production
of the automobile so if you're
technologies natural thing and I
agree with this co sponsor that
there needs I'm sorry about that
sponsored but the person who
stood in opposition that we need
to continue to communicate and
work together just transition
goes forward and so I don't want
to take much more time but just
say that for those reasons we
oppose the bill both of the
committee county doesn't thank
you madam chair members of the.
Thank you Mr Gonzales it looks
like we have someone in
opposition on the soon as well.
Jeff.
Thank you can you hear me and
see me.
We can hear you we can't see
you.
That's okay.
All right now.
Still can't see you but it's
okay we can hear you so let's
just go ahead okay the committee
my name is Jeff there and I'm
proud to lead the economist
vehicle industry association not
to be at we can compose of the
world's leading AV companies
there safely testing and
applying across the country
including in New Mexico thank
you for giving me the
opportunity to testify today in
strong opposition House Bill
three seven eight.
Yes supports state legislation
to provide for the safe
deployment of AV technology like
legislation New Mexico passed in
two thousand twenty one however
we are concerned that house bill
three seven eight when he the
safe deployment of the
technology preventing AB
operators from continuing to
bring the many benefits of
babies The New Mexico as a
result we praise the committee
for quality gas this bill for
multiple years now New Mexico
has supported AB Development
under a statutory framework
authorizing the operation of HBs
this framework was developed a
significant stakeholder
engagement including for
multiple rulemaking for areas
The New Mexico department
transportation health on the now
final eighty rules this multi
year process was public and
thorough allowing people the
holder the opportunity to engage
and taking into consideration
all inputs received.
As a result the existing AB
framework for flexible
stakeholders and the state's
interest there is no reason to
deviate now from this framework
by this bill would do for
following the rules were
finalized only last year.
Imposing a human driver
requirement on EV's would not
only conflict with New Mexico's
current approach to it also
deviate from the overwhelming
majority of states approaches
the AV regulation.
Twenty two states and how to
expressly allow for AV
deployment and none of those
states require a human driver to
be in the vehicle as a result
Senator I mean it would make New
Mexico a significant outline and
first all A. B. investment
development and operations in
your state.
In addition requiring a human
driver to be physically present
in eighty one entirely prevent
the operation of HBs designed to
be fully driverless or fully
occupants take for example zero
occupancy delivery vehicles that
right now I'm safely bringing
groceries in parts of the United
States and do not contemplate a
human driver.
Whereas New Mexico's current
framework establishes a program
headed and level playing field
this bill would restrict
numerous companies with a B. S.
we cannot accommodate occupants
from operating in the state.
Moreover it is critical to New
Mexico continue to allow for
driverless AV operations to
ensure the benefits of HBs can
be delivered at scale in your
state of paramount importance is
the ability of HBs to make us
all safer after all babies do
not speed they do not text while
driving drive drunk and they do
not drive the T. sadly human
drivers do all of those things
the current senior high road
deaths nationwide in two
thousand twenty one with nearly
forty three thousand Americans
die on our roads eleven percent
increase over the year before.
In New Mexico specifically two
thousand twenty one was the
deadliest year ever for New
Mexico roads the state have
unfortunately long then the down
the street for pedestrians.
Combat the startling trying to
station support safety enhancing
technology like autonomous
vehicles rather than discourage
ladies are safely operating
without a human driver across
the country and we will make our
roads safer as this bill is as
bill and limit eighty operations
in New Mexico we strongly oppose
the bill the persecuted to vote
against it thank you for your
consideration I am happy to
answer any questions you may
have.
Thank you Mr Berra.
Okay is there anybody else
there's a time to go to the
committee one more yeah one
more.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it's Leri
Sonntag here coming to you as a
small business owner and a
member of the better together
New Mexico grassroots advocacy
organization the previous
speaker articulated well some of
the concerns that I had and the
fact that we do already have a
very good things in that have
been put into place from
rigorous debate in the past that
was not was not the time to
change.
There are practical
considerations that were
mentioned dealing with safety
and fuel efficiency a Thomas
vehicles as they continue to be
developed an address supply
chain issues we've experienced
greatly over the last three
years at from a worker
perspective that that was
mentioned the fact is we have a
worker shortage we have not
enough commercial CDL driver's
license holders and I've seen
some stats the state up to
eighty thousand truck driver
shortage nationwide so
continuation of of the.
Science behind autonomous
vehicles needs to be allowed I
don't see where this bill has
any exceptions for testing or
non public highways or anything
that would allow all this
science to be continue to be
developed and it's much needed I
encourage you to vote now
against HB three seventy eight
thank you.
Thank you Mr Santana is anybody
else.
Okay now let's go to the
committee help me out Mr vice
chair.
Of anybody of the committee
questions.
Representative growth thank you
madam chair vice chair.
You know I I wish I could with
the confidence of the same
problems of some of the speakers
at related to these extremely
having vehicles traversing our
highways.
Are in fact a Tesla recently is
doing the right because of their
software because their vehicles
were unsafe for work causing
crashes so I think the idea
that.
That we need to have at least
for a period of time
humans in these vehicles I think
it's prudent so I am going to
support this bill.
the other thing that I I think
that we need to consider is that
we do have a plan.
Because one of the concerns I
have is particularly around a I.
You know all of this technology
is built for the benefit of
humans photo stops benefiting
humans I think need to be
concerned and so this
legislature and certainly
nationally and worldwide we need
to consider the implications of
A. R. as we move forward
otherwise what is the point of
having technology that benefits
humans if at the end it does
not.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Harper
and.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative issue this
morning.
I just want to share a couple
sauce and one of the parties to
accompanied by my friend
Representative doctors.
I guess the first question I ask
is in the accidents that we've
seen were
Yes the car was involved.
Was a person in the car.
And yes every single time a
person was in the car.
in this state I I listen to
three are long podcast you on
Moscow he talked about self
drive and it was fascinating I
loved it I'm discussion of any
two quick things that are that
are fascinating.
So there are two big problems
one is hard work.
And then when the software
hardware.
Think about this you have a you
have a little motor that is
connected to either of the front
tires that you know you send a
signal to it and it turns the
tires right will you send a
signal we save Turner I agrees.
Well a lot of these early
actuators they have tolerance
built into it so it's five
degrees plus or minus point I.
Right and so they were quite
right it's so Tesla had to
redesign and yet extremely
accurate actuators so it was
five point zero degrees I was
orders right another something
called Jenner.
Right you are we all see a
request to take a picture phone
right sometimes is a little bit
of.
Well imagine you've got cameras
all over the car and it's
telling the computer I see a
current copy.
We'll just that Jenner that plus
or minus ten milliseconds in the
that single game into a computer
and the computer processing
center to actually transfer
it's.
Right.
Italy not at this time Mr Turner
right so there there's a ton of
time and effort decided to hard.
And that software wise
right what are we we we are
essentially neural networks
right and and and we got these
amazing cameras call all rights
right we've got nerves that
control network process.
And so the first several
versions of self drive.
Were were just long was a
program.
There are now moving towards
developing neural networks in
silico.
That can process understand
right.
So the whole point of this is to
say is what I'm trying to say is
this is actually one of the
hardest problems humanity is
ever tried to Saul.
is self driving and it's just
fascinating we're gonna get.
But yes well in Moscow very
honest they say this is beta.
Right the state.
We want the driver doubles has
on will be paying attention.
He also says
Intel's self driving is ten
times or a hundred times better
than a human.
I mean they're they're saying
don't used right I mean use it
with your hands on the wheel and
but you know what.
we're gonna get to a point where
it is ten or a hundred times
better than humans for the
reasons are mentioned
I will hear you know we get a
click bait articles thirty
thousand cars we call by yes I
know it's like a software update
right I mean that's where we're
deploying a new version of the
software that we don't have a
chance to get suffer dates are
here's our phone so.
So I guess I want to try to make
his yes we are in the infancy of
this.
This committee and this
legislature or sidewalk two
years ago an effort to help the
industry.
with testing and progression
something that actually helps in
page county very support of keep
moving in that direction.
And just remind the committee
that the residents were receive
self driving cause accidents
there already was a human.
In the vehicle.
So I I.
Very respectfully madam chair
and representative I I don't
think this is the right
direction right now
I would like to see that New
Mexico place that welcomes this
industry to their testing.
At and help usher in this this
incredible
technology.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative anybody
else Representative Ralph.
Thank you madam chairman Mr vice
chair representative good
morning.
So as I pondered this whole
subject area I feel like we're
in a time work with the jets I
don't understand.
All the intricacies of
Representative Parker does
Act pretty conservative when it
comes to things I want safety
and I think I see totally
freaked out if I were on the
highway and the car passed me
with no driver in it doesn't
feel right to me
I I think that one of the
questions I just want to have
addressed madam chair and
representative is what what is
no safety record I need to have
yeah I not so much the testing
part of it but what is a safety
record as we know it for a
Thomas vehicles chair.
Madam chair and representative
from the New Mexico business.
Madam chair and committee at
this point I don't know exactly
what the testing I do know that
for as a testing facility in
Albuquerque and this bill our
doctor not discouraging testing
or automation where do we are
full purchase or later we all
understand that automation will
take over this industry much as
a lot.
The the underlying issue is.
Known for the fact that the
pilot takes off of the pilot
lance Thomas Lee in the air
planes flown by the computers
there's no doubt that we
understand that eventually that
is going to be an airplane yes
it crashed and killed a number
of people that is lost going
through traffic with your kids
your grandchildren either it is
in the air it has somebody still
there that can take over and has
the ability to correct and has
some times correct on the
highway there is an amount of
time.
Recently incident urges all or
the truck with two operators
sent.
Avid we have the crossover
between the Thomas and the
manual operation there was an
argument and was blamed on the
operator on the Thomas it was
shown that the crossover time
between the two the drivers need
Thomas basically got into an
argument by the time the Thomas
released the drivers corrected
costs Frankie there are still
which is in the system at no
point did we expect that this
isn't going to take place and
this bill isn't here to stop the
development in McKinley county.
We have a problem with them
working at we just walked human
being sitting in those seats all
those cars we don't have.
Chair and representative thank
you so much for that I
appreciate that information I
I I think there was.
Something in our analyses.
Talked about the way he does.
Written it might prohibit.
Seven years on the rules
that are delivering the state
grocers or
Madam chair representative could
you address that please and
again owner defer to my.
Think I need for that to your
your delivery perhaps I think
the technology assessment
venture.
the the reason I don't have any
information
I don't I'm not exactly sure I
have the issues writer from me
I'm not sure what you're talking
about an area.
UNM's bureau an issue that we've
had instances I have a vaccine
from the from the teamsters work
some of these Thomas vehicles
with don't know.
Operators in them have driven
through fire scenes crime scene
right over poll is.
You know there's there's too
many glitches involved were
involved in the Montes were.
The the.
GPS system has people running
the lakes because there are not
being attention what they're
doing they're only paying
attention to what that box tells
them to do and I believe that
any type of policy still need
the oversight to do it people
get trying to look at that and
that's a prime example of having
to operators have an invisible
operator and a and a piece of
what tells you to do something
your fully relying on that piece
of equipment.
That operators well and there's
going to be wrong.
But I still believe human aspect
just Representative Harper said
we we as human beings me being
on the road respite thirty two
year trucks you feel the axe you
don't have to see how you feel.
Candles a a Is know that as well
as human being.
In time I believe it is possible
at this time of the day.
Madam chair representative so
Yes it looks like this
technology is moving forward at
a pretty good clip I know the
military uses a lot of.
Vehicles and does so with great
precision and a lot of factors
of course come into play there
but I I think my my concern
about the bill is gets drafted
in a way that's perhaps over
brought.
I think for him some choose the
Thomas vehicles that ought to be
allows without.
Person in the in the vehicle and
for that reason I this is a
tough one for me and madam chair
I.
I see this I see the arguments
on both sides but I listened and
answered it.
And I love this race it was
senator that Thomas these
vehicles did not drive drunk to
teeter over the speed limit and
in that sense water safety
benefits from using the so thank
you madam chair.
Go ahead vice chair.
Representative thank you madam
chair and thank you vice chair
thank you Representative for
bringing this I too have
concerns with.
Some of the language in the
bill.
One of the.
Madam chair and vice chair.
One of the comments we heard
during public.
Comment was on loss of jobs.
Share my share our arms.
Run an internet service when I
started when I was eight years
old that.
Four five men on men or women on
a survey crew to get a job.
Today we go with one.
Sunday's we do it with one that
just pushes a button.
So if the vehicle which is a
button and then pushes a button
boxes of active ring only
process information.
I think that's that's cool but.
You know we had trained people
we had with him without other
things instead of somebody being
in being out on the survey
creating hammer and hammer
stations on the ground.
We talked that.
We improve the
process and put them in the
office behind a computer version
the buttons so I think
technology.
we need to let technology coming
continue to move.
In one of my problems with what
I've seen well I've been here is
that too many times there's a
hundred twelve of us the trying
allay of Business progressing.
And the I don't like limiting
business.
Madam chair I share.
I agree with Representative
brown there's it's it's over
brought with this respect from
the Santo.
Chair vice chair the only way I
can get behind something like
this is there is an annual
sunset and reporting.
And I don't see that happening
in that would still I would
still have to be part of the
debate.
With respect we're not that
sunset with the rules behind the
sense and what the what the
reporting process would be for
me to ever jump on this bill so
with that thank you madam chair
thank you for your time.
Thank you Representative next
Representative debt accrued
thank you George wanted moment
to supplement my statement
earlier with the idea of
driverless vehicle Tesla
vehicles up question yes that
will drivers in the vehicles but
it'll always assumed that the VA
the person K. I one of the most
frightening things C. K. on
television is what some of the
sleep at the wheel and they're
driving at excessive speed down
the road and the vehicles just
going on and so so regardless
you always have to gauge driver
and that's the system I'm I
would like to assume that should
there be a driver in a
commercial the that the would be
doing the job as well because as
humans we feel sometimes thank
you madam chair.
Thank you very much directors
that Representative David Chriss
or anybody else we have a little
more.
Thank you madam chair Mister
vice chair
And and Representative the crews
brought up a good point about
having somebody there is fully
conscious of driving a
commercial vehicle I just wonder
if you could explain the CDL
process for us.
Madam chair that makes this
speak thank you madam chair
representative of can I ask
are further you mean how we
currently get CD else or what
the CEO process for the new I
guess is both of them so what's
currently the process for
obtaining a commercial driver's
license and I guess the question
would be with that B. who may be
present in the economists
vehicles during this time.
Sure yes currently the process
is you have to go to school and
qualified to get the test the
the the CDL licensing and they
go through the state to which
includes a written and aid on
hands.
Pre test and driving test
depending upon the endorsements
that you need there are further
tests required and if you need
to breaks doubles triples
hazardous or any of the state
inspector I just the mine last
week I had to go back and read
mine at this point.
And qualified through the house
are structured by specific part
of it.
The people.
Working on the floor obviously
the CDL qualified individuals
there there is no current
portion for handling of Tom's
vehicles for me that is now
being handled by CDL holders I
have a number of friends that
work for parking do this job
they're very happy with the job
that they have of their work
work work very hard but my
question them everyday is you're
working in a company that is
tempting to put your work.
And madam chair and expert thank
you for that and you said that
just to clarify that you have to
recertify every four years is
that correct former student
manager committee for my seed
for my CDL test because I have
a.
Hazardous materials questions so
I have.
Four years and senator I think
that significant in transporting
hazardous materials across our
roadway can imagine what the
basis obviously if there's any
sort spillage it's very
dangerous as mentioned that some
of this material is pretty dense
in not very heavy on that
happen.
Tremendously hazardous to our
communities and so I think as
we're working on it Thomas
on technology nobody is saying
that this is technology that is
not going to come but certainly
wallets in its development
having somebody.
I think would be
yes I support your.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Next we have Representative vice
chair Garcia.
Your phone may
Because the people from
committee here I would like to
ask them to comment on the
rulemaking process will that
during that process.
Madam chair representative is a
director of the department
transportation of we're just
completing rulemaking L. for
some of our.
The work we're doing on I.
forty.
Some of the testing that we're
doing require drivers to talk at
all time or he's not here at all
times of really doesn't affect
that but some of our.
Of other assets with the
department transportation like
our real bureau of the policy as
their issues with the bill what
we stand for for now I chair
vice chair.
Thank you madam chair of you
know I have a couple of comments
you know I've been doing
industry forty years.
All actions we come off on your
state of your ninety percent
Google.
Just a comment with the word
what do I do for a long time
and.
Is this even if percent have
election that happened.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much I don't
think we have I have one other
person and I'm not interject
very quickly and I'm sorry if
I'm going to and nerd out on
everybody but money for my.
He says for my masters and not
imitation and space I agree was
on automation.
And the future of automation and
airplanes and basically this is
been the number one talked about
issue within the aviation
industry there's two differing
clashing philosophies is the
Boeing philosophy which is there
should always be in our pilot in
the plane and there's the Airbus
lost the which means that the
computer always I just and so I
you know I think that this state
I issue is not gonna go away I
can understand how we want to
make this a jobs issue I
understand how it makes people
feel safer to know that a human
being can take over if something
were to go wrong especially and
you know in a situation where
there are hazardous materials
are chemicals but the truth of
the matter is is that this is
the future the future is here I
and don't know if if the
sponsors realize this but I
think three or four of the
sponsors of the original
autonomous vehicle of bill are
sitting in this room and so you
know we we definitely
understands and appreciate where
you're coming from but I think
that from an economic
development perspective you
would really be setting New
Mexico back in a way that's
unnecessary I'd like to
Representative Pettigrew is idea
of maybe a sense that if we have
to even though I I really don't
think that's necessary I also
read in the analysis that the
definition of who who the human
being would be and and and in
the vehicle.
What they would be doing when
they be driving with the be of
serving I think that definition
is definitely problematic as
well so you know I I again I
appreciate the bill but at this
point time I just that I can't
support it I think that it's too
broad and I am a and I think
that it's just going to bring
New Mexico back in terms of
diversification of revenue
especially in some of our more
economically challenged areas
and that with that I'm gonna go
to Representative Lundstrom
thank you madam chair I move to
table.
It's call the roll.
Representative Brown.
Yes to table.
Representative the.
Representative Cruz this is no
to table.
My understanding is yes to table
no.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Jones yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Senator Representative Romero
no.
Representative Garcia is to
table Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes to table.
Those ninety two I'm sorry.
Seventy two thank you very much
thank you madam chair thank.
Very good discussion thank you
very very good discussion
fascinating.
Okay at this point I think we're
going to call house memorial
thirteen.
Representative Alcon areas
no.
Hey thanks to you.
There is an awesome.
Wake up in the morning.
This.
How's that for a second.
It's nice to be here.
Nice to see you here too
Representative.
So
Your I don't system here we have
an office is.
But what we're doing here yeah
we're asking the fire with the
thank.
That means we.
That was study the ownership and
maintenance responsibilities of
the Indian service route one
would be those and we get to the
root of the.
So they aligns with the federal
reserve and records in the plan
the dress hello concerns on
growth on my right here and.
Make Donald's remained on.
Explain to you why we are really
looking at this and why do we
have so much Representative is
that.
All right thank you madam
president and members of the
committee so I am the executive
director of alliance secured
will stationary which is a small
nonprofit animal rescue located
right in the Mexico we are the
only business in this very small
unincorporated.
Indication yet we've been is
Alice's abusers per year to our
sanctuary even in a.
About a hundred residents
according to the twenty twenty
census now this road Canada to
road is gravel four mile stretch
from stationary that is pretty
under the under maintained due
to the nature clay soils to
becomes really hard to travel
during inclement weather such as
monsoon season or winter this
makes it extremely hazardous not
only for the local residents but
also for the visitors I cannot
see the sanctuary and especially
considering that the area is hit
a thirty year drought and
susceptible to things like fire
you for one awful disaster in
the area that is the only
entrance road for the members of
the community so this makes it
further difficult to response
urgency such as fires just
because conditions of the road.
Thank you and the.
The.
The event was basically we have.
No.
we have no reason.
These folks are citizens of the
state of New Mexico looking for
help I think that since the
state of New Mexico so they
asked.
So that madam chair.
The extent.
Thank you very much
Representative is there anybody
in the audience in favor of this
bill.
We have two people.
If you were.
The service chair members of the
committee my name is the phones
here.
And right now they have over
seventy displace wells and wells
docks the depend on visitors and
donations by.
They are right now we can accept
visitors for several months.
Huge loss of the.
Also
we had an emergency situation or
us I thought read that I'm able
to bring in workers because of
the conditions.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is trying to
do on the W. secretary for the
New Mexico department
transportation
we do support this bill were
truly happy to work with them at
least to begin with the palaces
and gentleman who is owners of
the roadway we do that very
frequently with our rules on the
only thing that we would ask is
if through that determination we
find out DOT is not in order and
see the the the tribe or an
allegation that we ban are
removed from the task force we
don't have any authority over
that road if that becomes the
case I do offer support that if
we find another agent wrote
there have been difficulties
maintaining a finding funding we
will work with historic T. F. R.
local government program.
Fund.
Try to find ways to to improve
that relate that again we
support the bill only from the
position that.
The task force to try to find
out who owns and maintains it is
important that the road not just
this one but if the road is used
by the public it is properly
maintained so that's our
position and and why sports.
More.
Anyone else.
But in opposition.
Okay of the committee.
Madam chair.
Mr vice chair of the COVID that
the W. secretary just mentioned
we have to amend that bill make
sure that the they're not
responsible if that is the you
will over a comfortable chair.
I'm it good question
Representative Garcia and so
what I was going to offer after
reading the analysis on this is
you know sovereign immunity is
an extremely
important thing.
And I think with anything we
need to get some sort of a task
force together as DOT had been
previously mentioned just to be
able to figure out who has
ownership of this road I'm not
sure we need a memorial for this
someone's going to have to
change my mind on that I think
that we can put a task force
together without having that the
force of a memorial behind it I
other concern with having an
memorials if we were to
unnecessarily or
or accidentally name DOT as part
of this part of this work group
and they have no authorization
to be working on this road
because of the sovereign
immunity issue we could really
get the state in New Mexico and
into some trouble so my
suggestion was to see if we
can't get the Sanchez with DOT
to day even do it at my office
so that we can start that task
force and start identifying who
it is that on that road and who
we need to talk to to get this
issue taking care of and if we
are unable to if if we're if
we're unable to provide any
relief that way we can always
bring the memorial back but I am
very weary of passing language
in a Morial that could
potentially have issues with
preemption and sovereign
immunity in it but that's just
my take.
They may also have any other
thoughts.
Well that.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I I did have a I also on this in
the FIR is already states based
on the Archie and Indian Affairs
Department responses.
That according to DOT they
believe this to be an Indian
service route under your of
Indian Affairs for Navajo
Nation.
so my question is is that they
already know it's not there's.
And they feel like they've the
data B. B. I. A. or Navajo
Nation which is different
different funding sources
different processes.
Find a ready narrowed it down to
one of the two so would it not
be just quicker as you said
madam chair to make some calls
to some quick analysis to help
the Representative.
Under that get this identified
but once it's identified what's
the next step if it's not a
state road we can't put any
money on it so is the next step
down to approach the the the the
I. A. or down the whole nation
and ask them to services.
Or is it something that can be
done under a mutual aid
agreement with me with civil
County.
I know we have mutual aid
agreements madam chair in
McKinley county with native
roads I don't know if they do is
to pull the county.
Because it's a patchwork of road
system part of it is County part
of it state part of its B. I.
and whatever but I mean they may
be willing to help with that I
just don't know what the
relationship is Cibola County
and say the Navajo Nation.
Who who.
Representative Lundstrom my
billing and my thoughts and
feelings Act throughout the
whole area specially aria right
we have a lot of roads that are.
Prior year or even for a
different entities are involved
in those roads it is hard to
figure out who want to do
Sanchez Bill before.
Where are problems we don't have
the we don't we don't know who
asked I what will madam chair we
we've already been told with the
FIR that's not state.
but that doesn't mean that the
county.
Would be willing to health as
they do in McKinley county
because this is a economic
development board is a business
that's being served.
And so it does have public
benefit I mean they as a
business they have to play pay
taxes and everything else so why
wouldn't they be considered a
public benefit for that County.
Just a thought thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Lundstrom I mean Representative
L. Kong would it be possible to
ask you to work with DOT and
perhaps could I ask you
Representative Lundstrom to work
with Representative akong
quickly just on and on how the
process you've gone through in
order to get a mutual aid
agreement so that we can try and
find a solution now and bring
this back later if need be
I have no problem with that the
factors of the OAG is really not
at the expense their Sydney
Hines I hope you're saying yes.
Other thing behind you and
they're looking straight at my
face telling them that they need
to help so hopefully they'll get
with you right after this.
I think it's done.
Thank you very much we're gonna
go to our last bill before we
have to be on the floor not in
the house bill four forty three
is Representative Martinez
around.
Area I promise.
For every.
Okay welcome welcome
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
today I.
I bring to you for forty three.
that.
Provides a snapshot of.
Trying to look at and fix the
problem of your body as it
relates to
Uninsured motorists problems
with.
On.
Do we do.
We see too many times in the
news.
Repeat the W. this.
Hitting somebody there's no
recourse for the victim because
vehicles not in.
And we this is an issue that
this legislature needs to take a
hard look at and try to come up
with solutions and I believe
also for forty three provides
one of those out.
I do have a expert witness I
believe she's on soon saber
Walter.
It over to for for.
Comments of the house.
Hello hello.
Hi.
you madam chair and other
committee members thank you I'm
glad to be joining your
committee meeting today I was
asked to speak to that S. R.
twenty two certificate which I'm
familiar with I'm I'm familiar
with it because the company I'm
with which is called in talks a
lock has worked with your state
in the past on ignition
interlock legislation in the
area of impaired driving and I
have to say New Mexico has some
of the best model legislation
for ignition interlocks across
the country.
And as advocates that work on
policy to prevent impaired
driving there are several levers
look at in the area to help with
that this particular lever which
is there are requirements SR
twenty two insurance is utilized
in thirty three states across
the country in particular the
western states have adopted that
it
with bigger Colorado Arizona
Texas all have this requirement
in place just in general like in
layperson's terms which is how I
can explain it that within a
legislative language is that
when an individual who has had
their license suspended or
revoked because of a D. W. Y.
goes to get their license
reinstated they are at that
point required to have an SR
twenty two certificate which
comes directly from the
insurance company to the state
of New Mexico this would be the
alternative to the current
process where the person can
walk in to get reinstated show
the physical card and then leave
the the problem with that and
why that S. R. twenty two
certificate has been utilized in
other states is that a person
can walk away from getting after
they've gotten their license
reinstated.
Stop paying on the policy and
then you know they don't really
have insurance even though they
did present a chart that showed
an effective date current so
when they got their license
reinstated and then there are
they can drive you know without
being insured
with SR twenty two how it works
in many other states is that the
insurance company
will charge zero to ten five
dollars to send this certificate
electronically to the state the
state gets updated monthly on
the if that insurance is
currently active or not and of
course this is not for any any
driver in the state it's only
for those drivers that the state
defines as high risk and in the
bill we're proposing that would
be those who have been convicted
of a DWI.
So I you know we strongly
support four forty three and do
you think that is another
measure that you can and act in
the state to prevent
drunk drivers being on the road
and another thing I think that
is important to emphasize is
this does not cost the
individual more to have that the
certificate this the end of FY
twenty two certificate just tell
the state that this person had
the minimum that are required by
the state of New Mexico so it's
not a heightened level of
coverage it just in fact
insurers they have coverage and
that is it remains active
through the period of their
license.
Thank you very much I'm gonna go
to the audience is the body
stand in support of this bill.
M. as in any anybody in
opposition to the bill.
No okay let's go to committee
members Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative good to see you
this morning I just that couple
clarifying questions for myself
so my understanding is
prescriptive I'm on what this
bill is trying to see do is if
someone has had a suspended
license for three or more years
that's the trigger for this they
will then have to percent
additional documentation
verifying their insurance
besides just insurance card.
Madam chair representative yes
it'll be electronic so the
insurance company will update
motor vehicle on a monthly basis
because what we see sometimes
they'll go rate one of insurance
and then walk away from the
insurance.
That's one of the reasons why we
have so many uninsured motorists
on.
Okay so madam chair and thank
you for that clarification as
rose a little hate to know I get
that six months you know it
insurance card and and I know
that even when I get pulled over
you know that officer asks where
are they they can look it up in
their system immediately taken
out all I have to policy one
expires so I.
It seems like we have systems
that right now allow us to kind
of do this already but you're
asking for a month a different
electronics document that
initially refused and then it is
given to the Department every
month afterwards Madam chair
representative or for.
When you when I get that six
month record.
If I changed insurance companies
a few years ago.
It was never changes or motor
vehicles I council one policy
with the company.
One with another company.
It wasn't until I went to update
the address on my vehicle.
The the center will.
Do you still have this insurance
and I'm like I don't have that
insurance for two years or we
still have that one our system.
So getting that monthly update.
Gives those guard rails.
A little bit more to provide
because then that rubber is
required.
To keep the insurance up and
then the insurance will update
the state on a monthly basis
instead of every six months
review your.
And and madam chair
representative I certainly
understand so then if if we did
an axis
And three months in the state
receives information it's no
longer active.
What do they do then the Mr
madam chair Representative
Harper then that person is
representative license would be
impact.
And is that.
The legislation here.
I believe on page four of
references.
The.
That would be the actual
language.
That that would affect a
person's for.
Notified I am sure were.
And I decided not to ensure
that.
Technically.
I should be impacted by.
But unfortunately.
A lot of times that drivers not
impacted with the language that
references the impact of the
individual driver
is under the mandatory financial
responsibility.
The state wrote I'm not sure if
you're familiar with that if you
can comment on that.
Yes am I still able to be heard
yes.
Yes thank you I'm yes it is the
I think and as we worked on this
bill with the sponsor.
Clearly it would be the
intention that if that
insurance was no longer valid
for that high risk drivers that
had been convicted of DWI the
intention was that that person
then would go back into
revocation status on their
license and if if the committee
does not and madam chair does
not believe that language is
clear I'm David
I I do think that we should
modify the language or proposed
to modify the language to make
that clear.
Yeah so some chair
representative and the SROs are
thank you for that I
I do believe that as of right
now it does not capture their
intent
And I'll just say you know
knowing the department very well
and and and working with them
very often it also see some of
the language in FY are this this
is actually a major change to
how they they operate.
Thank you madam chair
representative Martinez so I too
The problem where people get
insurance you're going to cancel
Thanks to our safety on roads so
I try to think and I I didn't
vote for the bill but also with
the hope that you will work out
some of the what's the address
not just by Representative
Parker but anything else in the
bill and then one question I
have and chair why three years
and two years chair Mister
Representative Martinez Madam
chair representative I would.
But I.
When we first phone calls going
to be able to vehicle I'm not
sure if that's an existing
language in there she statute
but I can get a clarification on
that thank you madam chair.
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I I I understand
what we're trying to do here but
I don't think the language is
correct I don't think.
I'm sure it's cooked enough to
go out of this committee and I I
just suggest that maybe sponsor
work with Representative Harper
and and and I and others to try
to correct the language before
goes out of this committee just
a suggestion.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and I
agree with Representative
Lundstrom is that before this
move forward if we're looking at
such a substantive change to the
way of the internet business is.
Here before we pass along with
the hope that it gets straight.
Thank you.
Mexico Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the I'm
just have a comment I I I think
anything that notifies.
Any system that notifies our
state that we're that we have
people that are not elected to
roll is a good thing and I don't
think this should be limited to
do you live I think this should
be for everybody.
You know of people do that
unfortunately madam chair the
tools I insurance for a month
and then they let it cancel and
that this is all risk and so
looking at the bigger picture of
like futures work statewide for
everybody with that said
you know the language the the
discussion of those with maybe
six in some language support
that and I don't impose the
concept behind the bill I just
like to see a broader.
Thank you madam chair
representative well I agree with
you and I think this is a good.
First up to start that
conversation
Because in the long run it's
only going to benefit us not
only.
You know peace of mind that the
person driving next to your
house insurance but it's also
going to be an economic
benefits.
Representative Harper for the
second time thank you just one
quick comment on that Madam
chair representative as COVID I
have a similar thought why are
we just doing this for folks
with you that you are to have
everyone having their insurance
updated but then I recalled back
today when I was in college and
I actually what it lacks for
like three or four weeks on
accident.
And and so we sure hope
we don't act system that.
The second someone it's not good
for a also on your driver's
license is revoked so I I think
we really need to be careful and
give us some real.
Go down that route language in
here that the division's first
notified you know and and it's
not automatically repealed some
of you just.
This through carefully thank you
madam chair.
Representative Brown for the
second time thank you madam
chair so
I I I you know I I think we've
all expressed concerns with the
bill as it exists right now with
the next committee would be
Judiciary and just you know
those are people who have still
traps for mines and they're
going to really work this over
so whether we do it or they do
it
this may not make it through the
session because of needed needed
improvements but to be
interesting to hear more on the
bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much as anyone
else.
Okay vice chair just yet to do
want to say something about and
chair of Representative a no
this is a good deal maker said
earlier with the first step to
making it happen you know
unfortunately part of a well
sessions over but Representative
involvement in office manager
goes to the gestures of pick it
to the in the middle but there
so we don't have.
The one for the.
Madam chair representative this
is my excited face about.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for
presidents and so what I'm
basically hearing from the
committee
is made so I also have to let
some of you in and kind of the
and inside baseball with our
leadership and and and share
meetings we are highly
discouraged from sending flawed
legislation on to the next
committee for consideration I
just asked to be additional
workload that those committees
have I think judiciary has a
wait list of over two hundred
bills right now so actually
think that if we keep this bill
in our committee if we work on
it and we improve it and make
all the amendments that we have
spoken about today I actually
think we give you the best
chance of getting this through
Representative Sweetser because
I do think that there are some
parents to this bill but I think
there's big problems with that
as well especially as it it's a
major change the way that
attacks in red of deals with
insurance at this point the
tapestry system and we don't
want to we don't want to throw
anything on that they're not
ready for because we don't want
to put that system in to chaos
so what I would like to suggest
if you're open to it
Representative is that work with
Representative Harper
Representative Brown Pettigrew
whoever Representative Romero
need whoever to get some quick
amendments made on the bill I
will get you back on the
schedule as soon as I can with
those amendments and then we can
help you get a much better bill
out how's that sound madam chair
I appreciate the opportunity my
first call will be to the
department of motor vehicles.
All.
Make sure that they are are part
of this conversation and then I
will work with the rest of the
committee
and hopefully look back on the
agenda as soon as possible.
Thank you very much and thank
you for your openness to that
and thank you for.
For keeping me from getting in
trouble for passing on another
building Judiciary that they
just don't have the with the
thing I have right now so thank
you very much and that concludes
our meeting for today.
Thank you.
We need a very very something.
Thank you know I just have one.
