Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum. Please rise for today's
invocation led by the geneator
from Bern Leo Representative Joe
Garrett.
Thank you please join me and
pray,
prayer, padro
today as we honor our Hispanic
cultural roots of our state, we
come together as legislators and
citizens of this great state, we
pray that your love, your truth,
your beauty, your graciousness
and your wisdom can guide each
one of us as we craft
legislation, discuss
legislation, and work with our
colleagues and that we can
always.
do it in a gracious way, even
when we disagree on some policy
or issue that we can do it with
respect for the your presence in
each one of us. We pray that
you'll be with us this week and
the remainder of the 60 day
session and we pray that you'll
be with our families who make
the sacrifice for us to be here.
I pray this in all of our names
and traditions. Amen.
The lady from Senator Borego
with the Pledge of allegiance.
Gentlemen from Grant Hidalgo and
Catherinerasas with the pledge
to the New Mexico flag.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
Good afternoon members.
Buena started this and Hispanic
Heritage Day.
All right.
I'm gonna go first to the
gentleman from Colfax Mona Ria
Riva San Miguel Taos
representante Sanchez, Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
the House Memorial 21 be removed
from the speaker's table and be
made the next order of business
objection. It is so ordered that
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house memorial.
2121 has been taken and it's not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the memorial. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Today, February
11th is a secia Day here in New
Mexico, uh, I'm excited to be
the sponsor this year. I also
have some guests in the rostrum.
Who are the heavy hitters of the
The seki community, uh, I have
Ms. Mary Mascarienass, who is
the chairwoman of the New Mexico
Aseca commission. uh, Mr.
So
Mr. Alfredo Montoya, he's vice
president of the New Mexico
Association Association, a
member of the AECA commission.
I have Jackie Paul, a member of
the New Mexico Asea Association
Concilio, a member of the AEA
commission.
I also have Kenzie Padilla, who
is the granddaughter of Jackie
Paul. She lives in Artija and is
a sophomore at Artiia High
School.
And last but not least, I have
your land.
Yolanda, a member of the New
Mexico Association Concilio.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask
the chief clerk to read the
memorial ask you to read it,
gentlemen, but we can, we can do
the chief clerk.
Maybe you can sing it later.
I don't want to scare you now,
Mr. Speaker.
Clerk 3
House Memorial 21 introduced by
Representative Sanchez. A
memorial declaring February 11,
2025, a Sea day in the House of
Representatives. Whereas for
generations asseas have
supported a way of life centered
around local agriculture and
customs of sharing water, and
whereas asas are a centuries old
form of water governance in New
Mexico that have created a
cultural landscape with a web of
waterways that nurture tens of
thousands of acres.
of farmland.
And whereas Eseia customs and
traditions regarding
agriculture, seed saving,
irrigation practices and food
preservation are important
aspects of the cultural heritage
of New Mexico.
And whereas Eas contribute to
the well-being and livelihood of
thousands of families who
generate income from farming and
ranching, thereby supporting
diversification of New Mexico's
economy through local food
production.
And whereas Eass and community
ditches number over 700 in New
Mexico, with each one governed,
operated, and maintained by
elected commissioners and mayor
dormos.
And whereas the role of Assea in
local governance has been
affirmed by laws enacted by the
state recognizing assass as
political subdivisions and
enabling Ezekius to have
important powers in local water
management.
And whereas for more than 50
years Eacus has come together to
protect and defend water rights,
advocate for water policies,
strengthening asea governance
and support funding programs for
Assea infrastructure.
And whereas the New Mexico Esea
Association was established in
1989 to advocate for water
policy beneficial to Asia and
the assea commission was created
in statute in 1993 to serve as
an advisory board in state
government.
And whereas hydrological studies
by the New Mexico Water
Resources Research Institute at
New Mexico State University have
documented hydrological benefits
of aceus, including aquifer
recharge through earthen ditches
and whereas as water management
is complicated by long-term
drought and increasing demands
for water. Asia will continue to
be important in any decisions
about water policy at the local
and state levels. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Represent
ative s of the state of New
Mexico that February 11, 2025 be
proclaimed a cea day in the
House of Representatives in
honor of the contributions of
Asaccheus to the history,
culture, economy, and management
of water resources in New
Mexico.
Is there a debate on the
memorial.
The gentle lady from Torrance
and San Miguel.
Are you a parente before I
recognize you?
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, may
the gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker, I do yield to the
gentle lady.
Um, I just wanna again voice,
voice my support for our secu
day. I am a local commissioner
on the Amado de losrijilles out
on the Rio Caina Saseki
Association also the Greic house
he ditch, um, and my family for
many, many generations have been
um parentes on many of the
aseass there throughout the
Villanueva community.
Lovato, all of the names above,
so I just wanna again just
reemphasize what was read in the
memorial and the importance of
those waterways. Um, I also want
to express my support for many
of those seia systems that are
now in the process of rebuilding
post fire, um, you know, dealing
with all the constant struggles,
um, you know, I, I commend all
the leaders that are up there to
on the rostrum, um, and I also
want to recognize I'm here with
us today, not here in the
gallery, but there are many of
my uh seA leaders throughout.
District 70 that have been
meeting with me and just wanna
again, wholeheartedly give my
support to this memorial. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady for the
debate, the gentleman from
Katrin Hidalgo and Grant
representante rasas.
Speaker, with the gentlemen,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I do yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, you know, uh, in
my neck of the woods we have
asequis also those the political
subdivisions that ditch
associations or on Aila and the
Mimbres. They're a big part and
I'm so glad that you brought
this up first of all, uh,
because they're a big part of
our farming and ranching
communities and in in that area
they're they've been there for
many, many, many years before
they were even, uh, uh.
Codified as as political
subdivisions they've been doing
this work for I would say even
over 100 years, so I appreciate
you recognizing them their hard
work and their contributions to
the farming and ranching
community. Thank you, my friend.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And
there is further debate, gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, will
the gentleman from all those
counties yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
Representative um members of the
house. I just wanted to read
something from the Interstate
stream Commission, a secular
community ditches are recognized
under the New Mexico laws
political subdivisions of the
state. Many of the states of
secular associations have been
in existence since the Spanish
colonization period of the 17th
and 18th centuries, historically
they have been the principal
local government unit for the
distribution and use of.
This water, Mister Speaker, I
rise in support of this, um, of
this memorial, um, I grew up
with the uh secia Madre the
Santo Nino de la Cannada right
behind my house and we grew up
playing in the ditch. We grew
up, um, chasing after light bugs
in the ditch and getting toads
and and snakes even.
Out of the ditch, so, um, Mr.
Speaker, I want to thank the
gentleman, uh, Representative
Sanchez for bringing this
forward and recognizing our New
Mexico way of life.
Thank you gentle lady let's go
next to the gentle lady from Ria
Riva Sandoval Santa Fe and
Taospresentative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind gentleman and my
neighbor district yield.
Mr. Speaker, I do yield to the
gentle lady.
I rise in support of this uh
important legislation, uh, for
those of you who don't know asea
are a way of agriculture in the
North. This is how we get our
water to feed the crops to
irrigate our land to to do all
the things that we need, uh, to
keep uh farming and agricultural
and ranching and livestock alive
in the North, um, I've been in
a, a commissioner on Mayaeia for
34 years.
Uh,
it is, it is democracy at the
local level that's that's really
the most um the closest thing
really. It's, it's pretty
incredible and when you have a
fight over the water rights or
who gets what water or who, you
know, how it, how it gets out or
who's taking water, uh, it's a
fight, um, however,
Uh, this has been in generations
in New Mexico for years and it's
worked.
It's amazing. It's worked very
well and so I, uh, compliment
all the uh seia people that are
here today. I know they're out.
I just got to the floor. I'm so
glad I got here in time to
congratulate you on this, uh,
legislation and with that I am
conclude. Thank you, Mr.
lady. Let's go next to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. The gentleman
yield,
It's amazing. It's worked very
well and so I, uh, compliment
all the uh seia people that are
here today. I know they're out.
I just got to the floor. I'm so
glad I got here in time to
congratulate you on this, uh,
legislation and with that I am
conclude. Thank you, Mr.
lady. Let's go next to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. The gentleman
yielder, to the gentle lady.
Thank you. I, I just want to
for.
all the reasons already
mentioned and, and for my own
upbringing and, and culture of
playing in the sequesea madre
here in in Santa Fe and um being
connected to this part of, of
Uh, the culture of my culture
here in New Mexico. I just wanna
thank all those that are doing
the work.
It's not easy
It's, it's time consuming. It's,
it's hard labor, it's, it's,
it's diligence, but it is a way
of life and it's a way of life
that we need to preserve and we
need to um continue to
incorporate and to educate our
youth, and I just wanna say
thank you for what you always
and you continue to teach me and
as I, I teach those those ways
and those, um.
Respects and responsibilities to
my children as well, um, we're
gonna have more conversations
and I look forward to working
with you all on how we can
resolve some of the issues that
are at hand now as times are
changing as our population is,
is, uh, changing as well, Mr.
Speaker, we know that there are
no more needs for our se and for
um those that are still um
moving or living in, in um in
attending to their land into
their their ass and.
need to really improve and help
uh make it easier so that we can
preserve this, this cultural um
aspect of our lives. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. There's further
debate, gentle lady from Tao's
representative of this. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the gentlemen
from all those counties yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you so much. Uh, I'm so
grateful for your, uh, for
bringing this, this, um,
memorial to the floor, um, I am
not originally from New Mexico.
I'm from California, that's
central San Joaquin where
there's a lot of agriculture. It
is what defines the area that
I'm from my parents were farm
workers. My grandparents were
farm workers. They're great,
their, their parents were farm
workers. We have a long lineage
and connection to the land, but
what we didn't have.
is the rights that Asequiros
parentes have and hold dear and
um that is something that I am
deeply jealous of, um, but as a
former uh, assequierra myself,
uh, commissioner of the Vijay
Romo, uh, Asea in Taos, um, I
got a sense of what it feels
like to be so deeply connected
to the water and to the land and
to have uh to play the role, to
have the control over.
how the water is, uh, runs down
the field and the art that comes
from, you know, moving, you
know, moving a rock, digging a
linear, you know, having the
water go in in various
directions and just the, the
deep expertise and knowledge
that comes from that I am really
grateful and I could see that in
action, um, every day when I
was, uh, a commissioner on my
ditch, so.
I'm grateful for this. I echo
many of the the people in this
chamber who say that we will do
whatever we can to make sure
that we've got all the money
that you need for your ditches
and for, for your aseas and to
uh lower the burdens for you as
we've done in the last couple of
years so that you can use the
funding that's out there so that
you can make the improvements
that that we need to get the
water flowing artfully.
In the ways that you do and I,
and I'd love to see uh Ms.
Mascarenas on the on the rostrum
there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
think a young lady next we'll go
to Jenny from Santa
Feresentative Romero. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Does the gentleman
from all those counties yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you, Messino, Paula Power,
Mr. Speaker, it's so exciting to
see all the folks up in the uh
rotunda today with their palas
talking about what we love to
talk about with us which is
history, tradition, culture, all
blended together. It's food,
it's people, and for me,
sometimes it was punishment
because it was chores, but
that's OK.
Because today we celebrate all
of the water flowing through our
different communities. I think I
challenge um the memorial um
holder today, Mr. Speaker, is
the 2nd largest proportion of
Aseass in our community in the
Norte, um, which means if you
have any extra capital outlay
over there, um, we need it in
our community to make sure that
our uh asequias get those funds
and we've been working really,
really hard to do that.
But this is such a beautiful
blend of culture, traditions
since the 16th century, not only
did we get to learn this from
the Moors coming from the
Iberian Peninsula, but this is
also a blend of indigenous and
um our Pueblo Indian cultures
very sophisticated method of
irrigation that over time has
been the syncretism between
these various cultures. So Mr.
Speaker, I'm so proud that in
our district we get to celebrate
that every single day, and I'll
come out and bring my pala with
you if you wanna.
do that together when we get a
weekend off or something like
that, Mr.
Speaker.
will be cleaned in about a month
and a half, so you are welcome
to come join us, gentle lady. If
there's even better, that's what
I'll be there for. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker Paula Power
lady from Berlioibulamaquinli
San Juan Socorro Valencia
Representative Abeta. Thank you
speaker. Does the gentleman from
Colfax Mora, Rio Reba.
Representative Sanchez Yi. Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you. uh Speaker, I rise to
celebrate and support this House
memorial Esea Day and also to
just indulge in the celebration
of the community knowledge and
tradition where we, we have
embraced partnership for the
nourishment of our communities
further speaker, I'd like to
introduce my guests.
That are there on the rostrum,
if that's OK with you. The first
is Miss Beverly Tafoya from the
Community ditch of San Jose de
la
Cenega from San Fidel, New
Mexico.
Mr. Martin V. Hill, also from
the Community ditch of San Jose
de la Ciga San Fidel, New
Mexico.
And finally, Mr. Stanley
Michael, a member of the San
Mateo Esequia Association.
And fun fact, Mr. Michael is the
nephew of a former state
representative Toby Toby
Michael, who is also the
majority floor leader. I'm so
happy to be working with this
group of individuals and welcome
to the house and to the rest of
our guests. Welcome and we stand
in support with you. Thank you.
Welcome to the house.
General lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Serrato, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Colfax, Mora Rio
Ribas and Miguel and Tay.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, I, I was
vida and I'm so proud to uh
serve on rural development and
land grants and cultural
affairs, um, the Esequia
Association brought in a
wonderful presentation and
really helped with pictures and
and, and, and looking at, you
know, what is an Esekia today?
It, it is history. It is the
land, it is culture, but it is
the life that you all are
preserving today. I really
appreciate, um, Chairwoman, um,
um Mary up there for all of your
information that you gave our
committee, um, because it really
helps.
round this out as we see so much
innovation happening across the
world. How you are preserving
and innovating in your
communities and, and I, it's
just incredible, and I hope that
our committee and all of us can
continue to be partners with you
all in that. Um, it is so
wonderful to be able to take my
daughters out and say, look,
look, this is the land and it's
been here for so long, and the
water that that flows through
it, you know, the fight that had
to come from that. So I want to
thank you for that. I wanna
thank you all for all being
volunteers. Um, this is not a
light duty. There are
so many, you know, regulations,
everything on top of it. So
thank you for volunteering your
time with us, and I hope that
you, you will continue to see us
as partners, um, as you help us
see how to innovate in a way
that preserves everything you're
doing and protects you in the
utmost way. So thank you.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from Sierra.
The lady from Donana Sierra and
Socorro Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Religion
yield, Mr. Speaker, I yell to
the gentle lady.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
even though you killed my
favorite bill, um, I still want
to stand in support of your
moral because I think it's
awesome. Um, I have a lot of
sakass and ditch associations
throughout my district and, um,
these folks work so hard and
represent, uh, our, our, our
rural areas so well, um, and
they, they partner with um some
water districts to get work
done, and I, I would be remiss
if I did not mention the 72
akass that are within the
Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon fire
that still
have not been rebuilt 3 years
later. And when I talked to
those folks, you know, they're,
they're working so hard, they've
got a lot of people, volunteers,
people coming out of retirement,
every everybody who can do what
they can, but they've got so
many barriers at the federal
level. Can you believe they have
to do an archaeological survey
to rebuild an aki that existed.
They've got to do biological
surveys on an essea that already
existed and they're looking for
mice and different things that
that no one's ever identified.
So it's just, it's gotten really
extensive. It's gotten really
heavy. So I hope this is an area
We can agree that we hope that
Trump does do some waivers on
because I'd sure like to see
those as rebuilt, and I think
everybody else would too, um,
but thank you so much for
bringing this very important uh
memorial today. Uh, this is just
New Mexico through, through and
through. Thank you. Thank you.
Hopefully he does a better job
with that than egg prices, so
we'll hold them to it. See, no
for the debate. The gentlemen
from all those beautiful
counties to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'd just
like to mention, uh, I grew up
in a family of 8.
And uh my my father had at least
5 jobs that I know of growing up
and one of them was uh growing
apples and selling them on the
side of the road.
He'd exchange those apples for
potatoes in Colorado, um.
It's just, uh, critically
important.
How, uh, aseass are to to our
communities, um.
And uh
We got to do all we can to help.
I know the issues have been
brought up, but, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent
of the House that the records
show that the role has been
called and for all those
president voted in the
affirmative.
See an objection, uh, all
members present will be voting
in the affirmative.
Gentlemen, um.
We, before I take the motion,
um, I'd like to add my words to
to this debate, um, I, uh, I am
myself in Duranes. We have a
small ditch called the Pierce
lateral, and I don't know if my
myordomo's here he might be
there. He is calling and bow.
Mayordomo for the pierced
lateral and uh I've got to tell
you my kids, I didn't grow up
this way. I, I like, you know,
you all know my story. I didn't
grow up with I I guess I'm an
immigrant, uh, but my
grandfather did in southern
Chihuahua, and they have a
seass. They had azequias back in
the day, and I have memories of
him working on the SAS and now
as an adult, uh, raising my own
children, they are learning the
art of the SA along with our uh
Mayordomo and his uh beautiful
kids and and the other
neighborhood kids of which
We have quite a few running
around is, uh, but it is an
incredible tradition that I am.
Extremely grateful to have been
allowed in.
To the culture.
Um, so with that,
We are on final passage of How
Memorial 21. The vote is now
open.
The border is now closed by a
vote of 69 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative. House Memorial,
21, has really passed his house
quevise.
Gentlemen from Bernalillo, we
are staying on water.
So I'm gonna go to you next.
Alright. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um.
So today is the centennial,
obviously very fitting for the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, um, and Mr. Speaker,
if you wouldn't mind giving a
shout out to the folks up in the
gallery. To the folks of the Rio
Grande Conservancy district in
the gallery. Welcome to the
house. Thank you for your work.
All right, so we do have a
certificate, Mr. Speaker, but
I'll just mention that um the
middle Rio Grandes Conservancy
is obviously the keepers of the
Asea water, um, in the middle
Rio Grande and the the keepers
of our cultural traditions
there. So we certainly
appreciate everything that they
do, um, especially here on uh
Seia Day. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen, and we do
have a certificate for the
conservancy district that we
will present to you all, um,
when, when you make your way
down, uh, next I'm gonna go to
the gentle lady from Lee
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. I
want to bring attention to this
product on everyone's desk, and
it is called Sore No More. Mr.
Speaker, for those of the
legislators that are
experiencing
strains due to long committee
meetings and late nights
studying the bills this product
is for you, Mr. Speaker, this is
a natural alternative for
powerful pain relief, and Mr.
Speaker, it is locally owned in
Albuquerque. Mr. Speaker, if
anyone wants a personal
testimony, uh, Representative
Chavez is open to setting up
meetings with you all today.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
I found my weakness just make me
laugh and.
Everything goes to hell around
here.
The these, do you guys have
stock in this stuff? What are
you selling it? It's like QVC.
Remembers take note, so no more.
Gentle lady from Bernard Leeen
Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I
want to ask you, Mr. Speaker,
and all the House of
Representatives to join me today
in recognizing February 11, 2025
as Lowrider Day. I would like to
acknowledge the uh
representatives and senators who
joined me in this uh
certificate, uh, representative
Sanchez, Representative de la
Cruz representative had Susan
Herrera represent.
Tar Luhan representative Doreen
Gallego's Senator Leo Jaramillo
and Senator Mo Maestas, uh, Mr.
Speaker, I would like to
introduce a couple of guests
that I have on the rostrum, if
you would allow me so. Of
course. Mr. Speaker and
Representatives, thank you. Uh,
today I have with me city
councilor Clarissa Pena, who
represents District 3 in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
And representatives and uh Mr.
Speaker and Representatives, um,
Councillor Pena is no, um, she
is definitely been on the
council for a while and she
knows her way around the city.
She encompasses an area on the
southwest Mesa and parts of the
South Valley from Central Avenue
South and West to the Rio Grande
and the incorporated area
counselor vice presidents and
counselor and former president.
Pena served has served on the
city council for many years and
has served as president in 2019.
This year she's serving as
council vice president, and I
just wanna mention to you, she
didn't put this in her bio, but
I'm gonna add it, um, counselor
Pena started the first low rider
Albuquerque police unit and it
was nationally recognized. So I
just want to give her
Uh, a little bit more applause
for having done that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
Representatives also with uh
Councilor Penny attending today
is Lorenzo and Otero, AKA house
and so we have house in the
house.
Welcome to the house house.
And let me tell you who who
Lorenzo Artero is. Lorenzo Otero
is the president of the West
Mason Neighborhood Association,
president of the Southwest
Alliance of Neighbors and a
member of the West Central
Community Development Group.
He's also known as a leader
within the Lowrider community.
In New Mexico and was a key
proponent of the cruising ban
repeal in the city of
Albuquerque in 2018, and some of
you may remember that.
And uh Mr. Speaker, uh, we do
have a uh certificate, but
before I um acknowledge that
certificate. I want to also, if
you have a moment today to go to
the east side of the capital, we
have low riders from Albuquerque
from Santa Fe from uh Espanola
from all around the state, so
please go and visit the
Lowriders that are um exhibiting
on the east side of the Capitol,
Mr. Speaker, we wanted
take a picture with you,
definitely, and uh if you
hopefully you brought your
lowrider today.
Gentle lady, uh, out of the list
of sponsors of the certificate,
I might be the only one with a
lowrider. I'm just saying.
Well, I think Councilor Pena has
one too.
I meant the legislators.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I might have
one somewhere hidden.
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, thank you
for acknowledging the
certificate and um it's your
choice if you want it written
into the record.
Gentle lady, we don't have it
down here. Why don't we present
it to our guest, um, and, and we
can, uh, we can read it at a
later time. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I appreciate it.
Lowrider Coulter, as, as we all
know, is, is near and dear to
the heart of New Mexico, uh, the
lowrider capital of the world is
just a little bit north of here,
um, and it is a tremendously
important part of our heritage
and and I think Councilor Pena
for all the work she's put in on
the city to get the city of
Albuquerque really embracing the
culture and and creating.
Opportunities for, for people
young and old to participate,
um.
Uh, gentleman from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would
be incredibly remiss of me if I
didn't stand up first in support
of this uh certificate and also
to acknowledge our guests on the
rostrum this morning. Councilor
Pena, and I'm glad you said his
name because I just call him a
house.
Lorenzo, Councilor, welcome to
your house.
Mr. Speaker, all of my life I've
had low riders. In fact, my
first car was a low rider in
1964 Impela.
I own 63, 64s. I currently have
a 59 GMC.
And back in the day, Speaker, we
couldn't afford these fancy
hydraulics house.
Mr. Speaker, all that we could
do is put weights in the back of
the car.
And it made it kind of flat in
the back.
I put cement sacks in there.
It worked
It didn't hop.
That
In 1976, Mr. Speaker, I had a
poetry class at UNM.
And I'm gonna
Just say the first line of that
poem that I wrote in 1976.
Low ride seemed to just glide
Carro Maslindo.
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to
the representative for bringing
the certificate.
I can't wait to get out there
and see those cars had I had a
little more time, I would have
brought the truck up.
So congratulations to everybody
that was involved and thank you
so much for bringing those
vehicles. It's not easy to do
it.
Some of them are driven, some of
them are traitored.
So thank you so much thank you
speaker.
So I'm gonna take a couple more
comments and then we have to go
to joint sessions so I'm gonna
go first to the gentle lady from
Berton Leo.
Gracias onorable.
Uh,
inlabra del dia cultural
Hispana.
Qqueria la bien Benida todos
miscolegas.
Tambien quierro explicar.
Uh, loquetienen escritorio.
So Mr. Speaker.
Thank you in honor of.
Our celebration today of
Hispanic Cultural Day, I wanted
to point out to all of my
colleagues on the on their desks
they have a gift for me.
And it is in this little box.
And it contains a tamal.
And I intentionally gifted you a
sweet tamal.
So that it would stay good and
healthy and fresh.
And so I want to also.
Say, Mr. Speaker.
And
Promote our small businesses
because they are the backbone of
our neighborhoods and this was
prepared.
For us by.
Panaderiaoteria
sunny, which is located on
Airport Road.
So if you like, Mr. Speaker,
this Tamal.
And um you would like to get
more tamales.
Please visit panaderia
Tortilleria sunny right here in
Santa Fe.
It's located off of Airport
Road. They were very, very
proud. They wanted me to tell
you, Mr. Speaker,
como immigrante.
Todos los travajan and tortieria
immigrantes.
The Muncho orguyo.
el presidente
de estacamara deputadosos.
Is fruit los tamales que esta
casa este deputadocamara
deputados.
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I
just wanted to let everyone know
you do it's a sweet tamal so the
thing about the sweet tamal is
you do you would like to um warm
it up.
And have it with your milk or
coffee or whatever, but it does
need to be warmed. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you mucho
gracias, ala familia de la
paneria. Uh, I want to recognize
in the gallery, uh, if you are
part of the crew that brought
your cars to the capital today,
please rise so we can recognize
you. Thank you guys. Thank you.
You know, a good friend of mine
in the South Valley has a saying
la cultura kura.
Culture heals, and I truly,
truly believe that. Thank you
guys for your work. Gentle lady
from Rio Reba, Sandoval in
Santa.
In Taos
thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to
salute Lowrider Day at the
Capitol. This has to be one of
the best days of the year,
everybody. I see that Lalo and
Joanne up there, I can't really
see everybody in the gallery,
but uh we have 3 cars from
Espanola and I don't know if
everybody knows this, but 60
Minutes devoted 10 minutes of,
of airtime to the low riders of
Espanola on Good Friday.
20024.
It was amazing. It's an amazing
story for those of you who don't
live in a lowrider land I have
to tell you when you drive by,
people usually have 2 cars out
in the out in the parking lot or
out on the out on the dirt and I
just want to tell you one of
those cars they're gonna
refurbish and the next car is
for parts. That's just how you
do it in the North, so you drive
around and you can just see what
everybody's planning for the
future. It is an exciting it is.
Exciting part of our culture in
the North and um we all have so
many friends who are so
committed and devoted to this,
and I would like to add, uh, to
the house that, uh, I'm also
bringing a bill together with uh
Senator Leo Jaramillo to build a
lowrider museum in Espanola, a
state museum. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe sky.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the speaker appoint
a committee to invite the
Honorable Lieutenant Governor
Howie Morales and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the House in
this chamber for the purpose of
being addressed by speakers in
honor of Hispanic Culture Day.
If there, if there's no
objection, the chair will
appoint representative Herrera,
Representative Ortiz and
Representative Nicole Chavez to
invite the honorable lieutenant
Governor Howie Morales and the
honorable members of the Senate
to meet and joint session with
the House for the purpose of
being addressed by our
distinguished guests.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the House stand in
recess subject to the call of
the chair and that the rules be
suspended to allow the seating
of guests in the chamber during
the joint session.
we will send in recess subject
to the call of the chair.
Guys ready? Wait, wait, wait.
They're they're still trying to.
Oh yeah, come on through.
Um
She got up there.
Yeah, they put one up there.
cruise.
Don't go see.
It's
Right.
You know what they're, their
music stands.
last night.
I
I
You were
Yeah
No
Because it's down there by at
the very end of the world.
Did
Mr. Speaker.
The sergeant at arms.
The Honorable lieutenant
Governor Howie Morales.
The honorable members of the
Senate of the state of New
Mexico.
And Lorinos.
Been escorted by Lorinos.
Welcome to the house.
But
God
were
going to
be
be
be
s
So
and
I
may be seated?
The joint session of the House
and the Senate will come to
order. What is the pleasure?
Of the joint session, Mr.
Chairman, the chair
recognizespresentative Svansky.
I ask unanimous consent that we
resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole House and
Senate for the purpose of
hearing speakers and
presentations in honor of
Hispanic Culture Day. There is
no objection, it is so ordered.
The committee of the whole House
and Senate will come to order.
Please help me in welcoming some
of our guests seated here at the
rostrum.
Beginning with Fara Chavez.
Anita Cordova.
Mr. Steve Garcia.
Nasha and Torres.
Mr. David Manzano.
UNM athletic director Fern Lobo.
The Honorable Edward Lujan.
Loan bird.
The one, the only, Dolores
Huerta.
Juanita Chavez.
Zach Quintierro.
Patricia Pinzon.
Elizabeth I didn't go.
Florencia I am Trujillo.
Vivian Cuadra.
Jim Ward.
Mary Martinez.
The Honorable Clara Padilla
Andrews.
The Honorable.
The Honorable Raymond Sanchez.
Beverly Frazier.
Joketo.
Michelle Hernandez.
John Hernandez.
And Lena Hernandez.
A Malina.
Christian.
Noel, Miriam.
Tammy had a meal.
Chuy Martinez.
Otilio Rees.
Gilbert Benavides.
Linda Garcia Benavidez.
Ramona Holguin.
Lorena Alvarez.
Vanessa Archuleta.
Diego Gallegos.
Justina Grant.
Ashley Campbell.
Jose Padilla.
Angela Serrano de Rivera.
Martin Serrano de Rivera.
Roberto Richie.
Ernie, see the baker.
Jerry, you see the baker.
All undone.
Demonic Luhan.
Steve Chavez.
Catherine Nicoloa.
Ryan Cangelosi.
Marco Gonzalez.
Janice Torres.
Ana Truil.
Audrey de la Cruz.
Jamila Luhan.
Ernest Rodriguez Naz.
Alicia Lucero.
Aaron Muffaletto.
Minerva Jurado Perea.
Damien Lana.
Dina Mandriguez.
Doctor Adam Amador.
Elena Baca.
Eli Baca.
Eric Contreras.
Yeah it is.
Amy Padilla.
Anna Greer.
Anna Lee the Silinnas.
Gabriel Regos.
Gloria Arts.
Isaiah Torres.
Harida Gurule.
James Chavez.
Janine Morales.
It so Lopez.
Katie rook
Hennis Scott
Lila Flores Dunas.
Carroll.
Mandy Torres.
Bill ucker.
Cecilia.
Robin Moses.
Santiago Candelaria.
Sarah Keller.
Savannah Tapia.
Teresa through Hickey.
Tomaso Pacheco.
Valerie Mesa.
Yvette Lucero.
And Mr. Rudy Zamora, please big
round of applause for all of our
guests who are joining us today.
At this time, it is my honor to
recognize Speaker Javier
Martinez to make a few remarks
followed by a musical
presentation by Las Flores de
Valla after that, Senator
Michael Padilla will make
additional remarks, followed by
today's guest speakers, Vadna
Charles and Michelle Hernandez.
Ladies and gentlemen, Speaker of
the House, Mr. Javier Martinez.
Oh thank you that's yes,
gracias.
Thank you, gracias Familia thank
you family colleagues, friends,
uh, thank you to all the
sponsors of this joint session
to our colleagues in the Senate,
um, to all of the guests that
are here, took time out of your
day to celebrate Hispanic
Heritage Day here at our
roundhouse.
Um, I'd also like to thank two
people who were instrumental in
building this day many years
ago. The late chairman
Kikiavedra and his family. Round
of applause for them, please.
As well as the late Senator
Altamirano and his family,
especially his wife Nina
Altamirano, who wishes she could
be here celebrating with us
today. Uh, he was part of the
crew that brought this together
many, many years ago. Round of
applause for the Altamiranos,
please.
Here in New Mexico, we are
blessed to be a home.
To be an epicenter of Latino
Hispano culture.
The combination of this culture
along with that of the
indigenous inhabitants of this
land makes us a beautiful
tapestry.
A tapestry that has been woven
carefully over many, many years.
And we might be in perfect at
times.
But it is an important reminder
of what beauty can be achieved
when we, when our cultures and
traditions are embraced, and
most importantly, when they're
celebrated, not just on one day,
but each and every single day.
When I was first elected to this
office 10 years ago. I remember
walking into this building and
uh it might have been for our
sad or land grab day, uh, but I
was approached by a, a gentleman
from northern New Mexico and he
asked me my name and I said
Javier Martinez, and he said,
you must be from the Martinez is
up from Mora.
And I said, well,
I'm sure we're primo somewhere
down the road, right?
Left it at that.
Now just a couple of years ago,
I was at the Chili Liland Grant.
And of course, they knew my name
was Martinez and the gentleman
asked, hey, you must be from the
Martinez of the Chilili.
And I said, well, we're probably
primos at some level, right?
Left it at that.
Uh, now I'm asked if I'm the
Martinez from New York Rancho
and I'm like, no, that's
Representative Alan Martinez,
and we have the same haircut,
and we're probably primo
somewhere down the road. Um,
But that's the tapestry that I'm
talking about.
At the end of the day, we're all
familiar.
We primos, we're primas.
That's who we are as a people.
I believe we are blessed to live
in a place that celebrates who
we are, not just today, not just
a month, but every single day.
Spanish is in our state
constitution as an official
language.
We embrace cultures.
Those who personally or whose
families came from south of the
border like mine.
As well as folks who have been
here for many, many generations.
Going back to the Spanish crown
and even before that.
Growing up as a first generation
American in a border town I
never imagined becoming a
lawyer, much less a lawmaker.
And I often say that my law
degree,
is made of drywall.
Because my dad taped drywall for
many, many years. Literally
broke his back doing that work.
And so that law degree, you
know, that fancy paper to me
smells like drywall if you've
ever smelled the smell of
drywall. It's a very unique
smell.
My parents Anna and Javier still
hard working blue collar folks.
Like many of the people who run
this building who cleaned this
building.
And I know many of us in this
house and in the Senate.
Have similar stories, have
similar roots.
And all of us
Democrats and Republicans
Us from the urban centers, us
from the rural communities.
are all part of that tapestry.
That is interwoven and
interconnected.
Now
I know that I'm not saying
anything new to you, and I'm in
many ways preaching to the
choir, but our institutions, we
know they function better when
they look more like the people.
That they represent
And I'm proud that today our
legislature looks a lot more
like New Mexico.
In addition to having the
strongest female majority
legislature in the nation.
We also have
More people of color and
immigrants and folks who grew up
the way we did.
Serving the people of the state.
And I know that you all would
agree that having more
diversity.
In our
Legislature
Means that more New Mexicans can
see themselves reflected in each
and every one of us.
And it helped and hopefully it
helps more people recognize.
Their own power in their own
community to create real
meaningful change.
From the oil fields of hobbs all
the way to Shiprock, all the way
to downtown Albuquerque, all the
way to the AEs of northern New
Mexico.
Honoring our culture means
Living up to our shared values.
And that includes standing up
for families and communities.
That includes treating people
with kindness, respecting our
neighbors even when we disagree
and above all, it means having
each other's back.
I've told each and every one of
you in this chamber.
Rs and D's
That I'll always have your back.
I'll always have you back.
No matter
What the situation might be.
No matter who's sitting on the
other side.
Of the table
And I mean that because that's
how I was raised.
I was raised to look after.
Each other.
As your Speaker of the House, I
promise to continue to live up
to those shared values. So those
shared New Mexican values.
And to give voice to those
communities that many times are
overlooked.
And sometimes underestimated.
Today I want to encourage us all
To not just celebrate.
That beautiful past.
That mixture of cultures.
The indigenous
The Spanish, the Mexicanos.
And whatever the heck
It has created in people like
me.
That beautiful mixture.
That mesti sake.
That makes up who we are
friends, we are our ancestors,
wildest dreams.
Think about that for a second.
We are their wildest dreams and
here we are living up.
2
those shared dreams and shared
values.
Now it's our work.
To build a society and a
community that our children and
grandchildren can be proud of. I
always say we stand on the
shoulders of giants that came
before us. Now let us be those
giants for those little kids
coming after us, gracias.
Ladies and gentlemen, Speaker of
the House, Mr. Javier Martinez.
Now we welcome a musical
presentation by Las Flores del
Vala.
This
This is a song from all parts of
the state, as the speaker was
talking about, and it's done in
the uh.
The melody of Las Mananitas.
the
I
That's
And
No
And
Yeah
What
Oh yeah.
So in all of our precious
waters.
precious Rio Grande.
We want to do a little on to
that.
Every river
for
See
And
so
the stones
Your grand
to Mexico
Mhm
The
way
no
and
of
s
mountains
I
One more year rolls down by the
of
For cry
the
Pilgrim
Passing
Tra
In
One more
the stand
the
Oh
And
Mountain
down by
Thank you very much.
At this time is my honor to
welcome.
Senate Majority whip.
the stage.
Senator Michael Padilla.
All right, good afternoon,
everybody.
All right, thank you very much,
uh Mr. Lieutenant Governor,
Madam President, Mr. Speaker.
Dolores
Uh, Leor, leader sharer, Whip
Woods, and I'm, I'm one of the
whips also whipping it good, uh,
leader Supansy, whip Hochman
Viheel, whipping it good. All
right. Uh, Leader Armstrong,
caucus chairs, whip Martinez,
uh, chief clerks, thank you very
much for allowing me to say a
couple of words today. I know
that we all work um around the
clock in this building at times,
and we have people that work
with us and support us and do
many wonderful things for us day
after day, and just, we need to
thank them as well.
Thank you so much.
But, uh, Mr. Lieutenant Governor
and Mr. Speaker appoint a
personal privilege. I have
someone in my life.
That has just done wonders for
me as a human being and has
helped me to get all of my work
done and she works in my office
here in Santa Fe, and she works
in the business office back in
Albuquerque, and it is her
birthday today, and she has been
in this building for, I won't
tell you how many years she
started when she was about 5,
and it is her birthday, but with
your permission, Mr. Lieutenant
Governor, Mr. Speaker, I'd like
to do a rendition of Happy
Birthday to my executive
assistant Dorothy. Temer, who's
sitting right up here.
123. Happy birthday.
birthday to
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday.
Happy birth
The
you
OK, with all that being said,
today is Hispanic Culture Day
and the Hispanic Culture Day in
New Mexico holds, and thank you
all very much for singing to
Dorothy. She means a lot to me
and I know all of our, our
assistants mean a lot to us as
well.
Hispanic Culture Day in New
Mexico holds a significant
cultural and historic
importance. New Mexico has a
rich Hispanic heritage with deep
roots that stretch back over 400
years. The celebration of
Hispanic Culture Day
acknowledges the profound
contributions of Hispanic
communities to our state's
culture, economy, and
development in many different
ways.
Some key points that I thought
would underscore why this day is
so important. New Mexico history
is intrinsically tied to Spanish
exploration, which began in the
16th century. Spanish settlers,
priests, and soldiers laid the
foundation for the state's
culture, introducing language,
architecture, religion, and
agricultural practices that we
can still see today all over our
beautiful state.
Hispanic Cultural Day, Culture
Day, um, honors the traditions,
customs, and contributions of
Hispanic communities in New
Mexico. This includes the
preservation of unique art forms
like folk music, dance like
flamenco, and I see some of our
flamenco friends here.
And crafts such as pottery and
weaving as well as culinary
traditions like Chile and
tamales.
Uh, the celebration is also an
opportunity to recognize the
contributions of Hispanic
leaders and individuals to our
state's development like
Dolores, like Ed Luhan.
For many years, um, for, for
many New Mexicans, Hispanic
Culture Day is a time of pride,
reinforcing a sense of identity
and connection, uh, to a shared
history. It fosters
intergenerational pride,
especially among younger
generations who may be learning
about their history for the
first time today and during
these special days.
Today often includes events that
educate both the local
population and visitors to this
beautiful city, capital city of
ours.
In New Mexico, where Hispanic
culture has been deeply embedded
in everyday life for centuries.
Hispanic Culture Day celebrated
by this legislature serves as a
reminder of the lasting impact
of the state's early Spanish
that came here and the ongoing
influence of Hispanic culture.
It's a day to celebrate the past
while we look ahead to the
future.
So a little closer to home here.
When I arrived here about 13
years ago.
I began attending these joint
sessions, and I asked myself,
why do we do these? Why do we do
so many of them? And why do we
do them every year or every
other year.
So yes, it is about the topic of
the day, and yes, it is to bring
people into this historic
building so they can experience
these, these days with us. Yes,
it is to eat, which I think we
all know I love to eat. I'm
working on it.
But, uh, I'm working on it, like
I said, but we also sing and we
dance and we chat and we see old
friends and new friends.
But here's something else I see
on these days.
I see us learning something new
together.
I see us reinforcing what we may
already know together.
I see us clapping together,
laughing together, and sometimes
crying together.
I see awesome unity as we
celebrate days like this and
other days.
I want you all to know that I am
proud of every single one of you
for the personal sacrifice that
you bring to this role, and the
leadership that you provide, and
that's everybody in this
chamber. So thank you.
It is also true that we
dramatically and at times
enthusiastically disagree, and
that's OK.
But if you think about it, I
think we enthusiastically
disagree on probably 10 to 15 to
18 topics, we agree on about 95%
of the things that we work on
here, and we pass them through
this historic building in a
bipartisan fashion, 95, maybe
92, 95% of the time.
Right now, I'm looking at the
right side, your left, all the
way down at the end there.
Everybody wave over there? Yeah,
yeah. I want to ask you all to
just kind of, especially
legislators, I want you to look
all the way over to this side of
the building and look over in
this room, find 23, 10 or
whatever people over there and
over here on this side of the
room, I'd like to ask our
friends over here to look on the
other side of the room and see
35, 10 people on the other side
of the room and remember that
sometimes we will
enthusiastically disagree on one
day.
those 1015 or 18 subjects.
But then the very next day,
we're going to be locked arms
and we're going to be trying to
get things done, just like those
Spanish settlers did all of
those many years ago.
Let's make sure that we don't
forget about that because we get
a lot of really great work done
here.
So with that, I just want to say
thank you, thank you to the
organizers and the folks that
put today on, and I want to
thank you to the legislators one
more time for all of the
personal sacrifice and work that
you provide here.
Thank you. I, I humbly
appreciate the opportunity to
speak. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Michael
Padilla.
It is now my honor to welcome
one of our guest speakers today.
Charles, thank you so much for
joining us today.
Hello. Yes, thank you.
Good afternoon, Honorable
legislators and dignitaries.
Lieutenant Governor, Mr.
Speaker.
All of our house and Senate
leaders and all of our familia
in attendance today.
My name, it was close. My name
is Vedra Chavez.
And I am so honored and
privileged to serve you and the
people of the state of New
Mexico as the board president of
the National Hispanic Cultural
Center.
Thank you.
I'd like to start today, um,
first of all by thank all of you
for taking the time to come to
this session and and celebrate
this great day with us. I'd also
like to thank our wonderful
musicians who started and have
entertained us. So thank you to
all of them.
25 years ago, yes, it's been 25
years, 25 years ago, a small
group of Nuevo Mexicanos in
Mexicans came together and
brought an amazing vision to
life. They joined with the
community of Barelas with some
key philanthropic partners and
the governor, the government and
created a very special place.
A place where Latino and
Hispanic art language, history,
tradition could call home.
25 years ago and still to this
day, that place was the only
national Hispanic cultural
center in the United States of
America.
In just 25 years, we have had
the opportunity to host
National artists and performers,
International operas.
Some, some amazing performances.
Um, some of you, the center as a
performing arts destination.
Others view it as a place where
they can display their gallery
creations on a national level.
Some see it as a place where
they can bring their children to
actually hands on um engage with
our art and the music of our
culture.
Some really see it as a place
where they can explore their
genealogy through our genealogy
center and trace back their
family ties. In fact, the center
is all of that and so much more.
Our mission at the center is to
promote and advance.
Hispanic and Latino art,
culture, history, and language.
And we are committed to doing
that.
We educate, we empower, we love
to celebrate.
And we do all of that together
with all of our gente.
We continue to lead nationally
in debuting spectacular
breakthrough artists and
performers and really set the
standard at a national level so
that artists from Shiprock to
the South Valley of Albuquerque
to Sunland Park across our state
of New Mexico and across the
Americas know that they have a
place to unite and to thrive and
to show their wonderful
creations.
Whether you're Disney coming and
showing the first um Latina
directed movie or you're a young
girl in the audience watching
the big screen and seeing
someone who looks like you on
that screen. Um, whether you're
a young boy from Mota, who is
learning about screenwriting so
that you can write the story of
our seass.
Or a family that has joined in
the center to celebrate a
wedding or a graduation or
perhaps placed a brick in memory
in our laza Mayor. This center
holds a special place in the
hearts of our people.
And that's why I'm so excited to
be here today to celebrate and
kick off our 25th anniversary
year.
This year we'll be sharing
stories from across New Mexico
and across the Americas.
Through art, film, performances,
it's gonna be a great
celebration. If you've never
been to the National Hispanic
Cultural Center. I would like to
challenge each and every one of
you that this is the year that
you change that, that you join
us in our celebration.
Now more than ever, regardless
of zip code. Our goal is to be a
place where New Mexicans can
come together, can, can unite,
can build community.
A place that New Mexicans can be
proud of.
Our goal for our anniversary is
to host both on campus, but more
importantly, off campus
opportunities for New Mexicans
to come together and connect to
our culture and to each other.
And my greatest wish is that you
will join us as we do all of
that.
I will now pass the mic to our
wonderful partners in
philanthropy, Michelle
Hernandez, who is the chair of
the National Hispanic Cultural
Center Foundation. Thank you
all.
Thank you once again Majora
Charles.
And we welcome the Honorable
Michelle Hernandez.
Good afternoon. Thank you,
Lieutenant Governor, uh,
Morales, uh, and, uh, Speaker
Martinez, Majority Whip Maria,
it is my pleasure to speak
before you and so many friends
and colleagues who I've known
for many years and new friends,
so alike, um.
It is my, today we celebrate the
vibrant tapestry, the tapestry
that representative Martinez
spoke about of our Hispanic
culture. It's woven and rich
traditions, artistic brilliance
in the enduring spirit of our
communities again on behalf of
the board of trustees for the
Hispanic Cultural Foundation.
Welcome to Hispanic Cultural Day
at the Roundhouse.
I am Michelle Hernandez, and I
am a partner of the Gordon Reese
law firm, and more important
than that, I am a proud New
Mexican and a proud Latina and
is my one of my greatest honors
to be here today, especially,
uh, with my honored guests, my
husband John Hernandez and my
daughter, Lena Hernandez. I'm so
glad that we pulled her out of
school so she could attend this
day.
Yeah.
Um, so thank you so much. It is
a privilege that I welcome you
to this momentous occasion. A
day made possible through the
dedicated partnership of the
foundation and the center.
We owe a debt of gratitude to
the late Senator Alta Meano and
his family whose vision laid the
foundation for this incredible
institution. They foresight has
enriched our state and provided
a platform to celebrate Hispanic
cultural.
From around the world.
I would like to express
gratitude to our sponsors, a
heartfelt thankful thank you to
our generous sponsors, many of
whom are here with us today.
Your support is essential and
your partnership.
is what makes events like this
possible.
Specifically, I'd like to thank
Presbyterian Health Plan.
ExxonMobil.
Swire Coca-Cola and Chevron.
And I'd like to give a special
thank you to our partner and
many things, not the least of
which is today, um, is with the
Albuquerque Spanal Chamber of
Commerce with Ernie C Dubaca,
the executive team from the
board and his board. Thank you.
My connection to the center
spans many years and as trustee
chair for this past year, I've
witnessed firsthand the
extraordinary work that happens
there daily.
For 25 years this center has
been a beacon of cultural
expression.
Hosting everything from the
mesmerizing festival Flamenco
Albuquerque.
To the beloved annual Nutcracker
and even the grandeur of Opera
Southwest.
This milestone anniversary year
is a testament to the center's
impact.
We are home to the awe inspiring
Torreon.
The largest concave fresco in
North America.
It is a masterpiece by the
renowned artist Federico Vigil.
I urge you.
If you haven't seen it, I urge
you to experience the beauty
firsthand.
We also showcased world-class
traveling exhibitions and hosted
significant events, my
counterpart Vedra alluded to Eva
Laconia directorial debut with
the film Flaming Hot.
This October 21st we celebrate
the center's 25th anniversary as
we look forward to the next 25
years, we ask for your support
and we respectfully request
$100,000 allocation in your
capital outlay budget.
I'm incredibly proud to stand
here today celebrating Hispanic
Cultural Day alongside so many
colleagues who have championed
Hispanic excellence and
achievement.
Your contributions are
invaluable.
To further celebrate the
contributions of our
legislators, you, we are hosting
a luncheon immediately following
this event at the Inn and Spa,
Loretto, just across the street.
We'd be delighted if you could
join us for an opportunity to
connect and celebrate together.
In closing, I just would like to
thank you for sharing this
special day with us.
Your presence and support mean
the world to the national
Hispanic Cultural Center.
Thank you.
Thank you very much to um.
Michelle Hernandez for those
beautiful remarks as we continue
throughout.
Programs like this recognizing
the different people of New
Mexico.
It's always great to remind
ourselves that we continue to
strive as one.
Because ultimately that's where
Things really happen when we are
working together.
You know, Mr. Speaker,
I was given an opportunity many
years back, uh, when former, uh,
Speaker of the House, Raymond
Sanchez indicated to me, said,
why don't you go up there and,
uh, preside over the joint, uh,
House and Senate.
And I said, are you sure you
want me to do that? And he
indicated to me, he said, uh,
You just started. There's not
much that you can do.
So
he sent me up here and uh at
that time I had a whole book of
uh bills ready to be rid out.
And little did he know because I
said, uh, and I turned to the
speaker.
And I said, uh, ready for the
next order of business.
So, Mr. Speaker,
This is deja vu. This is
something all over again.
And I, I have a book full of
bills here ready for the next
order of business. I, are you
gonna try to stop me today if we
take action on these bills.
I don't think I have the power
to do that, so, uh, they're
reading coming up, folks.
All righty, you all better get
ready and another lesson for
each and every one of us,
whenever you are sitting in the
speaker's chair.
It's something not only as a
prestige, but it's something
where decorum.
And protocol is followed and so
I think we'll skip it this time,
but, uh, I just, I, I just, uh,
want to let you all know that as
we deal with this,
This is a very important
opportunity for each and every
one of us, not only with today's
program, but the lessons that we
all learn from.
The first day that we're here
all the way to the last day
before we leave.
And so in dealing with that, I
think it's really time for a
little entertainment.
In order to go ahead and kind of
wind this down and then we'll
get ready to, to close out
today, but again I wanna thank
each and every one of you for
this opportunity and to you, Mr.
Speaker, and to our lieutenant
governor.
The opportunity to be here with
you.
For this, not only an auspicious
and precious day.
But one that recognizes our
original roots and who we are as
individuals.
Ready for the next performance,
and I understand that this is
going to be by Las Flores del
Valle and there they go, they're
getting ready.
And
I
Oh
the
No
Yeah
that
You
That
And
If
my
That
see.
We
We
I don't remember
Thank you, thank you very much
Las Flores del Valle one final
round of applause for not only
them but for all the performers
and the speakers today.
Mr. Chairman,
Spansy, please unanimous consent
that the whole House and Senate
rise and report progress. The
joint session of the House and
Senate will come to order, Mr.
Chairmans representative
Shipanski. I unanimous consent
that the joint session of the
House and Senate be now
dissolved.
no, it is
sorted. Thank you all very much.
Thank you members and honored
guests. Uh, thank you for being
here today. Shout out to Las
Flores del Valle Carol Vijil and
Leyla Flores duennas who are
representative Anaya's moms,
thank you for being here and
gracing us with your art.
That's what we need
ladies
I'd say so
Members, please stay nearby. We
will continue with our morning
floor session to do bill
introduction and committee
reports. Members, please stay
close by.
Yes.
Members, please stay nearby. We
will continue with floor session
shortly after our guests depart.
Right, folks, we are back in
session, gentle lady from
Bernard Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I move to go to the
next order of business committee
reports clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
human services committee to has
been referred House Bill 138 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended.
And then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
For an adoption of a favorite
committee report on House Bill
138 as amended.
All those in favor, signified by
say aye.
Oppose 8. Yes, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 151
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
No it option adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 151. All those in
favor, X5 but say no.
I suppose.
Yeah, that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 174
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
we have adoption of a committee
report in House Bill 174. All
those in favor 5 but say a.
I suppose nay, the SAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 186
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair,
we adoption favorable committee
report in House Bill 186. All
those in favor of 59.
I suppose they, yes, I report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Bill 260 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G Andres,
adoption of the committee
reportable committee report in
House Bill 260. All those in
favor see if I would say aye.
Bona.
Yeah SA community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 164 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and it's referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
do Wanda Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
164. All those in favor Cinepapa
say I.
All those opposed? Nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 181 has headed our
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
the Wanda Johnson, Sheriff.
speaking of adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 181. All those in
favor and I and I.
Po name, the IA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 194 has had it under
consideration in report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but that House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 194 do pass and then
referred to the education
committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
community report in House Bill
194, but a favorable committee
report on how government
elections in needian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 194. All those in favor I
would say.
Why.
Although suppose nay.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Commer and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10 has had it
under consideration and reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair.
Mr. Speaker of adoption adoption
of a favorable report in House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10. All those in
favor 5 but say 9.
I suppose, nay.
It's a good bill.
The AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 66 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 66 do pass. Respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair.
speaking of adoption?or
committee report in House Bill
66, but a favorable committee
report on House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 66. All those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those supposed name.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 149 has had it under
consideration in report same
with recommendation that it do
not pass, but the House
Judiciary Committee's substitute
for House Bill 149 do pass and
then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair. Mr.
Speaker, we adoption unfavorable
community report in House 149
but a favorable community report
in House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 149.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
All the supposed day
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 56 has had it under
consideration in reports with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Dorean Yao's chair.
Mr. Speaker of adoption
favorable committee report in
House Bill 56. All those in
favor, senior 5 would say aye.
Post name, the I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 258 has
had it under consideration
report, same with the
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and he referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen, chair.
We've adopted him, Mr. Speaker,
of a favorable report in House
Bill 258. All those in favor if
I say aye.
Others supposed.
Yeah, I have a community report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Clerk.
House Bill 351, introduced by
representatives Murphy, Mejia
Mason, Henry, and Vincent, an
act making an appropriation to
the board of Finance division of
the Department of Finance and
Administration to provide zero
interest loans to political
subdivisions of the state for
projects to replace or repair
public infrastructure damaged by
flooding or debris flows or
projects to remove debris
accumulations attributable to
too, the storm event on October
19, 2024. House Bill 351.
I got 351 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Rural
Development Land Grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee,
thence the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 352 introduced by
representatives Herrera,
Sanchez, and Senator Jaramio.
An act relating to courts,
closing magistrate circuit
courts in the McKinley, Santa
Fe, Torrance, Dona Anta, and Lee
districts, relocating magistrate
district courts in the Grant and
San Juan districts, relocating a
circuit court in the Rio Ariba
district. House Bill 352.
House Bill 352 haven't been read
twice. My title is or printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 353 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to economic
development, enacting the New
Mexico Youth Film and Media
Development Act, providing
requirements for the higher
education department, creating
the youth film and media grant
fund, providing for grants from
the fund, making an
appropriation. House Bill 353353
as my title is or printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 354 introduced by
Representatives Lujan and
Hochman V. Hill, an act relating
to mental health, creating the
community criminal justice
diversion project as a six-year
pilot project in the behavioral
health services division of the
Healthcare Authority, providing
for project requirements,
authorizing financial assistance
for participants assigning
duties, creating the community
criminal justice diversion
Project fund. House Bill 354.
House Bill 354 being read twice
by title is ordered, printed and
referred to the.
To the health and human services
uh committee that's the how
House Judiciary.
House Bill 355 introduced by
Representatives Lujan and
Hochman V. Hill, an act relating
to public health amending the
Harm Reduction Act to create the
overdose prevention program,
limiting civil and criminal
liability for people acting
pursuant to the Harm Reduction
Act. House Bill 355.
House Bill 355, having been read
twice by title disorder printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary.
House Bill 356, introduced by
Representative Brown and act
relating to water, providing
that replacement wells within
100 ft of the original well are
not subject to protest, allowing
an agreeable and request for
hearing to be filed.
House Bill 356.
House Bill 356. I'm twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the house
agriculture and EAS and Water
Resources Committee, then the
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 357 introduced by
Representative Lujan, an act
relating to public assistance,
prohibiting the inclusion of
healthcare provider gross
receipts tax and a mi via waiver
program participants budget.
House Bill 357.
I was spill 357 having been read
twice by the by title is order
printed and referred to house.
Health and Human Services, then
the house.
where we are.
Here we go. House transportation
and public works capital
improvements Committee.
House Bill 358, introduced by
Representative Pettigrew, an act
relating to legislative affairs,
creating the interim
administrative rule oversight
committee, requiring legislative
review of executive agency
proposed rules, amending the
state rules Acts notice of
proposed rulemaking to include a
fiscal impact statement if the
estimated cost of implementing a
proposed rule is greater than $1
million making an appropriation
House Bill 358.
House Bill 358 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Appropriation and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 359 introduced by
Representatives Pettigrew and
Zamora, an act relating to
criminal offenses, providing
that knowingly making a false
statement on a matter for which
testimony is requested in a
legislative proceeding
constitutes perjury regardless
of whether the statement is made
under oath, affirmation, or
penalty of perjury. House Bill
359.
House Bill 359 haven't been read
twice by title this order
printed and referred to the
government, uh, House government
elections in and in the affairs
committee that's the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 360 introduced by
Representative Pettigrew, an act
relating to rules, providing a
process for the distribution of
rulemaking information to state
legislators. House Bill 360.
House Bill 360 haven't been
through it twice. My title is
ordered and printed and referred
to the House Government
elections in India Indian
Affairs Committee, that's the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 361, introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero, an
act relating to natural
resources, providing that the
energy, minerals, and natural
resource department may
authorize a conversion of an oil
or gas well into a facility that
provides energy storage or
develops geothermal energy,
House Bill 361.
House Bill 361 have buried twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the house.
Energy environment, Natural
Resources Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 362 introduced by
Representative Chatfield, an act
relating to the environment,
creating a rainfall enhancement
pilot project to be conducted by
the Roosevelt Soil and Water
Conservation District requiring
reporting, making an
appropriation. House Bill 362.
House Bill 362 haven't been read
twice by title's order printed
and referred to the House
Agricultural sector and Water
Resources Committee, thence the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 363 introduced by
Representative Dixon, an act
relating to non-profit
associations, creating the
decentralized, unincorporated
nonprofit association Act, House
Bill 363.
House Bill 363 have been read
twice by the title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, that's
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 364 introduced by
Representative Anaya and act
relating to children requiring
that children, youth and
families department to determine
federal benefits eligibility for
children in its custody. Apply
for federal benefits and either
act as the child's
representative payee or
determine an appropriate
alternative setting forth the
department's obligations when
acting as a child's
representative payee prohibiting
the use of federal benefits to
pay the department for the
child's care, setting forth
provisions for the
release of federal benefits
provided to children in legal
custody, custody of the state.
House Bill 364.
House Bill 364 having been draw
twice by title, it is order
printed and referred to the
Health and Human Services
Committee, that's the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 365 introduced by
Representative Garrett, an act
relating to public schools,
providing staff to the public
education commission
transferring the charter schools
division from the public
education department to the
commission. House Bill 365.
House Bill 365. I remembered
twice by title. It's order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, the
the House government election in
India Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 366 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to employment,
including veterinarians in the
definition of health care
practitioner for the purpose of
making certain provisions in
healthcare practitioner
agreements void, unenforceable,
and against public policy. House
Bill 366.
House Bill 366. I remember read
twice by title. It's order
printed and referred to the
house, Health and Human Services
Committee, that's the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 367 introduced by
Representatives Sanchez, Lujan,
Royal Caballero, Terrazas, and
Mason, an act relating to horse
racing, amending the time frame
for the number of live race days
necessary for a racetrack to
maintain a gaming operator's
license. House Bill 367.
I'll spell 367. Hamer read twice
my title is ordered, printed and
referred to the House Government
Elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, that's the house.
commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 368 introduced for
representatives Joshua Hernandez
and Dixon, an act relating to
the high wage jobs tax credit,
amending the definition of
threshold job applicable to the
credit. House Bill 368.
Hospital 368 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house.
Commerce and economic
development.
Committee, the the House.
The House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 369 introduced by
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
and act an act relating to
insurance, modifying certain
time frames and fees for
licensing. House Bill 369.
Hospital 369 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 370 introduced by
Representatives Gallegos,
Hoffman v. Hill, and Joshua
Hernandez, an act relating to
hospital staffing, prohibiting
hospitals from denying
credentialing to healthcare
professionals based on economic
factors. House Bill 370.
Bill 370 and mirrored twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Health and
Human Services Committee, that's
the house.
Commerce and economic
development committee.
House Bill 371 introduced by
Representatives Terasas, Doo,
Sanchez, Montoya, and Hall the
2nd.
An act relating to motor
vehicles authorizing local and
county elected authorities to
allow off-highway motor vehicles
to operate on paved streets and
highways within the political
boundaries of the authorizing
entity. House Bill 371.
House Bill 371 have been rigged
twice by titles ordered, printed
and referred to the House
Transportation, Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee.
The the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 372 introduced by
Representatives Terazas, Doo,
Lara, Lindstrom, and Hendry.
Henry, apologies, an act
relating to motor vehicles
amending the off-highway motor
Vehicle Act to reflect changes
in the off-highway motor vehicle
industry and improve
registration enforcement and
responsiveness to the needs of
off-highway motor vehicle users.
House Bill 372.
House 372 haven't been read
twice by title, this order
printed and referred to the
House Transportation Public
Works and Capital Improvements
Committee, the the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 373 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to family law enacting
the revised uniformed Parentage
Act clarifying the determination
of parentage, assisted
reproduction, and surrogacy
agreements, providing penalties,
amending sections of the NMSA
1978, repealing the New Mexico
uniform parentage Act, House
Bill 373.
House Bill 373 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 374 introduced by
Representatives Armstrong,
Duncan, and Vincent, an act
relating to medical malpractice,
amending the definition of
occurrence in the medical
malpractice Act, House Bill 374.
House Bill 374 haven't been read
twice by title. It's ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services,
uh, committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 375 introduced by
Representatives Ferrari, Eleanor
Chavez, Jones, Senator Lopez,
and Representative Cates.
An act relating to higher
education, enacting the graduate
behavioral Health Scholarship
Act to provide debt-free
education to eligible graduate
students who are studying to
become behavioral health
professionals requiring the
higher education department to
administer the graduate
behavioral health scholarship
program, making an
appropriation. House Bill 375.
House Bill 375 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee,
thence the House Appropriation
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 376 introduced by
Representatives Terasas, Jones,
Dow, Montoya, and Mejia.
An act relating to public
safety, creating the border
security division in the
Department of Public Safety,
providing powers and duties,
providing authorization for the
governor to develop and execute
an interstate compact regarding
border security, providing a
penalty for the trafficking of
certain controlled substances,
controlled substance analogs or
counterfeit substances that
results in the death of a human
being.
Revising penalties, providing
fines, making appropriations,
declaring an emergency, House
Bill 376.
House Bill 376 haven't been
written twice by title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the House government elections
in India Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee,
the the House Appropriation and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 377 introduced by
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
an act relating to property tax,
amending the definition of
residential property, providing
methods of valuation for
property tax purposes for
multiple like kind properties
within a single county owned by
a single taxpayer and for
separate contiguous tracts owned
by a single taxpayer, excluding
transfers of residential
property that do not have a
dwelling or structure from the
requirement to file an
laughed at it with the county
assessor, requiring a valuation
authority to include comparable
sales data that the valuation
authority used to value a
property in the notice that the
valuation authority mails to a
property owner of the net
taxable value of the owner's
property, providing penalties or
interest for delinquent taxes if
the valuation authority has not
timely mailed a valuation notice
to the property owner. House
Bill 377.
House Bill 377 haven't been
written twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee, the
the House taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 378 introduced by
Representatives Montoya and
Armstrong, an act relating to
medical malpractice, amending
the definition of occurrence in
the medical malpractice Act,
limiting the amount of damages
that can be awarded due to a
medical malpractice claim
requiring payment from the
patient's compensation fund to
be made as expenses are
incurred. House Bill 378.
House Bill 378 have read twice
by title is ordered and printed,
uh, ordered printed and referred
to the house.
Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 379 introduced by
Representatives Montoya and
Armstrong, an act relating to
medical malpractice, limiting
the availability of punitive
damages in medical malpractice
claims. House Bill 379.
House Bill 379, have a mirrored
twice by title as order printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 380 introduced by
Representatives Montoya, Jones,
Reeb, and Vincent, an act
relating to public safety,
enacting the women's safety and
Protection Act, providing
definitions requiring single-sex
spaces in domestic violence
shelters, public schools, and
juvenile detention facilities in
certain circumstances. House
Bill 380.
House Bill 380 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
You
House Bill 381 introduced for
representatives Lord Hall the
2nd, and Block, an act relating
to pretrial detention,
establishing a presumption that
the prosecution has proven by
clear and convincing evidence
that a defendant is dangerous
and no release conditions will
reasonably protect the safety of
any other person or the
community, allowing the
presumption to be rebutted in an
adversar, oh, sorry, an
adversarial hearing declaring an
emergency.
House Bill 381.
House Bill 381 have haven't been
read twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to.
The house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 382 introduced by
representatives Lord and Block,
an act relating to children
amending the family in need of
court-ordered Services Act,
expanding the definition of
family in need of court-ordered
services, making an
appropriation. House Bill 382.
House Bill 382, haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to.
The Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 383 introduced by
Representatives Lord and Block
an act relating to crime and
adding the exposure to the use
of fentanyl as evidence of abuse
of a child, making an
appropriation, House Bill 383.
House Bill 383 haven't been read
twice by title, this order
printed and referred to the
House consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 384 introduced by
Representatives Lord and Block,
an act repealing the seven-day
waiting period for the sale of a
firearm. House Bill 384.
House Bill 384 have been read
twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to.
The house consumer and public
affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 385 introduced by
Representatives Lord and Block,
an act relating to criminal
sentencing, providing for
chemical castration treatment as
a condition of parole for sex
offenders, providing that
refusal to undergo chemical
castration treatment is a parole
violation. House Bill 385.
House Bill 385 have mirrored
twice by title. It's ordered and
printed and referred to the
house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 386, introduced by
Representative Joseph Hernandez,
an act making an appropriation
to the office of the state
auditor for a class and
compensation study of the
governmental accounting sector.
House Bill 386.
House Bill 386, haven't been
read twice by title is ordered
and printed it and referred to
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee,
thence the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 387 introduced by
representatives Doo, Tarasas,
Mason, and Montoya, an act
relating to education, enacting
the education opportunity
Account Act, providing powers
and duties, providing for
education opportunity accounts,
providing allowable uses,
providing procedures and
application requirements for
parents in education service
providers, creating a review
commission making
appropriations. House Bill 387.
House Bill 37 having been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 388, introduced by
Representatives Doo, Bon Toya,
Henry, and Vincent, an act
relating to education, enacting
the low income education
opportunity Account Act,
providing powers and duties,
providing for low income
education opportunity accounts,
providing income eligibility
requirements, providing
allowable uses, providing
procedures and application
requirements for parents and
education service providers,
creating a review commission
making
appropriations, House Bill 388.
House Bill 388 have mirrored
twice by title. This order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 389 introduced by
representatives Thompson and
Sarana, an act relating to
health amending and enacting
sections of the electronic
Medical Records Act to require
that the entity designated as a
state's health information
exchange shall also function as
a state's health data utility.
House Bill 389.
House Bill 389 having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Memorial 20 introduced by
Representative Sanchez, a
memorial raising awareness of
the contribution of certified
water and wastewater operators
to public health and urging the
House of Representatives to
elevate certified water and
wastewater operators to
essential workers and to fund a
study on providing certified
water and wastewater operators
with state health insurance and
retirement benefits, House
Memorial 20.
House Memorial 2 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house.
Government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 22, introduced by
Representative Doo. A memorial
declaring February 12, 2025,
Family Day in the House of
Representatives. House Memorial
22.
House Memorial 22. Have a me
twice by title is ordered,
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
Let me, let me do this again.
House Memorial 22 has been
ripped twice by child and is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speaker's table.
General gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
From Bernardlio
Gentle lady from Bern and Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Egyptian, it is so ordered.
gentleman from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at, uh, room
307 at 3 p.m. or 15 minutes
following the conclusion of the
Republican caucus.
Members take note.
The gentle lady from Bernelio
Representative Thompson, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, how's
Health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning at 8:30 and we plan to
start right at 8:30 and just a
reminder, get your pink for pink
out on Friday.
Members take note, uh, the
gentle lady from Donana
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, the House
consumer and Public Affairs
Committee will meet 10 minutes
after the um Republican caucus,
and we hope that doesn't take
long. Thank you.
Members take note, the gentle
lady from
Catron Sierra Socorro and
Valencia, the the our our our
leader, Armstrong. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Uh, just a
reminder, there will be a
Republican caucus in room 318
immediately following the floor
session.
Members take note.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
representative, uh, Roel
Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to, uh, just state that the
House Labor veterans and
Military Affairs Committee will
meet as soon as you can get to
room 315 immediately following
the Republican caucus and please
listen to the announcements
because the announcement will
state that we will be convening
thank you so very much today
sorry today 1:30 not 1:30 but
room 315.
Right after the Republican
caucus thank you
note the gentle lady from
Valencia, Representative Mirabal
Moya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, this,
uh, earlier today we did not get
to uh introduce uh
Representative Chatfield's
guests, so I wanted to just take
a quick moment and uh and
introduce our, uh, his guests,
uh, first we have, uh, Selma
Baca from Roy, New Mexico, Selma
was the only student in her
graduating class at Roy High
School. Uh, Selma plays a key
role in the Baca family farm and
ranch where she fixes fences,
installs irrigation systems,
repairs equipment.
Brands castrates vaccinates
dehorns, feeds, and waters farm
animals that deserves an
applause right there.
Mm
Selma is a sophomore at the
University of New Mexico where
she works as an equipment
manager for the global football
team and is studying sports and
exercise science and plans to
become an athletic trainer.
Selma is today is here today
with her roommate.
With um Isabella McTeague.
And Isabella is at the Capitol
today as an intern for the New
Mexico Asea Association, uh, so
perfect day to come, right? Um,
Isabella is, has been working um
on the Esea de Ojo sarco on the
high road to Taos since she was
4 years old.
Uh, she is from Los Alamos and
uh where she is the youngest
member of the Los Alamos
Federated Republican Women.
Nice. And Isabella is a junior
at UNM and is studying
accounting. Let's welcome these
tough, smart young ladies.
Welcome to the house.
Any other announcements?
gentle lady for Bernna Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House standard recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
The house will stand in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
