I am
in agreement with everything I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill forward the increase
in litigation is not helpful in
any regard and I am a retired
police officer having served
twenty years and I can tell you
that this and a combination with
another billion getting here
today.
Dealing with qualified immunity
that being taken away absolutely
is causing a problem for police
departments to be able to
recruit and retain officers
I think we need to support the
repeal of the Civil Rights Act
H. B. one oh nine thank you.
Thank you yes yes.
Okay.
I'm.
And is there anyone else in
support in the of wept in the
zoom plant.
Okay of that will go to those in
opposition will go to the
audience first item on this site
who would like to speak okay go
ahead.
Start from the front.
Thank you madam chair and
members of this committee my
name is Kelly Sanchez I'm a
trial lawyer in Albuquerque New
Mexico Representative children
who are victims of sexual abuse
and physical abuse and I'm
speaking in opposition to this
bill
I'd like to talk to the
committee very briefly just
about what is not being
discussed on that is the impact
on on to New Mexicans and the
children that this bill has.
Samantha was a seven year old
girl on and she found herself in
a terrible position when her
mother suddenly died of illness
the only caregivers you never
know.
See what the men and insured her
and her brother that.
They would be safe.
And see why do you should law
enforcement that they would the
state.
And what CYFD figured out.
Samantha's father was.
Sh they talked with Samantha and
her brother that lives with her
father.
And what CYFD this despite that
conversation and then.
Tell you see like the last time
we saw him three years ago.
As for.
See what.
The word that this man had a
history and have flexibility to
child abuse and the fact see
what the thank you lord the
previous the children not to go
in and just shot towards them
out the door setting back with
their father Senator live with
the positive never really.
Other than the one time that he
has he's.
Unsurprisingly two months later
dimensionless brutally health by
father and stuff in a trash bag.
Your honor and sorry.
Give me seconds members of this
committee
the man that had a right to be
free from this the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act honors children
like Samantha it breathes life
into the New Mexico constitution
which without the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act without the
ability to bring a claim it does
not have an thank you and I
should remind people two minutes
please.
And please state your name madam
chair members of the other but I
apologize to the sentence
because I didn't know there was
a time I'm representing the New
Mexico trial lawyers association
and they are opposed to this
bill we do hear a lot of the sky
is falling the sky is falling in
regards to the civil rights act
that was passed a couple years
ago and what we don't hear are
the individuals that are harms I
take institutions big companies
big government we need to we
need to do both they and we
needs the Civil Rights Modeste
intact we also need to make sure
that we're thinking about the
individuals that the Civil
Rights Act pre tax thank you.
Thank you yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Naomi
Valdez I'm the director of
public policy for the American
civil liberties union we stand
in strong opposition of any
measure to weaken or repeal the
Civil Rights Act
in twenty twenty one this body
community stakeholders all agree
that it was long past due that
the civil rights of New Mexicans
be protected in this way
as far as being a cost saving
measure to repeal this we would
encourage government to look at
the problem which is civil
rights violations rather than
wait accountability for the
current thank you for.
Thank you anyone else on the
side that would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay on this site is.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Nicholas court of a I'm an
attorney in the healthcare
director The New Mexico Center
along poverty we at the center
stand in strong opposition to
this bill our legal rights are
often meaningless if we don't
have the ability to enforce them
in a court of law.
This legislature's sought to
correct that issue by passing
the Civil Rights Act.
Through this long all New
Mexicans have a path towards a
person or legal constitutional
rights and therefore were able
to hold accountable those with
power.
The legislature took a giant
step towards reading life and
for loss and constitution now is
not the time to reverse course
we are to do not pass.
Thank you.
Is
Madam my name is Lucas got hit
with Americans for prosperity we
are also standing in opposition
of the bill we are standing in
full support with the ACLU in
opposition.
Very much.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition on the side.
Hey
on soon.
There's one person Stewart
income would you like to go
ahead it two minutes.
Can you on mute yourself.
Stewart if you would I need
yourself please.
He tried
to get it yes there we go.
But that we're having trouble
I'm this is merry ng my husband
Stuart Ingle agency right here
also we are in support of of the
bill I'm sorry we were having
technical difficulties trying to
get in there it's appropriate
time.
But yeah we really appreciate
your support the bill and
that's.
That's it thank you.
Okay thank you is there anyone
else in opposition of the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay thank you we'll go to the
committee.
Thank.
Yes now is.
That's your cue.
Chair representative so I'm just
gonna be super fun hi sorry
thank you madam chair thank Rev
I'm gonna be super blunt about
this bill I understand the see
what the issue because I drafted
I think ten bills trying to fix
UFT and answer horrific issue
that I'm trying to fix as best
as I can but the problem with
this is the law enforcement
issue so I'm very fortunate I
have quite a few friends in law
enforcement and the things
they're telling me about the
morale issues overall and I hate
that they keep getting the brunt
I keep getting hammered with all
the stuff madam chair and
representative.
So we had a bill that was coming
up I hope I never see it as B.
two fifty two was coming and
that was another bill to another
tech online force meant there's
been this whole thing for about
the past five six years of law
enforcement or bad they're evil
people and it breaks my heart
because I know a bunch of them
and they also cannot stand the
bad apples within their own so I
hate that they get lumped into
one big thing and I hate that
this is becoming another morale
issue for why people are not
going to the academy's Madam
chair representative we have low
turn out of people want to be in
the counties.
Everyone I know wants to leave
everybody I want I know it's
like I'm gonna go to Missouri
because it's way better they've
like law enforcement there this
this is one less thing I have to
worry about my Mendes Mendez
polities are scared to death
that if they get a lawsuit
against law enforcement they
won't be able to for the
insurance against are going to
raise that.
So.
We talk about the benefits of it
and yes I going after like CYFD
in other organizations that are
allowing children to be harmed
and F. I after reading of the
autopsy report I'm going to just
lose it
At the same time the side effect
is that our law enforcement it's
hitting them it's just one of
those this is another Erro just
another arrow it's another
chipping away it's another I
don't want to be in New Mexico
because all these things are
working against me I mean we
just had some bills the
representative the other day to
try to take.
Firearms of the pandemic
traffickers we had a discontent
calling and say well they need
that because it's a dangerous
job they should have guns why do
I want to send my law
enforcement officers out.
To go on patrol with they're
going to know these are drug
traffickers who people think
it's okay for them to have
weapons.
An inmate.
So I wish everyone would sit and
think about the consequences of
what happened to law enforcement
because they're the ones that
are getting the brunt of this
they're the ones who keep
getting chipped away at this is
a lot of reason we're having.
Low turnout low people want to
be in law enforcement so.
This is a side effect I support
this mostly for that reason
That's all I have to say I just
I I'm I'm really tired of the
whole defining a place and kind
of penalizing them all the time
so thank you madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair representative and I
definitely echo your concerns
regarding law enforcement right
now we have such a issue with
the crisis I would say with
trying to retain law enforcers
and also try to recruit them and
right now in Albuquerque I think
they're they're offering folks
of nineteen years and Department
they're offering them bonuses of
I believe.
It's like some it's a it's
fifteen hundred dollars a month
incentive just to stay on the
force because right now there
are so many other opportunities
in different states if you look
at states like Alabama what
they're doing at least in my my
district is the Alamogordo
police department they're giving
five thousand dollars checks to
hopefully try to get these law
enforcers to come to our
communities however once they go
through the training process and
once they go through all the
steps the costs around fifty
thousand dollars if not more
training new officer and so when
they do that madam chair
representative.
A lot of the time these people
they leave and that fifty
thousand dollar cost is that of
the city or the municipality so
these unintended consequences of
this very you know it sounds
great sounds Civil Rights Act
why would you ever want to
repeal the Civil Rights Act but
I certainly see the holes that
are in in my bill and that bill
as well you know CYFD for
instance I would certainly be
open to an amendment to not.
Allow these folks at CYFD to
have that qualified immunity
because you're right there's
been so many children that have
stepped through the cracks and
we cannot afford even one more
children one more child to be
hurt so I certainly echo the
concerns of miss Sanchez and all
the other individuals who do of
concerns and I appreciate
everyone in miss Cooper Mr about
miss Valdez Mr court of a Mr
Stewart Mrs income because I
think all of their concerns are
very important and we need to
definitely keep all of them and
consideration with this bill and
any other legislation that would
change or repeal the Civil
Rights Act thank you madam chair
thank you Representative.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank
everyone for joining us early on
a Saturday this morning
I just I I don't really have
some comments because I
definitely non support of this
bill this is a huge compromise
and twenty twenty one that so
many advocates fought for so
many people were involved in an
entire commission convenes prior
to the creation of this law to
ensure that it was found that
every agency have participated
in the process and so just to
give you some some history about
that and I'm sure you.
I had some knowledge about it
was it was a massive undertaking
and a massive compromise to get
to where we are today and it I
just you know with the history
of what was going on that here
in prior years this is certainly
something that protects the
people of New Mexico and those
that work on in these agencies
ensuring that who is to be held
accountable will be held held
accountable there's been a lot
of discussion here about data
and facts and numbers thrown
around and yet none of that is
provided to us about the
frivolous lawsuits the retention
numbers the fact that people are
being hired because of this we
were in a hiring crisis prior to
the action of this law
and if the cops are being paid
fifteen hundred dollars a month
to be retained I would love I I
do not would love some facts
about that that mostly because I
have family who is in law
enforcement and there might
family and we cast a wide net
about how it is that we want to
ensure that everyone feels good
about what's going on with this
law and how it's it's it's been
enforced.
That said madam chair I just I
want to talk about the fact that
we have made this about law
enforcement and this touches on
every agency in government
The police are not the only
officials that.
That an act that we as we've
discussed that discuss that
engage with people with their
civil rights and it's really
important that we know that
injustice comes in so many
different forms and many sources
and this protects everybody
so I just I felt madam chair
that we just need to sort of re
hash where we've come from where
we are and understand that this
is also still new quite new law
for early learning through the
process of what it is that this
is this what what's happening
with our agencies but I have yet
to see any information regarding
what you've.
You know a proposed today that
we're seeing many lawsuits
frivolous ones at such a
would love to get a handle on
that but I just for everything
it is that I understand about
this this is not true and that's
just not the case so that said
Madam chair representative I'm
in strong support of this act
whatever we can do to continue
to improve it I think is what's
important here but protecting
the citizens of New Mexico is
why this exists and will
continue to support it's an
action thank you madam chair
chair if I could just respond
very quickly to that I
appreciate your.
I'm sorry yes okay yes I'm just
really quickly I appreciate your
concerns and I think we all
believe that civil rights are
important to New Mexicans and
you're right this is far
reaching it goes over so many
government agencies many
municipalities and I would be so
happy to provide you any
information that you may request
regarding current litigation or
the costs of what this bill has
done in the past and you're
right it's not just folks in law
enforcement I tried to I
hopefully try to make that clear
in my opening you know I talked
about just local government
bodies that are definitely
affected by this so I'd
certainly love to get together
and talk more about maybe admit
amending this bill or anything
that we could do to make sure
that we can protect systems in
the state so thank you so much
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative block do you have
any information on when was the
last time New Mexico law
enforcement was fully staffed
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I believe
it's been five or six years and
I don't have the exact number
for you but I did read a lot of
that the other night so I will
definitely get that information
to you madam chair read and
share I have been hearing I've
been here for eight years and
we've been hearing it for at
least that long so to say that
we are short of of law
enforcement because of this
because of the Civil Rights Act
it it doesn't make sense in my
mind but so how are you
How are you saying that officers
don't want to stay or don't want
to go into it because of the
Civil Rights Act what data do
you have that shows that that is
the cost I mean there's a lot of
causes low pay the rural notice
just whatever so how what data
do you have that says that this
is the costs thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative you're right I
think that we do a problem and
it's happened for many years and
it's also been countrywide and
so if you look at data and
Colorado and New York City where
they passed similar laws that
would have exempted law
enforcement from their civil
rights acts they did not have
massive declines in folks that
were in those departments due to
that so there are their exit
interviews that they take with
these officers and so in New
York and in Colorado where they
did pass similar laws that was
not as much of a factor however
here in New Mexico since we
don't have many large datasets
because it's such a new law and
twenty twenty one I've spoken
directly to officers at least
Alamogordo I I wouldn't want to
put their names out there but
they have left the department
because of this law and also in
Albuquerque I'm sure that we can
definitely see more anecdotal
evidence regarding that so I
know that it's so new there's
not much data out there yet but
if you look back in the the last
FIR for when this was passed in
twenty twenty one there were
huge concerns with the
department of public safety and
the department of corrections
that did say that this this
happened would in in in fact
affect them and if you look at
your current F. I. R. for your
committee analysis it also says
the DPS and and MCD they did say
that this would have a major
effect on their both of the
departments madam chair
representative thank you and I
will just give you a piece of
wisdom that I learned early in
the legislature the plural of
anecdote is not data.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank.
Have a motion.
If.
Madam chair we have a motion to
table Representative block no
ma'am I'm sorry no ma'am
Representative Lord no.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thomson yes
yes.
Representative Rubio yes to
table Representative Ferrary yes
to table madam chair we have a
motion to we have a vote to to
to table of forty two.
Representative black you have a
motion of the fifty two tabling
forty two.
Thank you madam chair and thanks
for the discussion today I
appreciate it on I should
explain for the audience on
house bill one of nine.
Yes yes yes.
Thank.
Sure.
Just in case of some people are
here for bills we have taken off
the agenda at the Sanchez
request house bill seventy three
which is a biomarker testing
house bill one seventeen the
title transfer and also house
bill one thirty five which is
the child advocate's Center
funding.
Okay thank you and so of this.
See here for one fifty five.
yes house bill one fifty five a
groovy battery on a peace
officer penalty
Representative reef thank you
and I am going to have to go to
another committee so our vice
chair will tear Committee.
Representative every go ahead
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
I'm here and Representative
Freeman I'm also here with
Barbara Romo she's a district
attorney as expert witness of my
case I wanted to talk to a
little bit about this bill
this is a bill that it means a
lot to me and I'll and I'll
explain why and all it really
does and and I know people hate
to hear this but it raises
penalties for shooting a police
officer from a secretary for
third degree felony to a second
degree felony and I wanted to
talk to you a little bit about
why this is important
and and kind of tell you a
little bit as of a story and how
I got to this place on this bill
I was prosecuting a case where a
father was accused of actually
sexually assaulting his daughter
and there were two brothers and
they testify for me and and they
were ten eleven years old at the
time and the case went fine and
there is a conviction and about
nine years later I'm sitting at
the DA's office in this police
officer walks in and I
recognized him immediately as my
witness from that basis name was
officer Chris grown and and I
was like what are you doing here
police officer now and he
explained to me from that case
that he decided that he wanted
to pursue a career in law
enforcement from his experience
in that case and being from
small town
I got to know pretty well and
then when I got a call that he
had been shot
in a situation where he was
pursuing an offender the they
got in to type of like I guess
like a garage type area where
was really closed off and the
individuals trying to either
flee from him or get away from
him and he was shot in the hand
so I prosecuted that case and I
started scouring the statutes of
what I could charge him with and
madam.
Chair and members of the
committee I the only thing that
I could find was aggravated
battery upon a peace officer and
that basically was when you use
a firearm inflicted great bodily
harm to a police officer but
they don't diet it's a third
degree felony and is punishable
by three years in prison and a
five thousand dollar fine they
didn't make a lot of sense to me
because are increased penalties
for everything so started
scaring over that statute I
tried the case I was able to
charge with the third degree
felony and one your fireman have
spent which I believe was a
fireman hands but at the time
but I still did not feel it was
right that you could shoot up up
police officer and only face a
forty three year penalty
basically so when I went back
and looked at the statutes for
aggravated battery which is
thirty dash twenty two dash
twenty five.
What it says under B. and it's
part of this bill you're seeing
is whoever commits aggravated
battery upon a peace officer
inflicting an injury to the
peace officer which is not
likely to cause death or great
bodily harm the cause us pain
painful temporary disfigurement
or temporary loss or impairment
of a function or any member or
organ of the body is guilty of a
fourth degree felony so then I
went back to what is aggravated
battery in a regular person and
when I went back and looked at
what activated batter was on a
regular person it was the same
definition it was a misdemeanor
order okay that makes sense they
leveled it up for it to be a
police officer then I went and
looked at what activated battery
was for
are a police officer and again
as I stated was a third degree
felony when I went back to what
it was for a regular person it
was a third degree felony also
with the exact same language and
I'm like so I can shoot a cop
and it's a third degree felony I
could shoot you madam chair and
it's still a third degree felony
and the structure of the statue
did make sense to me and why was
there not a higher penalty to
shoot a police officer an error
costs great bodily harm to a
police officer that was to shoot
a regular person we have
advanced penalties for health
care workers when their battered
or shut out we have advanced
penalties for school personnel
is so structurally this does not
fit so it's not a bill that's
basically intended to just try
to raise penalties because I
know there's always the argument
madam chair members of the
committee that this is you know
it doesn't deter crime I tend to
disagree with that when it comes
to a police officer but I think
what this is doing is making the
penalty fit the crime because
structurally this isn't doesn't.
Work and I've seen it across the
state prosecuting cases I've
talked to other dust and yeah
it's a down until an officer
that when you get shot in my
case was shot in the hand I've
heard officers get cut shut the
shoulder that is no different if
I shoot Representative block I'm
gonna get the you know I'm gonna
get a third degree felony and if
I go and shoot the chief over
here it's going to be a third
degree felony to and it doesn't
make sense and it doesn't
structurally fit
and I looked at this fiscal
impact report and.
Part of it from the LA PD says
well it's going to cost more
money it's not going to cost
more money these are the jobs
that prosecutors and public
defenders do every day because a
penalty is raised to
structurally fit the statute
because that's what should be is
a second degree felony that's
not going to cost more money
it's what we do every day we'll
just put a prosecutor on it's
gonna have a little bit higher
of a penalty wouldn't cost T.
A.'s anymore money and I think
what's important to to note and
at the bottom of the fiscal
impact statement for the
committee analysis report it
says from the Office of the
Attorney General hypothetically
there for for person who shoots
and hits a peace officer with a
firearm without killing the
peace officer would face a less
would face a less harsh penalty
three years than a person who
shoots out of but Mrs that and
then they would face nine years
and and that that doesn't make
any sense what whatsoever
and so you can also you know
some arguments will go to
assault with intent to commit a
violent felony on peace officers
and you can get a nine year
sentence on that but that
requires an actual intent to
kill and when you don't have an
intent to kill in a lot of these
situations you cannot get to
that statute so when you shoot a
cop as the law stands now and
not cops cop does not die and
maybe suffers great bodily
injury but does not die it is
the same as if I shoot you and I
just don't think that's right
and I don't think the structure
of the statute structured
properly and I think we should
make that a second degree felony
to be in line with the
aggravated battery for regular
people it because it starts in
line with bringing the
misdemeanor on a regular person
that to forty degree felony and
a cop that go back to the
regular person and aggravated
battery it's a third degree
felony.
And it stays a third degree
felony when you do it for police
officer so ladies and gentleman
and members of the church a
chair ladies and gentlemen of
the committee I'm asking you to
look at this is not one of those
things it's trying to enhance
penalties again it's making the
crime and the penalty fit and so
I'm asking you to consider this
very seriously we're in a time
and in a situation where police
officers are bill and the go out
there they put their lives on
the line every day for us their
shot at their kids it affects
our families they don't want to
be cops anymore because of the
taking away of qualified
immunity
Madam chair why shouldn't we
make this a higher penalty for
them they risk their lives for
us I'm not risking my life if I
shoot Representative block I
mean this is a different
situation well he might to me
back but either way that's the
argument and that's the problem
I've seen in the statute as all
the years I've been a prosecutor
and all the dust I've spoken
with so I I don't know if my
experts and do Raul has anything
to add to that but that's
essentially what I'm trying to
do with this bill and thank you
Representative.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Barbara mall and currently the
elected district attorney for
the thirteenth judicial district
I have over twenty five years of
prosecution experience I I.
Very much understand and
appreciate some of the remarks
regarding the last bill
particularly from
Representative Thomson some of
these stories are anecdotal but
when you live those anecdotes it
becomes a little bit more than
that I was the prosecutor for
cop killer and a Romero Rio
Rancho police officer who was
who was gunned down and I don't
know how I don't know how I can
express to you what I
experienced which was the fact
that when a police officer is
killed or assaulted or attacked
it's really assault on the
entire community it affects the
entire community and I truly
believe that that's the reason
that our society through our
representatives.
Have traditionally made crimes
against peace officers elevated
for that reason that that
particular case murder of a
police officer it was the first
jury trial after the death
penalty was was repealed but as
you recall that was a death
penalty offense to murder police
officer and now it is one of the
crimes that carries a life
sentence without the possibility
of parole so I you know I I
asked you to look at it in terms
of public safety because if
someone like Representative
Reese said someone's going to
kill in that case a police
officer should a police officer
who's armed in broad daylight
they're not going to hesitate to
shoot at you or me or loved ones
so I ask you to look at it in
the spirit of public safety and
in the spirit of what this
legislature has always
recognized is that it makes us
all safer when we recognize that
the police officers who go in to
work every day not knowing if
they're going to come home
should have there should be
higher penalties for the
assaults on those individuals
because again that an assault on
the police officers is really
assault on all of us thank you
madam chair and representatives.
We're.
Is there anybody else that wants
to speak for themselves.
Sephora.
I was just asking if there's any
more testimony from from the
representatives no ma'am madam
chair not at this moment.
All right so we're gonna open it
up for support and opposition
I'm here in in the the committee
room I'm so if I can have folks
raise their hand if you are in
support of this legislation.
Okay is there any opposition.
Okay will go ahead and start
with support on the side Sir if
you can stand please.
Committee we have been going out
again today early so Sir of
course part of this bill is we
appreciate of the representative
for not not just for any reason
other than she promised a police
officer how many of so many
years ago that she would do this
for him of I think it will go a
long way showing of police
officers that this this type of
things are important
I presented some data during.
Senator offices use of force
hearing a few a few days ago of
data that is not anecdotal of
one of our officers just the
police since in the last five
years have seen a vast increase
in assaults on towards them and
batteries for them I believe in
two thousand seventeen we had
ten of fast forward to this year
that we just finished we have
fifty eight so there is a rise
in this and I do believe this
would be helpful I don't
understand how we create actual
work of the work is already
there.
And so some of the other things
are so much for that the only
term is catching people quick
this is not one of those
problems we catch those people's
quickly can so I'm here in
strong support of this bill and
thank you for letting me speak.
Thank you Sir I'm so we'll go to
the well let's to opposition Sir
if you'd like to get up.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bennett
our chief public defender and
like the chief of reading choose
the opposite sides of bills but
I'm glad we're gonna be able to
go and kind of talk about some
of those differences in the
hallway might might just million
this is B. so far in my roles
administrator also my roles from
funds during Representative
particular clients
in this first of all in terms of
resources when you raise
penalties there is additional
work that's done frankly in this
I don't think would be extreme
and wouldn't take you have funds
for Tories or something like
that but when the penalties are
more severe the risk for severe
pain you're looking at more the
potential prison time and so
attorneys are going to put more
time and it's more likely to go
to trial
that aside I don't think that's
the core reason why hi opposed
bill in the way it's written
it's the the charge is very
broad and of course this is the
way the charges always been but
it's not just about somebody who
shoots a police officer it's
about somebody who let's just
take it out one step to to Mrs
which I'm not in support of it's
also somebody who swing to stick
it officer who by an officer
maybe even spits at officer by
things charges aggravated back.
And so many of the
confrontations between police
and and people on the streets
are when those people are in
mental health or substance abuse
friends frankly there are being
there are being rude they're
building and so on and
sometimes.
Fund although we defend them I'm
not conduct that they take for
the office but
I thank you for.
First of all you can charge
someone issues a police officer
battery I think you charge and
aggravated assault on a peace
officer there would be no double
jeopardy point some of the case
like here you could enhance our
sense with farm management and
you get a chance with the three
year
activating average of cents so
there are different things you
can do in the end.
This would make a second degree
felony nine years potentially
the penalty for someone who is
angry during a police power
swing something and Mrs and so I
think we need to focus on the
people who are actually doing
the series.
Thank you Sir.
Next we'll go to the
to zoom if you can raise your
hand if you were in support of
this legislation we are on house
bill of one fifty five.
A Larry go ahead.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee it's Leri
Sonntag here I'm speaking as an
individual who spent twenty
years with the Albuquerque
police department I can tell you
that I still have associations
in contact with officers who are
on the streets working.
And the discussions that are
going on in committees where
bills to increase penalties
against criminals are being
tabled and table and table I can
assure you it's not anecdotal to
say that we have a morale
problem and yes there are money
issues there are a lot of issues
not just litigation but one of
the things that police officers
do not feel is that public
officials in all cases have
their back and support the work
that they're doing putting their
lives on the line every day and
when they are injured they're
treated less important than an
average citizen would be.
The bill sponsor and the expert
witness.
Again you correct information
and I encourage you to pass HB
one fifty five thank you.
Thank you Sir I'm if you are in
support of this legislation
please raise your hand.
I only see one person
Larry if you could put your hand
down please.
Thank you store.
This is actually a merry NM is
wife.
Go ahead.
Are you in opposition of this
legislation.
I support the the legislation
and so is my husband storage
here also the I appointment we
we have you have the same
experience with the officers
we've known for for many many
years and that the same feelings
have been discussed of I'm just
not feeling supported and
encouraged and their and their
jobs and particularly one that
we've known since before he was
born is is moving out of state
he served in Afghanistan and
Iraq and.
If it is the city has a lot
harder to find with with the
support that is receiving from
from above in in the Albuquerque
police department the need has
with the the bad guys quote that
he's dealing with so Israeli I
think this would be a help to
them and would be an
encouragement two four from the
community and from the state and
legislators to realize the
importance of.
the seriousness of the the type
of crimes that are being
perpetrated against our police
officers thank you very much.
Thank you ma'am is there anybody
else in support of the
legislation.
Is there any opposition.
Okay.
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
So this way personal for me
because I had my friend was
actually shocked because a state
police officer my district and
this guy's most amazing human
being and it scared the heck I
mean when you get shot we're in
session and that person that did
have a very very very long
criminal record.
So there's no way I can go back
and tell him to his face of why
wouldn't support this bill but I
do have questions for you on the
serious nature so help me
understand and and these are
serious questions
And this analysis that we got I
don't know if you had.
Okay so on the second page it
says because I'm comparing it to
here on be on the first page
years aggravated assault on a
peace officer right now is a
third degree.
Felonies that with eighteen
months in prison is that correct
or degree is three years in
prison with the I at five
thousand dollar fine
Representative okay so we're
taking this is this what we're
changing or making it to a
fourth degree felony and madam
chair no Representative for what
we're doing is we're taking the
aggravated battery third degree
with a deadly weapon or causing
great bodily injury out from a
third to a second
to make it statutorily more in
line with what it is for regular
person on a regular person their
job being a misdemeanor to a
fourth degree felony issue see
here and then but they don't do
that for a police officer right
which and thank you madam chair
representative which.
It you know sometimes when
you're here at the roundhouse
you learn things and you're just
like I why why is it this way
and.
I hate to say supported because
I'm afraid that's going to have
some sort of weight on that but
I do completely supported and
there's no way I could go back
to my district and look at my
friend in the eyes and say I
don't or did not support this
because it's very important that
our law enforcement officers
understand that if something
happens then they're treated
like everybody else's even in
the line of duty and that's
really the only question I had
to thank you for bringing this
forward madam chair and
representative lord also just
like to say that I appreciate
that and and again it just
structurally doesn't fit with
what we're doing and and I
wanted to clarify one other
thing
that Mr Bauer stated was this is
no involving swings at officers
or or Miss Pollock said officers
are spitting at officers a
battery has to actually have
contact with the individual and
the salt house no contact so
this isn't affecting assaults
this is affecting actual
batteries and I think that
that's a very important point
that I wanted to committee to
understand that we're not
talking about assaults were
talking about batteries so thank
you for your question.
Thank you representative
Representative block in the
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and I feel
like this bill is very important
especially because our police
officers there are some of the
best of us in our communities
they keep us safe every single
day they work very long hours
I've so many friends who are
police officers and you know
when they when they take that
that patch of velcro off every
day that is like a sigh of
relief when they get in their
house and their family sees them
alive unfortunately we do have
drug problems in the state we
have a lot of crime problems and
especially you know with these
people they need help.
But also making that kind of
assault on a police officer in
my opinion madam chair
representative it should have a
an increase penalty because like
we were just talking you know if
you sue me and now it's way
different than if I was a a
police officer.
In the line of duty protecting
our community that's their whole
job and so madam chair in your
bill if I just want to reiterate
Representative Lord question so
it goes from three years in
prison to nine years in prison
with this restructuring of the
law madam chair Madam chair
representative yes with we if we
restructure this bill will
enhance that third degree felony
to a nine year a second degree
felony which is basically nine
years still discretionary by the
court they don't have to be
given that nine years the
fireman has been obviously for
jury finds that that can be
tacked on these are
discretionary sentences for a
judge to definitely put the
sentence in place that they feel
is appropriate for that set of
circumstances mandatory time yes
madam chair Representative a
block that is exactly what it
does races that penalty one
level up thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative so
this doesn't tie the hands of
any any judge that would make a
determination based on certain
circumstances such as if they
were behavioral health issues or
any kind of thing like that
madam chair Madam chair
representative black now it does
not okay thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
thank you and so this bill.
You know it looks like it's a
very simple bill in my opinion
it's two pages and it appears
that you have support from so
many swath of the population so
madam chair representative I
just want to clarify the
question from the audience
regarding if you would bite an
officer or if you would just
slap them I believe that would
be assaults not battery is that
correct madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative it's it's it is
an assault because you're
actually you're you're making
contact but it's not going to
fall into the realm of this type
of great bodily injury cause
great bodily injury the
definition of that is injury
that creates a high probability
of death results in serious
disfigurement or results in the
loss of any member or organ of
the body so that's the
definition of great bodily are
madam chair Representative
blocks if you bite an officer
you're going to be going back
down to simple battery on a
peace officer which is a fourth
degree felony that's already
being used every single day and
critical point thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative and so with this
mimic other states that that may
have similar laws that make it a
notch up to.
To put it on police officers
just a question that I was
thinking madam chair
representative of what I I can't
tell you what actually every
state has I just myself know
that when I prosecuted this case
and other dust to prosecute
cases this does not fits.
Trucks release stature really
this is just not you know how it
should be thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative and
exactly I think it's important
as you as a former district
attorney you actually had to
fight this in court and if you
didn't have those options to
charge someone who did deserve
that kind of penalty it could be
letting out people out of jail
and you know six years that they
would be out on the street maybe
going right back in and doing
the same thing because they
didn't get that penalty madam
chair Madam chair representative
black I'll tell you it's very
very difficult and speaking with
other district attorneys and a
speaker dieta drum farm to this
morning this is so hard to sit
down and tell an officer what
you've just been shot but the
most is going to happen to you
the best case scenario is you're
going to get a three year
sentence best case scenario
might be a serious violent
adventure might serve eighty
five percent of it and we could
tack on a fireman hands but
possibly if they have no prior
felonies is not going to be any
individual.
And when you tell an officer
that madam chair representative
of blocked there just like that
is it I get shot and I literally
could get the guy could get
three years in prison Argall and
it it it's frustrating for them.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and yeah I
think there are sent so many
horrific circumstances we could
go on and probably we could look
at all the cases in the state of
New Mexico that both of you may
have may have dealt with seeing
this kind of abuse of officers
and I certainly would not want
to ever stand in opposition to
anything that could protect the
very people that keep all of us
safe you know today we went
through security there state
police officers here in the
state keeping us safe in this
building right now and those
people we need to make sure
they're protected as well as in
every single community because
as New Mexicans we should all
have the civil rights of being
safe in our communities so thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative Madam chair
representative block it also
like to bring your attention
under the statute this officer
was shot in the hand luckily he
still has use of his hand but if
he had been hit in a certain
place you might never bill to be
a police officer again and so
that great bodily harm
can be a life long situation and
just because they didn't die
it's still three years.
And.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Romero thank
you madam chair thanks for
bringing this bill I.
Pretty shocked to know that this
discrepancy exists considering
how much we would love to
protect our peace officers and
just need to
do that often times we say in
this body you know what I would
hope actually is that we get a
better sort of understanding and
grasp on how these
These
crimes are sort of uniformly
Addressed and
I guess assigned in court as
we're going through the process
on the fact that this
discrepancy exists just shows
that we need to look at all of
these laws for for how it is
that we
Assign these these crimes
and we often say to that this is
not what your bill does if you
have a better option bring that
and so I feel to it it is my
duty and some future time to be
able to look at how we assign
these these crimes to to folks
and and what it is that we can
do to improve the overall system
your bill today for me gets us
to a point where there's at
least uniformity and the crimes
that are committed and what it
is that we're seeking to
actually punish and what we're
what we're seeking to prevent
from happening as well and so
for that reason I I'm I'm in
support of your bill and I I'm
grateful to to understand that
there was the discrepancy here
that we can fix and then I hope
in future given the sort of
inconsistencies that we have
across the board for various
forms of law that we can get a
handle on how it is that judges
can assign these types of
punishments and what it is that
we can do to improve overall the
system of this piecemeal
approach that we have which I
know is really difficult it's
very expensive it's it's you
know when we're looking at
increasing fees penalties it
comes at a huge cost to the
localities as well so that
doesn't fall
softly on my concern with how it
is that we would you know
recognize that this is something
that we need but also understand
that we need to fix the broader
system so with that madam chair
just some comments on this thank
you for your help thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Senator Senator I
or I move to pass Representative
Lord there it's not your name
doesn't always find somebody I
was there but I move it to pass
if they if you're commentaries
okay before we do that I did
have just a couple questions
because I think I'm still a
little bit.
and I don't know if you have
questions or anything nope okay
regarding the battery verses
assault and just how that's
clearly defined especially when
you go in front of a judge and
and all of that so this past
year we had a woman in her
seventies down in Los crucis get
shot by police in the end it was
discovered that she was an elder
issues in our seventies it was
discovered that not not only
does not speak English but she
didn't have
she had dementia and she had her
two knives on heard it happen
really quickly I think it
happened like within forty
seconds cop's daughter twice in
the chest and
I guess I'm these are the sort
of cases that I'm thinking about
especially when we're talking
about issues related to mental
health and all the systemic
issues that we have how how does
how does a case like that get
handled under.
Like as if she would have lived
is I mean I wish she would have
lived but if she would have
lived how would her case have
been handled if if this if what
you're proposing was was in was
in law.
Madam chair at a they can guess
I don't see the connection
between those because that would
be an officer
Is on her and I I'm not sure at
what point the cop
I decided it was that he needed
to to pull the trigger but I
think he felt I guess on safe
that she had those those two
knives on her I guess what I'm
saying is is that when we're
talking about soul to verses
would you see us all purses
battery
had the circumstances been
different in this case where she
would have lived and and I guess
it's just a hypothetical but I'm
just just kind of trying to
understand that with people
mental health issues I know you
said the gentleman earlier was
talking about someone spitting
on a police officer someone
throwing whatever a sticker or
whatever that there's a
difference between assault and
and all of that like how does it
fall under I guess I just want
to be sure that
That we're not just putting
someone in prison for nine years
who probably could have utilized
a different type of service like
mental health services things
like that madam chair I think
well the first distinction I
would make between about battery
assault is is a battery is an a
and intentional touching of a
person so whether that's with
the firearm or you hit somebody
over there to the sticker
stabbing with a knife whatever
that might be an assault is the
threat of an immediate battery
and so that is where I might
walk up to you with a knife and
say I'm going to kill you and
that is a threat of an immediate
battery it's not medically later
it's so it's so it one is a
touching and one is a threat
where you feel you are going to
be battered the assault as you
feel you're going to be better I
think of with this statute madam
chair
all mental health situations and
and issues will all come into
play in well first whether
they're competent in the whole
proceeded with your competency
and mental health evaluations
and then ultimately when this
happens
it still comes down to the
judge's discretion to use those
mitigating factors of whether
they're going to pose
appropriations the full nine
years three years maybe my case
because a cop was shot in the
hand and you could still use his
hand maybe he would get the the
the perpetrator make it five
years but maybe if you could
ever uses hand again you might
get nine years you know so I
hope that answers your question
I'm and I'll defer or if you do
you have anything else you think
you could add to that.
Madam chair I I guess I would
just add that all of that is is
part of what prosecutors look at
when we do charge
for example if if that had come
across my desk and the the lady
had list that would be sent
certainly something that we
would take into account and like
Representative Reeves said if
there's an issue of competency
right away that would make us
look at the case differently and
what we may not charge at all or
we may charge and recommended
that person go to mental health
court so that that's
It's probably not the best
answer Representative and and
she madam chair but that's
that's what we do every day we
we look at the circumstances and
and we do we do look at
the the person who was was shot
whether it's a police officer
and a and a citizen or to
citizens we always look at that
whether or not that the shooting
was justified whether it's a
police officer or an ordinary
citizen those are things that we
always look at but certainly if
there was a charge to
aggravated battery with a second
degree penalty on the table
that's something that any good
prosecutor would look at and
decide on on how to charge and
if we do charge what we
recommend happens to that case.
Thank you representative of
Representative thank you miss
ma'am so we have a a motion for
to pass in the second
and I don't believe that there's
is there any opposition click to
explain my doctor okay but is
there any opposition to the
bill.
Okay madam chair you have a due
process with house bill one
fifty five Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative re read re
been remiss to I'm so I was
really concerned about the fact
that it it it's three times the
penalty for missing that it that
just seems wrong I'm not a
hundred percent sure that this
is the right way to go about it
but I think judiciary should
take a look at it and because
none of us on this panel are
lawyers yes yes so that that's
that's why I voted yes thank
you.
Thank you very much I appreciate
you thank you.
Yes it was.
Thank you all.
Now you guys guys are.
Representative.
I've never met in.
We are on the last bill for
today we're on house bill two
zero three reinstating qualified
immunity defense Representative
Martinez whenever you're ready.
Madam chair members of the house
and concern House consuming
public affairs committee thank
you for the opportunity to
present to you for approval
House Bill tool three.
The reinstatement of the
qualified immunity defense for
law enforcement and other public
officials.
I am a freshman I've been on
this side of the desk for
sixteen years fighting for
policy for veterans.
being on that side for three
weeks has shown me the heavy
responsibility we as legislators
have and the decisions and how
are votes affect all New
Mexicans.
All right.
Socked with great attention as
my colleague Representative
block presented the same bill
and I am nowhere near is
eloquent is my colleague is so I
will keep.
My comments short.
the doctrine of qualified
immunity protects state and
local law enforcement officials
from individual liability unless
that official violated a clearly
established constitutional right
I think everybody here.
And everybody in this body.
Knows how important
constitutional and civil rights
or.
What is important is as I used
to.
Push for veterans benefits.
and our model was serving those
who served.
I'm here today to try to protect
those who protect us.
We heard prior testimony how
this is affected morale.
And how it has affected.
Recruitment and retention just a
couple weeks ago I met with the
local law enforcement agencies
in the shared with me that in
the past when they would put out
a recruitment they would have
between two and three hundred
respondents.
This last recruitment effort.
Reduced one application.
This is a real problem.
One of the major reasons is
because we removed.
Qualified immunity as a defense
now I listened very intently to
the arguments
that my friends from the ACLU in
the public defender's office put
forward.
And I do not believe that
reinstating qualified immunity
for law enforcement officials
and other public officials.
Will.
The truth prosecution of those
bad actors because in any group
law enforcement and other public
officials do have bad actors.
But historically.
There have been policies and
procedures to take care of those
bad actors whether they be law
enforcement of.
Social workers with CYFD or even
people that worked for me at the
department of Veterans Services.
There are policies and
procedures and I heard
you're talking to somebody that
who oppose this earlier this
week.
That in the past it was police
officers investigating police
officers.
But in most cases.
The HSD will bring another
agency another outside agency to
investigate those actions.
This is closed on necessary
stress and loss of morale.
Unless the current laws
repealed.
One of the unintended
consequences of the current
statutes.
Is the costs to local
municipalities and the costs to
you and I.
When we pick up the phone and
dialed nine one one we all
expect.
A law enforcement official to
show up.
If the trends continue we have
less and less who answer that
call.
And what are we going to do
them.
Several months ago my father
dialed nine one one and locally
an experience law enforcement
officials showed up.
And as I went with him to the
court proceedings I had a chance
to speak to a very young state
police officer.
And I explained to him that I
was running for office I said if
there was one thing that I could
do.
To make sure that you move that
I supported you what would it
be.
And he said.
Reinstatement of qualified
immunity because I'm looking at
taking a job in Texas.
We are losing.
Very qualified individuals who
love New Mexico.
But cannot afford to lose their
livelihoods their homes.
The things that they've invested
in.
Because the state of New Mexico
no longer protects those
officials.
Like I said at the beginning I
will keep my comments short
but it I will close with this.
Historically New Mexico's
protected those who protect us.
And I would ask.
We take a moment to really think
about what we're doing.
And for those who protect us
some protection.
For putting their lives on the
line on a daily basis.
They never know when they leave
their families if they're going
to come home.
I would hope that we would be
thoughtful.
And that we would look at the
decisions that we make when we
sit behind that desk.
And once again let us protect
those who protect us.
Madam chair members of the
committee with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative and
welcome to the legislature hi
hope for three weeks have been.
Okay.
this.
I will open it up to folks in
the crowd kit if you can if you
are here to support the
legislation if you could please
raise your hand.
If you are in opposition.
Okay before we had there folks
on if you're on zoom right now
if you are in support of the
legislation please raise your
hand and leave them race please
we will start with folks here in
support there are non are there
if you are in support in on zoom
I will start with
eight hundred guests go ahead.
Please and yourself.
Are there you go try about that
can you hear me yes we can hear
you.
Okay so I read I just retired
from from twenty six years a law
enforcement are from Bernalillo
county's lieutenant here just a
at the beginning of the year
when the qualified immunity bill
went through that was one of the
biggest punches to the gut I've
seen a lot forced to take in the
time that I serve.
Qualified immunity isn't just a
given right by certain certain
things have to happen in order
for in order for qualified
immunity take place the Supreme
Court backs at a public courts
back at it it is what it is but
the representative just spoke is
absolutely correct after I
retired BCSO has lost five more
deputies they're moving to Texas
and Utah and Idaho and other
places because they don't want
to work here.
And it it begins to endanger our
families your families and and
the people that live in the
state like there there's no
reason for it nobody nobody in
this room except nobody here
makes us put goes to work makes
a split second decision that
will cost them their life their
friend's life maybe somebody
else's life their job put them
in jail make them lose their
house any of those things none
of you have ever unless you're
in the military law enforcement
none of you have ever done that
you don't understand and we do
that well I see we but we do
that multiple times a day
sometimes ten fifteen times a
day and then after those
decisions are made in a split
second people sit down all over
it for two or three years or
eight or nine months and pick
out every little teeny tiny
thing a lot forces that rob.
Qualified immunity helps us
build to make those decisions
and know that we'll be back if
we're in the right for the wrong
were in the wrong we're just
like anybody else we can just
hurt people and call it good
that's not how law enforcement
works but we have to have some
protection what people are
expecting us to make these hard
decisions in split seconds and
maybe save not only their lives
but are all.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir and and for folks
online I forgot to mention we
have two minutes of Mr Deputy
and for your comments and
it just FY I next we have a
Montoya bond.
Good morning can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you.
Thank you for your time on
February eleventh I was shot in
the neck by an armed suspect on
an ankle monitor of when this
law was first passed I began
considering leaving law
enforcement I was in three
critical incidents during my
career in which deadly force was
used it was incredibly stressful
for me I understand that there
are protections for the
individual officers who serve
but their agencies are being
undermined and their insurance
is being put at great risk and
our agencies will suffer for
that in the long term and most
is difficult for me I agree with
Mr Romero who retired but reduce
excuse me retired the same day I
did that this was a message from
our political leaders against us
that they don't want us and
we're leaving in two thousand
and two when I joined the New
Mexico state police there were
twenty four hundred applicants
for my class the ninety ninth
recruit class that we.
The.
Graduated in twenty twenty one
had twenty six applicants twenty
six are we're real trouble we
would ask that you understand
that we love you we care about
you Mexico and we want you to
understand that we will fight
for you that we would die for
you necessary but the message
that you set when you took away
qualified immunity was very
clear and there's only so much
abuse that we can take before we
will leave you and we will not
come back and vote apologies
we'll make it right and so this
needs to be changed and is this
to be fixed and well to brother
retired of the twenty twenty one
I retired last year my little
brother retired this year and we
will leave New Mexico and the
data which is done but I hope
that you will reverse course and
consider what you've done and I
thank you for your time.
Thank you Sir.
next we have Larry.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Leri Sonntag
here I also I'm a retired a
twenty year Albuquerque police
officer and I will repeat what
the previous people have said
but I will comment on the
impression that qualified
immunity that protected officers
who outside who acted outside
the scope of the lost is
incorrect I spent three years in
the internal affairs unit I
personally investigated police
officers and any.
Officer wants the same thing
that I did when I worked in
internal affairs if policies are
broken if laws are broken
officers need to be held
accountable and there are
mechanisms in place for that.
But the decisions you make US
lawmakers or maybe you know not
split second life decisions but
the decision to make do impact
lives just ask you to consider
how it would feel where instead
of next session or two sessions
later coming back and saying
Oakes we made a mistake on that
bill we need to amend it.
Officers do not get that luxury
they are making split second
decisions and to have their
whole livelihood their family
put on the line.
you can understand if you were
put in that same situation that
if you pass a law that ends up
causing somebody to be harmed
that you would be help
personally responsible the prime
make a big difference in how you
do your job I ask that you give
that same consideration to the
people who put their lives on
the line every day to protect
your safety.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir next we have merry
in gross income.
Hello I'm the new probably know
your your go ahead.
Sorry.
Yeah I just really respect the
the three previous many spoke
who are serving you know in the
realms of of in a police
officers and I we really don't
have anything to add to that I
just feel like we really need to
to make this bold move and
legislation so that they can be
protected we I mean the idea
like you saying of calling nine
one one and nobody comes because
of of you know not having this
protection is is heartbreaking
I'm at the.
Everything is a mother of the
you know
assistant managers as pray that
you guys will do do the right
thing and support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you ma'am will go to
opposition here if you are in
opposition on zoom please raise
your hand I will go on to folks
here in committee if you could
raise your hand.
but.
No well I'm going to speak are
you all going to are you all
speaking okay so go ahead.
We're starting from the front
back.
There have been to have members
of the committee Julianna could
representing the New Mexico
trial lawyers association I've
had great conversations with the
representative really respect
him and respect the intention of
wanting to
make sure that our we are able
to recruit and retain not just
one aspect of the system but
also aspects it reminds me of
Chief Justice bacon's comments
on the state of the judiciary
judiciary that in order to bring
these people and keep them we
need to fund and provide
appropriate resources to all the
parties in the system that dust
law enforcement public defenders
this unfortunately is not a
solution to that problem and I'm
gonna turn to live here miss
Sanchez to get into details
about that but we do stand in
opposition and respect the
sponsor program this forward
thank you thank you god.
The morning madam chair and
members of the committee Kelly
Sanchez and Tyler New Mexico
want to make clear that the the
doctrine of qualified immunity
it was created by the federal
courts and it was created to
shield individual governmental
actors for persons
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
as Representative Romero is
stating earlier after lots and
lots of work an analysis and
compromised specifically only
allows for suits against
governmental entities against
the actual introduce new cannot
sue under the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act you cannot see the
individual after and so that you
cannot be personally accountable
in a lawsuit under the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act but it
is the entity that must do that
and qualified immunity is a
doctor in that is meant to
shield and that is not what the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act was
meant to to do and again this
was looked at extensively
through significant compromise
and committees and task forces
get reviewed this and that is
why we oppose the.
Thank you god.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
Really on a code in an agency
that stands lunches laid out
really well why this bill is
problematic I'm cert I'm not
introduce myself my name is
Sammy Valdez in the director
Policy the ceiling Mexico
the ACLU opposes this measure as
well and it is not because we
need to don't share the concern
of wanting to make our
communities safer but for all of
the reasons that have been laid
out this is just not what we
consider to be a viable solution
to that problem additionally
qualified immunity has proven to
be problematic in a lot of ways
it actinides that creates a
culture of a lack of
accountability and it creates an
unreasonable delay for
plaintiffs beyond that we really
got to start having a more
nuanced conversation about
accountability when it comes to
these types of measures and not
rejecting anything that gets at
accountability or create a more
even playing field for those
whose fire rights are violated
and the party who may have
violated them as being anti
police or anti law enforcement
or anything like that we all we
all share the common goal here
we call this place home to thank
you.
Thank you is there anybody in
support and opposition of this
legislation we'll go to the
we'll go to zoom again if you
can raise your hands if you're
in opposition first we have
Chris make Caylus.
Yes thank you I'm speaking on
behalf of the and double ACP
Santa Fe chapter hearing the
previous comments I am struck by
the fact that it is difficult to
recruit and retain law
enforcement however I don't
believe any public official
should be immune to
consequences for behavior that
is egregious.
And this reinstatement of
qualified immunity will as
previous speakers have said
create an atmosphere of on
accountability.
So I think we should look
instead it beefing up our
recruitment process making law
enforcement more attractive in
particularly training.
New recruits and.
People who have been in law
enforcement for some time on
best practices on appropriate
behavior and then support them
in those actions so the end of
laci P. strongly opposes
repealing.
Qualified immunity thank you.
Thank you ma'am we will then
I'll go to committee first we
have Representative Romero.
You madam chair of thank you
Representative welcome to our
committee
I just have a few questions for
you just I think for to inform
the body to again on the
differences between qualified
immunity and sovereign immunity
can you just give me a
definition of what you think
either means.
Of the doctrine of full fight
immunity protects state and
local officials including law
enforcement officers from
individual liability unless the
official violated a clearly
established constitutional right
and sovereign immunity Madam
chair representative I do not
have the definition for
sovereign immunity Madam chair
representative your bills only
touches on sovereign immunity
it only as the language of
sovereign immunity and sovereign
immunity affects the states and
the state officers and agencies
so when we heard testimony from
County agents from city agents
of folks that work for them this
would not actually pertain to
them
do you also have Madam chair
representative know the history
of how we started talking about
sovereign immunity or qualified
immunity in the federal system.
Madam chair representative
Newman we do.
So madam chair representative
the idea that qualified immunity
exists was actually really
challenged by a lot of a
conservative judges including
Scalia and Thomas for the doubts
that they had on exempting
certain agencies from.
Being able to assert litigation
Madam chair representative in
the sort of concert concerted
effort that no one's above the
law and truly when we look at
why this is so important to New
Mexico for me is that no one's
above the law we're talking
about the agency and the broader
implication of what it is it's
important to protect with New
Mexicans
Madam chair representative your
bill only adds the term
sovereign to this bill and so I
think the distinction and and
just the sort of understanding
of what it is that we're trying
to what would really happen to
this law should we change it and
just to know that this was a
made up doctrine in in federal
jurisprudence to to sort of
question the the ability for
those governments to be held
accountable and I think it's
important for the public to know
the nuance of this discussion
and how critical it is that we
hold folks accountable so for me
Madam chair representative I
can't support this but I do
appreciate being able to
continue that to inform the
public of what's at stake here
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I could just quickly
respond Representative Romero I
appreciate the the.
Education.
I am.
I love being a freshman logic
provided because my curiosity is
constantly at work and I'm
constantly trying to learn new
things and understand new
concepts so I truly appreciate
the the definition and the
separation of qualified and
sovereign immunity you made a
comment about holding people
accountable there were policies
and procedures before this was
removed.
as I stated in my opening that
held those bad actors whether
they be you in law enforcement
or any other government agency
the policies and procedures to
hold them accountable
earlier yes testimony from the
opposition was that.
Qualified immunity some hope
creates a culture of.
The lack of accountability I
think is.
Something that I disagree with.
Because no one wants.
more accountability than a good
police officer I've spoken to
many of them.
I have friends in law
enforcement I've known lots of
people who have retired from law
enforcement veterans would come
to me and we would help them get
in the law enforcement.
One bad actors to be held
accountable probably more than
you and I.
So to say that.
If we were to pass this bill it
would create the culture of the
lack of accountability I think
is.
Not completely true.
Chair.
Just respond to that
so the the issue was that
qualified immunity was a defense
for folks to be able to bring up
when it was still allowable on
the books madam chair
representative and essentially
was a stop in your tracks sort
of provision that the courts
could take as a defense saying
this is a government official or
government entity rather
And essentially the court the
the case just and if there under
that defense madam chair
representative so taking away
that ability for justices to go
through the process of bringing
justice to the folks who
creating come forth with these
claims I'm here Representative
that's that's really what the
the core element of this was is
that that's no longer defensible
we're gonna hear your case we're
going to make sure that it's
presented well we're going to
we're going to decide on the
merits of that so madam chair
representative that that
qualified immunity staying in
their takes away that
jurisprudence and that ability
to do that so that defense no
longer exists in New Mexico
Madam chair representative in
the and and I think for good
cause for the right reasons for
why we want to be able to to see
these types of cases go through
the process and so that's you
know no longer defensible so
just so that you know why we why
we intentionally got rid of that
language and did not want to
give the justices the power to
simply stop hearing the cases
madam chair representative thank
you.
Thank you next.
Next we have Representative
block.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and the I
appreciate you for also having a
similar bill as I do I know that
the the drafting office that
they can't tell us who is also
guarantee of bills that would
have totally co sponsored yours
but madam chair representative
so we heard a little earlier go
about the difference between
sovereign immunity and poor
absolute immunity which I
believe can be interchanged and
then qualified immunity and I
believe madam chair
representative of the doctor
that was spoken about was due to
it a court case Harlow versus
fitz Gerald in nineteen eighty
two that put restrictions
actually on on folks who are in
public departments to not have
absolute sovereign immunity from
just saying well I can just do
whatever I want and since I make
this plea to say I'm sovereign
the immune I can do no wrong
Madam chair representative
currently with the qualified
immunity or passively I guess
you would say when it was in
statute you can just go as a
police officer or a public body
go do something illegal violate
someone's rights and then have
no consequences for that Madam
chair representative so you know
I'm looking at this court no law
school study that they had and
it talks about the differences
between absolute immunity and
qualified immunity and there are
many stipulations in this that
show that there are protections
for individuals who may have
claims under these laws that
cannot be changed you know if I
go violate your civil rights
Representative you can sue me
and I can sue you.
Right back but we can't do
qualified immunity unless.
You know a let's just say you
were a police officer in your in
the line of duty in the previous
for for this bill passed and you
had issues in self defense and
someone they they have a lawsuit
against you from the trial
lawyers who say that well eve I
laid my civil rights when you
did that now you could as a
police officer go in and say
well this is why I did it I had
those protections in law because
I am working as a police officer
to protect the community and so
madam chair representative I
would just.
Trying not to get stuck on the
very fact that sovereign
immunity and qualified immunity
may be different but qualified
immunity is not sovereign period
Madam chair representative so I
do want to absolutely make that
case and that's what your bill
says and I think it explicitly
says Madam chair representative
on page two of your bill no C.
R. action for which sovereign
immunity has been waived under
the Civil Rights Act shall be
maintained.
Madam chair representative so is
that correct.
Madam chair representative block
that is exactly what the bills
what this draft says great thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative and so I'm seeing
my analysis here of this bill
that according to
Firefighters associations across
the state there's been at least
a ten percent decrease in
firefighters.
And they tied is directly to the
qualified immunity being yanked
away is do you think that that
is correlated madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative block I
absolutely believe that for all
first responders whether they be
law enforcement EMTs
firefighters I I spoke to our
local of fire department and
they were they believe the same
thing the lifting of the
qualified immunity is hurt
recruitment
God forbid my neighbor's house.
Start on far when I called nine
one I want them to show up.
and and I'm.
I'm afraid that the trend that
we're seeing.
It'll be it'll eventually get to
a point where we're all
volunteer fire firefighters.
Madam chair representative block
thank you for that thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative and I agree with
you I I think from the just the
testimony alone we heard today
from law enforcers who said I
love the state it was it's my
native homeland however.
I I can't stay here anymore as a
law enforcement officer because
there have been so many
restrictions on me as a peace
officer or my department that it
could open up those departments
and even local bodies to huge
settlements that they would have
to make madam chair
representative and I would make
the case and Civil Rights Act
that was passed in twenty twenty
one.
Two million dollars is the cap
for those claims but two million
dollars for small community
madam chair representative such
as a small town maybe even
something that's not even
incorporated madam chair
representative.
That could decimate the coffers
of that individual municipality
madam chair representative don't
you agree.
Madam chair representative block
absolutely I live in the town of
Bernalillo.
Two million two million dollars
settlement would.
Devastate the coffers of my
town.
I thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative and I
agree with you to and I live in
a small city but we don't have a
budget that's hundreds of
millions of dollars or billions
of dollars like some in the
state or around the country so
madam chair representative I
just would like to reaffirm that
this bill absolutely does not
reinstate sovereign immunity it
reinstates limited immunity
which would be qualified
immunity and that would only be
if they do not violate someone's
civil rights which is also also
currently protected in the tort
claims act and many other pieces
of statutes madam chair
representative and that tort
claims act I believe the million
dollars it's in there so there
still would be hefty penalties
if someone did violate those
those laws and those would be at
the brunt of the taxpayer
unfortunately so I will just a
stand with that and I appreciate
your bill madam chair
representative.
Representative block thank you
for that.
Representative for thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative so I just want to
point out.
The reoccurring theme we've had
state police called in we've had
APD Colin we've had people with
the sheriff's department Colin.
There is a reoccurring theme.
And because I'm friends with a
lot of they've told me a lot of
stuff that's happening with the
morale issue this is just
another thing that.
They're getting out of the
state.
I mean I cannot keep track of
how many people in like you're
moving you're moving you're
moving everybody's moving out
here because I mean there's a
lot of the issues to be this is
just one of the many things and
the one thing I really want to
point out with this is
somebody's said they need to be
paying more it's not that it's
it's a morality issue it's the
crime is and our hands are tied
it's this it's all the same tied
together make to our law
enforcement are leaving in
droves we had a state police
officer just say there are many
people in the academy that is
for all of them.
That state police the chairs is
all there I don't know what
we're going to do when we're
supposed at two hundred people
and there's only twenty I mean I
really don't know what the
future's going to hold for
specially in Berlin can't land
from the county.
Research has some of the highest
crime and some to call this a
more training they have tons of
training the time to time to
hours of training so that that's
not the issue either.
There's a recurring theme of law
enforcement they're leaving but
the main thing I want to point
out was a couple things
Qualified immunity did not cover
or protect for gregis behavior.
It was for a protected them from
liability unless they clearly
violated and established
constitutional right to want to
make sure their banner stands
out that it wasn't for the
greatest behaviors for the
constitutional right.
And this is the most important
person I got most important note
that I got today.
Officers understand that while
it's the government that will be
on the hook there's a huge
chance that they will not be
retained and they will be let
go.
So there's that so we got the
leaving already they're thinking
they're not going to be able to
stay if something or happen.
And in towns that I have I
municipalities now in Torrance
County they can't handle two
million dollars are barely
surviving a what they have.
So I'm just gonna state again
this only Mister but this is
repeatedly we keep hearing from
law enforcement officers stand
look we're we're having such a
hard time as it is this is just
another nail in the coffin of
people wanting to move this is
detrimental to the
municipalities and something
needs to be done to figure this
out because in short order we're
going to have nobody in law
enforcement and people are going
to leave the states and more and
I love the state I don't want
people leave I want them to stay
here some that's all of St that
madam chair Representative thank
you.
Madam chair then make a full of
COVID.
Yes.
Madam chair representative lord.
The fact that we're seeing the
drain in law enforcement is not
lost on the criminal element.
We saw in the news just a few
months ago a very large blast of
drug dealers saying the reason
we come to New Mexico is because
we can be us here it.
Criminals.
Are not always the brightest but
they're smart enough to know.
Where there is less law
enforcement presence.
My fear is.
Then we will start losing good
people from New Mexico moving to
other states not only law
enforcement but we're constantly
talking about diversifying our
economy this is one of the key
issues is the crime level.
to keep your comments to the
bill.
Yes ma'am madam chair I
apologize for that
Representative Lord thank you
for your comments I completely
agree with you.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
I I just had just a couple well
one question mostly because I
think this is the third or
fourth bills were we've heard
that there's concerns with
recruitment because of this
issue so when you're recruiting
for New police officers is this
sort of is this the qualified
immunity something twenty as it
used to entice recruits to come
on board.
Madam chair representative Rio
is not used to entice but it is
taken into account by somebody
who wants to join law
enforcement.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative I guess I mean
I've I've never have joined
law enforcement I that's a
number that wasn't my my journey
but I guess I'm just trying to
better understand if it's if
it's not in if it's not
inflicting anything on the
individual it themselves but
it's the entity the I I guess
I'm trying to understand how
this is limiting recruitment for
you recruits for the the
academy's Madam chair
representative Rubio lawn the
law enforcement community is
generational you will see signs
of law enforcement officials
joining the police department.
As.
This.
Was stripped from law
enforcement.
Parents were no longer
encouraging their children to
become law enforcement officials
because I saw the writing on the
wall.
Representative Rubio they didn't
want their children to lose
everything they are.
because.
Because government no longer had
their back so they're not being
encouraged to join and like I
said law enforcement is very
generational.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I actually
have family members who are in
law enforcement so I understand
how important that is however
I'm I'm still not quite sure why
this is.
An issue what what we're talking
about is the law that we've
we've passed are to enhance what
the constitution is what what's
already stated in the
constitution
and so when it comes to issues
around recruitment when you're
talking about an increase in
crime I think it's more of a
bigger issue that we're facing
from I more folks on this on
this on this committee have
stated around a lot of systemic
issues I don't believe we've
been given enough evidence to
show within the last two years
that
removing that putting that
qualified immunity is actually
going to improve that do it are
there is is there data that you
are aware of that has showed
that that's the case.
Madam chair there I don't have
any hard and fast data but I
have talked to law enforcement
officials who said they are
discouraging their sons and
daughters from joining the
police department that is the
best for me that is the best
data available when I can look
that law enforcement official in
the eye and say I will do
everything I can to fight to
reinstate qualified immunity
because you was a law
enforcement official or that
important to me yeah thank you
madam chair and and thank you
Representative I. E. I
appreciate that I guess what's
been concerning for me the last
few days as we hear a lot of
these bills is that folks have
been talking about more and more
about how it's initiative
recruitment and you're you're
talking about how it's a
generational thing that there's
people that take pride in in
this effort but it's also been
mentioned that there's also that
it's only bad apples within one
for spent for example which is
is like is that generational to
I mean it's a systemic issue
that we're trying to address
here I don't think qualify the
putting back qualified immunity
is actually going to improve
recruitment I don't think it's
actually gonna report improved
reducing crime in the state I
think we have to do we have to
do a I and I hate to use the
sports metaphors but we we need
to do a full court press on on
when we're talking about issues
related to public safety and
community policing and so I
guess I really want to encourage
folks that if we're talking
about recruitment I think I
worried that.
Qualified immunity is what's
being utilized as a way to
entice law enforcement officers
from the beginning that to me is
is is problematic on my end and
so I appreciate you bringing
this this bill forward but I I I
will not be able to support the
legislation thank you Madam
chair representative Rubio I
completely agree with you that
it is a large picture
but a larger law enforcement
presence would actually bring
down crime and I would suggest
that you speak to your family
members or law enforcement and
get first hand
feedback on how this is
affecting them.
Thank you.
We have a very very spirited of
holidays we get together.
I can imagine.
Thank you madam chair so first
off one of our at.
We one of our analysis some.
This page which it away.
Okay so one of our analysis
states that qualified immunity
is a federal concocts additional
protection established by judge
made law so there's no cost no
congressional law that and
qualified immunity has never
existed under the New Mexico
constitution and thus it cannot
be reinstated so can you address
that.
Madam chair representative
Thompson all I can say is if it
was taken away it had to have
existed before.
Okay thank you for that and then
you said that people are not
going into law enforcement madam
chair because they can lose
everything you have and I'm just
confused if you're not
personally held liable how can
you lose your house and your
your car and everything else
when it it by law it cannot be
you could not be sued
individually.
Madam chair representative when
you leave a career that you
love.
You're no longer getting that
paycheck.
How do bills get paid.
Madam chair of like everyone
else you get a different job I
mean that's kind of the reality
of the world I'm and then I just
I just have to say again you
know every people have said I've
talked to officers you know you
may have talked to five hundred
officers I don't know but there
are many more out there who you
haven't heard from you may
indeed have opposite so I will
say again anecdote is not but I
mean anecdote plural is not data
with it I would suggest that
that somehow a survey of
whatever of all of the officers
involved in this kind of stuff
so that you actually have data
because it's really hard to pass
bills on I know a guy kind of
thing so that I'm just I'm just
asking for it for you know
people who are interested in
this to try to actually get some
data and see if we are losing
officers are not having them
come to the academy or I mean
there's a myriad of reasons that
we can't just say well they're
leaving and we did this so they
must
That connection is not causality
thank you Madam chair
representative Thompson maybe
you and I can team up on a more
able to.
To study like that.
Madam chair I have thirty bills
and I'm chairing a committee and
I've told myself I have to say
no from I'm I don't always but
I'm sure there are other people
who I appreciate the offer but I
am under water thank you.
madam chair I would like to move
to table second.
Russian would.
Like to clarify something before
the take a vote that the wording
of the MRCA just says it's not a
defense.
It doesn't say it's revoked or
taken away it's just in that
Civil Rights Act it
Prohibited the use of it but
that doesn't mean it was there.
So we're not.
Thank you just to make that
clear thank you madam chair okay
we have.
Moved move to table and seconded
and would you please take call.
Representative block madam chair
a no to table and I'd love to
explain my vote I can't thank
you.
Representative Lord noted table.
Representative Romero yes to
table.
Representative Thomson yes
Representative Rubio yes to
table Representative Ferrary yes
to table madam chair we have a
vote to table for two two and
Representative blocked explained
his vote thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative for
bringing for this very important
bill you know I I definitely see
the reasons why we're trying to
get this kind of accountability
back into our system to ensure
that we have protections for the
group brave men and women who
protect us on the streets as
police officers as well as
across the government because we
value all those individuals and
I would certainly be happy to
help you with your memorial
madam chair representative I
only have fifteen bills so I
think of a little room thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair just one
let you know the all those have
been invited to BCSO Bernalillo
county sheriff's department
citizens Academy certain to send
if we can't make that they have
another one they would love for
us to go and see what it's like
to be on the other side thank
you.
Okay anything else okay with
that we will stand adjourned and
I'm sorry I forgot to say
depends.
We have a.
To table.
it was for fourteen forty two
thank you madam chair members of
the committee I appreciate the
the.
Wonderful conversation and I
appreciate the educational so.
Thank you will stand adjourned
until Tuesday thank you.
