Look at page 3 line 14.
Well, actually 13. If a
healthcare provider determines
further evaluation is necessary.
OK, OK, go ahead. Sorry. So, so
we are leaving it up to the
professional judgment. So, OK,
here's a red flag.
You now we know it, now it's up
to the professional to decide
where we know what further tests
or what else to do. So, the
problem before that we heard.
From folks was that it was
mandated that there be a lec
electrocardiogram or um
An EKG.
That is electro never mind. Yes,
it was it was I believe a
electrocardiogram, but we had
taken the other type of.
Testing, but we still left the
electrocardiogram in there. So
that was none of it is mandated.
OK, so, so none of it's
mandated. However,
If a doctor does say, OK, based
on this pulse oximeter based on
the background check.
It's required, we believe that
you're.
Newborn should have further
testing.
What happens as far as liability
if the further, if they're
indemning and the further
testing would make, would
require a flight or drive to
Albuquerque. Man, does the
parent have the right to say we
can't afford that.
Yes, Madam Chair, they do have
the right, um, and as I said,
it's up to the professional who
is working with the baby and the
family to determine whether they
need an echocardiogram or, or a,
um,
EKG
Thank you, Ma'am, because that
was a lot of the concern that I
was hearing is that they, if
they had the life light or fly
the child to Albuquerque, that
would be unnecessary expense. So
what you're saying now the way
that this is written.
They're going off of the initial
testing, asking these questions,
and then they're saying,
We suggest. Is that correct? The
doctors say we suggest further
testing that's between the
doctor and the patient, Madam
Chair, I can't say what, uh, and
it would, of course, it would
depend on the severity if it's a
life threatening cardiac defect,
then they may have to air flight
him if it's a, oh, they may have
a, a, a hole in the heart, but,
you know, it's not affecting
their their
Apgar scores, etc. then so it's
totally left up to their
discretion of the professional
as they are, that's what they
are trained to, to do is to
figure out what our next steps,
so we are in no way, Madam
Chair, um, prescribing what
their next step should be.
OK, ma'am Chairman
Representative, because I know
from experience that my husband
got into a motorcycle crash in
the middle of nowhere that
those.
Flights are not cheap by any
means, um.
I think that's the only question
that I have on this amendment
because that was,
I did. I did have a couple of
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. And I was looking for a
room this morning and I, I went
to the wrong room and I was
like, oh, this is the wrong
committee. So good at least I'm
in good company here. So Madam
Chair, representative, a couple
of questions regarding the, the
changes. I know we had an
amendment in the, the other day
in committee that we, we didn't
act on. And so Madam Chair
Representative, is this on page
3, we're talking about the first
degree.
Does this just mimic that and
then can you just give me a
little detail on, on what
conditions the first degree
would be necessary. I, I think
it's.
It's mostly pretty standard
stuff, but could you just go
into that for me? Starting on
page 3, probably lines.
23 going to page 4.
Lane 4, Madam Chair.
I'm Chair of Representative
Block, so are you asking me to
tell you.
What a first, what an
implantable defibrillator. I'm
not sure what your question is.
Sure, yes. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, I'm just trying to
figure out what these, what
these specific
Requirements are or these these
specific
Maladies, I guess you could call
them.
are
And how did they
Go into determining whether this
individual needs an
echocardiogram or
A uh
Electro
Whatever the other cardiogram
thing is, Madam Chair.
So, so thank you for the
question, Madam Chair, um,
Basically, it's, it's a whole
picture thing. It's not a, oh,
you know, oh, that, you know,
the, the grandfather had Marfan
syndrome or whatever. It's kind
of a, well, there's this and,
and uh, you know, the, the.
Grandfather died of a heart
attack at 40. It's kind of a
whole picture thing and the this
list came from an um an article
that the American Academy of
Pediatrics, um, published.
So they're not just taken from
the thin air. It's, it's what
the American Academy of
Pediatrics recommended.
Be the
The, the, the conversation with
a newborn family.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative that,
that helps me on that.
Because I know a lot of these
are, they, they result in death,
and I know a lot of it results
in just
Death of of an infant
previously. So, Madam Chair
Representative, would this
include a sibling who
passed away.
From one of these
Uh, really grave situations, is
that included since
It's, I just want to make sure
it's not vague in any way man
I'm sure.
I, Madam Chair and
Representative, I don't believe
it's like number 3 on page 3
line 21, sudden infant death
syndrome. Well, that's obviously
not of the parents or they
wouldn't be parents, so, um, a
sibling, um,
And and first degree relatives
includes.
Siblings, of course.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and then I see
above that it says um family
history of
Heart disease or congenial
heart, heart disease. What part
of the family is that referring
to? Because I don't see any
first degrees or 2 degrees,
Madam Chair representative.
Representative in uh Madam
Chair, that's, that's one of
those things that, that it's
kind of up to the provider to
decide, you know, it's if it's a
4th cousin twice removed, then
that's probably not, but if it's
a
You know, if it's
3 of Mom's siblings had this,
and it's kind of a pattern. So,
well, you know, we're not trying
to prescribe how to, how a
provider should
Do their jobs, but we are trying
to um.
Leave it up to whoever's dealing
with that family to decide, you
know, whether they need to bring
in a genetic.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
that, that clears it up for me.
So it's upon the discretion of
the provider and then right
above that, we talk about
systemic or genetic disorders,
that seems pretty broad. Do we
know which kind of disorders
we're looking for regarding the
cardiac.
Issues or is it just in general
with the whole body, Madam
Chair,
representative, Madam Chair,
we as legislators are not uh
medical providers. We're not
saying what, what those might
be, cause once you start a list,
you're gonna leave something
out. So again, leaving it up to
the, the expertise of the
practitioner.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. And then
regarding the
The referral if the individual,
let's just say they, they accept
the referral. Do they need to
know specifically when that
referral takes place to get
these tests.
What
I mean, I'm just wondering cause
some of these flights like
Representative Lords that are
kind of expensive and I know a
lot of folks in our state are on
Medicaid, and I'm just
wondering, would that cover that
transportation.
For these infants if they were
referred and they did not
refuse, Madam Chair
Representative.
Representative and Madam Chair,
I can't say what Medicaid will
cover. Um, and, and I doubt.
If, if the infant is sent in
such serious need, they'd
probably need an air flight
anyway. They're not gonna need
an air flight for a test if it's
a, you know, we think it, but
there's no.
Significant signs in the baby.
It, it could be something that
could be put off for a month.
That's, again, it's up to the
professional discretion of the
provider.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, that, that helps
me on that, and I think those
are pretty much the main
questions I had regarding this,
but, but thank you so much,
Madam Chair and Representative.
The
Thank you. Is there, are there
any objections, um, committee
sub is adopted.
Is there anything else you'd
like to say about the bill? Just
vote yes.
We'll go to um.
The audience, is there anyone in
opposition?
This
I thought, I thought we did
take, uh,
I'm sure I don't think we took
comment on the.
Substitute though, I know that a
lot of folks at 18 emails just
this last couple of days from my
district from physicians and
pediatric folks. I was just
wondering if we could get a
couple, a couple of comments in
that on the committee substitute
alone, Madam Chair. OK.
There's 2 people in opposition
of the committee substitute.
OK.
You'd like to.
Did you want to speak?
OK
One minute please thank you.
Hi, um, good morning. My name is
Doctor Bharathara. I'm a
pediatric cardiologist here in
the state of New Mexico. I've
been here. I grew up in New
Mexico. I've been here for 14
years now practicing as a
pediatric cardiologist.
Um, in terms of a cardiologist,
but um I did crafting a
statement here that um addressed
the previous bill, but uh and
the title that has changed and
but everything changed so
significantly and morphed into
something that doesn't even
resemble what was the initial
intention that I um I can't
really speak to my previous
statements and um in terms of
the issues that this will cause
to um to our patient our current
patients and the new patients.
Um, what I can say now is that
the initial
requirement to do these
electrocardiograms and
echocardiograms would have
placed, was, would have been a
significant drastic change to
our practice. Uh, we would have
bogged down the system for so
many patients who we currently
are in need urgent care. Um,
But the way that this is sort of
morphed into something um
completely different to this
almost has no um real merit or
um I don't see the value in
adding this.
OK, next.
And if you could state your
name, please, in one minute.
Yes, ma'am. Uh my name is Doctor
Sergio Barakin. Uh, good
morning. I'm one of, uh, only 2
pediatric interventional
cardiologists in the state,
pediatric cardiologists and
boards of pediatrician. Um,
I have to say is one of only
Handfield cardiologists, about 6
of us in the state. We
unequivocally state that this
proposal is extremely concerning
to all of us. It's an attempt to
by laypersons telling us how to
practice what we already do day
to day, everything you are now
proposing, especially if they're
suggesting optional. This is
exactly what we already do.
It is not the place for the
newborn nursery to ask these
questions. If a child passes the
pulse ox screening, there isn't
going to be any answer to any of
these questions that would
mandate us or even consider
transporting the child
emergently. It would result in
the pediatrician follow-up as we
usually do in the first week of
life, and then subsequently the
pediatrician discussion with us
would decide if we need to
transfer for an outpatient
cardiology follow-up. This is
what we already do.
The AEP guidelines that has been
mentioned, that is false. This
is not going by those. Those are
for essentially children,
school-age children, that we ask
those questions and those
questionnaires are for.
There's nobody that's going to
have a positive family history
of Mar fans, for example, that
you're going to transfer a child
or do any testing for the
newborn period because you will
not find anything.
Thank you.
Right. Anyone else on Zoom
that's 2 people, OK?
You announce them.
I definitely can't read this.
Hi, this is Doctor Melissa
Mason. I'm a general
pediatrician practicing in
Albuquerque, but I see kids from
all over the state, um, I agree
with what has already been
stated, so I will not repeat
that, but I have a couple of
concerns even with the bill as
amended, um,
First
There are a lot of holes in the
heart that are physiologic,
which means that's normal when
babies are born.
If somebody had a yes answer to
those screening questions, which
are basically sports free
participation, physical
questions for kids going into
sports, if we use those
questions, and there's a yes and
a study is done, we're gonna
pick up a whole lot of
physiologic or normal holes in
the heart that then have to be
followed and done something
about, um, the other is, I, I've
heard representatives, a lot of
you have stated, you know, we,
we leave it up to the medical
providers
depression if they want to order
a study or not, um, which I
appreciate. However, as we know
in our state, we are
We relied very heavily on um not
only physicians, but, but
physician assistants, uh, nurse
practitioners, and a lot of
mid-level providers, uh, my
concern is they would order a
lot of tests because they're not
comfortable making that decision
on their own. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning
good morning.
Um, chair representatives. My
name is um Doctor Brian
Ethridge. I'm a pediatrician in
Silver City, New Mexico and
have, have practiced in the, in
the state for, oh, I don't want
to age myself, but, you know,
the past 16 to 17 years, um, I
also share the, the, the same
comments of my colleagues that
that this, the bill and even the
substitution or potentially
flawed, um, and not and not
meaningful for the the
population that we care for,
the, the criteria that was
referenced
is for adolescents and not
newborns, um, and the, even if
my I share the same concern as
my, my colleague Doctor Mason
that, that putting this type of
putting this type of language
into type of bill is
prescriptive and could create a
lot of confusion, um, put
practitioners at risk and it's,
it's hard when you have this
type of criteria that, you know,
the, the goal should be to, to
leave this and have the
practitioners and do it, let us
do our jobs, um, and that this
is somewhat prescriptive.
And it could be confusing and,
you know, and I, I have
routinely had to transport
patients sometimes, you know,
based, you know, when, with
concerns with a congenital heart
defect and sometimes you're
wrong. There can be other
causes, but this bill doesn't
change any of that, um, and so I
would, I would, you know, not in
support of it and, you know,
agree with my, my colleagues
throughout the state and the
American Academy of Pediatrics,
you know, the, the, the various
other professionals. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else on too?
One more.
This is Doctor Karen Carson.
Good morning, uh, chair and
members of the committee. I am a
pediatrician from Roswell. I
have practiced for 25 years.
This bill will cause harm to our
families. This will make it very
difficult for patients and
families to understand how we
are triaging patients and why we
wouldn't immediately fly their
child somewhere. It, it takes
medicine out of the
practitioner's.
hands and puts it into a law
that may not make any sense, and
I am in opposition to this bill.
Now we will go to the audience
and is there um anyone here in
support.
Of
changes, OK? Anyone on Zoom.
Uh, this is Bob Farland I'm the
parent of a child that had a
hole in the heart that went
undetected for 15 years and, and
we are wrote the bill. Um, there
is, seems like a lot of
arguments against previous
versions of the bill, which we
have tried to edit and adopt and
address. We are not
Trying to place harm on
families, but to bring awareness
to families.
Um, we're talking about the
number one killer on the planet.
Um, and we believe that more
action needs to be taken,
starting with newborn screening,
and that is the essence of our
bill.
Uh, regarding sudden death.
Um, in the young Bai in the
article that was published by
the American Academy of
Pediatrics, it does say many
many cardiovascular diseases
that but young individuals at
risk for sudden death have a fam
familiar inheritance.
And so that is what the
questions are about.
Um, could you state your full
name?
Oh, he's already gone.
It's Bob Farlander. Farlander,
thank you.
Thank you. OK.
Um, yes, uh, Madam Chair, thank
you, Madam Chair. So there was a
lot of talk about emergent
transport that is nowhere in the
bill that came up in
questioning. This has nothing, I
mean, as always.
The provider is going to decide
if the.
Patient needs to go elsewhere
and whether an air ambulance
will work whether, I mean, so
that was a red herring. This
bill has nothing to do with
emergency transport, and one of
the cardiologists talks about,
well, a cardiologist would do
this and a cardiologist, we're
talking pre-cardiologists. We're
talking about newborns.
In the, in the newborn period
before they're released from
their birth center or hospital.
So, so cardiologists would not
be involved until
The, the person dealing with the
newborn decides what, you know.
To refer or not, and that's the,
that's what it is now, those,
those um folks doing the
neonatal care and can refer or
not, so that we will not be
taking up extra cardiology time
because
The professionals will or will
not refer to cardiology.
Thank you. And I'm.
Wondering if people didn't um.
Know about the different changes
and weren't aware of the
committee's substitute, Madam
Chair, I believe committee
substitute can't be um.
Put online until it's adopted.
So
That's a uh an issue with our
system.
What is the will of the
committee?
Madam Chair, I moved the table.
OK.
Which is
We motion to table.
Representative Block.
the table.
Representative Representative
Romero.
Representative Thompson? No.
Madam Vice Chair, not a table.
Madam Chu, note to table.
On a vote of
Uh, 2
3 in favor
I'm sorry, 2 in favor, 3
opposed, uh, the.
Motion to table has failed.
On House Bill 76 with the
committee substitute. Do I hear
another motion.
Sure, I was on the list to make
comments.
Sorry
The lighting in here, I couldn't
see it. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I just had
a couple questions and I, I
recognize that the substitute
has not yet been put on online,
um, I just wanted to ask in
terms of some of the folks,
cause I have also been receiving
um some, some messages from,
from physicians and, um, I
guess, is there any alternative
outside of the spill or is this,
is this the bill that was.
Constructed like collectively to
figure out how to address this
issue.
Madam Chair and Representative
Rubio, this, this is, I don't
know how many iterations it's
been through, but this has been
taking in the comments from
particularly physicians, but
from other folks, so this, this
is the, the final product, um,
well, the final product as of
this committee, um, and, and the
comments were based on the
previous bill without the
substitute in terms of the
mandated um EKG.
electrocardiogram. So, it's hard
to say, you know, if those
comments would change if they
saw this, but, but I, I, we have
made many changes based on the,
the input that we've heard.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and what
is there going to another
committee or did it already go
to health? It already went to
health. OK. All right. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you uh
thank you representative.
Oh
And um
Madam Chair, I just, uh, was
wondering if this, even with the
changes for the screening will
help to find more, um, sooner
the um.
Cardiac problems that
Children later on, like in
sports that suddenly, you know,
die or pass um while they're in
extreme.
Uh, circumstances, will this
help to prevent that? Madam
Chair, that's the, that's what
we're doing this for. That,
that's
I'm sorry, uh, the audience is
making comments.
OK, he said 0 chance. So, um,
the, the intent of this bill is
to
Prevent the, the, the
Farlanders, um, Madam Chair
heard their testimony in health,
um, their son was very ill for
the 1st 15 years of his life,
including over 300 different
medical.
Um, appointments, and they,
they, he nearly died before they
figured out that it was a hole
in his heart, so the family
brought this to me, Madam Chair,
um, in an attempt to prevent
that happening to other
families. Is it a fix all? No,
but it's one more tool in the
tool chest, as it were.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass,
and I will 2.
Um
Is there um it's a
do not pass that whole.
So, Madam Chair, I do, uh, do
not pass on um House Bill 247
and a due pass on the committee.
0, 76. Sorry, I just want to
move ahead, um, on, uh, do not
pass on House Bill 76 and a due
pass on committee sub committee
substitute House Bill 76.
Thank you. I will second that.
Um, is there any opposition, OK,
we'll take roll.
Representative Block with a
short explanation.
Representative Lord, with the
explanation, Representative
Romero.
Representative Thompson.
vice chair, yes, Madam Chair,
yes.
So you have a do not pass on.
Uh house Bill.
76 and a do pass on the
committee substitute for House
Bill 76 on a vote of um.
Uh, 3.
yes.
Go ahead, Representative. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair, and,
and so I have many concerns
regarding this bill, especially
regarding the autonomy of
physicians and their practices,
I think that if we're trusting
physicians, I believe physicians
will know the best practices to
ensure that children are safe.
And then, Madam Chair, I also
think it's really scary on page
one here we have the test has to
be in writing from the family,
but how do you have time to do
it in writing if it's something
that's an emergency?
situation. So I find that to be
very burdensome on the families,
as well as just taking away
autonomy. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
of Lord. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I stand and support with our
pediatric experts. I think they
know more than we do. And I
think this opens the door to
massive liability issues, uh,
well this one test said this and
you didn't do that. Therefore,
we're gonna sue you to the end
of time and we're gonna lose
more doctors.
Uh, I still, I know it says it
doesn't mandate, but it does
because it puts a doctor in a
situation where they have to do
tests.
Based on something. And if the
pediatric cardiologists that
have testified against it came
in and said, Yes, we agree with
this and whatever. They had
their hand in this. If they had
their hand in all of the
wording, if the experts came in
and said, this is what we would
like, then I would vote for it,
but they have not, and it's
based on someone who sadly had
some issues with their child and
that breaks my heart, but I
cannot.
Vote for something without the
experts agreeing on.
OK, next we'll go to um house.
Wait, I'm sorry. We're going to
roll.
Um, House Bill 247.
And it will be heard, um.
Thursday, February 20th.
I apologize for not announcing
that sooner. Anyone was here
waiting. They next will go to
House Bill 250.
The menstrual products and
correctional facilities.
Good morning, rep Onanu. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, committee members. Um,
yes, this is House Bill 250
providing this products to, um,
people who are.
In custody, um, this should be
very familiar to you. We heard
this bill last year. This is
just, um, follow up language,
the appropriation was made in
the budget last year, and this
is just the bill language to
support that. Um, I have two
experts with me, Madam Char and
I'll let them introduce them.
Madam Chair representatives, um,
my name is Courtney Montoya. I'm
with the ACLU of New Mexico. I
am a community engagement
specialist.
Madam Chair, my name is Sherry
Crier. I'm a community member in
Albuquerque and a formerly
incarcerated female.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. So
as I said, this is really just
the language to support the um
appropriation that was made last
year, so.
All this bill does is that, um,
oh, we also have our, uh,
secretary of Corrections, uh,
secretary Alicia Tofoya Lucero
here who has done an amazing job
of provide products to the
incarcerated this entire time.
However, we acknowledge that
While she has done that
wonderful job. She is not
immortal. She will not always be
our corrections secretary and we
just want to ensure that these
products are available for the
future of our state. So with
that, Madam Chair, thank you.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition of
this, OK, how about on Zoom?
OK, then we'll go to the
audience for those who are in
supply and if you'd.
Whoever would like to speak, if
you'd like to come.
to the center or he can hand you
the.
Good morning, chair and members
of committee, Kat Sanchez with
Bold Futures. We are a
reproductive justice
organization by and for Black
indigenous women and people of
color across the state. Uh, we
appreciate, uh, uh,
Representative Ona Nonus
consistent work behind the
scenes to ensure that we have uh
this bill heard again, and we
are in full support of this bill
and urge it do pass. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alicia Tafoya Lucero.
I'm the cabinet secretary for
the Corrections department, and
I just want to stand here in
strong support of this bill, and
of course, of Representative
Andornu and uh and what she's
trying to do here, I think it's
wonderful when we can codify
positive actions in statute.
Thank you, chair and committee.
My name is Laurie Merrill. I'm
the executive director of Free
Flow New Mexico. We distribute
period products and reduce
stigma around menstruation and
in support of 250 and also
support of the variation
products that are included in
the bill, including liners,
tampons, and pads. All three of
these support each individual's
cycle and also helps um reduce
costs by supplying liners, um,
it can, it can just help, um,
um, with the finance.
Go to anyone on Zoom?
Two people. OK, 1 minute.
Or, OK. One minute each, please,
and.
If you'll announce your name.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor, and
I'm the executive director with
the New Mexico New Mexico
Coalition of sexual assault
Programs, which leads the
statewide sexual violence
prevention and invention efforts
in New Mexico. We appreciate the
sponsor and secretary to for for
this bill. Over half of people
living in New Mexico have
experienced sexual violence, and
through the New Mexico sexual
assault helpline and our sexual
assault service providers. We
serve over 500 individuals each
year who are currently
incarcerated.
Who have experienced sexual
violence. And our recently
published crime victimization
report based on a study we
commissioned in New Mexico.
Those who were ever
incarcerated, had the highest
victimization rate at 69%. This
is, this bill is about restoring
dignity and the right for us to
care for ourselves and as a
survivor justice issue. On
Wednesday, I was at a high
school basketball game in Rio
Rancho, and there was a bin in
the restroom that said all
menstrual products are free.
It's such a simple act.
reduced stigma and to access
supplies we need to care for
ourselves and support people's
mental and physical well-being.
Please support this bill. Thank
you.
Good morning, chair and
committee, Diane McCash, I just
wanna echo echo the support
you've already heard and thank
the sponsor and the secretary uh
for their support in all of
this.
Oh, yeah, a, um a arena bega and
chef. I am a
Indigenous doula, and I also
support this bill.
As, again, the stigma to have
access to free products such as
this. It's empowering and also
supportive of our individuals
that need these type of
products. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Haley Zock, and I'm the
staff attorney from Southwest
Women's Law Center. We strongly
support HB 250. Menstrual
hygiene is a basic human
necessity and not a privilege,
and incarcerated individuals
should not have to suffer due to
lack of access. This bill
addresses injustice by ensuring
facilities provide sufficient
supplies without cost or
restriction. Denying menstrual
products is a gendered form of
inhumane treatment and HB 250 is
a simple common sense step.
Towards dignity, equity, and
public health. I urge you to
support this bill and ensure
that no one is forced to endure
unnecessary hardship while in
state custody. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, do you have any
closing remarks?
Um, just to say that access to
these products isn't just a
maintaining human dignity, and
to me it's just common sense
let's just thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, we go to um.
Committee and Representative
block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative. So my first
question is this legislation
that we, I think this body
passed.
1 year ago, 2 years ago, where
did it just die on the Senate
side or did it?
What happened to it, Madam
Chair?
Thank you, Representative
guests. So it made it into the
budget, so the appropriation has
been made, that's why there's no
appropriation with this piece.
The bill language, however, I
don't think we even got this to
the floor. So we just want to
pass the statute.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So then last
year's appropriation, what
happened to that? Is it going to
the prisons without this change
in statute or where did that go,
Madam Chair.
OK. OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Ani Nornu. So do
we know how much it's gonna
cost.
Annually when it comes to like
the next year, it usually, from
what I've seen with inflation
and things.
Do you expect it to be recurring
and if you do, do you expect it
to be a larger appropriation
each, each year, yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. So we did not make
this, um, budget recurring
because the products that are
given to um inmates at present
are in the prison budget. So
this would just ensure because
they are tied to the prison
budget and the prison budget is
just ensures that should the
money not um again, like I say,
secret, but if she is no longer
the secretary going forward
because she is not an immortal
person. Um, this would just
ensure that there, if there are
any drafters and money set aside
specifically.
Sounds good, Madam Chair
Representative and.
I had no idea she wasn't
immortal. I mean, the way that
she acts, she, she just does a
good job. So she's madam.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
know we're using different
Well we're using language to, to
specify certain places that this
goes. Does it also transcend or
does it also include jails,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair representative, yes,
um, I believe, actually, we
contacted them.
We heard back from two who are
in support, and 2 just never got
back.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. And then I guess
I, I just want to know where in
the budget on the corrections
budget.
Is it, is it under like a
administration or
I know there's so many different
line items in their budget. I'm
just wondering where, where it
falls. Does it pretty much go in
its own little category, or does
it also go with other products
that are used, such as shampoo,
etc. Madam Chair,
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative, I don't want to
speculate as I don't have.
Immediate access to the prison,
but OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative.
I don't sit on the finance
committee, so that's why I
Appropriations as they call it,
so I, I didn't know where that
would be, but OK. So is there
currently a problem with
incarcerated women not having
access to these products, Madam
Chair, Representative currently,
currently, and we just want to
use the case.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, that, that
helps. And then I'm just gonna
start on one, on page one A.
Uh, defines correction facility
broad enough.
Is it broad enough to cover
everything in New Mexico. I
mean, and what are some
Other things that could not be.
Included. I just want to make
sure folks are not not excluded
if it's not explicit in the
statute. So I'm on page 1A or
I'm on one and section 1A.
Starting on line 182. I believe
it goes to 21 ending with the
word persons.
Yes, ma'am Chair representative,
so correction facility, jail
prison, other efficiently broad.
All right, thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative, and
then,
I'm curious, would this also be,
would this allow female prison
workers.
To get access as well if they
need these at work, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would say that that would be up
to the warden needed an
emergency pad or tampon.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, because I know
there's a lot of really good
awesome women who work in our
Corrections facilities. I know
there's one lady who at the
Otara County one, and she runs
it like shipshape and she is
not, not enough staff and stuff.
So, I would just say it might be
an incentive or not, not even an
incentive as we're talking about
a basic need, right? It would
just be OK.
would be good, but I think that
if we could put some maybe
rulemaking on that, that, that
could be awesome. So, Madam
Chair, Representative.
regarding a private contractor
running the facility, how do we
ensure compliance with those
folks.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
Representative in that last
question. Saturday.
I'm just wondering how, how do
we oversee and ensure that the
facilities
are.
Properly using these products
and then how do we make sure
that they are indeed
Following the letter of the law,
Madam Chair.
Well, we definitely, um, believe
there is no report. Sorry,
there's no reporting requirement
provided in the statute, and we
believe that they act in good
faith.
In budget, um.
Say there's no
Like explicit language in the
budget that outlines the
requirements, but we trust our
wardens to make.
Correct decisions and make sure.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I, I do trust them as well.
I just wanted to make sure. I
don't know if they had like a a
document every year that they
provide.
Annual report or something that
says, oh, this is what we did
with the.
With the prison and these are
how many products that we
That we gave out because I would
just like to see what the
differences are when it comes to
a public prison or a private
prison or jail or any other
detention facility included in
this, just to see if maybe
there's a little more
discrepancy with one versus the
other. So I don't know, do they
have an annual report, Madam
Chair Representative Madam Chair
Representative, no, we don't
require that would be
interesting to see, but the
purpose of this language
products are available, not
necessarily tracking the data of
how many or how.
Sure, OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative that, that's good
to hear. And then uh next uh
what correctional facilities be?
Able to have the authority to
restrict access just to the,
the, the normal amount needed
for folks who may be
Misusing the amounts that they
are given, madam.s for staff to
requested, but we wanted to keep
the language broad enough person
in custody can request products
at any time, so.
That is why that language is
there. So if you know if someone
makes a request for like.
A staff person in there, why
don't we start with 3? OK, thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
Could you just tell me where
that is in your bill. I'm just
trying to find it here. I'm
sorry. I think it may be on page
2 somewhere.
But
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, since I'm not, sorry, I
believe I'm by the definition
then leaving it up to the OK,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I think it
said something about like
sufficient products sufficient,
yes.
OK, that's pages 7 and 8. Got
it.
And then Madam Chairs
representative on the top of
that page, we're talking about
policy, implement a policy for
all menstruating persons too.
Uh, in custody. And so, Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering, so would that policy
be able to say if you misuse.
The system we're only going to
give you just sufficient needs
and could it also restrict them
from, from that combination of
ones that they're requesting
later on in this section, it
says, they have an option to
choose a combination of
menstrual hygiene products,
Madam Chair. I'm wondering would
that, would that have to be in
there, uh.
plan or their policy.
I'm sorry, madam, could you
synthesize that for me just a
little bit.
My apologies.
Trying to trying to make it make
sense here. So, so when it comes
to someone misusing the
products.
Could that also be included in
the policy?
Or is your bill kind of not
allowing that kind of
exclusionary.
Language when it comes to uh
misuse
and so I'm clear, are you I
miss I
I guess I'm not looking at a
disciplinary way. I'm just
thinking in a
OK, if you misuse the products.
You say, let's just say you, you
get 20 of them or you, you're
selling them yourself, which is
also a misuse of the products.
Is there something that
A prison or a correctional
facility could do to limit that
in the policies that they would
need to promulgate according to
your the section one,
Madam Chair.
That particular hypothetical to
everybody.
So, I mean like page 2 line 19,
except when strict restrictions
are strictly necessary to
prevent injury.
But beyond that
I have not had coffee or, Madam
Chair. You're totally fine and I
have not had my Red Bull this
morning either, so.
I will probably before we get to
the floor, I hope, but Madam
Chair, Representative, I guess
I'm just, my, my question is
based on the word sufficient on
page 2 line.
6
Because it seems kind of vague
in my opinion, and I was just
wondering if there was something
in the policymaking where they
could be a little more uh
prescriptive to say, OK, maybe
if you, if it's an
An extenuating circumstance, if
you need an extra one, maybe,
maybe there was some, someone
stole it or something like that.
You can get another one.
I think I'm starting to get it
now. That's a little too
difficult to put in the language
because.
Being prescriptive and how much
sufficient is, that's not going
to work forever. It's definitely
not literally not a one size
fits all situation, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the, the
information, you know, I, I'm
the one gent on this panel, so I
apologize. I don't have a lived
experience of that, but I do
want to make sure that at least
we're having some kind of a
guidelines and barriers to make
sure that they're not misused,
so that people can get access
when they do need it. So, Madam
Chair Representative, when we're
talking on page 2, line 11,
about the combination.
Of these products.
How, how does that work? Or how,
how have you seen it work, how
it's currently working, cause
apparently it's working right
now. How, how would this
Be utilized, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative,
right now as it stands, uh,
people do have access to pads
and they can purchase tampons at
$10.85 a pack. Now, not everyone
has, uh, through commissary, not
everyone has access to jobs, um,
those who do make between 20
cents and $1 an hour, so just
the, the ability to have access
to tampons if one needs.
that they can combine products,
like, for example, having a
tampon doubled up with the pad
just so that they can maintain
cleanliness and of course, um,
comply with um the inmate
hygiene policy, um, 150,110, so
that they can, yeah, just
maintain cleanliness, so, uh,
doubling up having different
types of varieties of products
just based on one's needs cause
everyone's cycle is different.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
and I, I agree. I
I'm glad that that's being added
here. So,
Then I will, uh, go to the
bottom of the page on page 2.
And we're talking about being
available for all persons in
custody.
And so, Madam Chair, I'm
wondering how does this apply to
folks who are in solitary
confinement, people who are not
necessarily in the general
population, how does that work
for those folks? How do they get
access, Madam Chair.
OK
Madam Chair, uh, representative
currently as it stands, people
get access to hygiene products
that are distributed throughout
facilities that are in um
administrative segregation, so
it wouldn't really change the
distribution of products if
people are kind of um
administrative segregation.
They'd still get their issuance
of hygiene products, um, it's
just that they would have access
to also tampons, panty liners,
and it would just kind of adds
unless they purchase them, of
course.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, I'm, I
guess.
That, that brings a question up
for me. How do we get these
requested? Because I see in the
language, it says they could ask
for a combination. Is there
going to be a form that each,
each inmate fills out before.
The the week's end to get that,
you know, I need 20 or or 15 or
maybe 5 of this one and then 20
of this one. I don't know if
that's high or low, as again,
I'm the only gent on here, so I
apologize, but I just want to
make sure that there there is
some kind of good communication
with the wardens and with the
the facility managers and things
to make sure that each
individual gets their access
without being denied in any way,
Madam Chair. Yeah, Madam Chair
representative, again, that's um
not like how they choose to run
their
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I guess I, since
it's not in their
prescriptively, I just want, I
just want the intent of your
legislation to to be applied
across the board. So if a warden
says, oh well, we, we gave them
access. There's like a a box
that we put out there in in
general pop, and everyone has
access to it and let's just say
it just
People ransack it immediately
once it's out there and they
start hoarding it. And then
there's a situation where, yeah,
you technically did have access,
but what if you were disabled
and you couldn't, couldn't walk
as fast to the box or something
like that. I just want to make
sure that there is nothing that
can be said, oh well, we're
following your statute, but
Everyone has sufficient access
at the beginning of the day and
so.
You know, I just think, could
you, could you clarify that? How
are we making sure that that is
also followed so that people
actually do get access, Madam
Chair, and I'm sorry, that was
quite a question the compound.
So again, I don't, and I don't
wanna, Madam Chair
representative, I don't want to
be too repetitive in my answer,
but, um, we do trust our wardens
to be running their facilities
in an area where that is not the
case, and that would be, you
know, a separate issue entirely
of not running a safe and
healthy institution, um.
So this
We are not prescribing how they
do that because at present they
already do, Madam Chair um and
not to be repetitive again, um,
Madam Chair Representative, um.
I feel that the Borden, uh, the
wardens of the facilities would
have, um, it's under their
purview to ensure that they're
maintaining facilities and I
think they're doing a great job
at making sure that people do
have what they need, um, but
this will just be an add-on and
also, yeah, provide dignity to
people so that when they get
back into the community and if
you're interested, Madam Chair
Representative.
Well, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I would say that
um.
That's a hard question to answer
because it really depends on
who's implementing, uh, whoever
you're commanding officers on
the pod, I really uh.
Embrace.
Representatives, uh, question
about how do we ensure access,
um, I think it's an important
question and maybe that's a
different piece of legislation
isn't my wheelhouse, um, but I
do believe that the access to
The 3 different types of
products is um transformative in
our uh cultural system.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and
That, that helps me. So.
Regarding the products
themselves, we have uh
Liners, tampons, pads, and other
options.
With, with the option to choose
a combination. So is this
Could you just tell me if this
is all inclusive because I know
I've gotten an email, I think, I
forget the individual, but they
were formerly incarcerated
person and they were saying
something about
Some kind of of underwear that
was
That was also included in in
that.
And I, I do not know, and I'm
sorry, I need to find the email,
but it's so early, but they said
it's some kind of underwear that
was special. It was, it was
prescriptive in some way, and
I'm just wondering if you could
confirm for you that that
exists.
Mhm.
OK, so with that individual,
Madam Chair, have access under
this
legislation
not currently, no, this is just
for like single.
Like I, like I said, Madam Chair
Representative, I can confirm
that those products exist, but
there are, they are very
expensive, reusable but
expensive and really heavy and
contain a lot of peas, so.
People have opinions on those,
but those are
Thank you, and yeah, I'm, I'm a
big opponent of PPI.
Hay fists.
PA, whatever it is, PFAS, right?
PFOS.
So
for every chemicals and uh yeah,
so thank you for the answers.
This helped me a little bit. I,
I do have some questions about
that, that last item that I
asked about, but I'll continue
listening to the debate and
thank you so much,
Representative Anya Nonu, Madam
Chair, and experts for being
here and thanks for your, your
insight because it helped
educate me and I appreciate
that. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Lord, uh, thank you, Madam Chair
representative experts. So to
clarify what you were asking,
because you don't know, flows
and they need.
A product I thought Clara Clara
there for you.
Thank you, Madam. Thank you.
Afraid to say, to say things. I
do have a few questions and then
I do have
Um, we had some didn't get in in
time, but I wanted to ask you if
they'd be representative. So
when people are in the jails or
they're in the prisons, they do
have things that they could do.
Do you know how many people are
currently in the jails or
prisons. I'm trying to get an
ID. I know you said they could
buy them, but do you have an
idea of how many people are
working or how many.
What percentage of jobs are
available to people in jails and
prisons.
I'm sorry. Oh, ma'am secretary.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
a handheld that might be better.
Uh, OK, good morning, Madam
Chair. Sure, I, I mean, I can
speak for the prisons but not
the jails in the prisons,
probably about 80% of our
populations are working in some
form, uh, some of them might be
in treatment, but that's
considered a job and they are
paid for it. Um, but in our
system, the, uh, the inmates can
choose to purchase additional
sanitary products, uh, but they
are provided with the base of
what they need. So like if they
wanted a specific brand or
something, then they could make
it because I have another
question you might be able to
answer.
Because right now it says that
the correctional department says
that they already provide.
People that menstruate. So, is
that correct? Cause they're
saying that they Madam Chair and
uh Representative Lord, yes,
it's correct. The, the, the
state corrections department
already does provide those. OK.
So, Madam Chair, representative.
You the prisons, they all have
commentary, um, and are tampons
available in those commissaries
for purchase.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, yes, uh, prisons have
commissary. I don't know if all
the jails have commissary
situations, but I do know that
our prisons do, and there are
items available for purchase,
but they're sort of like if you,
like I said, if you want a
specific brand, then you would
make that purchase through
commissary, otherwise, we're
providing uh all of the
available products to the person
at the request and we're
providing whichever product it
is that they are asking for. OK.
Thank you,
Madam Chair. So, Madam Chair.
submitted, we're not madam,
I'm not asking about. I just
want to ask if she thinks
they're friendly or not. That's
all. Thank you. Um, one of the
things I noticed in the bill.
I'm sure representative on page
119, um, I was thinking you
should probably add the word
halfway when people get out of
prison, people are in rehab.
That's still a, a government
funded entity and otherwise they
would be excluded. Uh, would you
think that that would be
possibly?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'm not entirely against the
concept, but tuition, you have
the opportunity to work at a
regular and then since part of
the purpose of a halfway, I'm
not necessarily against adding
that language, but once you're
in a halfway house it is.
A man because they're also
including when you look at
because they're going through a
rehab process, so I would
consider that, and I would tell
anybody out who is in a
situation, Madam Chair
Representative.
I would say that, um, centering
it on cursorral.
Settings is appropriate because
in the carceral city uh setting,
we, it's like the worst kind of
inflation you could.
Experience, right? As, uh, the,
I forget your title, um, you
know, you're, you're making
sense versus
Dollars and you're only allowed
to order things through the
commissary, which everything is
really inflated. So when you're
in a treatment,
facility, you're not necessarily
experiencing the same thing as
being incarcerated. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair. Sorry, in case
you didn't.
See?
Thank you, Madam Chair Rusted.
Um, the other question I had,
uh, about an amendment is
OK.
Because the wording is hygiene
products, these products used
during menstruation or uterine
or vaginal bleeding.
I was thinking possibly striking
out and include.
And shall.
Include
Uh, Panella's tampons, because
there are some people who.
What I want to see is more
clarification that
Somebody from
That I believe the way it's
worded and maybe being correct,
is that it's saying that we have
to supply one of these, but I
want to make sure that it was
clear that it shall include
because you will have people
that need a tampon and a pad.
You will have people who don't
want to use tampons for
religious reasons, so I'm saying
to to say that they shall
include all of them to be.
Their representative, um, I am a
little confused about which part
you intend to strike because as
I look at Bill, as I look at the
bill line 2, no, sorry, it's
sorry, Madam Chair, I'm sorry.
Page one line 24. I'm sorry, it
is early and this is.
So where it says,
Bleeding
And I, I would say shall include
instead of includes because when
you say it's going to include,
they'll say, well, we're just
gonna buy a bunch of panty
liners or we are not enough.
Some people don't want to use
tampons. Some people need both,
so I was just thinking if you
change the wording and and I'm
not saying you have to, I'm just
saying to consider it, if you
putall include, now there's all
of them have to be included.
Yes, well, if, if I, Madam
Chair, represented if I, if I
could direct you to page 2.
Lines 45 policy shall jump down.
To line 9.
To choose from panty liners,
tampons, and pads. So the Xiao
language is in the bill. So the
last one that I have, we go back
to PIAs.
riser Black and I, you were on,
um, is it Radioactive and
hazardous material, hazardous
material.
And boy howdy did we learn a lot
about PA, all the cattle out in
Clovis. So ma'am Cha
representative.
Some tampons have peas in them.
Would you consider
Um, or at least think about, uh,
menstrual hygiene.
Line 22 and 1, it doesn't
matter. Would you consider
something, putting something in
there that.
tampons with PAs would be the
brand that they, I know it's a
chunk.
Not a huge chunk, but that they
would not be giving.
People that menstruate PIA
tampons. Madam Chair
Representative, um, were up to
me, I would outlaw them in the
manufacturing process entirely.
Um.
However, since
The issue that we're not solidly
in statute, then where we buy
the products from PIA's in their
product, Maam Chair
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, because I,
I would
Products out that have PAs and
then find it in their blood for
me. So, uh, that's all. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Rubio.
Madam Chair, I moved to pass a
motion on the table for a due
pass. Um, is there, are there
any objections?
Representative B block.
Representative Lord.
Uh, no, with the minor.
Representative Ramiro,
Representative Thompson. Yes,
Madam Vice Chair. Yes,
Madam Chair
explain his vote. Thank you so
much.
Oh yes, gave it.
Um, you have a due pass on House
Bill 250, um.
Represent.
OK, well, the other day in our
caucus meeting, they were
talking and I, I had to use my
phone as a gavel, and that
worked.
Quite well. So keep that in
mind, Madam Chair. But I, I
really have some concerns about
the PFOS. I do, and I also have
some concerns about that.
Um
Halfway house not being
included, myself and
Representative Lord we just
prepped some amendments because
we wanted to address those
concerns and it definitely
doesn't mean I'm a no on the
floor, just means I'm, I'm a no
for now until PFOS is addressed.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
And I just might add I'm
carrying a bill that will
exclude POS from a lot of our
consumer um
products, yeah.
with Puss.
And our cookware.
So thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members.
Next we have House Bill 253, um,
the ceiling of certain court
records, um, representative
Rubio.
you bet. I'm sure whenever
you're ready.
Uh, thank you, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
we're here to present on House
Bill 253. Um, House Bill 253 is
a bill that protects tenants by
automatically sealing eviction
court records when a case is
filed. It does 3 main things. So
if the landlord wins the case,
the record becomes public after
15 days unless tenant appeals or
they can't or court decides to
keep it sealed. Um, the second
thing that it does is after 3
years, the record will be sealed
again.
Uh, tenants won't have to
disclose sealed evictions, and
they can petition to reseal
records.
If it serves justice, and then
the bill also ensures that the
eviction records won't be sold
or shared in bulk and allows
access only for specific legal
and governmental purposes, and I
have two experts here, um, that
are with the New Mexico Center
for Housing.
At law and um it's surge and
Allison and um give some brief.
And then maybe just add on to
what I've just. Yeah,
absolutely. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, um, uh,
uh, as representative indicated,
this bill really does have, um,
3 goals, increasing housing
stability for all New Mexicans.
Did you state your name? I'm
sorry I'm sorry, Alison
Friedman. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
this, this bill does have 3
goals, increasing housing
stability for all New Mexicans,
increasing information accuracy
and ensuring that um integrity
of our judicial process.
Right now, any tenant that's um
ends up in eviction court, has
an eviction on their record for
the rest of their life. That's
true whether a tenant wins the
case or loses the case, um, and
that's because of the billion
dollar out of state tenant
screening industry that is
currently controlling
essentially the records in New
Mexico. Um, right now, if a
tenant is taken to eviction
court, their name is put on an
online docket, uh, tenant
screening companies pull all of
those names and then sell or
code those as having an
eviction, sell that.
information to landlords we're
paying quite a bit of money for
that inaccurate information, um,
and the only way to really sort
of solve that issue is through
sealing all eviction cases on
the front end, which is the crux
of what this bill really does.
All cases are sealed at the
front end, um, and then there's
a bifurcated process for
unsealing to ensure information
accuracy. Essentially, if a
tenant wins the case, the case
remains sealed. If, um, the
landlord gets a judgment of
possession and wins, the case
gets unsealed and
That way, um, you're getting
more accurate information. Uh
good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, my name is Serge Martinez
and stand for.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience, um, is there anyone
here in opposition?
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. My name is Joe Thompson.
I'm a registered lobbyist for
the apartment Association of New
Mexico, and I had the
opportunity, a very pleasurable
opportunity to visit with
Professor Martinez and Alison.
And I guess we still have some
lingering questions,
specifically, what, how do you
reconcile
Say the court, the ceiling of
the records, and the information
that Experian and the credit
agencies have, I'm afraid, I'm
afraid you'd have two separate
sort of tracks.
And it's possible that some of
the mom and pop operations who
may not.
Uh, they may not use Exper would
be at a disadvantage because
They would only be doing what's
available in the public records.
It's my understanding that those
Experian records are only purged
every, I know they're supposed
to be purged more often, but I,
I'm led to believe they don't
change for 7 years.
So that's a concern, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors and the realtors
respectfully opposed the bill.
Uh, the reason for their
opposition is that access to
eviction records is a critical
tool that property owners use to
identify potential tenants who
may pose a risk due to
nonpayment previously to um.
Having uh engaged in some type
of property damage or lease
violations. And so without this
information, landlords are left
to make decisions based on
incomplete data, and that
exposes them to the financial
risk associated with managing
their property. It also means
that they may unknowingly rent
to someone who has multiple
convictions. And what I would
point to is in the state of New
Mexico, we have a large
multi-family units, but we also
have smaller mom.
pops that are uh renting a few
units to folks, and they may not
have access to all sources of
information and so when you cut
off uh a source of information,
you may have a detrimental
impact on, on those smaller uh
rent, um, smaller landlords.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Anyone else in
opposition?
Is there people? OK, um.
They say your name and also one
minute, please.
We have Enrique Cano.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Enriqueel, and I am
speaking in opposition of the
House bill of House Bill 253 on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
There are, of course, always two
sides to a story, and one
important side is that landlords
have bills to pay too. Landlords
are in the service business.
It's an expensive business that
often requires a large uh
capital commitment and the
expenses associated with ongoing
maintenance and repair, um,
eviction is not a simple
process.
Landlords don't want to go
through the hassle of eviction,
if they can avoid that. Uh, we
should also keep in mind that a
great number of landlords aren't
some faceless giant corporate
conglomerate, uh, rather they
are small business people
striving to make ends meet just
like everyone else. Uh, we, we
do urge a no vote on House Bill
253. Thank you.
Next is Alan Lee.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name is Alan Lesek, and I'm the
executive director of the
apartment Association in New
Mexico. So the first part of
this bill with the uh the first
initial ceiling, you know, does
read similar to the California
law, um, but where this really
differs is this adds an
arbitrary ceiling of all records
after 3 years, even if there is
a judgment against the resident,
and as was mentioned, this
really disadvantages the
smallest of housing providers
who often rely on court records
rather than, uh, you know, which
are free rather than credit
bureaus. Um, this also seals the
records of more serious.
convictions such as substantial
violations and really 3 years is
just too short a time for owners
to make informed and practical
decisions that not only protect
their property, but also protect
the other residents. So with
that, we stand respectfully in
opposition to this policy. Thank
you.
OK. Now, those who are here in
support.
Great. One minute, please, and
be sure to state your name.
Madam Chair, representatives, my
name is Isabella Villen Naranjo,
and I'm a legislative fellow
with the Quality New Mexico. I
stand here in support of HB 253.
I remember a point where I also
truly believe that a responsible
money management is what led to
eviction. Then I moved into my
first apartment in Albuquerque,
and within a year, my rent
jumped from 970 to 1250 for a
one bedroom.
Uh, being my first lease, I
wasn't aware that after paying
$1200 in deposits and pet fees,
I would be left with, I would be
left to worry about my rent
rising every 3 months. I was
quickly being priced out of my
home, not being able to save up
for another one. I spent many
nights sleepless as I realized a
40 hour work week and relying on
the food banks still didn't
leave me enough money.
Though I put every last penny in
rent utilities and other bills,
late payments started to stack
up and evictions seemed
unavoidable.
Worried that I would ruin my
ability to find housing in the
future. I had, I had to be
granted early access to my
inheritance in order to break my
lease and move into a studio
apartment from a local private
landlord. Though my situation is
common, the opportunity I had to
solve it is not. I urge it to
pass.
Um, good morning,
Madam Chair, we'll take care of.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Winter Torres and I am
the CEO and founder of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
diversion. Um, I also would like
to state the Public Safety
Coalition has endorsed this
bill.
We work on these cases every day
and I think there is a
fundamental, um,
piece that the industry side is
taking for as an assumption
which just does not exist and
that that that that there is a
fair um eviction system going on
in this state and that's just
not true about 90% of tenants
don't even show up. They don't
really understand that they have
a court case and um now we have
nobody representing them
essentially because legal aid is
taking no cases right now and
has not taken a housing case
since last summer. Um,
There is not capacity in any of
the nonprofits to do the
litigation that could um
hopefully eventually handle
these issues.
But we are a very poor state and
housing prices have gone up by
60% compared to 20% in the
nation
by the Pew report and um we very
much need this bill to keep
people housed and not homeless.
Thank you.
Anyone else, oh, hi, madam
chairwoman, members of the
committee, I'm Melissa Kenny
Guyer, former Oregon legislator
and chair of Human Services and
housing there in the in Oregon.
I'm also part of the Affordable
Housing Coalition here, and I'm
on the Community Development
commission in Santa Fe that
oversees affordable housing. So,
um, information is really
important, but it's important
that it be accurate and it's
really unfair to have eviction
records out there when it hasn't
been decided by the courts. We
have way too many.
tenants who don't get
representation from legal aid
and other sources end up on the
streets. This is a common sense
bill. Thank you so much.
5 people on Zoom will take the
1st 5 and 1 minute each, please.
Hi, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Deanna Creighton. I'm
the co-founder of the housing
nonprofit Amparo in Albuquerque,
New Mexico. I urge your support
for House Bill 253. I wanted to
share that the data we've
gathered from the hundreds of
families over the past 5 years
that we have served with the
eviction prevention and rent
assistance shows that evictions
are often the result of a
temporary financial hardship for
renters, but an eviction record
can create lifelong barriers to
housing stability, and we've
seen that this makes it very
difficult for
to secure a home in the future.
Sealing these records would
protect these individuals from
being permanently marked by an
eviction which follows them in
the databases previously
mentioned that are used by
landlords and tenant screening
services and financial
institutions. This bill aligns
with our efforts to reduce
homelessness, to protect New
Mexicans from the lasting harm
of the eviction history and to
promote economic security for
our communities, please vote yes
on this bill. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Irina Begay, I
am the housing justice community
organizer with McKinley
Community Health Alliance, I
support this bill. I, um, have
also experienced the aftermath
of an eviction notice and being
a family of 6, it was a struggle
to surpass that record and to
secure a stable housing.
So speaking from my own
experience and the experience of
others, um, this bill is
essential.
And it is not a representation
of us. It, it's a temporary
hardship, so, and also I can
speak to the fact that not only
does it just affect the renter.
It's also an impact on all the
individuals within the rental
space, so being that if that
person is a minor,
unfortunately, that will be
picked up down the road. So I
definitely support this bill.
Thank you.
Um hello, my name is Catherine
McGill, and I support for and
I'm with the New Mexico Black
Leadership Council. I urge
support for HB 253, which
ensures that tenants are not
permanently punished by stealing
records that prevent them from
securing stable housing. Large
corporate landlords often claim
to speak for mom and pop
property owners to oppose bills
like this, but HB 253 is
designed to protect both tenants
and small landlords. It allows
small property owners access to
necessary rental history while
preventing corporate databases.
from weaponizing past evictions
against renters forever. This
bill is about fairness and
second chances, and eviction on
record where due to job loss and
medical emergency or other
hardship can follow a person for
years, even after they've
recovered financially. Sealing
these records after a reasonable
period, prevents homelessness,
stabilizes families and
strengthens communities. Housing
is a human right, and we must
stop punishing people for
struggling in an economy where
wages haven't kept up with the
Good morning, ma'am. Good
morning, madam chair and members
of the committee. This is Kurt
Reger, director of Lutheran
Advocacy Ministry of New Mexico,
and we also represent the
position of the Mexico
Conference of Churches on this
bill. We're here to speak in
favor of HB 253. I hope that we
all, we can all agree that there
are far too many New Mexicans
that live paycheck to paycheck
with just one major crisis away
from pushing them past the edge
of financial survival.
If you're like me, you know that
all can collapse around an
individual or family, including
losing their home, and being
evicted is far more common than
ever before.
There are so many reasons that
lead a person to the point of
being evicted from a home or
apartment. We believe it's
possibly the worst moment in a
person's life should not follow
them forever regardless of what
led them to the point of
eviction. I don't think any of
us would want that for our lives
either. We believe this is an
issue of what's reasonable and
if a potential tenant has 3
years of good tenancy and is
eviction free, that is
sufficient data for landlords in
its fair and reasonable. We urge
your support for HB 253, and
thank you for the opportunity to
share this position this
morning.
Hello.
Hello, my name is Maria Grego,
and I'm the director of economic
equity at the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty, and we thank
the sponsors for this important
bill. Uh, we stand in support of
this bill because it removes
barriers, uh, unnecessary
barriers to stable housing, um,
eviction records create
long-lasting barriers. Many
renters who face eviction, um,
often due to temporary financial
hardships are permanently
blacklisted from future housing,
even if the eviction was
dismissed or resolve resolved.
Um, many landlords automatically
reject applicants with any
eviction history regardless of
the circumstances or how much
time has passed. This leaves
families trapped in cycles of
housing instability even after
they have regained financial
security.
This bill strikes a fair balance
between landlords and tenants.
It recognizes that renters can
have an eviction case filed
against them due to
circumstances beyond their
control, especially in New
Mexico, where short time periods
to pay rent leave tenants with
very little time to catch up
when they experience a financial
setback.
Um, evictions essentially
function as a scarlet E, even
when a tenant wins their case or
the filing was made an error,
the record can permanently block
access to housing and
employment.
Thank you. Uh, we, we believe
this is an important bill and we
stand in strong support of it.
Thank you.
Um.
Is there anything else you'd
like to say, Representative?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I just wanted to end with some
comments that I didn't share
earlier, and that is that we
have been working on issues, um,
for housing for since 2021,
shortly after the pandemic
started and this bill
specifically has been worked,
um,
It's been, we, there's a cohort
of housing um uh housing
representatives within the House
of Representatives that have um
worked on this bill for most of
last year. It's been vetted
within the interim and, and the
folks here, um, my experts have
been working on this issue for a
very, very long time. This is a
bill that will help to provide
additional tenant rights, which
don't exist in New Mexico.
Tenant rights have very, very
few rights, and so.
This is one of those tools in
the toolbox that we need and um
especially during a time right
now where we have an incredible
housing crisis, and so I urge
you all to vote yes, um, and so
thank you very much.
Um, first we have in the
committee representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and experts.
So
I do have some questions on this
one. I, I guess I'm gonna start,
Madam Chair.
Just on page one with the new
material.
Authorized attorney, Madam Chair
Representative is on line 22.
So
Who would this individual be in
in regard to the tenant, would
they have to hire their own
legal counsel to get this record
unsealed, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, I'll defer to,
to my experts here.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, this
authorized attorney is someone
that, um, so I just want to
start with any lawyer or any
landlord or any tenant, that is
a part of the case has access to
the sealed records. Um, so
there's no question there. This
is a very limited number of
individuals um who might need to
see records that are sealed for
the purposes of representing uh
either a tenant or a landlord.
So it might be, let's say a
legal aid attorney who has not
yet entered an appearance in a
case.
But it needs to go in that very
morning, uh, to, to represent a
tenant and um needs to see, you
know, the records in the, in the
file. So it's a very limited
number right now all attorneys,
landlords, tenants that are part
of cases, that's the same as, as
it currently exists. Um, so,
this is a very limited um
exception.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. And then we're
talking about the court record,
which court are we referring to,
that they would have to go in
front of Adam Chair,
representative.
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative Madam Chair
Representative, um, this would
generally be the magistrate
courts um or the Metropolitan
Court here in Albuquerque, that
is where most eviction cases are
are heard. And so when we're
talking about the sealed court,
court generally maintained by
those sports.
OK, so either one of those, so
magistrate or metro.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative next here, I'm
going to go on page 2.
And we're talking about the
eviction and then we have some
things that we list for the
owner.
manager and it says mobile home
park, trailer park.
Or park
to regain possession and use of
a mobile home, mobile home
space, space, possession. I'm
just wondering, it seems like a
little, little clunky to me. I
don't know if that's intentional
versus space instead of just the
mobile home space. Couldn't we
just say the word space?
And just be inclusive on that,
but I don't know how that was
drafted, so, Madam sure I'll
just ask that. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Yeah, can you
use to say more about that,
please?
So I'm just reading it. It says
uh.
The eviction of someone from a
mobile home park, trailer park.
Or Park.
To regain possession. So I just,
I just cannot under, I just
don't, I can't.
See what just a park would be
and I'm just wondering, could
you give me some more
information on, on that because
I know where we live in town,
we've trailer parks, we have
mobile home parks, and then we
have like maybe like a KOA
campground, which may be the
park. I just want to know what
what kind of
park are we talking regarding
that? Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. This
is, there's a broad.
People live in a in a variety of
different places, they rent a
lot of different places and this
is specifically to cover, and I
don't know if you all wanted to
add to that. Yeah, thank you,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, this language also is um
directly act as well as the Mole
Home Park Act. So, um, we
attempted to keep the OK and I
see a referenced that, so I was
just wondering where that came
from. So that does help me on
that. So, down on the next.
One, it's number 4.
It says on line 16 starting
there, but it does not include a
person or persons jointly or
severally, who as owner leases
the entire premises to the
lessee of vacant land for.
Apartment use. So, Madam Chair
Representative,
How, how would that work? Would
it be someone who just owns land
and they lease it to somebody
who built an apartment complex
on that, uh, I just am not
really understanding what that
portion is. And that's starting
line 16 and it goes to line 19
regarding the owner, Madam
Chair, and representative. Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Alford.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you. Um, this language
also is um directly from the
uniform owner of resident
Relations Act and the Mobile
Home Park Act, so it is um from
uh already existing law, um, in
terms of how it functions, um,
that would, that essentially
this is designed to ensure that
we're talking about, um, you
know, owners of mobile home
parks differentiating between
let owners, um, is what that
language is meant to do, but
again, it is already pulled
from.
OK, that, that clears it up for
me. OK, Madam Chair
Representative, then on page 3
we're looking at.
court staff and then authorized
staff of the judicial department
of the state. Who would those
folks include other than just
the judge and and their
immediate staff who would have
access to that sealed record.
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um.
I'll, I'll hand it over to um my
uh my expert here.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you. um, authorized court
staff could include, for
example, the courts who would be
sealing or unsealing records at
times. So this is to um from
lessons learned from other
states, this is to ensure that,
um, you know,
Folks who who need access to the
records to actually seal and
unseal, um, although much of it
will be automatic, uh, do have
the appropriate access, so, um,
it's just the core folks at the
court who, who will need access
to do.
OK, so mostly AOC staff and
maybe some other folks that are
officials in those, those
capacities, OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. So I'm,
I'm now going to go to B on page
2. It's on line 12, upon the
commencement of an eviction.
Madam Chair Representative, does
this include any and all
evictions because I know that
there are many reasons for
evictions when it comes to
nuisance, for example, there
could be a domestic violence
situations, there could be
damage to the unit.
There could be uh an individual
who's just repeatedly broken the
the rules of the uh
Of the lease when it comes to
the laundry room or things like
that. So it could go from
anything to an extreme where
there's like holes in the walls,
people are pulling out the
copper from the pipes and stuff,
which I've seen happen in
Albuquerque or just you, you,
you didn't or you walked your
dog and it, it pooped on the
lawn and and that was not OK and
it was repeated and so you got
your lease broken and you were
evicted. So how does that work
versus the, the most grievous
offenses versus the most minor,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. It's for
any eviction.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And so I guess I
would just kind of say I'd love
that to be tightened a little
bit because some, I've even
heard of some cases where there
are people who had meth labs and
things in in an apartment. And
so that could really damage the
the structure of that building
for a long time because a lot of
that you can't just take it out
with the one of those machines
that cleans the air and stuff.
So I'm just wondering, have we
considered maybe making that.
Only to those that are not
extreme circumstances where
somebody was doing something
extraordinarily grievous, Madam
Chair and Representative.
My expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, the ceiling
on the front end it at the time
that the case is filed is for
all eviction cases, but the
nuance comes in the unsealing
and gets it exactly what you're
talking about representative.
So, a records remain seas where
a tenant wins the case, records
get unsealed so that everyone in
the public can see them if a
tenant loses the case if the
landlord is granted, um, uh, a
judgment of possession. And so
in the instances you're
describing, um, those records
would become unsealed and would
be available to the public.
The ceiling on the front end is
really to ensure information
accuracy and to ensure that
there are those two bifurcated
paths. If you don't steal
records on the front end, the
billion dollar out of state
tenant screening industry is
getting their hands on those
records and not differentiating
between those two groups of
tenants at all. So this actually
helps promote um the
differentiation that, that
you're pointing out,
representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, because I know
we heard something about the
credit reports and like I think
it's
I forget which ones, Experian,
FICO, Equifax, etc. So I know
that there is kind of lag
sometimes, but I just want to be
clear, after 3 years, regardless
of the offense.
It would automatically be or
sealed.
After 3 years regardless of if
they were in the wrong or not.
Isn't that what I'm kind of
understanding on this one, Madam
Chair, and Representative
experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, Representative W
defer to my expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, yes, after 3
years, um, which is a total of
36 rental periods, um, the
records would be, um, the
records would be resealed, so
there's a substantial amount of
time during those 36 rental
periods for all, you know,
landlords, anyone in the public
to be aware of what has happened
in that case. That's why the
combination of that front end
ceiling to stop the tenant
screening companies and then the
back end, um, ceiling leaves
open a good period of time for
everyone in the public.
to be able to see, um, you know,
what has happened in a
particular case. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair, but in any case, it
would just be 3 years where it
would automatically.
Just switch off and be sealed
even if that was a, a bad.
Really horrible offense. I just
want to make sure that that is a
yes. Is that correct, Madam
Chair, Representative experts.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
yes, that's correct. I do want
to point out that um in terms
of, uh, let's say a substantial
lease violation. Those normally
have, you know, some sort of
criminal charge associated as
well. This bill does nothing in
terms of affecting, you know,
criminal records in terms of
credit, the credit reporting,
um, all of that is often
associated with um the
representative. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative,
because I know that there are
probably some cases out there
where if this did happen, and
I've seen in other states, I
think.
There there was a list from the
AOC. It talked about all the
other states that had it. And I,
I did see some news articles
about folks who just pretty much
were were couch surfing for 3
years. And then they, they said,
OK, it's off my record now I can
go get a lease. And so Madam
Chair Representative, do we have
any, any reservations about that
situation where uh a landlord
would say, OK, there's nothing
on the record. Let's give them a
lease and then that same
pattern of activity continued.
Is there anything in this bill
that would, that would let them
claw back that lease because of
the lack of that information,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
can defer to my expert here, um,
on that, I just will say that
part of the reason that we have
been working on this legislation
is because we, we, we recognize
that there are concerns around
landlords and tenants and
Um, tenants.
And the experiences going on
there, but um this this bill is
is here to reflect solely
tenants who have minor, um,
issues and have.
Could, could be denied housing
because of something that.
Didn't
Like nobody, I guess it's, it's,
it's a philosophical issue too,
because I don't think anybody
should be denied housing, and
this is one of those tools that
we're trying to support tenants
in in in in that. And so I'll
also hand it over to my.
Experts
Oh sure. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, uh,
If I understand your correct,
your question correctly, could
you claw back a lease if you
find out that there was bad
behavior in the past, um.
This bill doesn't provide for
that. No, nothing we have out
there provides for that. But
A repeat of Bad baby the least
or New Mexico landlord tenant
law would, of course, um lead to
an eviction and the landlord
regaining possession of the
property. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. So I guess
in that scenario, it kind of
This bill wouldn't really
address that in, in a way
because
Our goal here is to make sure
that people have housing.
And then when that individual
It may not even be a fault of
their own. It could be a a some
kind of a
Scenario in their life where
they have just issues.
And it's just a repeating
occurrence.
And so I think that that person,
if they did find out, or even if
they didn't and it was repeated,
it could end up in another cycle
where they have to go back to
couch surf for 3 years, and then
wait for their
Record to be expunged again or
at least sealed, not expunged.
So, uh,
I think that's just an
interesting just point that I'd
like to make because I have
heard from, from folks in my
district, because I have a lot
of trailer parks in my district
and there's a lot of turnover
when it comes to trailer parks.
And then there are also a lot
of, there's a turnover when it
comes to our apartments because
we are a military town. We have
an Air Force base right outside.
So a lot of those leases, they,
they get their orders and they
have to leave within a week or
something. So there's a lot of
vacancies and a lot of
uncertainty already. And I just
want to make sure that those
folks have some kind of, kind
of.
protection when it comes to
those leases, because I know a
lot of the leases are built in
where if you have orders,
military orders, it's
automatically, we, we have to
let you. So how does that how
does that apply to to military
leases, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative there's
other, there's other things in
the in the in in statute that.
And support, I guess, what,
what's really important about
this piece of legislation and,
and I guess it hasn't been
mentioned um enough is that with
this tool, it will allow for, I,
I feel greater communication
between the, the tenant and the
landlord. And so in situations
that you've brought up, I think
those are, are scenarios that.
Ha, um, but this is specifically
to ensure that if somebody has
to be evicted, that, and if it's
a circumstance that you've just
raised, that this isn't going to
impact their housing in the
future. OK, thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative and
I, I know it's kind of not on
the bill, so I apologize. It's
just
concern that I have in my
community regarding housing. And
I think we all probably have
have that same concern in our
communities when it comes to
housing because we just need
more housing. So and affordable
housing at that. So, Madam
Chair, representative, my next
question is on page 20. This is
a technical question. Uh, I'm
sorry, page 3, pardon me. Page 3
line 20. I'm like, your bill did
not just grow by 100, 150% right
now, but
Uh, it's on line 2 says orders
that the court records should
remain sealed, and I know a lot
of the time in statute we we use
the word shall. So how does the,
how's the word should?
How is that different than the
word shall in that instance,
Madam Chair, Representative,
just drafting wise. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Can you
repeat where you're at?
I'm on page 3, 20.
Right after the word record.
I'll defer to my expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, the, this is
an instance where um the parties
would agree that the record
remains sealed and then create
an order to that effect, um, and
so that's permissive just um to
give deference to the judiciary,
um, to allow the
OK, and thank you, Madam Chair,
and I know that those words.
Like this is not judiciary
Committee. If you go there next,
good luck out there. But uh
But I know the lawyers, they
like the shall and should and so
I'll, I'll leave that there. But
I think that's just something
that I saw that.
Could be flagged there. So,
Madam Chair Representative, next
on B on page 20 or I'm sorry,
page 3, line 21, pardon me. It
says a resident files an appeal.
So how does that appeal process
work? Is that defined in statute
somewhere or how is, how's the
appeal?
How, how do you proceed on an
appeal, Madam Chair,
Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'll defer
to my expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, yes,
this is a combination of um
already existing and it's also
governed by the New Mexico rules
of appeal.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. So
15 days, that helps me. And then
down here on C on page 3 line
25, it says as soon as
practicable.
How does that work when it comes
to our judicial system because
Madam Chair, I know that some
cases or some courts are backed
up for a really long time. And I
looked at the statistics, uh,
right now, and it looks like
during the height of COVID,
there was an average of like
17,000 evictions, and it's
dropped a little bit thankfully,
but it's only about 10,000, but
still, that 10,000 evictions
across the state is a lot, so
I'm wondering how, how do we
process that and then what is
practicable, practicable when it
to uh
That in a like a rural county
like mine where we have a docket
that's super backed up. How does
that work on that, on that end,
Madam Chair and representative
and experts. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, I'll, I'll, I'll
defer to my expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, this
language was included, um, after
speaking with the administrative
office of the courts to ensure
and address their exact concern,
which is that, um, you know,
different courts throughout the
state have different, uh, docket
loads, there's some varying
amount of time to, um, you know,
get to these particular records,
um, to, to reseal them. So this
is an intended to um create some
supports for uh individual um
court staff who are the
ones who are going to be doing
this and, you know, to provide
sort of the, the leeway that
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I'm glad
that there's been some
coordination with the AOC just
to see what they might need
because I know different courts
are definitely very different.
And then I'll go to the next
page, page 4. I have a question
about
Section section are we in?
Whatever this section is,
section one, I suppose, on D, it
says sell when it comes to the
court shall not publish the
names of the parties online or
sell.
Or release a sealed record.
I didn't know that that was a,
you could sell a record from a
public body. Can you just tell
me what that, what that would
mean, and I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Yes, you
can sell, um, I can hand it over
to my um Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative. Um, yes, this is
just to ensure, again that the
tenant screening companies are
not well, so this is just to
ensure that I'm in sort of close
the loop on that. It's just not,
you know, somehow made, made.
OK, thank you.
um, Madam Chair Representative,
that it happens and, and that's
why it's so important to to add
this to the legislation is
because, um, a lot of our
information and our data is
being OK, thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative. And
then is there any kind of
process in here where if there
is a third party that does get
it, I know that there are some
background check websites. I
can't think of any right now. I,
I was looking them up last
night, but some
Landlords use those as a
A resource when it comes to
Seeing who they will rent to. Is
there anything in this that can
require that website to take it
down after 3 years, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That's a really
interesting Friday night, um,
to, um, and I'll, I'll, I'll
hand it over to my
to my uh my experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, this
bill creates a, it does not
include anything to require them
to take it down, but it creates
a process whereby you can
potentially hold, um, those,
those companies accountable. So
that back end ceiling after 3
years creates a situation where
no one in the public should then
be able to see those records,
um, down the line, and that
opens up the possibility to then
hold, um, you know, the
companies that you're discussing
representative tenant screening
companies, anyone who's calling
these records responsible, um,
potentially either through fees.
or through litigation because
they shouldn't, they shouldn't
have access to those records at
that point. Um, so this bill
does not include that
specifically but creates
avenues, um, for.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. All right, so,
uh, I'm, I'm just gonna go to F
now.
It's tone, but the sealed court
record.
So it shall be sealed again.
upon a residents petition
indicating that sealing of the
court record would be in the
interest of justice. So it was
already sealed previously.
So they could appeal this, is
this kind of like that appeal
process, and then how many times
can they appeal? I don't see a
limit as 2 or 3 or however many
times. So could they just
immediately appeal right after
it was denied until they get.
The answer that they want, Madam
Chair, Representative
Representative,
the owner resident relations Act
and as governor only allows for
one appeal. So that, that um
would be a repeating process,
this particular section,
subsection F, um only applies if
um during that bifurcated
process, um, that I described
earlier, the, the records um are
unsealed, and then, um, you
know, we heard is is not um
sealed in the way that it should
be. So this provides an avenue
for a tenant to then come.
For a court for a judge to make
a determination, um, you know,
weighing the, the interests of
justice and what's important to,
to have access to the public,
um, and to ensure that, you
know, if there are any, any, um,
you know, mistakes that are made
or um other reasons that a
tenant um might need to have
their records sealed that All
right. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but in that, do
they have a limit on how many
appeals?
I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
this, this subsection does not
address appeals, um, and so, you
know, as, as governed by the
appeals procedures in the state.
There's, there is a limit. You
can only have one appeal, but
subsection F, um OK, thank you,
Madam Chair, representative, and
then on the same subsection F on
the next page, it talks about a
compelling need.
Shall be unsealed in order of
the court upon a showing of a
compelling need, and then it
says some some examples such as
scholarly educational
journalistic, governmental
purposes. So I'm wondering how,
how would that
How would you
Obtain such a need, and then how
would you argue that to the core
or is that just some kind of
process internally where you
just say, OK, I'm a journalist,
I need some data regarding how
many
Evictions or I'm a governmental
entity and we're talking about
budgetary or, or a census needs
or whatever it is, how, how
would that go into play, Madam
Chair Representative Rubio
experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I'll hand out to her. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, this process
was developed, um, in connection
with. This is a process, um,
that already exists for, you
know, bulk record requests for,
as you point out, representative
government officials who may
need the data, um, you know,
for, um, additional procedures
and things down the line. So
this is a process that already
exists, but we build to make
sure that there is still
government officials and such,
um, to get records, um, in terms
of compelling need, um, uh,
that, that's something that,
that judges
are generally OK, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative,
because it says here on for for
uh
Pardon me, let's see what pages
this is. I've I've written all
over this page. I apologize. I
think it's page 5, line.
6 to 8.
For bulk record requests a court
order.
Court records sealed pursuant to
this section shall be unsealed
only upon a directive from the
judicial Technology Council. So,
I, I just want to know how, how
is the bulk?
Work, what is bulk, is it 10
records, 100 records, and then
the council, how does that?
How, how do you appeal to the
council? Do you have to file
some kind of lawsuit, legal
paper or is there some kind of
internal process that they
already have to to obtain that,
Madam Chair, Representative
Rubio, experts. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you Representative.
Yes, that process already exists
as mentioned around the um
Uh
The judicial tech that was
described earlier, um, and so
when we're talking about bulk,
this is in relation to when
somebody is requesting, so if
you're a governmental official
who is looking for data to help
you with
Maybe legislation that you're
Sponsoring, then you can
request.
Bulk data.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative Rubio, and
then I guess my last question.
Maybe.
is on the end, when it comes to
the effective date.
So I guess it's probably 90 days
after its enactment, Madam Chair
Representative I see on the FIR.
Or maybe this is the AOC
analysis. Let me see.
Yeah, this is the AOC analysis
218.
And on the first significant
issue, they just say that they
anticipate requiring a minimum
of 6 months to analyze existing
data.
And the effort to identify,
review, and seal existing
records will require a data
analyst and developer. So I'm
wondering, Madam Chair,
Representative, if we might be
amenable to uh making this.
Not as immediate and maybe put a
6 month buffer in there to give
the AOC some time.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um,
we feel comfortable moving
forward at this time with that
date.
OK. All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
for the answers and thank you
both for the answers as well.
Sorry, Madam Chair,
keep on doing that.
Representative Lord.
Thanks.
Uh, I do have a quite a lot of
grants, a lot of funding.
Um
The fact that we do have rental
assistance is based on data, so
won't our Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um, the
subsection saying a moment to
go, um, is intended to ensure
that there is still access to
data for things like tracking
evictions, um, or eviction
prevention and such. So, um, you
know, there is a a process built
into the bill to ensure that the
access to representative if
you're talking about 4G.
Those records have to be that
that it was everything was based
on money. How would they go
about on OK. Madam Chair
Representative, thank you, um,
so this is a process that is
already in place, um, many of
my, my colleagues in the state,
you essentially submit a
request, um, they meet on a very
regular um and they, you know,
have a, a, an internal process
that is already laid out data
collection, those types of
thingsology council, um, you
know, believe for would unseal
those records groups. OK, thank
you, ma'am Chair. We're sorry.
some experts, parents, where
somebody who was
Will chair representative so.
If there is willful defiance.
If there's no criminal charge.
How
I, I mean, how is that going to
affect the next tenant if they
get, if they get stuck at the
next landlord in that situation.
They now have a personal house.
She was not, she never paid rich
to pay for a little bit and then
stop.
Go back and see the eviction.
I'm Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. Um, this is a
situation where, um, I assume
that an eviction would be filed,
would, would gain a judgment of
possession. So the record would
be unsealed. It would then be
unsealed and available to the
public so that future landlords
could actually see that
situation, um.
And so, that, that goes back to
sort of that um if a tenant, you
know, wins the case, it stays
sealed if the tenant loses the
case and future landlords would
be able to see, OK, so Madam
Chair, represent expert so that
Depends on
The landlord sections. I mean,
how, how's that decision made?
I'm sorry, I'm not familiar with
the process here. When that
eviction happens, I know it
takes a long time in other
states to evict somebody. So
what is an Madam Chair
Representative, um, New Mex for
nonpayment of rent, um, we have
a, a 3, so it is a, a, a rapid.
And get married you just
reminded me that I have somebody
who's an expert that I forgot to
Madam Chair Representative,
yeah, yes, beginning the, the
war in that they are, they are
the proceedings, um, in New
Mexico. Thank you, Madam Chair
and represent experts looking
up.
E-rap, I think they don't do
anything. There's no rule
provide rental assistance, but
that has dwindled down.
It's done. OK.
give me Me representative, um.
I noticed that.
This is a lot of moving parts on
this bill. So it doesn't always
go to the credit report, credit
report.
How would that
The person
Madam Chair Representative, um,
this bill does not affect uh
credit.
You know, credit agencies are,
um, to eviction records
themselves, not to criminal
records for chair because I was
looking that they don't usually,
but they can. Yeah, so if
somebody's looking, if they're,
if they're looking at the
records, they're looking at uh
rental history. They look
somebody was removed, the credit
bureau, they have no way to
system to say, no, this is what
happens to help them because
trying to get stuff removed off
there is quite challenging, um.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you. Um, so this bill is
intended to, um, you know, stop
uh anyone who wins an eviction
getting on the credit, uh,
report in the first instance.
That's sort of the front end
ceiling piece and then on the
back end, um, you know, when
records are unsealed, um, that,
that would then um make what's
going on to what's making its
way to credit reports, um, more,
more accurate, um, in the way
that that buy forgive my
represent, there was some
concerns about
This is gonna be have to done.
It's not gonna automatically be
removed. So somebody, they're 3
years is up, that's not
automatic. Who's going to, how
is it gonna happen because I
could hear you now, it's not
automatic. So who is going to be
the tenant?
To have that.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you, um, the language and
to, um, provides that, um, a
quart shall, um, seal the court
record no less than and as close
to 3 years as possible after the
date on which the court record
was made available to the
public, um, and so this is
something that we have talked
about with the administrative,
um, and that they could
potentially do sort of a sweep
every, you know, twice a year,
for example. So trying to
automate this process as much as
possible so that it isn't, you
know, trying to keep
track of every single case, um,
which, which um would be quite
difficult, but, um, does have a
way to do sort of a sweep a
couple of times a year, um, and
that's why this language does
not say exactly 3 years. It says
close to.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
this bill does not provide for
to be sent to a tenant, um, but,
uh,
They they could um potentially
Yeah, I believe that they could
look on in the publicly
available systems to determine
um whether their case is still
showing I was trying to figure
that out in my head how if
you're looking for rental or,
um, representative, the this is
in the FIR.
AOC with the data analyst
developer evictions happening.
It should be sealed, but if
they're saying.
And then how does this
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
Representative Romero and I are
attacking you. We're in the
smaller room if you don't mind,
I'll just stay here. OK.
um, so on the point of chair
when we legalize cannabis, we
said if anything is legal to
pass, so similar to that, it
took a while for AOC to sort of
get um
A system in order to understand
how to be with the law. So in
the same sort of way, um, Madam
Chair, we will see to make sure
that that occurs short to me and
when we chew and certainly, um,
we did go back and wanted to
clarify spungement that we could
do, work with the core 6 months.
Uh may I representative experts.
So what I had heard backlog or
is everything up to date, Madam
Chair, I'm not until we did
clarify in the law a process
some of those, uh, the back,
quote unquote backlog that we're
talking about.
For immediately to my knowledge,
and the backlog was due to some
of the archaic, you know, and
warehouses in the middle of
nowhere, um, to have court
records reviewed, um, that was
what the quote unquote backlog
was with that. We don't at all
mimics that. In fact, expert
will that lead to different and
is that in the budget to develop
that systems fundamental Alison
talk about that.
Um, yes, from a, from a
functional perspective, um,
there's a major difference and
involves the destruction of all
records, ceiling involves
shielding court records from
public view, um, and to, to
several of the other um
questions, maintaining the data
about evictions um for
nonprofit. And so that's why
this bill in public view while
having a process to still be
able to view those records under
limited circumstances, um, as
opposed to, um, in which case,
budget that is gonna, is there
big issues was they have to hire
more people and staff and IT
that ceiling and
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Yeah, so these are sort of 22
separate processes and in the
sense that um in the criminal
space expungement is already
exists and is already going on.
Um, ceiling is something that we
already also have in the court,
um, more sensitive cases like
juvenile cases for domestic
violence cases, and those cases
are already sealed, um, in the
court system. There's already a
process um for certain attorneys
to have um access to those
sealed records comment and the
AOC deals with quite frequently,
um, and that's sort of the
process that the court is
already familiar with.
OK, Madam Chair, and says, does
it have to be proceeding money.
Is there anything in the
Madam Chair, Representative at
this moment.
Like, not to, not at that
specific language or because I
think that might be why they
brought it up.
They also talk about they're
concerned about the proposed
legislation does not clarify.
What would a mixed result might
be talked about I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'm, I cannot speak to the exact
terminology of um mixed results,
um, but, uh, there is, I think,
in the bill, a clear process for
if there is a judgment, if there
is a potentially the mixed
result could be um a judgment of
possession and money, for
example, but the, the key factor
here is whether there's a
judgment of possession and that
unseals the record if there is
not, it remains sealed. So I, I
think if I understand that this
would not be an issue and that
there is that bifurcated
process, um.
Um, but I don't, I don't know
that terminology specifically as
to exactly what I was hoping you
could expand on that.
Um
Mans representative. So if I'm
gonna make sure I'm clear on
this.
We're technically nothing could
happen or could happen or how
to, what is that?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that 15 days is tied to the
owner resident relations Act and
in the New Mexico Rules of Civil
Procedure, um, tenants have 15
days or, um, you know, any
defendant has or whoever loses
the case has 15 days to, um,
appeal. And so that 15 day time
frame is tied to um existing
sure that there would not be a
ceiling. It just has to happen
once, so it cut that person can
appeal.
When somebody, they're big.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I can't speak to the exact
length of every.
It's OK. It's fine with that.
So, what I'm trying to get
somebody could be evicted as it
is. Madam Chair Representative,
um, I, I just want to highlight
that so I think this is a, a, a
corner case um that we're
talking about very infrequently,
but as again, um, intended
When a landlord goes to move
some, maybe you did answer this
one, for the landlord.
Does the landlord then have um
yes,
at that, at that point, um, that
can be pattern for
maam. Thank you, representative.
I'm sorry. That's funny.
Uh, thank you, rep. Um.
Are there any other questions? I
just, um.
OK, we have a, OK, we'll take
roll.
Representative Bloch, no, ma'am.
Representative Ward.
No.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson,
Representative.
We're going to do later, um,
hospital 255 because um.
This uh sponsor had to go and
present in other committees, so.
Um, that's OK. She wants to
wait.
But thank you.
Um
So we have.
55 is uh renaming it.
You so much. Thanks for the
courtesy, Madam Chair. Uh, this
is a House Bill 255.
I have the honor of
co-sponsoring with uh
Representative Thompson.
This bill up.
Cha deals with uh
with the juvenile Community
Corrections Act.
It was brought to us by the
sentencing commission. I'm
joined by Douglas Carver, uh,
the executive and also Nick
Costales who, a longtime leader
in uh.
Juvenile issues for me with
CYFD.
It does a couple of things.
Primarily, the main thing.
it changes definitions which
would allow.
Uh, services to be provided to
many, many more.
people
The um
juve
OK, very good.
Corrections Act, which were
to the Connections Act.
is funded in a non-reverting
fund, the.
balance over time has gone from
4 million.
Uh, $6 million of unspent monies
that could be going to direct
services for our young people.
It's making two changes instead
of
adjudicated delinquent, in other
words,
Found guilty.
Having access to these programs.
Anyone, any young person who
comes in contact with the
criminal justice can be
involved.
In these programs, which makes
it uh not necessary to convict
somebody, uh, if in fact
They're doing something that you
would make them do upon
conviction. So we're changing
the other words.
But I'm sure I'll just
4
change in the magic words from
uh adjudicated delinquent.
To
Uh, either youth or child, and
we changed the definitions,
obviously a child or someone 18
or younger.
You put a definition of youth
for someone aged 18 to 26, so
that any
Essentially young person under
the age of 26 can access these
programs.
It also does a few other
changes, uh, with regards to
panels, uh, instead of a
statewide panel, we want local
panels.
with further effort in my
experts. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Douglas Carver. I'm
acting director of the New
Mexico Sentencing Commission.
Madam Chair, the reason the
commission supported this
legislation.
Um, it's a process for a
two-year process of discussion
we had to be ready for that
session, but it wasn't germane.
So it wasn't heard, but that was
good because it gave us a year
to expand it.
Um, the bill is doing two
things, and this is why it was
unanimously supported in our
juvenile is expanding these
services to people as um Senator
Massa said, Madam Chair, um, to
people who are
in the CYFD system.
Otherwise wouldn't be able to
just through
The juvenile Community
Corrections Act.
That's why we're changing to
juvenile community connections
because it's broadening um me of
chair.
And but the bill also does is
bring the
Statute into conformity with how
my understanding, Madam Chair,
is that there aren't state
panels or haven't been.
possibly ever, um.
Definitely not for a
s Madam Chair, and so we're
trying to make the statutes
conform with how everything
works in the practice. I'm happy
to speak to the commission's
process, Madam Chair.
set up in the interest of time.
Good morning and members of the
committee.
Um, as I just explained you spot
on with the.
making these changes. For years,
this statute was just uh
providing services to you.
long
system formerly placed on
probation and this change, um,
Gets the services further
upstream.
Um, and it's a wide range
services that are
I mean
educational support and job
training, it's helping
transportation with housing.
And it's really
have those youth that end up
Sometimes deeper
into our system and we
I want to get this to them much
sooner.
One
that goes along with
Changing of not just adjudicated
kids, is actually the
in the protective service abuse
and neglect would also be
eligible.
Excuse me, madam chair for
Some of these services will not
just juvenile justice youth
anymore.
But I actually you that might be
involved.
neglect side. So that's a
benefit.
with that old temper.
Thank you. And um last bill, I'm
starting today.
And so we will um
not be hearing the last 3 bills.
I spelled 262-278 or 280.
So I apologize to the sponsors
and anyone who's come that is in
opposition to the.
OK. Anyone
OK, if you'd like this.
Good morning, madam chairwoman,
um, and most of the committee.
Uh, my name is Ramonto Martinez.
I'm the deputy general counsel
at CYFD.
We stand in strong support of
this bill, um, essentially this
is expanding the juvenile
correction services, um, which
provides a critical role for
diverting adjudicated youth away
from deeper involvement in the
justice system and towards a
community-based solutions.
However, um, the current statute
limits the access to these types
of services and it leaves many
um at-risk youth under our
custody without the support that
they need. This bill would
broaden eligibility, allowing
CYFD referred youth to benefit
from these programs rather than
just limiting those two who are
adjudicated. This expansion
would reach additional youth and
provide meaningful intervention
for those at risk.
Um, of entering the system.
Thank you.
Madam Chair.
Esteemed committee. My name is
Linda Sanchez Sandoval.
I'm a former educator.
And I have, I've worked with you
all my life.
I apologize for my voice. I have
chronic asthma.
Um
I'm excited that
This bill gives us a chance to
broaden the net. It's just
really widens the support for
our youth.
Um
I have seen you.
Turn the corner because of
supports such as
HB 255.
We really and truly need to get
behind this. I beseech, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Laurelly Bonta and
I'm Nico.
I stand in favor of house built
in New Mexico should invest in
free education, jobs with
dignity.
Thank you much.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ben Bauer. I'm the chief
public defender. I'm here in my
role as chief public defender
and as a member of the
sentencing commission, uh,
speaking in strong support of
this bill. I think it's a great
idea to move services upstream
to children who are not
adjudicated so that we can get.
Is there anyone on Zoom in
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Michael Vitzini, policy manager
from both Futures in Mexico.
And that you're not getting good
audio.
OK. Are you talking through um
Your phone or
I'm on my computer. I'm sorry.
Yes, you can do it through your
Let me see. Can you hear me
better? I'm, I'm at my computer.
Um
So, that's not working.
OK. I, I'll pass this morning,
but I just want to say I support
both features in Mexico.
OK. Thank
That's everything, um.
What is the will of the
chimerius Me chair, uh,
representative. What, when was
the last time we updated this?
of that
19.
1900
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
that's my only question. Thank
you for the bill. I really
appreciate you.
Thank you.
Madam Charm, OK, it's been
moved.
Is there any opposition or
decas.
OK, seeing none.
have.
To nothing.
On house Bill 255.
Thompson.
will now be adjourned and I
