Sure present.
Representative Allison here.
Matthews.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Lara.
Representative Kate's here.
Representative.
Here
did you call somehow
Representative.
seeing that we have a quorum we
will begin in the as chair I'd
like to recognize center I'm
very excited to have are
secretary of agriculture with
this that Jeff Whitty and I just
read your resume and I was kind
of in the state you were kinda
bored and raised and you know
kind of just for the leader for
the state all these years and
and and culture and and so it's
a pleasure to have you here in
and I as I took the committee
and then by the all the
secretaries of different you
know different agencies that
we're gonna be working with to
kind of get overview of you know
where they are with a look to
see if and their vision and now
there and how they hope to help
this committee.
In in this session and during
the interview so with that I'll
be quiet and say thank you for
coming thank you madam chair
it's a it's a pleasure to be
here thank you for those that
kind of those kind words to it's
it's been a lifelong passion
that culture.
This is how I could do it and
try to help people from all
across the state.
Part of the press these were
delivered to my office Friday so
you all are getting the the
first copies of the latest New
Mexico agriculture statistics as
we go into the presentations on
the highlights of
the top with.
New Mexico is a is a the
impactful agricultural state
agriculture is probably the top
economy in virtually every
county the state maybe outside
Los Alamos and Santa Fe in the
but the actual still impactful
in each of those companies in
some way.
Our number one commodity in
state is is no very production
of one point six billion dollars
followed by Callum cav the cons
the number three in the state
I'm in slot of folks don't
realize that New Mexico is that
it's a it's an onion state as
well we're really famous for
Chile of course I thought that.
And then off office page paper
that should be I go to the next
the slide you got chili pepper
if you talk about New Mexico
products as far as how we're
ranked in the nation chili
peppers we are number one
productions across the United
States because we're number two.
Dona ana county actually so this
is the number one producing
county in the United States.
cheese were fourth in the nation
onions we are fifth in the
nation and is a new production
of the state so fifth in across
the entire United States and we
estimate that in August your
about eighty percent of the
onions consumed United States
are from New Mexico.
The.
A lot of people don't realize
that and then the number nine
the nation.
Mexico in general fund will
quick factoids twenty four
thousand seven hundred farms
across the state to go one of
the few states in the nation
during the last expenses
actually had an increase in the
number of farms in the United
States and and a lot of folks
last week why and we're in the
absence is here now those of you
in agriculture matching
signature accents is up it's
it's really important that that
data.
The USDA did a really good job
during the last census on the
Navajo Nation and that some of
the other areas in rural New
Mexico capturing all the
participants who are in fact
involved in agriculture and so
it's a it was more truer picture
of of who's in production
agriculture.
The average farm size in New
Mexico is is sixteen hundred
nineteen acres.
I three quarters of our forms
are less than five hundred.
So when you talk about New
Mexico agriculture you really
talking about a small
agricultural production state so
a lot of small small and medium
sized farmers in the state of
New Mexico and I think that's
something we ought to keep in
mind is that there's there's
great opportunities went to look
at things a little bit different
how we approach marketing
opportunities for the small box.
New Mexico beginning farmers
about twenty five percent of the
of the producers and why that's
important is because the average
age of our farmers route sixty
so we're going to see it over
the next few years not only in
New Mexico but across the United
States a great transition in
agriculture that next generation
is going to be coming because
the senior generations gonna
want to do something else and
retired hopefully if the if they
want to as you know as as we all
know my grandfather retirement
use about seventy eight.
That's how we are in every
cultures don't retire because
you enjoy the lives lifestyle
and like that there's going to
be tremendous opportunities for
the next generation.
Something we have to keep in
mind as we're creating programs
in the state going forward is
how do we keep encouraging that
next generation to become
producers.
One of the things when I talk to
producer groups these days is is
that across the United States
and across the world two percent
of the people are now involved
in agriculture.
Two percent growing food.
At our taxes that's quite a bit
less than that.
And it's something we need to be
paying attention to because if
that next generation of twenty
five percent of you know we
don't grow that twenty five
percent of the of the younger
generation and agriculture
what's going to happen.
Who is going to be growing that
food that you eat.
And I think we have to this is a
country in the world pay
attention to that
I think there's a lot of
opportunities in this office I
go to conferences where the that
next generation to participate
at the not afraid of technology
they're not afraid of of new
marketing opportunities and not
afraid to extend themselves and
and look at the new options to
bring value to their home place
and we have to continue to
figure out how to encourage
that.
There's several things in the
state of New Mexico that are
that are before the legislature
they started last year the food
initiative called food
initiative for short food
hundred mischief.
Last year that
Put a a new emphasis on
coordination amongst.
A myriad of agencies something
that I've been hoping for for a
long time lot of agencies touch
food in the state of New Mexico.
Public Education Department
department of agriculture
the the children youth and
families and at the department
of health the list goes on.
Last year was the first time in
and candles secretary of diverse
out of in the governor's office
the governor really.
We brought the ages together to
work together.
And the opportunities that are
in front of us with that well
I've been doing this a long time
is is bright red and in my area
background.
When I first started working is
that government first person the
farm bureau we started talking
about the.
New Mexico can you remember what
the name of us backed and was
just like a grown program.
There were about eight producers
in the state I remember right
back in the late eighties who
actually could sell to the
school systems.
Today there's over two hundred.
These these food this food
initiatives creating
opportunities and it's not just
agencies the farmers market
association it's it's a it's a
partnership that we've got with
the food banks and and others
that are creating these
opportunities to to grow our
markets to the last expenses in
two thousand seventeen show that
six percent of our producers
direct marketed to the consumer
six percent I have charge my
marketing team that this next
access is better see an increase
in that number.
COVID showed us how important it
was to have access to look for.
This food initiative with all
the agencies working together
with the food banks and the and
the farmers market association
by a growing that approved
supplier program getting people
trained and certified and
actually selling the school
system senior centers and other
opportunities
it's going to grow that program.
When you see that there's that's
the opportunity you have with
the local level to really grow
and people start seeing and
former start having those
markets and then they can go
outside of that they go the
farmers market than some of the
schools and sell direct to the
consumer.
That's what it's going to take
for us to continue for rules
Mexico so the food initiative is
really important
Priorities for I think for all
of agriculture to continue that.
When we invested more in the
special during the COVID during
the double up food Bucks program
we have so the new injection of
federal funds that we can match
with that ladies and more for
the fund funding so that folks
who needed some assistance good
I am more fresh foods yes the at
the local.
So those are some of.
Today in some conservation and
when I finish this on the run
over there but we're discussing
the land of enchantment legacy
Fund.
That's that's a a new fund the
new idea that is been proposed
by the governor has been working
with a myriad of partners from
across the state for the last
couple years and trying.
This opportunity.
If you think about where we're
at today is it New Mexico we are
drier today.
In this period of the last few
years than we were during the
festival.
That's a fact but yet we haven't
had the dust bowl.
And why is that because our
producers have better techniques
of.
Are everybody is starting
understands and we've been doing
this for a long time and you
know during the dust bowl there
that's what created the the sole
conservation programs and that's
what started educating folks in
changing our techniques and
things like that so these the
Slevin channel legacy fund is
going to help us with continued
support developing some more
those programs things like
healthy soil program in our
department we have a noxious
weed program we have had funding
for Texas we program in many
years due to budget cuts and
things like that with the rains
that we had last year with
through the fires and.
We're gonna have a we problem
this year.
There's no doubt in my mind and
we've got listening we control
districts that are are organized
throughout the state this this
land of enchantment legacy fund
would dedicate funding to those
control strict so they can work
on the ground and take care Mike
my things in working salt water
conservation districts that the
department has always been on
the ground on the ground program
we need food on the ground new
program to get together you got
it to the equipment type program
projects that'll for it's a
here in the system to you know
they got all these opportunities
we don't need we we need a
little administrative things
that make sure that all running
right here accountability.
My mantra Department bags always
been a hundred percent
flexibility into our percent
accountability but you want
programs on the ground and
that's what I'm striving for
Jeff thanks.
Talk about just a little bit
about our our budget request you
us we discuss a presentation
about our budget needs of one of
our priorities that in the in
the executive budget recommended
in the in the LFC budget.
The kind of the LESC budget give
us like a percentage increase of
about four in ten thousand our
our request for operations about
seven hundred.
Seventy five thousand a total of
twenty thousand that would be
dedicated to that diagnostic
left our labs in Albuquerque is
part of the tri Services
building co located with the
office of medical investigator
the state scientific lap
Division Department health from
the first floor then they go up
from there
Dr fan issue you'll cry here
from a little bit from with me
with my division director of
that diagnostic program for a
long time turn that program into
a twelve
fully respected across the
nation the diagnostic lab
and our because of that our lab
capacity has our abilities of
grown the the the the.
the diagnostic services that we
can present find for the state
of New Mexico is our capacity is
increased because of our
federations so now we've got to
pony up in and make sure we keep
those accreditations and keep
those opportunities going so
that four hundred thousand
dollars of the dedicated towards
in improving the staff there and
meeting preservation the second
requested and sent five thousand
this is a recurring request that
the executive also approved
and that is to help our and
consumer services division
that's our weights and measures
are are you go to a gas station
you'll see a little sticker on
all the gas pumps we're making
sure that when you're paying for
a gallon you're getting a gallon
you're not getting more than a
gallon for less than the.
I stopped at this little story I
stopped at a station tier C. one
time by inspector was doing his
routine inspection I asked the
station owner he was there if my
folks were bothered me said no.
He said I wish you people could
come once a month.
They.
Are so important to what we do
because.
We want to make sure we're
giving the consumer what they're
buying and sometimes our pumps
to set up and we give our
products a way sometimes they
don't loosen up and we need to
and our people make that level
and he said I we could be in
business with us unsolicited
that totally shocked with that
kind of a deal but.
November of one of the problems
we don't do inspections on
tribal nations in public unless
they ask us to
a respected the sovereignty and
and one of the coverage is
asking about is his programs
that we're we're by no I'm gonna
make up a number but we're
buying a million gallons a month
and we're only selling nine
hundred thousand was the other
hundred thousand going are they
stealing it will also talk about
they're actually giving.
They found out they were giving
their gas away because the.
Demeter's loosen up over time.
At they signed an agreement that
you guys inspect this as often
as you want.
And those are wrong because of
of the the unix environment that
we're in in the in the state as
we're growing the small
businesses that sell micro
things on the scales are but
consider that
we have to expect all that to
make sure people are are when
you're selling goal.
Do you want to know that you're
selling apps and that you know
something something more
provided as a as an example so
so that's what that purpose with
that budget cuts over the last
few years just because of the
state but just at the time and
so we're trying to build that
back to bring back the best.
Without madam chair of the last
thing on state and then I'm
happy to answer a few questions
if you'd like of I presented
from this committee.
Many many times.
First.
One was.
Probably nineteen eighty seven.
Chair projects which Jerry was
the gentleman at the time and it
kind of took me under his wing
to only son board always
remember house or to the
Republicans or Democrats they
just need a let's go make K. so
I'm ready to go makes may.
Thank you Secretary ready where
I'm really pleased that you took
time out of your busy schedule
to come just give us an overview
you know I just probably at
thirty thousand foot overview of
of what you're looking at this
session and and you know we're
we're all buried eight here
that I really appreciate your
service senior leadership to the
state throughout the years I I
want you know that's really
important and debt with that
will entertain questions from
the committee Representative so
thank you madam chair and thank
you Secretary for coming and
visiting us then your
presentation.
What to use is the most
important tool.
The the landowners in the
agriculture sector needs to pass
this on to their kids.
You know the majority so the
tool that they you're gonna have
to have.
It in New Mexico we've got a
long time producers who've been
on the land if you look at the
extensive and you can see that
the equity is really high in the
state
landownership so you to estate
planning is going to be the
biggest to you're going to need
and it because if you have to
sell the wrench at the change of
in the state to pay the astute.
It's lost.
so so that's it might be the
summer one.
The state planning the the other
things that that we need is is
surely of of water policy
This is a state also that is.
You know I I in in round figures
a third federal third private
the third state tribal.
And if you wanted to design a
state that we messed up take New
Mexico as the perfect example of
of land ownership you got all
the scattered boards.
Culture board.
Land ownership patterns it was
really hard for producers to
have surely when you're on a ten
year lease on a federal or state
land.
Our schools with a small bit of
private property tied to it.
so you know our our department
pay attention a lot to the
federal land policy statement
policies with an eye towards
that continuity how do we make
sure that the producers are
going to be able to to continue
producing
The state was settled you know
through the homestead act way
back when and and my grandfather
was a homesteader and he put
together parcels.
By buying his uncle's places
that that just gave that they
can do it and then other
neighbors a good good start with
a hundred sixty acres and you
grow enough to do whatever you
can can partial together the
land that was able to be honest
it.
And you know at the end of
perfected up yet to make a
living on that's what became the
bill in the and the federal.
And so it's really tough in the
state to to.
To use that kind of land all the
time for for production to make
sure that you're capable of
doing that.
The business technology
technology is going to take us
to the next generation
It in the farming area
prescriptive in precision
agriculture of mechanical
harvesting things like that are
going to be what will.
Transform the state and the next
generation is ready to do that I
don't that dentures but and and
and and and it's getting there
but then my.
Mr secretary.
On that estate planning side are
those most most of those issues
from the federal sider as a
state policy that that that the
times that I've been doesn't
lead manager Representative
Zamora a lot of the federal
policy that that that the states
also have their own state you
know the state limits in New
Mexico I think we match the
federal I'm I'm not a tax policy
expert but but it's mainly that
federal discussions that we have
to watch out for
It it's the.
One of those K. business owners
usually
die cast quarter land rich.
And you know it's the land is is
the asset that they can't.
Basically quantify monetize
because if you monetize that
you're out of this
That's the challenge in future.
For the next generation and I
think as a country we are madam
chair and and and Mr secretary
are in think as a country in the
state what are we looking at
that and promoting our kids and
given them the responsibility so
as when the when the.
Parents or grandparents or what
are still alive so they can
bring him through that process.
Because it is different to carry
the oxygen carrying the load and
understand what you have to do
with the bank and everything
else so thank you for your
presentation thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and Representative the cell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I
Appreciate you being here today
taking time out of your
schedule.
And I just want to point out
the.
As opposed to the state of New
Mexico is the second largest.
Trimeter to the state's budget.
And I think it's remarkable.
But the average age right now
for farmers and ranchers as well
above sixty is that correct
madam chair secretary chair it's
it's right at sixty I think the
next expenses will pop up a
little more thanks so I have
really has to.
Whenever you're I'm going back
to what we were talking about
unfortunately I had to.
Failed to questions from
trying to get everything balance
like this is times of.
You're talking about your
diagnostic laughed and Kurki of.
As most people know I am
involved with the racing
industry we have to put it out
of R. F. P. for testing of
forces because we want
everything to be on the up and
up and do away with those people
that do like to cheat.
We do not send any of our to our
any of our samples to the
diagnostic an album that
diagnostic lab in Albuquerque
can you explain that please yeah
madam chair and may have to get
doctor managed to help me
I'll make it up until it's still
tells me otherwise Madam chair
representative result we do not
we are not a crime that we are
not a that will drug testing lab
the twelve by the horse racing
industry okay we looked at that.
About twelve years twelve
thirteen fourteen years ago I
think the legislature was
looking at doing some of that in
state
That didn't pan out at the time
because of the the intricacies
of of hi you have to set up that
kind of a laboratory assistant.
And I understand madam chair
and.
Secretary witty of what all is
required as as far as testing
forces not to get that manpower
is one of them and then try to
keep everything updated now with
the here testing that's going on
is it can be a little bit
overwhelming.
madam chair and secretary
waiting for we're talking about
water policy and unfortunately
that water bill that needed to
come to this committee ended up
being heard this morning go for
in house inter's.
And I'm really upset about that
very upset about that because
what this bill proposes to do
they did I think pass it out of.
That bill now fits the whole
state.
And madam chair Secretary witty.
Whatever we have farmers.
That affects the lives across
because they have run out of
water over that five year cycle.
It will probably now take a
hearing that can take up to
sixty days for them to be able
to do a temporary transfer
emergency transfer and I am
really really bothered by that
whenever we have farmers out
there that are faced with
constraints like to use in there
and.
Looking at losing their crop not
been able to pay back the bank
loan or FHA FSA loan whatever
they can't pay their suppliers
of whatever they can't pay their
bills there is a problem.
If that was supposed to be just
strictly for the acequia
association the debate should by
department to the in instead of
having one size fits all and I
am.
Very upset with the speaker of
the house.
Sending that bill to the energy
committee.
Even though we didn't make the
request that they come to this
committee and he refused to
change now I guess it's going up
to the judiciary is that correct
madam chair that's my
understanding I try
Representative it if you're it's
me but I will get off of that
okay.
We just need to legislate right.
Madam chair representative
developing others some folks up
here that have been talking
about rain making for years.
I see the exactly.
We're always at risk of what
Texas is doing trying to take
the water that we were entitled
to of in this big thing there
and following up on what.
Representative Zamora was
talking about.
We don't have enough young
people that want to get in this
game.
Unfortunately everybody in this
room and everybody in this
building and everybody in the
state of New Mexico does need to
eight.
And we are a dying breed we
don't have the end of that are
willing to step up because they
understand the hardships to go
along with this what people need
to realize madam chair Secretary
witty.
This way not only live on the
land we live with the latest.
And that's a very important note
right here.
Whether we're talking about
conservation easements miss
madam chair and secretary Wendy.
To I'm not gonna ask you for
your thoughts of these.
But those people that are still
out there for these conservation
easements that take place their
hands are like this.
And I across my hands because
their hands are tied.
Our farmers and ranchers are the
ones that do take care of the
state's wildlife.
We provide feed we provide
water.
We know what actually goes on
and now we've got to fill up
before certain committee to do
away with the game and fish
department.
They want it all to go into the
environment.
If that.
I'm not gonna get off on that.
Madam chair and secretary woody
can you tell me the number one.
Echo cultural candy the state
right now.
Madam chair it's it's a
Representative result the it
kind of fluctuates every now
that between Roosevelt curry
Chavis counties depending on
want to press.
Chavis counties is always near
the top is it is it is and madam
chair secretary waiting.
New Mexico does like the green
chili.
And unfortunately we've got.
People that actually don't want
to work.
Have you all been working with
anybody as far as mechanical
harvested to.
Has it been successful as far as
picking great I understand the
red process because we used from
acres and acres and acres of red
for red chip Matt madam chair
representative result you know
for years has been the number of
investments in research for
mechanical harvesters.
Last of.
August I believe that was I was
invited to go and look at a
At a chilly field where they
were doing mechanical harvesters
where a couple of farmers the
farmers of the greatest folks
for creative thinking and
ingenuity out there in the
winter time and these these two
farmers that taken the chemical
harvesters that'd been.
Gone through research and did
their own little tweaks so we
are at a chilly field where they
were doing mechanical harvesters
the doing a demonstration with
this machine and it was.
Perfect help okay in the end
that not only were they able to
harvest one time they were able
it didn't harm the plant and
they were able to come back into
his arms.
New Mexico State University step
drive seventy Walker is been
doing some research and and
she's created a variety
that these particular farmers
are just in love with for
mechanical harvesting and it
actually produces there the
fully loaded one parts and
The we're going to make a couple
more tweaks but they were they
are ready to this next chilly
season it will be in motion US
for mechanical harvesting.
It's a game changer for the
state of Mexico this and for the
children street so and madam
chair and secretary Winnie I
will attest to that if that is
going to be.
Off the ball over that plant is
not harmed as far as picking
grades go that is fantastic
because my particular area over
there thank you spending.
Of we had to chili plants built
within a mile of each other and
I mean when it we were taken
rates they were in full
operation.
They can grains.
Cause the shortage of labor mmhm
can get anybody to pick this up
in up there not pick buckets and
buckets and buckets JD my kids
did to those sometimes the only
way that we could.
Hurry up and get that crop
harvest we could not afford to
let it go by the wayside because
it's not cheap to grow not to
grow at all.
Another thing I do have a
comment about.
And senator Jennings I I was
gonna say fifteen years ago he
and I worked on this and well
it's whatever the Richardson
administration was still in
order of.
Companies to be king in the
state of New Mexico because it
was.
Didn't take all that much water
and there was lots of stuff that
came out of that product.
Closing this.
The oil.
The seed.
For replanting in the feed
espect of.
And madam chair members of this
committee and audience right now
there are two cotton gins and
state of New Mexico.
To that's it.
Because the department
department put the restrictions
on it that are greater than the
bank California.
These coverages because the
state appropriations because of
all the demands that are put on
there before to update all their
equipment even though they might
be in compliance because we got
a call.
Fifteen sixteen years ago well
we repaired says.
And
Seems like they had just kind of
Environment Department had just
kind of loss application on the
renewal after they had done all
the upgrades to this particular
need and down there that that.
That is.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars
to update this this is Sir
you're gonna have to.
Redo your applications take
ninety days.
And they were less than two
weeks away from the start of the
harbor cities.
It's getting rougher and rougher
for anybody that's involved in
Mexico to be able to make live
we've seen rising costs and
utilities we have seen rising
cost of fuel we have seen the
rising cost of bailing wire.
Machinery is out of sight right
now if that was possible combine
right now you might be able to.
I think it's over three hundred
thousand dollars in fertiliser
loan of three hundred percent
three hundred percent
fertilizer.
And
It's a struggle it really is a
struggle but we still have to
E..
People need to realize that if.
We.
That didn't belong in that
industry.
Whatever happened to that
whenever we are the hired hands
out there and I am the hired it
out through the range and I'm
still involved in the farming is
expected with my three brothers.
But I'll tell you what it's
getting tougher and tougher
especially when it we have all
these rules and regulations that
are coming down from Washington
DC a budget number odds that
don't even care about what their
constituents back home or by and
if there listen I don't care.
That's just the way I look at.
When we as a state race a good
product and we're fixing here
build regarding that whenever we
have to send our meat.
Out of state to get a process to
come back in here to be sold.
That goes to our school stores
tensions that the soldiers
consumers here.
It needs to happen.
It needs to happen.
And it also creates jobs.
Madam chair I'll get off the
bus.
Seven Bucks.
Thank you very much hello meet
those comments secretary was
thank you thank you I I must
admit I haven't heard the word
name brought.
I was being polite.
I'd like to recognize
Representative Kate.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Secretary for attending this
was great and and thank you for
the fresh off a high of the
presses I'm minuses short
comment I of my district has
ever cultural area that is
surrounded by urban area which
gives you need the opportunity
for education and training is to
allow those children know where
their food comes from and we
have some great of programs and
Kraus area.
Unincorporated areas that need
it and it's not my district in
Los ranchos as well there's a
whole agricultural center there
that I know the farmers in the
area and some of their
educational programs that we're
running out to the community to
try to encourage that next
generation and I would of
respectfully invite you or your
staff members if you ever want
to have a tour or to learn more
about this for ten cent would be
happy to share Madam chair
representative Gaetz absolutely
we we spend a lot of time and in
the urban agricultural area the
you know the things we talk
about the benefits of
agriculture we can talk about
three point four nine billion
and a lot of the stuff they're
more budget and just what the
dollar is the open spaces the
that's the water the providing
the local food the the whole
environment around New Mexico
the Lobos functions across all
the can see the impacts of of
that so thank you and would be
happy to come with you to
around.
Thank.
We cannot recognize vice chair
Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr secretary and my district the
four corners area a lot of
people are still hesitant to
resume their money their farming
because of the gold king mine
spill they still don't trust the
San Juan river what another
problem that they bring up is
that noxious weeds.
We have had promises from the
New Mexico State University
extension agents to assist
to the state three years later
we're still we still wait for
them to come and do something
about the Knox Keane's and is
there anything that we control
the farmers in our area to of
trust the San Juan river again
because
sometimes they say that they
still see saw our segment in the
eighties of their cation canals.
Madam chair representative
Nelson you know that's the.
The environment department
that's all being monitored I'll
have to check with Environment
Department of to make sure that
those are monitored at those
locations to to see on the
listening we issue I will get
with my team and then we'll
touch base with the extension
service often someone County and
that find out what's going on
there's a.
There may be an object measures
elections we control district up
there but if not the someone to
a water conservation district
may have an opportunity to to
work on that as.
Thank you for that Mr Cruz thank
you madam chair thank you and I
think that being said I know the
pressure chair.
The chair recognizes
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair I I didn't want
to waste time but I just want to
thank you for what you do and
now and your response to
Representative Zamora about the
state planning is a really big
deal and I've seen a lot of
ranches go so get sold to pay
for a everything that goes along
with that so I just I appreciate
that answer depreciate what you
do thank you thank you for your
presentation thank you well
again thank you secretary lady I
I just I'm amazed at what
farmers and ranchers can do I I
really am I I remember twenty
years ago talking to a small
farmer in different and and he
was saying he he parted.
Let forget this in the census
and I can make twenty five
thousand dollars up an acre of
land and he of course had a
profit garlic so we need those
you know value added the garlic
rates flowers and very people
brought I was amazed at at what
people can do it's it's always I
I really also I don't think we
recognize farmers and and
ranchers for for the courage
really you know you K. to start
with the crop here.
It on the the range I I need
everything to gamble I I mean
it's quite extraordinary with
people to do so I just I just
want to note that this chair and
I think it's I think it says a
lot about New Mexico that we
have a committee that starts
with agriculture.
You know I I think that says a
lot and that's where we are and
I as as chair I hope we can do
everything we can to reported
feels that really affect this
industry and favorable and I'm
looking forward to that and
again I thank you Secretary for
your press thank you and
anything our department to do
for the committee don't hesitate
to let us thank you with that I
would call representative
Armstrong for two percent of the
bill.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to introduce my expert witness
here Dr Hanisch is that correct
okay spell so Hanisch and with
the The New Mexico livestock
board and so ultimately madam
chair this is house bill two oh
five and the title of the bill
really does self explain explain
what this bill is about this is
authorizing the New Mexico
livestock board to conduct meat
inspections to ensure safety and
quality of meat for human
consumption creating the office
of the meat and poultry
inspection director providing
for inspection stamps and
establishment numbers providing
penalties providing exemptions
for
Ritual slaughter so ultimately
what what we did a few years
back just a little history madam
chair is during the pandemic it
really came to light
about the need for our New
Mexico eight sections to create
our own so that we're not
depending on the federal
government to to do this the
other part of this is to
hopefully expand the inspections
or of private processors right
now would be urged and helps to
be able to the USDA certified
and so ultimately this is the
these are the rules that were
promulgated by the New Mexico
livestock board in conjunction
with
Is that what the federal
government requires and this is
the next step in creating New
Mexico we inspections and
without will stand for questions
unless you'd like to see close
thank you in in thank you very
much Madam chair representative
the opportunity to speak and and
and thank you representative
Armstrong for for bringing this
forward.
The one thing I want to make
sure everybody understands is
that there are there are nine
components that did the the
state needs me these are federal
components to to have it
approved the poultry inspection
vision for New Mexico the top
component fiscal statutory
authority in food safety
regulations and the statute have
to meet the federal statute it's
called in people to program in
in that's that's with all the
components will be safe people
the same table to the the the
federal statutes and they
actually have a list of the we
can go down by component by
component if you're ever having
a hard time sleeping let me
know.
Components very after that
but but the components are are
that the on the statutory side
they actually have a table and
so we we were putting the
statutes together we were
looking at the federal statutes
that we had to meet and and
pairing up on the state side so
we're not even over the author
of of of this week but it it but
we're led by by by the the
mandatory federal statutes we
must meet.
Thank you input that will stand
for questions okay first will
that go to the audience a how
many
this is for the audience would
like to speak in favor of this
bill.
Participants would like to speak
against this bill.
I thought that what happens when
we hear the people in the speak
favorite this bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Taylor
Reagan's on behalf of New Mexico
cattle growers and lowers we
stand strong support of HB to
all five this state me
inspection programs Seaview next
to support last session and we
now need to support this act in
statute again these funds are
now available and we support the
program being set up and managed
by the New Mexico watched four
this act will help ensure
feeding my remains state
providing New Mexicans with
locally sourced protein that
they can feel confident in
preparing for their fashions
thank you and please vote to
pass thank you very much.
You madam chair members of the
committee on Larry Reagan
president New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau we stated
strong support about house bill
two I we appreciate work The New
Mexico lost awkward is that any
getting us on the right track to
reinstate the state regents
faction program house bill two
of five years caller I statutory
authority required by USDA's
food safety inspection services
for the state to proceed with
the federal accepted meat
inspection program a state
program will expand
opportunities in local
communities for livestock
producers for process there are
out and so there may be direct
to consumers and director
businesses this effort could
lead to more market access for
New Mexico producers for these
reasons central support thank
you for thank you so much for
coming.
I think we have another hand in
the back yes Sir.
Transaction there's on here as a
producer depends on access to
inspected processing of a living
and also as a representative of
the pharmacy and we stand in
support
There's some qualifications I've
been involved in advocate for
this for a long time and there's
a need to continue pressuring
the you know keeping pressure on
a lot of stock or to actually do
something to increase access for
local producers it's very
difficult given that they have
to meet that are Asians so this
is a good start and I think
that's a good thing so we stand
in support of it but we offer
that with some concerns about
how
so if I ever had about that.
Thank you talk for hours of the
importance of the challenges.
Thank you so much again this
chart all say what Zach with
Zack with.
Senator okay and now is there
anybody else in okay we'll turn
to the same audience in
recognize.
Beverly it seems that.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Beverly it's in good executive
director of dairy producers of
New Mexico we stand in strong
support of this piece of
legislation it's good for New
Mexico it'll bring economic
value to the state and it's good
for those involved in animal
agriculture I'd like to think
representative Armstrong doctor
Hanisch and the Legisla- port
for bringing this forward and
urge the committee to support
this as well thank you.
Thank you that the fishy and now
we have had right.
Madam chair and committee
members thank you so much my
name is Cameron executive
director farm to table wine
coordinate the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
we are here to stand in full
support of House Bill two oh
five and the expansion of our
processing facilities is a huge
opportunity for our ranchers
**** been stated by our
colleagues here in the room and
specifically or one specific
thing that we are so
appreciative of this if you many
of you know about the New Mexico
grown program as part of our
finish the of the larger
petition to get fresh fruits and
vegetables and now processed
meats into schools senior
centers early daycare centers
this is a major opportunity for
ranchers we hope anyway schools
and senior centers can spend up
to forty percent of their New
Mexico the state funds to
participate in the program and
we really need to see all of
these things is an opportunity
to expand markets for our
ranchers and all four year
support thank you so much thank
you our general our recognize
pollution from.
She did raise your hand all
right Sir okay.
In reserve.
I guess now we turn the meeting
over to questions from the
committee.
This is a more.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bring
this to the bill forward.
Of the first things I just a
representative madam.
Why is this bill so big and the.
Would you tell in your answer
Representative.
Why don't remember madam chair
my exact answer but it's
something to the effect of these
are all the rules that we have
to I I comparing to the federal
government the bank federal
regulations bringing it here so
it's it's the rules and madam
chair representative and that's
to make it all safe right yes
the process all state the up to
standards and make sure that the
people are getting good all of
the well inspected the state
healthy.
The.
And madam chair and
representative our secretary of
agriculture just touched on your
bill without really debating on
the bill but he was talking.
But the the basically the the
the farm to table.
Products that we have in our
able to produce in the state of
New Mexico and and here's a bill
that says to help to help the
ranchers and farmers of the
state and not even I think you
could be a backyard person not
really being a rancher farmer go
beef and and have a safe to
assume.
I like your bills.
I strongly supported we heard no
testimony against it it's a
chance for New Mexico to get
ahead and do better and and
support our agricultural
community which is a vital part
of our of our.
Of our.
Money for the state and and.
Great support for the state for
the agriculture community with
the second largest in terms of
the state.
I don't see anything for the
debate in this bill
the bills like that.
Madam chair and.
All the testimony we heard and
no no no what do against it I
would like to move affects.
Second all right we have a
motion on the floor with the
second.
Incentives of our second by
candy itself Representative
itself excuse me
question please yes at the.
The rest of us can be allowed to
stay national.
The rest of those if if we can I
think some people would like to
ask some questions and
Program.
State funds approach.
What what would appropriate I'd
like to make thank you thank you
thank you.
Representative thank you madam
chair just real quick to
response to Representative
Zamora.
I wish we had a golden buzzer I
come here because.
Right into the governor's
office.
Thank you Mr.
So if the chair recognizes
Representative that thank you at
the fact of the time that madam
chair and to.
Of senators and representatives
of.
Tomorrow after the fact that I
answer questions as opposed to
grow within the city of the city
I sometimes have to ask
questions just so sure
understand what I'm voting.
Is that I remember in prior
sessions madam chair that
we've had discussions of that
reviving the needs of packing
industry is is that the correct
price meatpacking industry meat
slaughtered.
Madam chair representative it's
more just about the inspection
alright this is all about the
inspection of our we have quite
a few you'll see a list of all
the different
Plants that we have here in the
state.
Right in front of you yeah right
there those are those of the
USDA certified and on the back
of page of that is the private.
Process custom processing
Madam chair of.
Senator.
Thank you for that I'm and I'm
sorry I came in late as it is
two fifty
Chris my memory though from
being on this committee in prior
years was that while we had
assumed the packing plants they
were small and.
The phrase I remember was that
we need to be able to feed
ourselves.
And that our our packing
facilities were not in
sufficient quantities size
whatever we want to call the
words to do that and I and and
that happened because we were
short we're able to do that
because we have lost our.
We didn't have inspectors before
and we lost our federal right to
do this and I mean this is a
very vague in my mind but is
that more last time what
happened whatever we're back to
rebuilding this industry Madam
chair representative actually
right now there's only two USDA
inspectors there's a whole lot
of different inspections that
happen from the USDA level a lot
of the plants choose not to do
to USDA certified and summer
custom which still means they
have to be licensed and
inspected and things like that
so there but what happens if I
it what happened and was brought
to everyone's attention during
the pandemic is the price in the
grocery store with through the
roof so people are trying to
have cattle processed by these
all of the list there of the of
the places you could have a
process and they were
overwhelmed so we personally
waited six months to have
something process and for
ourselves to consider and that
was really what brought it to
the attention we're if we had
more people to expect that one
of the issues was like with
Roadrunner Food Bank they had to
have a process to the USDA
certified.
just to give the meat away and
so on there's there's not very
many in the state of New Mexico
so it just was just heightened
and so we wanted to.
Create an industry where we
could do our own inspections at
the same level and this could
have more inspectors so that we
could maybe those of custom meat
processors would want to be USDA
certified I'm maybe not it's an
option.
Anything that doctors of thank
you thank you madam chair
representative Representative
Matthews it is it is situation
where where we if we do our job
correctly.
That that we will be regulatory
by nature.
But hopefully Michael our goal
is to do this from an
educational standpoint also
right now if you were to get
into the business if you thank
you Google FSIS we want to
safety inspection service and
you want to start a processing
plant of some sort.
To be overwhelmed by all the
regulations now when I will take
short cuts per se we were still
going to have to meet the same
standards.
But this correctly we should be
much much more approachable than
than than USDA and FSIS
individuals by helping people.
Take that leap helping them get
into business we're still be
regulatory we're not New York
for the we should be an Avenue
to be able to answer those
questions we should be able to
work with our universities we
should be able to work with our
extension agents to to to help
folks put their sanitary planes
together get everything done
their paperwork and so so that
that is the goal we will be
expecting them and they will
have to to to maintain that that
level of of of value per se but
Mexico.
madam chair thank you presenters
for that information is that's
helps me understand what's going
on here
The expect it would be fair of
them chair at.
That the goal will be that we
will have be able to meet a
higher percentage of the.
At the demand of our population
for processed meat products but
for meat products by throwing
this industry.
And I called about my what thank
you madam chair.
Matthews yes the the goal is is
is that if there are people who
are interested.
That that we will be
approachable and and I'm not
knocking USDA by by any means
they are stretched from credibly
thin they don't have the time to
do this but hopefully as we
develop this program we will and
in the of an outlet so we can
help folks get in there.
The other situation right now is
is Representative Armstrong
touched on this is that we have
what's called the custom
slaughter plant these are plans
that they are inspected their
expected a lower level and that
means that they cannot sell
wholesale retail they can they
can if you had a spear and you
can take it to them the process
of for you but it goes back to
you it's not for resale anyway
whatsoever so so some of these
plans that they're close right
there they're they're ready
doing this I have the expertise
so maybe there's a few of those
that that are interested in
getting into more of a retail
slaughter type situation and we
can help them to take that leap
and and and get them going
it and then then the whole state
benefits from it in this by the
fact that it's it's it's for
retail sale.
I'm Madam chair of the.
Is this is a step in the process
by which we re establish the our
ability in state to produce
enough meat for our population
is that correct that that's what
we're doing yes my next step is
that right yes
The and then chair
Of.
Could you
Could you just sort of just
outline doesn't have been great
detail whether the next steps to
get us to the point where we are
able to feed ourselves in terms
of our our demand for meat
poultry I'm gonna defer to my
witness Dr Hans thank you madam
chair representative is Massey's
there are there are nine
components.
Put out by the budget to safety
inspection service that we have
to meet and I can list for you
with us okay I want to but
please.
But but you've been warned that.
For.
Temperatures slipping.
Chair and so so this is the
first one that this is the
current rate is getting
statutory authority.
We have an we expect our oil
once we get statutory authority
and then another of the
components is financial
accountability but we're there
also.
We get those two going then we
can we can we can actually sign
are are are are in we with the
feds and then we can delve into
the other seven components and
we can start our trains we can't
we can't start trainings until
we get things lined out here and
there are there are several
trainings are specters we'll
have to do
myself included will be put on
bye bye bye if this I just we
have to get our database up and
running we have to get our
people hired and and and so on
and so forth laboratories we we
we've already talked to our our
state public health lab in
hoping to bring them on board to
do that to surveillance testing
would be required in in
processing plants slaughter
plants.
So.
Lots of things like that in the.
Okay as madam chair I thank you
for that answer so this is a
process is going to take awhile
to federal regulations
Do they include
regulations regarding the
treatment of the animals that
are going to be slaughtered in
and let me give it context to
that question.
Yes it it doesn't it doesn't
offend the
Not poetry also.
Portrait of and but but I you
can but personally I think that
is important that we treat the
animals.
Yes.
And so forth.
So my question is when we're
talking about the slaughter of
these animals are the
regulations that we're gonna
have to follow in your doing
this that.
Find for the humane treatment of
the census Madam chair
representative Matthews yes it's
a on number on the on the list
the categories that but that is
included humane handling is
included in the bill and in the
regulations.
Okay I'm sorry.
I see no reason not to support
this bill.
And I appreciate your answers to
the question.
And I.
Thank you madam chair maybe
actually one thing.
Thanks so so is a veterinarian.
Practice for for twenty years
and and thirty plus years again
in the profession the
manhandling slaughter portion of
this is the most important
aspect.
That we have two more sections
that goes along with that we I
thought chair thank you very
much for that.
Thank you and the chair
recognizes Representative K. in
the face thank you madam chair
and thank you thank you
representative Armstrong still
point on I I just and and and
Representative Matthews touched
on this I'm just looking for a
time frame C. S. three point
five at least a higher database
training
so if this bill passes and when
we get the golden button and the
signature from the governor and
are we talking about being able
to bring to act culture at
spring to but yours and tell
them that they can be able to
start this process and get the
state certification July twenty
twenty four what is the timeline
the same people.
Thank you madam chair.
And K.
Because we depend so much on the
federal side for this to get
done
eighteen months would be the
best we could ship.
Right now I think realistically
for the eighteen months to two
years that that we were at the
U. eighteen months I'd be
thrilled.
Thank you thank you thank you
Representative now
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
In my area in my district
there's a trading post that
caters to a lot of people.
And I see from the less that
with and seven five seven mile
radius there's three.
Legislation but at the St Paul's
I also see a delivery truck that
says it comes down from Cortez
Colorado.
The violating anything.
I I would defer to my experts in
this chair representative
Allison the coming out from
Cortez Colorado most likely
because it's coming from the
federally inspected plants.
By doing so then and that means
our meat product and can be
retailed.
So.
Does that mean that the federal
inspectors.
Is more.
Legal the New Mexico.
Of the spectrum Madam chair
representative if you to be able
to resell process to meet in the
state of New Mexico has to come
from the USDA certified plant
okay so not all the process
service are you just survive the
ones on madam chair
representative the first pager
USDA certified the second pages
custom meat plants which is
inspected and licensed just you
can't have you can't sell retail
after you have of me process
there okay one of the so.
On the front page is about maybe
two or three miles from the
state of but yet that cable
still gets their recent quarters
Colorado.
Madam chair representative that
happens a lot of because of the
being able to to process so much
me there's only so much time and
space in the meat processing
plants and a lot of times people
go out of state to have it
processed I know I know all
admit I had to pick processed in
Arizona because it was faster I
couldn't get anyone here in New
Mexico to processes okay thank
you for that explanation thank
you madam chair.
Well the chair allow recognised
Representative some more for a
heads all I'm sorry excuse me
just press Representative
Senator thank you very much.
This bill is absolutely.
Going to resound throughout the
farming and ranching communities
in our state it's it needs to
happen and the reason being and
I will point this to those of
you that are familiar well takes
place but if you what sets up
the process.
Ready for this the White.
The wait time that is here.
We have a lot of for a today
that they kids not do like crack
of those kids because they are
remarkable they do a lot of them
do race livestock and what if we
do have junior sales located
throughout the state of New
Mexico.
If somebody does by that babies.
It might take a couple of months
before it can if they process
for their personal use and
there's a difference between
personal consumption versus to
the public consumption.
Even for.
In my case I can only speak for
me I'm not gonna speak for
anybody else and to.
And representative Armstrong up
you guys probably faces to
whenever you have some
calcification somebody jobs that
we do have the ability to be
able to ship them to the company
in right on the other side of
the state funds go camping this
pack.
And there's a white lies list
before you could send your older
castles that are capable of
producing cap again or anything
else.
There is a white lives so that
rancher or that former literally
has to continue to feed that old
castle that is broken that
doesn't have any deeply left to
eat with us just a moment.
Right now.
But there is a waiting list
there.
I have to brag on this
particular point Dr you're the
very first.
US beef packing gentleman drew
it out there Cedarville road
rules will have been up to this
plan I was instrumental in
getting them up and going to one
of the first moved to that area.
We have been working with Pam
Rowley and her group of making
sure that this may it does go to
our local schools and stuff like
that and it's like.
Pulling teeth out of chicken.
There's no grab hold enough it
is.
He does a fantastic job as far
as processing goes but I noticed
over here on the second page of
Google search following because
to make processors it's not a
complete list the impacting
their rules is still open and
going on there's plenty others.
That are listed on here as well
we used to get our of the
process sometimes we would have
to take it over to thanks for
Senator.
And right now it's a six month
waiting because there that you
know dated with custom kills.
I do want people out there.
This the animal rights people to
the that we do whatever this
bill is passed in its budget
be passed this year folks if you
want us if you want to have a
viable source of food in our
state we have to get this done.
But under section money on page
two of the bill it says we have
to follow the requirements of
the federal meat inspection that
federal policy producers
inspection that and this is very
important right here the federal
humane methods of slaughter act
of nineteen seventy eight those
are all federal regulations.
And that is very important for
everybody to stay in.
And it does have all the
prescribed methods spelled out
in this particular field madam
chair as far as I can read in
this bill everything has been
cut and working along with New
Mexico State University of their
mates left.
And going forward with that.
We have the ability now to.
Trying young people or anybody
that wants to go through to make
eight as far as processing goes
anytime.
Of protein.
We'll be able to give the the
thanks retain those jobs in the
state of New Mexico.
What a concept thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and I in closing I would just
like to thank Representative
this bill for it it's a it's
been over do appreciate all the
work that we need to this this
is not an easy left for any.
And I just go and record as
saying that and recognize
is so Representative Zamora
thank you madam chair we can
push the button.
Go.
I'm madam chair I move in the
past
Two five seconds.
The motion for two thousand five
Since the more with the second
by candies of with the proposal
is
Is there any opposition to this
motion.
madam Representative Armstrong
you have to pass thank you madam
chair and I just wanted to say
thank you all for all your help
Mexico livestock board is been
instrumental in in getting this
done and and really taking the
task to heart and I look forward
to working with them on all
kinds of great stuff thank you
madam chair thank you so much.
Thank you thank you I would just
like to say part of the reason I
ask questions about this as well
as.
The flowers I know on this
committee and when it comes time
to vote and say.
This is about and now I am all
this wealth of information.
In a them and help them get this
way to learn madam chair.
Representative Matthews if
you'll just follow my lead.
The HSD.
Well in that I think we have a
Representative was and wanted to
make a statement on a letter
that she's asking members to
this
To see if you want to sign that
and that so that madam chair
thank you very much in our last
week's Committee of brought up
the issue regarding of the
aerial slaughter of cattle
with the divorce and as many of
you all that that last year they
did the same thing that kills
seventy five head of cattle over
there indiscriminately the
helicopter through typhus.
And this is all of the striated
by one of the Mexico Senators.
Funded through his capital at
the capital outlay for his
monetary ways of getting things
done.
The serial snipers could not
determine whether any of these
cattle's cattle were rented or
not I can't remember the exact
numbers I think it was sixty
five total there were sixty five
total hit that with kids.
Help me out here as far as the
number pools that were killed I
can't remember thank you all for
kids of that.
So if you take the number
cattle's that repeals.
And those banks were left there
as diabetes State there start to
death or became food for the
will fall will populate.
They're planning on doing it
again folks and I am incensed by
this it's it's by this with the
rising meat prices the way they
are.
I think that that would the
state of New Mexico would be
better served to have those
cattle gathered off of that
particular allotment over the
last.
And being utilized by.
I'm sorry getting passionate
about this about two of.
Utilizing this made to help some
of the.
Thanks based organizations that
do help feed the homeless or do
you think the under underserved
population of our state that it
would instead whatever they did
the slaughter those carcasses.
We're rod right there in the
forest they will waste.
And I am so adamantly opposed to
this I am so in light of that
whenever I brought this up I
said I would write a letter but
I would like to do and it's a
very short letter this year.
If it gets to the point.
This is going to be sent to a
friend more the United States
Forest Service fourteen hundred
independence Avenue southwest
Washington DC dear chief more
reimbursed for you to and in bad
Klay reiterate our letter of Feb
or the six two thousand twenty
two the text copy is going to be
at that almost of what a year
and one lawsuit later we again
find it necessary to write you
regarding the for service
flanking disregard for the law
New Mexico as previously
established the laws governing
the strays in New Mexico are
quite clear.
Seventy seven dash thirteen dash
one NMSA nineteen seventy eight
intentional in just injury to
livestock is a felony thirty
dash eighteen twelve NMSA
nineteen seventy eight your
actions in twenty twenty two
resulted in a lawsuit to prevent
the Forest Service from
slaughtering cattle in the heat
of wilderness by shooting them
from helicopters as you know the
lawsuit was settled in July of
twenty twenty two under the
terms of the settlement US FSP
greedy give seventy five days
notice before commencing any
further cyber operations we are
informed that following the
settlement U. S. at this engaged
with various stake holders in
the New Mexico livestock board
to explore not only the options
for the removal of strays from
the heat now it seems that all
of those conversations with
stakeholders in the New Mexico
livestock board were fruitless
for that US FS did not enter
into the conversations in good
faith.
You're twenty twenty two
operation resulted in the
killing sixty three cat.
We are not aware of how many
more you intend kids this year
but we sincerely doubt that the
number would be sufficient to
cause any damage to an area as
best as they heal wilderness
your proposed actions are
contrary to law and we urge you
to seek a more humane and less
with wasteful method of removal
both removing the strays from
the wilderness.
They love it respectfully
submitted and madam chair.
I intend to mail this I would
have.
Lots of other members that want
to sign on to it and I would
like to request that this
committee also elected to it as.
The committee members as a whole
of I think committee members can
sign on as they wish and
I certainly side on the last one
I personally will sign on this
one I think there are two main
ways of doing that I agree with
you and but I think it is up to
the committee members since us
to decide whether they want to
sign on and in the state I just
want to make an announcement
that next up this Thursday
Marquita Russel will be
presenting on the chess board
and I think this is important
for this committee because of
Representative Ezzell Sir on the
water transport for many years
this they have made a lot of
changes in how they're going to
do grants and grant applications
on loan applications to make it
really more accessible to small
mutual domestic water systems
and they have totally revamped
that in that organization so I
wanted her to come and present
that to this committee much like
we had secretary with the and.
Engineer my Canada so that we
most of this Representative
rural areas and I think it's
important that we know that the
changes that are going on
collectively as a body so she
will be presenting and I'm gonna
start these meetings at nine
o'clock until we get a full
schedule just to give everybody
more time if that's okay with
everybody and so you don't have
to be here at eight o'clock in
the morning and maybe you can
have a little more time to prep
for it ready for you at the
center of and representative of
our units that thank you madam
chair and I'd like to make some
comments on the slaughtering of
cattle and he's also.
Madam chair and members of the
committee is that humane how can
how can you shoot from a
helicopter.
And and get a shop that is going
to be amazing which is hard to
do anyway.
And the other thing that was of
great concern to me is that we
saw after.
Edges of after the aftermath of
that and there were cattle lane
is the river.
So how do we.
Following by.
By the laws of the United States
of clean the clean waters.
Bite slaughtering cattle like
that Levon later rock in the
river.
That makes no sense to me that
it is totally out of hand.
And somebody needs to be held
responsible for this and their
attitudes need to change.
It's it's sad that the federal
government things that come into
the state of New Mexico and push
their way around like that.
So thank you Representative
thank you madam chair
With that I do have one more
thing madam chair I may I guess
you may.
Madam chair the energy committee
just heard with that very
important water bill.
And that has to that it is on
its way to Judiciary and less we
as a committee of the whole to
requests from the speaker that
do.
To the house Ag and water
committee.
That deal with natural resources
of their we deal with
agriculture issues and waters
and they are totally by passing
this committee where it is.
Imperative that as water
committee that we do.
the Senate staff I absolutely
agree I think we should talk to
the speaker about I I have
talked to the speaker I will go
back again at the request of
this committee and see what we
can get I think all things
concerning water should come
before this committee and I I
also know the I I just heard
back from them working on with
the
into your hands on some of its
probably didn't happen in this
committee so we'll see what we
can do and I'll take that to the
speaker and the I think yes
madam chair would be closer to.
To.
Representative announcements on
the floor.
Thank you.
In the form.
Yes I do sometimes it's better
to well.
I would like to work at.
Okay.
With all due respect to you and
you're free data that's what you
want to call.
No with all due respect to you
