Presented of small.
Sierra said still here.
Meister's argument.
Chairman queen here okay have a
quorum.
I also out of options.
Rosters.
So this is.
Senator.
everyone for school.
you're not hearing today's
house.
Wells yes your TV production act
House Bill for fifty yes
recirculation tax credit
eligible for fifty has a role.
House Bill well as the rules
will have to.
So I have a house bill thank you
thank you Mr chairman of that is
waiting for the so that we can
meet somewhere else that they
would be our last and houses
and they're still working on
that and see for us here on
Tuesday.
Story aired on to the.
The good news is I think it's
coming back.
Shorter and simpler I think the
questions the living room
changes more.
This.
The.
So this.
I think that I.
About the pre show off house
bill's.
Your bill's the chance.
Is there subliminal messaging
at.
What we do you know this is
actually the the.
Process we.
With me I don't think the more
coming their way.
It's possible there's a thousand
other committees that can refer
to us but.
First.
I just want to have a I just
want.
Part
of the what the the.
I would I would be doing my job
in other questions or comments
Committee not.
So first.
It is four four three six I do
so thanks for that some of those
of our.
And.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee.
House Bill four thirty six up.
Mr chair there is an amendment
which like to for me to discuss
amendment before I do my
introduction for you all the to
the intuition.
The
question was what we yes Sir.
House before.
Four thirty six.
In my Mr chair members the
committee in my quest to find
economic opportunities for for
businesses in my area I'm always
looking for a for ideas and for
for things that I feel that may
benefit my legislative district
the border so that that isn't
particularly and in my
conversations with with some
folks in that area of the the
suggested that they talk to me
about biodiesel you know I had I
had really how to consider
biodiesel before but this is
something that sounded like a
good thing in this of the you
know that we are only the budget
that would benefit the
environment but also benefit
this is as well and I think in
my opinion it's a win win and
this is even better than that we
looked at
Adding renewable diesel to that
because.
I would like to open it up and
provide more opportunities for
for businesses in my area with
that Mr chair hi I would like to
recognize to my experts you
should be on scene Floyd rocked.
Will the.
What are.
The.
The.
Of the session I.
Yes.
Representative says is bills
with letter to the experts on
the.
And see if the other committees
our our.
Is that your.
I think we received.
Panels I think that's the thing
is right.
The.
There are the.
Yeah.
Good morning everyone hear me.
Yes.
Right.
Thank you good morning Sir
McQueen committee members thank
you for the opportunity to speak
I'm Floyd with our of the clean
fuels Alliance America where the
US trade association
representing the biodiesel
renewable diesel and sustainable
aviation fuel industry clean
fuel support the proposed in
Senate as it will facilitate
greater use of biodiesel in the
transportation sector I'll spend
just a few minutes covering the
economic environmental and
public health benefits of
biodiesel also briefly no other
states that have biodiesel
incentives in place and are
working on line in terms of
economic benefits LMC
international recently did a
study showing that are clean
fuels industry supports seventy
five thousand two hundred jobs
three point six billion dollars
in wages and twenty three point
two billion dollars in economic
activity that's that a study
showed that for every hundred
million gallon increase in
domestic clean fuel production
the direct indirect and induced
economic activity increases by
one point nine billion dollars
and US jobs grow by three
thousand one hundred eighty five
so to the extent your proposed
tax credit credit Senator by the
divisional biodiesel production
to meet demand it isn't it will
benefit New Mexico accordingly
going to environmental public
health benefits biodiesel
provides seventy four percent
greenhouse gas reduction on
average up to eighty six percent
or so
it also reduces diesel
particulate matter emissions by
fifty to eighty percent and a
host of other noxious compounds
by substantial decrease we
recently commissioned Trinity
consultants to use EPA modeling
tools to better quantify the
benefits the Trinity study shows
that switching to a hundred
percent biodiesel in just thirty
I usually use sites find nearby
communities with nearly a.
Nine hundred thirty fewer
premature deaths per year over
four hundred fifty six thousand
reduce as much cases per year
over a hundred forty two
thousand if you are sick or work
lost days per year all totaling
about seven point seven billion
dollars per year imported health
costs now Albuquerque was one of
those sites that we study a and
benefits per Albuquerque are
about four fewer premature
deaths per year over five
hundred fifty reduce work loss
K. per year and other improve
health outcomes all totaling
nearly thirty three million
dollars per year in avoidable
health costs couple of
additional points to note
bio diesel is a drop in fuel so
these environmental and public
health benefits accrue
immediately upon switching to a
hundred percent biodiesel and
they are scalable to the plan
level of biodiesel and they the
benefits come primarily from the
use in older legacy vehicles
about half of which remain in
the nation's fleet and then
finally these benefits are
specially important for those
disadvantaged environmental
justice and tribal nation
communities are located at or
near these hi Ezzell choose.
finally I want to talk a little
bit about the other states with
similar incentives all told
there about fifteen states would
read retail production blender
or consumption credit in place
this bill isn't radically
different than other biofuel
measures in the state and those
state for example Iowa has a
sales tax credit in an excise
tax credit for sales and higher
blends of biofuels credits
started at two percent.
Biodiesel nearly ten years ago
was right to raise five percent
biodiesel blend and then recent
legislation they passed last
year raise that to be eleven
eleven percent and an additional
credit for thirty percent
biodiesel blends Illinois had a
program for nearly twenty years
which way special excise tax act
six point two five percent on
the wholesale price diesel fuel
and landed biodiesel
and now that the that has the
right that has been recently
amended to start at eleven
percent and we moved to twenty
percent and twenty over time and
then finally I would know that
New York has a very similar
individual income tax deduction
of up to twenty cents per gallon
for using biodiesel in this case
in residential heating
applications
I would know that there is a P.
five and eight in New York in
New Mexico it has never been
implemented in eleven years so
an incentive based measure like
that before you today would
positively impact industry where
the on implemented mandate has
not I would know that one of our
membership run renewable energy
group had a partially
constructed biodiesel plant in
the Clovis area but so that
facility for demolition last
year due to a variety of factors
including in action in the state
on that day I mandate are you
ready now operates at ninety so
ladies as part of a run in the
US producing over five hundred
million gallons of biomass based
diesel so to conclude biodiesel
is a drop in fuel
it's a low carbon diesel
replacement with a multitude of
economic environmental and
public health benefits we
support passage of this bill and
look forward to working with the
department to develop and
implement any associate right.
A license thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Mr chair and of it
closing before I go to questions
Mr chair members of the
committee your where I'm always
like I said looking for
opportunities and and by
offering this incentive I
believe that they would
encourage business to to start
considering using this type of
field thank you Mr that was
several questions.
Thank you there's a lot more
than
release introduced the amendment
so that's a discussion so much.
Thank you so those are just
explain your amendment but we
because of thank thank you Mr
chair are you
what we're doing in the
amendment is we are in the
renewable diesel implanted
renewable diesel to to the
To the tax credit
you came to my attention that
this would also benefit many of
us all of the businesses in my
area to give the other option to
to utilize this other type of
people and so that's what the
the gist of this amendment is
used to include
the.
renewable diesel and the blended
renewable diesel.
was it's good to the public is
there anyone here in opposition
to this.
Well so what we're getting is
that the microphones here.
it's always.
develop.
Please.
Not a problem Sir Mr chairman
members of the committee Charles
good marker speaking for the
NRDC and while bio diesel
certainly in renewable diesel
has some environmental benefits
there's also some environmental
downsides as well in the process
of shipping the materials from
the Midwest to the you're
referring are to use your
amendment to retire in Wyoming
and and then finally to other
places so much energy is
consumed in the process that.
It's not completely clear that
requirement perspective but what
we have concerns about is also
that we think frankly that
there's a better way to clean up
problems that biodiesel helps
address which is through
incentivising.
Leader trucks and there's a
house bill four twenty two I
think is number that also has
been referred to a committee
that with support clean trucks
thank you very much.
Thank you.
For the record house bill twenty
two that.
Is that you.
But anyway also opposition do
not Ms if you're online and
would like to speak in
opposition to the bill please
raise your hand.
Thing that is they are not into
like to speak in support.
The second thank you chairman
CWI members the committee
Patrick killing registered
lobbyists for chevron
we support house bill four three
six we we think representative
of our for bringing forward in
June twenty twenty two chevron
completes acquisition of
renewable energy group R. AG a
company the help to establish
the U. S. biofuels industry
through seminary G. we're
working to provide lower carbon
solutions for the transportation
sector help reduce greenhouse
gas emissions assist New Mexico
and the United States in
reaching its climate aspirations
as presented earlier while New
Mexico does does have a
biodiesel mandate in statute is
never been implement eleven
years we believe an incentive
based measure like H. B. four
three six would positively
impact the renewable fuels
industry as noted earlier where
the unemployment mandate from
twenty twelve does not yet have
that fact so for those reasons
and others have on supports the
bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in
support.
It go online if you'd like to
speak in support of this bill.
Treasury.
we have Ricardo Gonzales.
Can you hear me Mr chairman yes.
This is Rico Gonzales registered
lobbyist for el Paso electric we
stand in support of this bill
for the purposes that
Representative Lara brought up.
In our territory and we have a
very small industrial base about
six percent of our low total we
always look for opportunities to
grow that building at the corner
of I. twenty five at I. ten and
on the borders of goods coming
across and back over we see this
is it is a great opportunity for
for the
Production to be homes fund and
to help the rest of the world
with the goods that they receive
from our our borderlands and
then as that Mr Chairman as a as
a comic make peace my middle
name is Lloyd so when I saw the
name of the expert witness I
couldn't help but stand up for
themselves thank you very much
Mr chairman and Representative a
lot of this bill.
Thank you anywhere else online
in support.
Okay
Others are largely the things
like that for you the committee
no Mr chairman we're ready for
questions.
Members of the committee.
Is that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
From a technical standpoint.
Diesel you may have to to use
tractors lower quantities.
That regular diesel during the
combustion questions.
Mr chair representatives are to
my knowledge yes but I would
like to defer to my experts
please.
Yeah that's a great question
the biodiesel you know when your
combustion yet will release CO
two coming out of the tail pipe
but it's important to note that
CO two is basically recycle CO
two from the atmosphere those
that was absorbed during the
biomass growth
you know when you take the
feedstock are growing it it's
absorbing that carbon dioxide
and using it to grow the plant
matter that is then converted
into biodiesel renewable diesel
so that question of CO two going
out the tailpipe is exactly
offset by the CO two that was
taken in by the plan and what
you're left with on a full life
cycle basis it's just a small
amount of CO two emissions which
is why I noted earlier that on a
full life cycle basis biodiesel
reduces greenhouse gases by
seventy four percent on average
up to eighty six percent I would
also point out that in
California there are producers
who are making biodiesel and
renewable diesel that have a
carbon emissions that are on par
with right electricity that's
used for heavy duty trucks so
you can really reduce your
emissions a U. G. H. T.
emissions quite a bit with the
the skills.
So Mr Chairman representative
and explore.
Okay this material.
So much for expansion there must
be.
Some differential with respect
to the carbon emissions of.
Process and knows.
Question need to control the
additional.
All requires about ten percent.
Of the total emissions.
To produce these.
What is that percentage with
respect to I will be able to
also it is are the is called to.
To the.
And this product.
And the C. U. two commissions hi
on the front end.
Mr chair and like to defer to
the server are for the.
Yeah.
Hi I'm still here in terms of
percentages the the amount of CO
two that goes out of the
kids life is about.
Seventy percent or more around
seventy percent of the total
life cycle emissions that's for
petroleum diesel and then find
as I noted that seventy percent
is offset by the amount of CO
two that's taken up by the plant
matter during broke so you're
left with a reduction of about
seventy four percent or so on
average like I said in terms of
the overall costs
here we can provide the
committee with reports from the
department of energy's clean
cities they produce annually
actually several times a year
alternative fuel price report
and does clearly show that there
is a.
A price differential that it
shows that biodiesel is lower in
terms of the what consumers pay
for that alleged two petroleum
diesel and that's that's pretty
much across the the US.
Sure.
Mr Chairman.
Representative why the need for
this search.
If each.
Less expensive.
Mr Mr chair representative.
Hi before defer to my to my
experts like I would just want
to I would like to answer that
and say that you were.
I I believe it's it's a way to
look at opening it up more I
would say I would more
opportunity you because the way
I see it Mr chair representative
is that if we have more options
on the table I think we're able
to.
Balance that out and I explain
myself correctly I just want to
get I what I what I'm trying to
do what I'm trying to what I'm
looking at two with disincentive
is to provide more options for
businesses to work need to use.
These or maybe we may have some
other companies who want to R.
or.
Eco friendly American conscious
and they would transition to
that and so what I wanted to do
with this is given the given
that option Mr chair
representative I don't know Mr
regard to happen response to
that as well.
Yes it's a it's actually a good
question I want answered color
to my previous comment Mr
the server are.
So it's difficult because you're
not in the room but the custom
is to go through the chair I'm
sorry address that Sir before
you address the representative.
Probably.
But.
Yeah so it's it's a good
question the the alternative
price of fuel fuel price report
that I mentioned earlier that
basically reflect the wide
variety and as I mentioned there
are fifteen states or so that
have a wide variety of
incentives and other programs
that incentivize the use of
biodiesel renewable diesel so
although it shows regionally
there are at price advantages
for biodiesel that's not uniform
with respect to states that
don't have these these
incentives so if we need as we
noted New Mexico has a B. I
mandate in place but that's
never been implemented and so
you know we would not expect
that sort of growth in biodiesel
volumes without the sort of
incentive that is you know in
this in this legislation.
Cheryl Mr Chairman
representative and export.
It is a more expensive product.
And.
Services on economic issues
today's.
Mr chair representative
Mr Berger I'd like to do for you
for that but please if you would
go through the chair place.
yes Mr chairman and
representative
the.
The you know there there is a
cost differential to produce the
product
It's it's a small differential
my my my point being that you
know these benefits that can
accrue can be can far outweigh
the amount of incentives that
would you know the states that
have these incentives in place
that impose you know that apply
incentives to that so you're
getting a lot of benefits with
you know very little incentive
programs and in place for
example in California.
They have a low carbon fuel
standard program there.
And that has directly driven the
growth of biodiesel renewable
diesel from fourteen million
gallons in twenty eleven to one
point two billion gallons in
twenty twenty one which is you
know that's an amazing story
there we see that growth and and
it doesn't have to be a low
carbon fuel standard we
anticipate two hundred eighty
million gallons of additional
biodiesel demand from the
incentive programs that three
states put in place last year I
Illinois and Missouri so we
believe that incentive programs
like this help to dry increased
volumes at that price the
investments into production
capacities that generates the
sort of jobs and economic
activities that I mentioned
earlier.
Mr Chairman representative so
the production of this material.
Generates a low carbon fuel
standard credit can you
quantify.
That credit in terms of
Which.
Zero to work at all.
Mr chair representative Mr chair
if I can have a point of
clarification are we still
discussing the member was in
development adopted.
We have the talk to the.
but I think get to the point we.
We can get up there we're just
discussing all the time thank
this is renewable fuels choose
to manage
renewable to two six.
Dange.
would have to move
characteristics so.
The
located disposable thank you Mr
dry I am to just wanted to
clarify the Mr regard we could
please respond to Representative
Scott please.
Mr Chairman representative Scott
it would be helpful if you can
clarify the question I'm not
quite sure I was tracking the
question correctly I want to
make sure I speak to
you know that the the question
that's being posed.
Chairman next four we had a.
West conversation yesterday with
respect to clean fuel standards
low carbon fuel standards and
one of the.
Of mechanisms.
That would be put into place
with that policy is the doctrine
of clean fuel credits so.
The question would be whether
while diesel for.
Of renewable.
Diesel what qualifies for a low
carbon fuel standard credits and
what.
How many pounds of CO two with a
gallon
or a barrel or chapter one of
biodiesel for renewable diesel
generator.
Okay so Mr Chairman
representative
Let me see if I can address that
question so yes the biodiesel
renewable diesel to generate.
Under a low carbon fuel standard
they're generating
very large numbers of credits on
the west coast where these
programs are in place
in California biodiesel
renewable diesel are generating
nearly half of the greenhouse
gas reductions under their low
carbon fuel standard or again
it's even more than that and we
anticipate similar of role in
Washington state I don't have
the numbers in front of me in
terms of actual we you know
grams CO two per gallon but I
would note that you know the
biodiesel renewable diesel in
California have generated
millions of metric tons I think
it was a hundred and ten million
metric tons of CO two reduction
since the start of the program
in California which is nearly
which is more than almost any
other program that that state
has put in place so it has the
potential to help any state at
pursues a you know an assertive
program for biodiesel renewable
diesel degenerate to help those
states achieve their climate
programs I also point out.
That biodiesel renewable diesel
argue the relative to other
fuels in that it provides that
determines ciation in those
sectors that are very very
difficult to electrify and we're
talking about heavy duty on road
off road marine rail aviation
and residential heating so with
that ladies in that respect we
believe electrification is an
appropriate carbon reduction
strategy that a number of states
are pursuing but at the same
time that is going to happen
it's going to take many many
years to accomplish that and so
biodiesel renewable diesel can
play a very important role in
helping states to achieve that
urbanization while they're
pursuing these these other
technologies.
Well done.
To the and then the.
The opportunity when we get to
this thank you Mr thank you
Representative.
Experts.
Is there a the we were familiar
with them and that is very
Reason not to drive them in
them.
I have a motion to adopt the
minutes to make a.
This year sorry
Representative during the second
Representative Townsend
certainly objection to the
amendment or any discussions
specifically on.
Okay so even in the.
Stature.
With.
This option.
Okay
thanks we a Representative
that's thank family thank you
Representative.
There's
There's a few things to.
Our unique about the handling
characteristics
I'll do so.
That I think body should
understand are you aware of.
Mr chair Representative no I'm
not.
Representative one of one
specification if you look at
ASTM specification on.
Do so that is critically
important especially on prior to
elevations it is four point.
And so I think your bill will
incentivize.
Of.
Meeting those characteristics
and one.
it was not at all uncommon
higher cultural patients that
you have that use eight eight at
the two.
Key diesel from jailing.
It's a west point or four point
builder of Bill detested looking
at the it'll tell you that that
is a characteristic of the age
of biodiesel it must be
regarded.
So I think that.
That is one of the reasons.
That I think you're ill may help
in.
Create more product.
Mr Chairman representative.
Part of the reason that the I
mandate.
Been implemented in New Mexico
and I feel this that's just not
enough I think so to meet the
market is that correct.
Mr chair representative to my
knowledge yes that's why I work
I'm working with my partners on
this.
And
Representative there's also
another unique handling
characteristics out.
Of I do so especially I know
this is a what elation of.
And all that so and and things
that we
When we talk about biodiesel you
it is not Representative type
one of all in the in a of
Marshall market is.
Mr chair representative yes
that's correct.
One of the issues has beyond
that
it takes more track
transportation dollars to get it
where it needs to be and in the
issues like frankly for the
committee that that is yeah
The concern of.
Of of.
Contamination other products
especially jet fuel of that may
be in the pipe at the same time
as the forecast we as a
committee on pipeline so
I I think your bill will
incentivize.
helped I don't take it right
back then.
Gonna
be everything to everybody to
change the but you it will help
incentivize that bio.
Market and may make it to where
it's I.
The.
Thank you mentioned it's it's
not a silver bullet but it is
the ball that that will help
move you to a cleaner burning
fuel.
Representative
There are some unique there some
other unique characteristics of.
File with removal our.
They're very beneficial one is
lower sulfur content are you
aware that.
Mr chair representative yes I.
About that yes.
And other characteristics that
has and the problems and we
lowered the sulfur
specifications and United States
is lubricity.
And that is of do so when we
took the software out we dried
it out in it because higher
where and mechanical failures in
diesel engines of we didn't have
the receipt that was naturally
occurring and virgin diesel is
that correct.
Mr chair representative to my
knowledge yes.
So.
I I think Mr Chairman
representative the
When you look at.
The poor point the handling
issues.
Yeah.
Okay.
HM I do so.
That would never been able to
get I do so.
Market institute New Mexico we
have.
I think bill will help.
certainly help in your district.
And it'll help by the Kim
Albuquerque for example were you
have.
More transportation fuels
So I.
I think.
When I first read about be
launched
I love all that pop on his
building.
As of.
As I have of consider the.
The budget empties and handling
to make it more user friendly
people of especially in higher
pull requirements.
Of the chance of it being able
to of the five.
In programming New Mexico.
It's probably in the right
direction thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Representative
Nibert.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair representative there
was a.
Talk about.
This being a step toward
creating more investments in New
Mexico and maybe jobs created.
And I'd like to talk a little
bit about that so let's look at
how biodiesel
Is this may what what the.
For New Mexico what would be the
primary components that would go
into the.
I am a manufacturer of violence.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that I like to defer to
my experts for a place.
Mr chair representative the
biodiesel is a relatively
straightforward production
process you can make biodiesel
and renewable diesel from the
same the stock basically waste
that will sing in oils increases
you can derive us from animal
wastes have rendered tallow used
cooking oil and distillers corn
oil from the alcohol production
process as well as properties
by products from soybean and
canola and other crops so you
take the lettuce the spoiling.
Put in through what's called the
entrances defecation chemical
process you basically reacting
it would on all call like math
and all along with a catalyst in
and out of that you get
biodiesel and
glycerin
and value based side products
and and that's pretty much it
and then you know so really I
production process
would just require the feedstock
to come in or or be made locally
the stock could come from
restaurants in the state in
terms of used cooking oil
and you know those sort of
feedstock or they can come in
from other parts and then that
gets processed through the
transistor for cation process
and then maybe a two we provide
to a usable of the killer fuel
that can then be used helpfully.
At thank you Mr chair
representative.
Do we have sufficient ethanol
production.
And production of.
Cooking oil
the other feedstocks to.
I guess it types those
investments in New Mexico and
create the jobs to to talk
about.
Mr chair representative a I like
to defer to Mister Burke are for
the.
It Mr chair representative
unfortunately I don't have those
the stock numbers specific to
New Mexico I can certainly find
that in a follow up to the
committee I would note that you
know the again the used cooking
oil is generally from the
restaurant industry
so you know depends on the size
that in New Mexico but you know
we have found that you know
given the right incentives the
market really responds very well
and provide the the
infrastructure investments as
well as the marketing and
distribution in order to make
these drugs available to the
consumers and in the states that
provide the sort of incentives.
Well it seems that.
In New Mexico.
The markets that would exist
for the feedstocks we go into
this.
Seem to be somewhat limited at
and so we talked about.
Extracting investment attracting
jobs to New Mexico and I'm I'm
just questioning whether or not
New Mexico.
With all its various sources
whether it be restaurants are
cooking all weather the ethanol
production which I.
I believe we have very little or
no ethanol production of the
current.
yeah and then the
thanks
other sources whether be grains.
Chickens cattle what have you.
We don't we don't have those
processing plants in New Mexico
so I'm I'm wondering how we're
going to attract that investment
I I might understand how they do
it in Illinois where they have
you know.
Hundreds of miles of cornfields
and soybean fields I might
understand that maybe you have
an parts of West Texas where
they have a lot of of our cattle
being slaughtered and the meat
packing plants I might even
understand it markets all with
that we have **** chicken
facilities
but I'm I'm looking at New
Mexico and the statement that
there's going to be a tractor
vestment create jobs.
I just wonder hello.
This incentives based on our the
page based feedstocks is going
to allow that investment to
accord  number one and number
two therefore the creation of
jobs and.
If there's an answer to that
great if not all I'll move on to
some other issues.
Mr chair representative
The way the way I envision this
and I'm thinking about my area
particularly is is.
This by incentivizing the use of
these fuels it's going to expand
this is especially trucking.
A transportation and will be
able to hire more people and and
invested in those communities
Mr chair representative.
There is a there's a we have a
local.
Some very small bio bio fuel
plants in in in in my area that
with the the struggle the Texas
or Mexico border and so what I
would in this I believe with
incentivize them to move their
operations into New Mexico and I
I believe the smaller businesses
the smaller companies that that
do bio fuels we'll be able to
come into New Mexico to sell the
product and so that that's how I
envisioned yeah this this
incentive is these jobs this job
creation the sickly economic
growth happening in particular
in in in in my area that that's
that's always I envision that Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair representative of.
The.
Tax incentive that's providers
may be going to the to biofuels
if I understand your your answer
but that this will create more
transportation in New Mexico Mr
chair and representative I've
always viewed New Mexico as.
Someone of the pass through
state with respect to
transportation.
We are.
Located on some major
transportation routes but.
I large transportation is moving
through our state not originated
from our state there's some
exceptions but columns the need
that we can make it with
in my area used to we exported
out thousand now we're bringing
out of state and
that the large it seems to me
that our transportation New
Mexico's transportation by large
is is.
Goods and services moving
through the state to major
markets not originated from so
again I I I don't know how.
This is would increase
transportation
Within the state and I certainly
obviously down to allow this
president let's look at that a
couple other things
You mentioned early on that it
would create more options all
right Sir that means more
options to consumers of these
diesel products with that we
active Mr chair representative
yes.
So would be your impression that
in creating those additional
options at the truck stops.
corporations that that have
their own fueling stations that
they would be creating more
they be putting an additional
tanks and additional pops to
have separate dispensers for
this product versus the existing
products that they're selling.
Mr chair representative hi I
believe that that type of this
bill would happen with this with
the with the it set up
and that's what that's one of
the the goals that I would like
to see with this by offering
this incentive is that they
would make that additional
investment into the company's
and and into the into the
economy.
Mr Chairman representative.
Are there any.
Problems with respect to the.
Storage of this type of fuel
tank for extended periods of
time I'm thinking of farmers who
would have their.
Factor of full of this product
for extended period of time are
there any things about this type
of fuel that would either be
better or maybe not as good as
as
The current diesel products that
are available in terms of
standing for long periods of
time.
And I mention this because I've
spent quite a bit of money over
the years claim and house of
thanks because the the water
comes in and then it gets the
basically become slides so so
are there advantages or
disadvantages to this type of
fuel that.
Mr chair representative that I
do not know all to for that to
my experts.
Mr chair representative great
question.
Biodiesel renewable diesel they
they.
Can function and perform just as
well as conventional petroleum
diesel with respect to a
storage.
What we see is that biodiesel is
a particularly good solvent and
what'll happen is the build up
in tanks from years of using
conventional petroleum diesel
you'll get a build up and there
from slides and other impurities
and the first time you use
biodiesel it may you know
dissolve some of those residues
and so the the recommendation
for those who are switching over
to biodiesel is that they you
know they look at and they
monitor the the tank
the first time they use it they
may have to clean it out once
and then just follow the
instructions from the supplier
with respect to fuel filter
changes and things like that but
other than that it's exactly the
same treatment as within
conventional diesel so it's
really just that first time you
put it in there you do a little
bit extra cleaning and you're
good to go.
As long as you use biodiesel
from that point on you're gonna
have a much better you know
you're gonna have a better
cleaning fuel it's going to
reduce the amount of
particulates coming out of your
engine that's going to reduce
the amount of loading that goes
into the filters from your
engine and so it has the
performance and engine budget
downstream from the from the
tank.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Bogart the last question I
have concerns of cost and.
The studies are I've seen
largely from Europe
Indicate that the cost of
biodiesel.
is is substantially higher than
the cost of
of refined petroleum products
diesel that we we know now and
so Mr Chairman representative
What what is the cost
differential between
that the cost to the consumer
differential and you could be at
fifty cents the.
Incentive here where that is are
still going to be a cost
differential between at the so.
Refined from petroleum verses
are blended for the
biodiesel
the I have to get the term one
hundred.
Is there could you talk a little
bit about cost differentials
between the products.
Mr chair representative I'd like
to defer to the server are for
the.
Mr chair representative a good
question the the incentives
that's contained in this bill
would go a long way towards
providing that cost parity for
the consumers similar to what
we've seen in other states that
have incentives in in carbon
policies in place so give you an
example in California
when you look at the start of
the program in twenty eleven all
the way through twenty twenty
the of the retail pump price
data from the I. eighty energy
information agency so that the
prices that the consumer pays in
California are basically the
same or even less you know at
that point then they were at the
start of the program so the
point being that with the right
incentives the right policy
signals you can put in place a
program that generates these
benefits and has little to no
impact what the consumer pays up
upon.
Mr Chairman representative
following up on that answer I
certainly hope that our prices
are consumers pay aren't equal
to California which he had
substantial rise above the
current price with that Mr chair
representative thank you for
answered my questions.
Representative very.
Chair and I'm not sure I am.
Reverberating Representative
Lara
I am thinking about this and I'm
thinking about when we brought
in the film industry and I
understand it's an entirely
different industries but we you
know we brought them in with the
with the sense and I was just
calling to see what the state of
New Mexico has in terms of state
incentives already in place and
what we have is we have
alternative fuel tax exemption
bio fuel production tax
deduction file Maez tax credit
diesel emission reduction
funding.
And you know I think about New
Mexico and I think we're
Mr chair and representative were
always you know.
We've always prided ourselves
against as being like the the
open highway and you know route
sixty six and all that sort of
stuff in New Mexico
But I think it's important that
we start considering.
How do we reduce our our
greenhouse emissions in New
Mexico some of that through
probably mass transit at some
point in time but the reality is
that we have a lot of people who
use diesel trucks
I mean it's kind of cool I guess
to have a diesel truck here.
Probably it to that
and but one of the things that I
noticed in terms of
one of these laws it's specially
the last which I mentioned is
diesel emission reduction
funding and I just want to
mention Mr chair in looking at
this it talks about model year
nineteen twenty nine to two
thousand nine class B. local
freight trucks
port drayage trucks I'm not sure
what that is
last four to seven local freight
trucks
older class forty eight school
buses which is in my discussion
here transit buses.
lift capacity forklifts port
cargo handling equipment and
this really sparked my interest
spark ignition.
Airport ground support equipment
and I think the reason that I'm
raising this Mr chair and and
and maybe you're you're
expert can address this a little
bit and how they deal with this
and other states that are using
this particular blended
biodiesel fuel.
is it fair and buses are
starting to use this app blended
biodiesel fuel
in particular I think sky blue
and I share ways and some of
these
you know pretty big.
Airways are using bio up land of
biodiesel so I just wondered if
you were
If you are.
Expert comment regarding them.
Mr chair representative server
up you have an answer for
Representative of.
The
Mr chair representative.
The with respect to the ground
equipment at airports I think
the representative mentioned
spark ignited engines those are
fundamentally different from the
diesel engines that are based on
compression ignition and so they
use different fuels they can use
propane gasoline that sort of
thing
A kerosene aviation fuel yeah
exactly.
So with respect to the other
incentives that are already
there I I I think the the the
benefits of the proposed bill in
front of you is to generate
additional demand of those the
the incentives that were
mentioned earlier I think
they're targeted to very
specific sort of sectors and
subsectors the bill before you
would generate additional demand
through General demands
increasing increase increases
from the average consumer fleet
operator and therefore that
would be generated sort of
benefits that we talked about
earlier.
Thank you and thank you Mr chair
for insulting me and and
Representative Lara I think what
my point is really is that the
film industry you know the state
of New Mexico had to offer some
incentives to bring them here
and we've seen what has happened
with the film industry and we
have Netflix now we and NBC you
have jobs all over the state and
I think that you know what my
point is is that sometimes we
have to invest to bring these
industries to Mexico and this I
think this bill that's being
presented today actually is a
step in that direction Mr chair
and Representative Lara so
That really was my point and I
think the other thing is that
buses and aircraft are indeed
using some of these deals from
what I can see what I've seen on
Google and that's kind of my go
to place here but you know I'm
not certainly not a.
Engineer but I think I hope that
we will have some correct
information thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative regular
I see representative Sarinana in
the.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have a couple questions
Representative Mr Chairman
representative how much
what is the benefit for the
environment is that we're trying
to do better our buyer.
Mr chair representative
we're yes benefit the
environment and also offered
incentives to business to
utilize cleaner fuels.
And Mr thank you thank you Mr
chairman Representative which
five percent biodiesel each
gallon.
How much how much really
getting.
Mr chair representative for that
I thank you for to questions for
Vergara please.
Mr chair representative good
question as I mentioned you know
we we did a number of studies
looking at the switch from bio
from a hundred percent actually
in diesel to a hundred percent
biodiesel those quantify the
benefits in terms of public
health improvements and they are
scalable to of whatever plan
levels at the curricular
jurisdiction it is interested
and so
you know what we found is the
higher the biodiesel blend
levels that are incentivized by
programs the the greater the
budget both environmentally and
public health wise so be I can
certainly get benefits from that
but the twenty P. fifty B. one
hundred you're going to get
concomitantly increased benefit
from those.
Thank you Mr chairman but the
possibility that ninety five
percent is still petroleum
diesel is kind of worrisome
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you representative
Sarinana.
I just got on.
As.
Thank you Mr chairman.
You're trying to do the math
dition to the recession but.
This research okay Mr Chairman
representative would apply to.
The five percent land.
So ninety four per share.
Thank you on page two the
regular petroleum diesel is that
correct.
Mr chair representative to my
knowledge yes Mr Stewart know if
you have anything to add to
that.
Mr chair representative that is
my understanding as well I I
would point out that biodiesel
and renewable diesel under the
proposed amendment they work
very well in all the years you
know they are considered to be
complementary fuels so a number
of an increasing number of
plates are actually using the
land of renewable diesel and
biodiesel up to a hundred
percent blend right so typical
would be eighty percent
renewable diesel to twenty
percent biodiesel and what this
allows is for fleet to improve
their operate you know yes he
scored you can go completely a
hundred percent sustainable and
they get the benefits of both
renewable diesel and biodiesel
like I said they are
complementary in terms of their
performance biodiesel has
improved lubricity relative to
the renewable diesel and also
has a lower price point and so
this sort of incentive has the
tendency to incentivize both of
those fuels and increase
investments in both those feels.
Which
Mr Chairman representative of
the next order cannot and do the
math.
It seems like a fifty so that.
Okay I'll on ships of the.
On.
Five percent and.
Would be pretty substantial that
is.
Five days for renewable fuels
correct call.
Twenty dollars a gallon.
And still the economic in that
scenario.
December to.
Mr chair representative Mr
Bernardi do you have an answer
for for Representative Scott.
Mr chair representative I I I
don't believe that twenty
dollars per gallon is accurate
like I said there's a you know
slight price premium from
production of biodiesel
renewable diesel relative to
conventional diesel but
incentives like this in other
sort of measures as well as a
consistent policy signal from
jurisdictions find that sort of
level of.
You know investment certainty
and the sort of signal that you
know producers need in order to
generate or produce higher into
this which would lower the price
of these fuels I'm not certain
if that addresses your question
but that's just in the kind of
experience that we've had across
the nation.
Mr Chairman.
Senator expert assist if this
was for I will.
For.
For it to the next committee or
to the floor that's all the
questions thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you that's got
See no other questions of the
committee your question to you
would like to make a motion I
have some questions about my
Just a quick.
That
and and get it.
so so that's the questions
Representative first can you
sort of clarify the difference
for me between ethanol diesel.
Mr chair
The way I understand the
distress at the nose is for
Macy.
And biodiesel is use utilizing
other materials they could use
corn as the court as well that
that that almost exclusively for
based to my knowledge yes.
Representative I I guess if they
could use car as well.
He can I claim a fifty cent a
gallon tax credit every time I
thought because there's always a
sticker on the pump and the
contains ten percent ethanol
there when they're not right.
Mr chair out of sorry I didn't
understand your so my point is I
think there's already just and
all in our guests if they can
use corn to make biodiesel
what's up seven just calling
ethanol biodiesel and be
eligible for this this tax
credit.
Mr chair that's a good question
I'd like to ask Miss regard this
as for the.
Mr chair representative great
question there's a fundamental
difference between ethanol and
biodiesel and renewable diesel
so Effin all issues in like any
passenger cars and trucks so
it's part of the gas in the mix
and you know as the states in
the nation is you know are going
towards greater electrification
in the light duty secretary
you know you'll see more more
the gasoline being replaced with
electricity biodiesel and
renewable diesel by contrast
operate in the heavy duty sector
so again this is on road and off
road heavy duty vehicles marine
rail and aviation so those are
two fundamentally different
fuels and depending on the sort
of the policy objectives that
the state wants to achieve if
you want to achieve
decarbonisation in the sectors
that are very difficult to
electrify having a strong
incentive in the policy signal
that incentivizes increased use
of biodiesel renewable diesel
certainly would make sense
while you know electrification
efforts are ongoing because all
state is pretty much all studies
show that that's going to take
many many years if not decades
in the heavy duty sector even
California struggles with with
that secretary so just to make
it clear that ethanol and
biodiesel renewable diesel
operated two completely
different sectors are not
interchangeable.
Okay thank you for that
Representative Lara the fifty
cents a gallon it seems I will
it is it is that what's the
level that's necessary to make
the public feel competitive or
like what it what it is ten
cents a gallon budgeted down
with that just be insufficient
Mr chair you get you know when
when we were discussing this and
there's always you know you
reach high.
And and then the negotiate after
that and so that's what the
that's what the the the that was
that was the idea with with with
this and your if if if we can Mr
chair we get the fifty cents you
know that's great but we you
know but we understand that of
the that may be you not
achievable.
It would so Representative Lara.
So it seems to me
The I I also often we see the
tax rate like this we see a
proper cap.
Yeah and I know that you'll
difficult with
transportation fuels but I mean
usually you know when we did
rooftop solar early you know if
you got a certain credit when
the total quite credited ten
million the the stock was for
the here and there there's no
upper cap on this and as a
result that the fiscal impact
reports he's concerning
I mean that they're just making
the fiscal impact on this you
know at the low end.
Update under million dollars.
Mr chair
That yes so up what what what
what I was looking at we're
looking at is you know first of
all we try to get the
conversation started.
And and then from there we can
you know look at other options
but what I what I really wanted
to do with this was at least you
know get get that going because
other questions have come up as
a you know how as of the
processes of the work whether
this applies to individual an
individual who owns a truck and
this is on trucking a company a
corporation that does that so
there's a lot of other questions
regarding the the the structure
of the taxes in the percentages
that that we also get a would
would consider modifying in
order to to get this about
moving forward.
That thank you for that
Representative Lara sh next
thing I want to certify shows
the percent biodiesel so I mean
to me if it's a city council hi
five percent.
Scene flow in your expert talked
about some of the benefits of.
earning Representative Pyle the
is so very bad diesel but
in studies of that assume that
percent I I recognize that the
city were scalable but
There are quite a few benefits
cited and so we have to do the
medical map that you.
If it is scalable to think up
the budget will actually be five
percent of that.
That it might.
Correctly summarizing that.
So Mr chair
That's one of the things that
that
you also considers it like you
had mentioned searchers stating
that so obviously you know I've
and I'm just here.
The fifty cents so you'll be
using you fifty percent also
five percent so that's we met
bye bye bye scalable so the
higher the higher the the the
the plant or the higher the
purity of of the of the easel
blank.
The higher the incentive would
be so that's something that that
we've also talked about and
considered as well to make this
your more workable.
And Representative Lara that
that's interesting I I think
that makes the ministration of
it obviously much more difficult
but but my question was you know
with the budget and like
And he talked about reduced
illness and things like that but
that was.
This to me and percent I did
see.
It says scalable I'd take it to
mean that it's yeah the the
number that jumped out at me was
would say for lives in
Albuquerque.
Significant but that.
Was based on I believe hundred
percent biodiesel and I don't
know if it.
Like hundreds of biodiesel in.
All the diesel burning engines I
mean I don't I don't know that
the top line but the to get get
get down to New Mexico I believe
what he was saying and maybe I'm
wrong we would have won benefit
with under percent scalable so
we would have I said budget with
five percent.
Is that is that what he means by
scalable maybe need to yeah I
think so Mr chair Mr regard
would you go like to answer that
question for the gentleman
please.
Mr chair representative your
understanding is correct that's
how the scalability would would
operate so hundred percent
biodiesel we get to the hundred
percent of the benefits that I
mentioned twenty percent
biodiesel twenty percent of the
budget and so forth.
And Representative Mr Rivera
would mean you're talking a
hundred percent biodiesel is
that a hundred percent biodiesel
in all the diesel burning
engines.
For innovation I mean what is
the what is the hundred percent.
Is it for a few solar for
secretary.
That Mr chair representative so
the hundred percent.
Refers to both the
The biodiesel itself so you know
you can get one range from you
know one all the way up to the
one hundred so if you're using
you know basically pure
biodiesel.
And you're using that replace
the petroleum in the legacy
vehicles that operate within the
the site that we study.
and the sites include ports rail
yards logistics you know Ag
operations freight corridor
right for eight dollars and so
forth so if you're switching all
of the petroleum diesel with a
hundred percent biodiesel then
you would get the benefits that
we talked about that as
quantified in the Trinity
studies.
Okay so the so in summary.
The the studies were
Representative by a diesel in
the present time and what we're
looking at is five percent
biodiesel.
Probably some other small
percent of the time if you're
only replacing ten or twenty or
a hundred trucks with them on
the biodiesel.
That's.
Yeah a small percentage of the
small percentage.
Separate this regard.
Mr chair representative I I
believe that would be correct
if you have an incentive that we
place is five percent of the
diesel in the entire market then
you would get five percent of
the you know sort of benefits
that we talked about hi your
budget approved from higher
levels of incentives that you
know
facilitate a higher payment
rates okay.
Thank you for that urgent
Townsend for six.
Yep right quickly.
It's not that simple.
There are some.
In the manufacture of.
diesel engines have.
Specifications that like if you
go look at.
Max or any of those the building
built their warranties and felt
like to be twenty only
On biodiesel but so you have to
be careful on that when you get
into a hundred percent bio.
There are some real
handling
Issues what with a hundred
percent bio but.
Just for the committee's
benefit.
Yeah this problem started like
in nineteen ninety one.
The government decided.
What did J. P. eight which is
exactly the same as commercial
Aviation fields a kerosene based
aviation fuel which care seeing
is number one diesel and came
right out of the diesel will
pull the market south
the soul to the farmers and
ranchers all a little and and
those people got to do so.
it's only gonna change and we
have production offset that so
that's where we're
going hundred percent it's not
it's it's.
I don't believe technically
possible.
Okay the Santo I thank you
so I I I appreciate that we are
in a lot of biodiesel today.
once upon a time I did too.
I was there to the motion.
Mr chair at over the past the
second we have a motion in the
second we.
To pass as amended.
Okay
we would do best as amended to
stick.
Representative radio.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Large.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Vice chair Sarinana.
No.
Chairman Greene no.
Seven four so but this in the
far you have to pass first that
we have Representative Scott to.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative act two
calculations wall other folks.
Asking questions in this city.
Breaks up the five percent and
even with diesel fuel.
R. O. diesel is sixteen dollars
and twenty nine cents.
And that seems to lie in the.
Thanks orient subsidy.
Or.
This process.
Richard.
Thank you Mr.
tomato it's expensive.
Thank you Mr chairman
Tax committee here
Representative.
So I'm sending.
I have.
I have a hard time.
To get.
Trying to tell.
However I would say this Mr
chair.
Thank you thank you for.
Representative our.
Decisions
Right.
Federal.
Mr Chairman representative.
I am.
This one tax.
Some.
The question is.
Representative eight questions.
the substance use.
I do that last.
Is.
Questions.
Just a a place.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you
thank you FOR I Mr thank you Mr
chair thank you.
That we had bills for thirty
nine action research receives
Representative Rapp.
Okay.
Representative whenever you're
ready Representative Scott thank
you very much Mr chairman and
members of the committee
we appreciate you hearing this
house bill before the Senate
Bill start arriving so
appreciate the timing on this.
Mr chair and members we have
teacher Trujillo on soon he's
recovering from COVID and I
believe he can we confirm that
he's with us Mr chair.
This year yes Sir.
That the teacher you is yes.
Okay very good thank you Mr
chairman so I think I need to
start with a little bit of
history about why we're bringing
the house bill four thirty nine
this legislative session and
this is really a the tax matter
and twenty nineteen the New
Mexico legislature passed house
bill six which dealt with
basically the intent of that
bill was to capture internet
sales there were a few other
pieces in the bill but the the
marquee language was capture
internet sales that what did not
go into effect until July first
of twenty twenty one and we have
discovered that there are some
pretty harsh consequences from
the able take implementation of
that what what that house bill
six did is take New Mexico to
what's called destination
taxation or destination sourcing
and prior to house bill six
of Business state located in a
particular city when it came to
providing goods or services
would impose a tax G. R. T. tax
receipts tax based on the
location of the business and
whatever that good or service
was provided that that was part
of the at the tax picture but
now that we have a destination
taxation or destination sourcing
we found that a couple of
municipalities in the state have
been very much harmed by that
the new way of doing.
In particular the communities of
Hobbs and Carlsbad there are
experiencing major losses in
gross receipts tax Mr chair
members because for
municipalities their sources of
revenue are somewhat limited and
in the case for example of
Carlsbad.
At least fifty percent of the
city budget is based on the
collection of gross receipts
taxes and so the shift to
destination taxation is actually
causing the city to lose about
two million dollars a month in
G. R. T. revenue.
SO that's that's a pretty
sizeable lost and I will say up
front Mr chairman members that
internet sales capturing that
tax component has actually
helped almost all of our
municipalities.
And counties for that matter to
potentially increase their gross
receipts capture but in the case
of Carlsbad and Hobbs
but for house bill six they
would be receiving a great deal
more and they depend on that
income that that revenue for all
of the city services that they
provide everything from fire
protection law enforcement to
all the other things that cities
typically do so we've been asked
to Representative got ninety two
to try to come up with a
solution on how to to not hurt
to those particular cities they
are very dependent on the oil
and gas industry that's where
the resources are are located
and so
the interim committee Tax
committee has really dealt with
this issue.
And everybody's really searching
for a solution.
And so we have several bills
this session I think is it for
five bills that try to deal with
this issue come up with a good
solution.
And so house bill four thirty
nine is is one of those and
Mister chair I think of what
Representative Scott at to the
wish wish to.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Unlike most communities in the
state.
Southeast New Mexico relies on
economic activity that is
generated outside of city limits
and that's whether you're
Carlsbad loving Eunice Jarrell
or home.
All of those.
All of that economic activity
all those wells are being
drilled and serviced that
activity occurs outside the city
limits out of the county and
what we lost with destination
sourcing was the revenue stream
that was associated with gross
receipts tax on.
All of that activity search show
offices in version which which
one should to Carlsbad and that.
Our.
Community leaders believe the
change cost the city somewhere
around two million dollars a
month and that's what we're
trying to rectify with this
piece of legislation Mr chair
members I I just point out the
main focus of the bill that is
adding in this is on page four
of the bill
it says on yeah I don't know
take you to point to page we're
going to Mr chair
that we're just modifying a part
of the statute so I'd say for
professional services and we're
adding and oil and gas
production services performed in
New Mexico and and the location
of the performer of the service
that we're that businesses
located would be the place where
the tax is is impose that tax
rate would be imposed and then
the other part of the bill Mr
chair that that
that carries us through is on
page six and here we actually
define what is meant by the term
oil and gas production services
and that definition is to page
to the few lines long and we
think it what it really does is
capture the services side.
of this this at taxation picture
and then finally Mr chair at and
members that mentioned that
there are already exemptions in
the in the existing statute for
professional services it's found
it
one nineteen on page six and
that definition was part of HB
six and what it really does is
give an exception to it's called
the attorneys and accountants
exemptions essentially because
they're the ones to actually get
up special a little bit the
special treatment they they tax
from the location of their
business not where the service
that goes out to so
I think you will stand.
And.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you is there anyone in the
audience who would like to speak
in opposition to this bill.
The is there anyone online.
I would like to speak in
opposition to this bill.
Let's be in opposition please
raise your hand.
The line is there anyone out
into like speaking support.
And is there anyone online it
was because.
that
members of the committee.
Just this small.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Representative is out
of this is that the taxes and
not services great and that
seems very appropriate Mr chair
representative I do have a few
questions and I'll probably
questions.
Best taken up and perhaps answer
by the tax committee Mr chair
representative
one with this change the
This will change sort of where
the receipts go between the
county and the city currently
many of these receipts are
captured by the county and would
then be captured by the city
under this legislation.
Mr speaker Representative small
No shoes the county will
continue to receive it's small
increments and the city will now
receive it so one two two five
if you will as of those
services.
Up.
Location of delivery just moved
from out in the county where the
to actually have back to the
location of the business in the
city limits that that thank you
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative
one other sort of peace so
Mister chair representative one
of the big things about the
internet sales and sort of this
Act equalization that one on.
For businesses that there are a
number of businesses
particularly closer to state
lines whether that's going to be
in the northeast part of of the
state or in the southeast we're
sort of northwestern southeast
part of our state.
If the businesses are coming
from out of state.
Under this legislation in the
oil field services.
Which tax would they pay.
Businesses that point would be
paying compensating tax Mr
Chairman representative okay
thank you Mr chair
representative I think begin
questions best taken up by the
tax committee but there could be
overall lower tax rates and
potentially a preference for
Services oilfield services that
would be located from out of
state then the paying lower
taxes depending upon the origins
where which state that they're
based in.
Mr Chairman representative that
is a possibility although
business location within the
city limits of hops also occurs
should fairly compelling reasons
to be fair with respect to
reduce distances to travel and
so on so forth understood that
thing Mr thank you
Representative final final
question
Senator Kernan I know it's been
a.
Very it is repeatedly brought
this issue up at the legislative
finance committee meetings and
then other sort of jurisdictions
approach Mr chair representative
if I familiar is more of sort of
a direct injection of revenue
sort of a compensating one time
recurring revenue for one time
revenue for the municipalities
is the in in is that
Representative Brown there were
a number of different approaches
is that one of the approaches
that you're looking at Mr
chairman and and Representative
that is correct there are as I
mentioned several bills were for
proposing.
That bill Senate Bill two ninety
two I'm a co sponsor and that it
moves beautifully out of the
Senate and will be heard I
believe in our first House
committee on Monday and so there
just seems to be a widespread
agreement that this is been a
truly huge challenge for a
couple cities and however the.
The payment would really just be
a mandated be just try to help
out a little bit until a better
solution is found in it's
nonrecurring so would be a one
time infusion just to help those
cities recover from the losses
Mr chair representative small
understood thank you very much
Mr chair thank you
Representative.
I know that a lot of these will
be taken up in tax but I
appreciate your time thank you.
Thank you for the small arms of
towns.
Yes thank.
Chairman of.
Representative she just made
money what my question was what
this one is a fix and the other
is a mandate and I do that is
important for those communities
for their.
Fiscal health and their ability
to forecast going forward.
And they don't make you
Does that make governing of
cities that easy does it.
Representative which.
Mr Chairman representative towns
and the absolute director if
you.
And Mr Chairman representative
the combined.
Lost thank you for of Carlsbad
and Hobbs of annually.
Is this what.
Mr Chairman representative it's
about collectively about twenty
four million twenty five million
we're still you know we're
seeing no data were processing
that information but it is on
the average two million dollars
a month Mr chair representative.
Representative I know your phone
in my phone of I'm off of it
just because it's real and it's
not insignificant and so so
I'm well I'm in favor of fixing
the issue.
Long term.
Eight.
At the end date if you the
just a one time.
Just which is back in the same
year and I think all of us
understand that the.
Appreciate the position that
those of the three of the the
thank you Mr Chairman
representative and I just add
this is actually a little
bandaid not to participate
because.
Is that went into effect in July
of twenty twenty one losses are
even greater than what we were
saying we would like to covering
this bill.
Thank you Mr chair right thank
you for that.
Thank you Representative
Townsend
so nothing a was also I have a
couple questions.
I.
look at the F. I. R..
It looks to me like the counties
to lose revenue.
That I are.
That.
Is is that what you're believe.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee so we have seen we
have been working on this issue
for quite some time and we've
seen data that show that the
counties actually gain some
maybe not as much as some would
have expected so and it says
here that the general fund
losses it but no to this FY
arses the general fund losses
are likely be smaller than shown
in its separated out by general
fund counties municipalities so
as as the of our also points out
we are still it's difficult in
and clear how to figure this out
they were worked at an agency
analysis needed and that the
bill has a cost that is
difficult to determine.
Mr chair.
So I.
Percentages I mean I I sort of
you this.
As a DOCSIS came forward.
Because I don't think we're
really with the exception of out
that you're really good point
from where it was Representative
small.
In I I never want tax a number
what tax Texas corporations less
concerned about that but I mean
this just search is not
increasing or decreasing the tax
collected.
Necessarily usually counties
might have little to lower tier
two right it's really who gets
the money once the taxes
collected.
Is that correct so we were just
sort of shifting where the money
goes.
That's the the primary thrust of
the bill more so than like it's
not changing the tax rate.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
chairman Mr chairman.
That is.
I think somewhat accurate to
counties are still getting their
Schmall G. or T. and promote and
that won't change.
The.
And the southeast counties are
actually doing pretty well right
now with other revenue sources
particularly to happen or
property taxes or accruing to
that of to the increased
production from.
So the impact on the amendment
would not be I think is
significant negatively as the
positive impact to
municipalities.
Okay so
Representative is going forward
to thank you all of that by our
this is this is a pretty big get
to the county.
Yeah and I I I understand the.
Yeah I've seen plenty of that
fires the I personally disagree
with so yeah that that that
could be read.
Thank you yep that's a fair
point Mr chairman we noted that.
Twenty one million dollar hit to
companies and sectors some
significant disagreement as to
the validity.
Mr chair if if that were the
case had I think we would have
heard from the counties by now
and and actually we've heard at
least I've heard nothing you're
not complaining about anything.
Right now but the newness of how
they surely have been getting
our our phones ring is that so I
and I you know I was curious to
see if the killings would show
up and they did.
but I I will say
You know the.
Google built
that that your Houston that I
wish I'd come to this committee
that I think it natural
resources implications.
I don't think this bill as
naturist beach.
so so I I locate like.
I think taxes the right
committee to through this
I don't have.
Because it doesn't have that
resource foundation you know I
don't have particularly strong
feelings about one or the other
like I said I mean I think we
just sort of shifting.
I get.
right
that.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman that do
pass with no recommendations.
Thank you.
So that's a
their second.
So.
I wanted to our lives right now
Can you say to take the.
Representative Braco.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Once again no and I'd like to
explain.
Representative Nibert.
I would sure like to vote for
one nation
Yes this.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Wasters Arianna.
Yes.
In yes often with the.
Okay and the one.
I want to thank you Mr chair
once again that tax committees
right place to have discussions.
however a point place run and
have a vote on this is here and
I sped northwest New Mexico was
a little bit different
situation.
These Mexico.
major part populations in the
city of forms Jordy the service
industries are in the city of
Farmington.
so the change that was made
With destination sourcing
even though the city lost.
The revenue from the from the
Oil and gas activity.
The.
Menace amount of internet sales
more than made up for tax so
they're in better condition in
our county is now in better
condition.
So for for for my community
going back to the way I think
could be.
necessary to the city and then
detrimental to my County so it's
a little different in that so
kind of the opposite situation
of what happened down south what
happened up north so
that being said this is not the
right committee to be having
this discussion so
Even though I would I would
probably go to wreck if
necessary assonance Committee
so I think it was this phone
that's probably what different
situations Allen county thank
you Mr chairman thank you so
much to add in I just want to
say.
I think I'm hesitant to do.
I don't like to do director of
those in this committee on
natural resources issues being
that this right this I said I
don't think it's enough
resources issue I think it's a
tax issue I think that this I
know some people want to vote
for the full through the
recommendation I I like the idea
of doing in the recommendation
and just you know sort of a
learning the tax committee that
you you guys deal with this
because yeah which is our
programs.
So you do have a due pass with
our nation thank you.
You that.
One or one that you stand there
okay the.
It's our last day is.
The impact of the oil and gas
emissions reduction tax credit
we do a committee so we took our
like to focus on the committees
of the.
The discussion this bill
took place when I was out of the
room
so will
Little through
can we have a motion to for
me so for the duration.
you reach the to accept.
Two three nine six three point
two is that what you
see over.
Two two five three one six.
As we go through that section
Chattfield thank you.
so we're on the situation at the
committee said will to public
comment on this because we for
the go for Representative
Townsend could you highlight the
difference between the original
bill with me so.
thank you Mr chairman committee
yes what we did was to committee
and.
And.
It did in the bill what we did
was we.
Limited.
The bill only to stripper wells.
Meeting The OCD definition for
stripper wells in the not.
The the lesser the.
Lower volume through the.
And we kept it and we sunset at
the bill
Still it's twelve thousand
dollars per well.
Get
is that a hundred million
dollars and has a five year.
accents that.
Mr chairman it's.
This bill
I thought was important after
listening to all the all the
talk that we've had on.
emissions at setter and in New
Mexico it seemed like to me.
This was.
A reasonable way.
To incentivize.
Small script for operators.
And owners.
To address emissions to to.
bring their operations at to
Current rules.
Also.
Mr chairman some of us of had
the opportunity to set the
yesterday.
At the.
Representative Texans
Invite and we talked about.
the value of these borders and
what they can do on carbon
capture point forward sequester
isam so.
I think what this bill does is
it takes.
Hey just that.
we are deriving substantial
income from in New Mexico.
and it gives them longevity
gives us.
in the state a revenue base that
secure.
It adds life to the war.
That you to the for.
And
So and it cleans up of the the
little field so that was my
point I.
I thought it was worth the
investment.
Share.
Representative Scott may have
comments Mr chairman I think
Representative Townsend did a
fine job introducing.
And will stand for questions.
The.
The.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
Tell us and I appreciate you.
Rolling that.
Service.
I have May.
Justin arguments
subsidies.
Going to the.
And I I appreciate.
you're reducing its down to
where.
Where this city actually with an
actual fact.
the stripper wells.
Just
are or not.
It's not what the big company or
please in New Mexico building
their businesses on.
They're doing a new production.
Date volume from the new thank
you well side is the consistent
wells that are.
In operation of hit their
studies state are just producing
income to the state of New
Mexico but the income for each.
Well it's very low.
Mr Mr Chairman representative
again New Mexico.
News what what was that again in
broke a date with ten barrels a
day.
So Mr Chairman representative.
To to try and force.
Once again I can discussed in
the debate to build back when I
stated that I I prefer the
carrot over the stick.
For the stripper wells ten
barrels a day you have somebody
over there who I know has
calculator uses action.
What would it how long would it
take.
To put in the capture.
State rising capture how long
would it take to to for for that
to be economic for somebody else
to.
For what it's it's different.
Mr Chairman Representative
Montoya.
These temporal day stripper
wells.
And.
Very much who are producing
reservoirs.
Do not make much gas.
And what state do my most of it
is recovered and.
Into the gas line is a low
pressure separator.
Which operates about thirty PSI
typically.
We are being forced to capture.
Or the vapors off of stock tanks
and those vapors or flashed off
of the cruise as it as that
pressure drops from thirty PSI
in the low pressure separation
equipment.
Atmosphere in the stock Tax
Court picked up and transported
to China.
So.
When you talk about.
The only pay up to two viable.
Of.
Dollars and cents once if you.
The collect the environmental
benefits completely the only pay
out.
UP dollars insurance wise is the
very very low volumes that are
recoverable from happens for
your.
Reporter should.
Actor that thirty five PSI into
the pipeline and.
In most cases for these low
volume situations there is
nobody out these are pieces of
equipment will typically
installed from thirty five to
fifty thousand dollars and the
volume of papers that are
recovered as a consequence is.
We'll never get to that number
so Mr Chairman representative.
In that case.
For going.
How long before the investments.
It's paid off.
How many years I mean if if
somebody is because what we're
talking about is through.
Through rulemaking to force
this.
And and the reality is.
The.
Yes the the the operators off is
is options are to that options.
Shut down
go apply well which isn't free
either.
Or to go and.
what the favorite capture on
their and then in essentially
pay it out what would be.
What has been profit over a
series of years how many years
would you say it would take to.
Thank you.
Mr speaker Representative long
till you will never.
So the reality is the only ones
that we would do that point the
only
One would benefit.
All right that's the only one
but we would benefit.
From this because this is.
More than fifty percent of the
income the state.
It's coming from stripper wells.
Chairman representative of.
There's on these on these.
Very marginal will submit back
the bill off to.
There's no pay out and there's
no directive.
Currently that would cause these
people to go to the if we if we
instituting wall in order for
them to do that they're looking
at the fifty thousand dollars
of.
thank that quit line B. R. U. a
quit line on the oil R. thirty
five thousand dollar.
And what happens is we lose our
revenue from the state more than
what we're talking.
Highs in the and we lose the
capacity of that war being used
for anything in the future that
the
Mexico so that to me I as I as I
thought about this bill this was
a bill correct time.
If we're really gonna spam tax
payer dollars.
And we're gonna try to do
something to clean up
the environment.
Where is the lowest hanging
fruit working to make the the
smallest investment with the
largest been the.
And the certainly your major
sources like refineries and gas
plants are all covered by EPA an
ongoing regulations I mean that
for them the majors are or were
before
a lot of.
Chapter quit was installed and
new technology but these.
Small volume mostly
and grow local jobs this is
where.
This investment.
Will help make a considerable.
Difference in the environment.
You'll incentivize them to put
some money up there is I mean
it's it no better than fifty
fifty on the very low we and.
And there's never pay out so
they're they're put Mrs like
there but not the need for
amount of money the state's
doing in order to address
environmental concerns that's to
me what we're doing Mr chair
Senator is
Are using.
For comparison.
That would be a different.
Would you like to take all the
old vehicles tires on sure.
And help.
One control on this is because.
And then Representative that's
not it Mr Chairman is not bad
analogy I mean just like to help
them find the catalytic
converter on the old car
differences being Mr chairman
where this analogy is a one for
one.
the state isn't making somebody
having battled car.
so so we're help.
Someone do the smog control
remaining keeping the benefit to
the state to our schools.
Fund
Representative severance tax
bonds.
so Mister chairman kind of what
one last question Representative
so your amendment and this is
the way I see it tell me if this
is how you see it but what what
are you doing here is.
Taking because I believe a lot
of the a lot of the discussion.
The last debate prior to this
amendment was that this was
really just benefiting big oil
companies yes on the other hand
you've removed benefit that any
big oil company can claim this
is literally.
I mean yes I think that they
will companies may have given
under the by at least percent of
these stripper wells as part of
the area purchase they quickly.
Is that all those are not what
they.
That makes your business on but
this is where small business
guys have made their money
right.
Well the vast majority stripper
wells on line I think Madam
populace just a small business
versus large business.
And one likely to be able to pay
for this and Mr chair
representative so acting I'm I'm
looking at this as this is not a
giveaway to big.
Would you.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Montoya.
St Paul.
New act.
And our Chavis New Mexico.
Is new drilling.
Horizontal completions very odd
volumes and all brand new
equipment.
In those circumstances.
A number of wells are nominally
being drilled off one.
Such that these consolidated
tank batteries can easily
accommodate to expenses of the
installation of the are you and
the capture of those records.
The problem is the low volume
producers legacy production and
there's a lot of that is
generally accepted to be
somewhere between ten and
fifteen percent of the stage
production.
Which is a very significant.
Revenue stream to the state
individually these wells don't
make a lot of money every month
and that is the target that
we're trying to capture with
this piece of legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman I I I do
like this.
By the because.
Once again as I stated earlier
I've.
Serving on taxes.
My concern has always been the
Senate's.
This puts the.
These four actually I.
I.
There is.
Our largest.
It's private this whole.
And our.
Trying to clean up carbon
capture.
Carbon emissions.
From the oil and gas industry.
The biggest the barriers are not
the news capturing.
Although she all.
It is these
Thanks.
And I think it's it's one of
those things I think this is us
investing not just in case
businesses I think.
US investing.
In what two things that that I
believe you're supposed.
What is.
Mentions to a right I think we
did this this would this would
affect carbon emissions more
than any other single thing we
can do state why is this one.
And set.
You to make maintain revenue
source.
So.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that Committee substitute I just
have a couple of questions
Representative
that I think apply just to the
the substitute I now ask
questions papers.
I was wondering.
In the definitions
page for
representatives of you do to
provide reductions in admissions
from well property I'm just
wondering
if there's so.
Quantifiable.
In terms of how are we
calculating the reductions is
there a is there a calculation
applied it just.
Thank you.
I don't think.
There is a calculation that
operators put forward.
Today.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't think are completely
understand question.
Mr chairman and representatives
I think what I'm.
Interested in understanding that
are is the house of
environmental impact that we
will see through this reduction
it's just wondering if there's a
way that we actually quantify
the reduction in New Orleans.
Carbon dioxide emissions that
will occur
through the addition of that the
areas.
Mr Chairman representative.
I would have to say that that
reduction.
Would be you need.
To everyone for.
And further unique.
To worry.
Well for the state to depletion.
That that.
Register for representative at
that will.
And let me explain one.
Underground under pressure.
Apparel of oil.
Changes surely significant
quantities of what we call idea
which.
Of methane and ethane.
As well as you for depletes.
The lottery and spoil all.
And are actually captured in the
casing annulus in public wells.
And
And the consequence of that
federal tickets to the surface
is that it contains less of
those light ends then it would
have what it was one one racial
or was under rich original
pressure.
So.
heavy crudes.
Hello in some circumstances
would not have measurable
emissions.
Depending on the depletion stage
of the rules of war and the
original quality recruit lighter
crudes would have slightly
larger quantities of the slide
ins even at very low pressures
but there is no single rule of
thumb that we could apply to the
savings I don't believe.
One thing I would add to that Mr
chair and.
It is is
Then you can see that are and
come up with a calculation based
on the re they pressured the
mall person on the flight ians.
But it is going to be very
unique that's one reason I kinda
hated to take midstream
operations out of this but
because midstream like on
pipeline applications would have
condensate collection facilities
and those would be typically
librarians more like gasoline
fifty.
Fifty fifty to gravity you know
point seven kind of specific
every numbers and their paper
pressure would be hired so they
are more inclined
New Horizons to admit more
lighting.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative that's very
helpful and just goes to show
for may have complicated all of
this is not that I didn't
realize is complicated but just
further increases my
appreciation for the complexity.
Mr chair representative is there
a reason I noticed in the FIR on
page three for the original bill
one of the questions that was
asked is.
whether or not it would be
better suited to use small
business facility and I'm just
curious about your thoughts as
to why
you didn't go that route and
rather Dick just what was just
stripper well property.
Mr speaker Representative could
you point us to work short page
workers talking about thank you
Mr Chairman representative
actually at the very end of that
at the age three and it's from
the environment department and
I'm sure that there's a good
reason and so I'm just curious
about it but it says.
NMED's rural New Mexico small
business facility and then they
provided definitions because
what they were suggesting is
that.
in the original for the original
Beloff they suggested limiting
the tax credit
to have taxpayers that meet that
definition and so just
wondering.
What thought process was for
going with stripper while
properties opposed to small
businesses.
Mr chair and some late.
I just to what the committee
offered and that's where I was
going with that I have no.
Real feeling the other I just to
the.
This stripper will definition
that went with that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives and and that's a
perfectly good explanation of
just wanted to check on the.
And then
Mr chair and
Representative sitting there
last question is with regard to
the question and that was also
highlighted in the regional FIR
on page four
the state land office had
highlighted a concern that they
had with regard to
Leister B. R. use.
some chair and representatives I
just wanted to clarify as to
whether or not this substitute
for limited the tax credit to.
one eight to be are you per
property
In its entirety as opposed to if
you have a stripper wells and
wanted to get a least we are you
every year which was their
concern.
So they've got the tax credit
repair.
Mr Chairman representative this
would pay for the installation
of the equipment only which
would occur once.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative Scott
perfect and
That was my last question I just
wanted to comment that I
As I previously discussed in
this committee I appreciate
incentives and carrots as
opposed to six
from the fiscal responsibility
perspective I also appreciate
that there is no sunset and cap.
Thank you very much.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr chair just a couple
questions this does affect.
A lot of the production
equipment in my County and
because it's mostly stripper
well production and so
I appreciate this my question
really is.
For most if not all of the
stripper wells.
The requirement that the states
impose.
Is going four thousand is
resulting in most of these low
producing wells to.
The part of the fandom with that
be accurate.
Mr Chairman representative
Nibert I'm not.
Comfortable saying that's
completely accurate.
Sure from changes were a number
of stripper wells.
Two more like production and one
battery.
Or even very very low volumes
would tend to generate long.
Almost a personal on.
On the single will.
Locations and go well batteries
with low volume production
what shape the likelihood that
to the operator would consider
plugging first before installing
this equipment would be much
greater but I can't.
I think I can say.
You have will put up a universal
rule one way or the other.
But that the complaints that
I've taken from some smaller
producers is our that's all
introducing.
Validator few barrels of money
that they are incapable of.
Meeting the cost of the vapor
recovery units.
And they are having to make a
decision to continue to.
Produce that well.
At those small body.
Or to plug and abandon that well
and so so that was the purpose
of money money my question and
maybe that get all the wells
with but we're talking about the
very low volume wells
the the operators are telling me
they're put up to basically
election either why.
With the vapor recovery units on
at some clause or to plug and
abandon the well prematurely
they're going to have to plug
and abandon at some point but to
plug and abandon it now because
I don't want to address the cost
of that the coverages and and so
it is I guess I don't know what
their number wells with the food
for those lower in would you
agree that that's the.
Economic thought process that
one has to go through in
determining whether.
But that recovery unit on to
that location.
Mr Chairman representative.
The only pay a.
If I can make back up is the
only one the only entity that
derives of the.
From this installation is very
probably the state.
Because of the longevity of the
board to continue production.
The operator in that set off.
Will be the B. now driving
economics to do this if the I
promise you that stripper well
operator had driving economics
to survive he would have already
done it.
This is.
This idea.
Was addressing the missions more
than it was in the economics of
the anybody other than the
state.
Yesterday it became apparent to
me that the well bore.
At the economics.
Possibly at some point in time
as we go into carbon capture
If if that if that generates but
the continued production from
the bore.
For the well into the state
coffers the only driving
economics.
This.
Has this project has.
Maybe there are some of those
very high.
Vapor pressure condensate wells
that.
Did you.
Put it on the and it would have
economics but if that's the case
they are also the highest of
mentors.
Of of the seeks out.
I mean you're addressing the
issue one way or the other in my
thoughts but.
Representative.
Mr Chairman representative.
US economic decision.
Thanks Welch even global in
triple wells did not produce.
If you will in a vacuum I cost
money every month to operate.
So if the choice is to spend.
So thirty thousand dollars to
plug one of these low volume
Welch and get those operating
expenses off the books or put in
of the our unit that has.
Basically an infinite pay out
for thirty thousand dollars and
continue to encourage those
monthly operating expenses
trying to recoup that I think
it's a matter of economics which
one of those two options would
cost me less.
M. Mr Chairman representative
the.
The economic analysis on those
small volume wells
Becomes a lot easier to make
your average of those thousands
of dollars and the piece of
equipment.
Have you're you're likely to
plugging abandoned wells so it
seems to me that the benefit of
this legislation particularly
now that you've modified your
Original Bill.
That number one it's addressing
the stripper wells.
Number two the state of New
Mexico will continue to receive
at Monaco of income from the
severance taxes attributed to
small quantities of production
all the.
But as I see it the biggest
benefit is exactly what we
learned yesterday and that is
these well borders these well
course have some intrinsic value
in addressing the very issues
that are being advanced in this
body.
To provide.
Conduits if you will first
carbon sequestration in the
future and if we fill those well
borders up with C. then.
We are limiting our ability to
maybe
be as robust here.
Capture that CO two and
sequestering and so to me
that's.
The real benefit of this not
only extended production the but
maintaining the valuable well
before that could be utilized in
the future for for.
Other.
Laudable purposes that are
coming up to food rations so I
appreciate the bill
Just say there's more that
that's the that's the.
Real value to the state of New
Mexico up the up the few dollars
that it may receive each month
from the severance taxes.
Having having a potential
mechanism to deal with these
other issues that would that be.
One of the things that you can
so.
Mr speaker Representative how
would not overlook.
A month to month Madam chair of
these low volume Welsh because
most estimates put our monthly
production between ten and
fifteen percent of.
Total production if we use a
hundred thousand barrels a
month.
Which I think would be a
relatively conservative the
church point seventy five
dollars a barrel.
Nine percent coming directly
into the state coffers.
Though not insignificant
dollars.
Carol at thing are you have to
remember that.
At this operators putting in.
equal amount plus assuming the
operating expenses going forward
so it's not just a one time deal
and he gets up and he's put
money in the he put the money to
keep it live and go and he's
going to keep incur the
operating cost ever look forward
to so.
He's got skin in the game or or
they have to get in the game
eight eight.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Representative
Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative
so many mom and pop.
Stripper wells are we looking at
saving with this.
We.
Well.
Representative it would be a.
And Mister chairman it would be
a factor of of how many can
afford to participate in the
capitol but you could you could
say
Several thousand.
Every year and
With with the full deployment of
this capital.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So are the stripper wells are
the top well getting any any tax
incentives from the government
at all.
Well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady ever
business has you know.
Appreciation and and avenues the
use.
At current prices there's no
there's no subsidy the stripper
wells that I'm aware of.
Right okay.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative so no no
subsidies from state tax state
or federal
I do believe we have come but.
This surprise said that
so.
Maybe stripper wells and we have
quite a few stripper wells
street is that correct Mr
chairman and Representative that
is correct.
And their mission is very high I
think mission is extremely high
is that correct no ma'am that is
not correct this is not correct
what is.
Sorry.
They are low volume producers I
I don't know like you.
I I I'm not sure what you mean
by very high but they're lower
volume producers and they will
not I met a lot there's just a
lot of and we're trying to
address each and every one of
us.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and Representative so what would
it be because they're low volume
and they do omitted methane
would be better of them I mean
in reality and in the big
picture for the alignment and
the people who live around them
in their health do you think it
would be better to love them.
Mr chairman gentle lady if I did
I wouldn't proposes bill.
All right thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Representative radio.
Thank you Mr chairman actually
Representative Sariñana
so we questions but
and my friend Google again gave
me some information and as
Representative Dixon mentioned
this is a very difficult
situation
so what I learned is that
nationwide we have about five
hundred thousand of these
stripper wells and in New Mexico
Texas we have about a hundred
ninety thousand which is about
nineteen which is about one
fifth of the total nationwide
percentage of these wells
in New Mexico and and I guess
south.
What is that western Tax.
so you mentioned
Representative and thank you
both of you for bringing this
issue up.
When you said low volume
producers what does that mean
exactly.
Mr chair and young lady
there is a definition of
stripper wells in our code.
in their coat of Sidikou and it
is Chairman barrels of oil a
day.
So it can be ten barrels a day.
Oil or eight low volume of
natural gas six.
Yes the.
Directly to your conversion six
M. C. S..
The and the and Mr chairman and
Representative and this is for
the SLO I mean for these pop
Wells what you're talking about
here.
It's for the love provision will
sell over the phone hi small
business men and women.
So Mr chairman and might and
representative my next question
is.
Do you have an average number of
sort of an average of how many
jobs are produced along with
these sort of low volume.
Producers is there an average
number of jobs that maybe.
Any idea.
Yes again just Mr Chairman
representative I have.
The official statistics for
total.
Employment.
In the in the petroleum industry
in Southeast New Mexico but a
hundred and thirty five
thousand.
Now I don't know that I've ever
seen a breakdown of employees
of.
All companies.
Producing stripper wells and
admittedly a lot of this
employment would be a
consequence of all activity
that's going on now I will say
that these are these low volume
Welch require attention from so
one every day.
Shoulder is.
Duration fairly significant
Welch servicing community.
Is developed around keeping
these little guys run in
although I don't know that I can
tell you.
Exactly how many folks is.
And just kind of a follow up I'm
thinking you said a hundred and
thirty five thousand.
employees more last.
for about.
But I said
we're about a fifth of the
nationwide appellation are not
population but
industry against
so if we figured that out we
could probably get sort of
averaging just
thank you.
And I can do that on my
calculator but I guess my
question is do they also provide
benefits to these employees.
At apercent like in health care
and and share and send all of
that stuff that.
Along with being an employer.
Mr Chairman representative.
All failed is known for very
high paying.
The.
Good budget jobs.
anecdotally.
Truck drivers for water
transport or all whole vehicle
which.
Like a hundred thousand dollars
a year which is.
The.
Good job anyway.
And.
So I would say generally
speaking the answer to your
question would be yes.
And what Mr Chairman
Representative what percentage
of these one fifth I guess or a
hundred ninety thousand
would you consider small.
Small strip levels.
Then the small ones the mom
problems.
In New Mexico.
Mr speaker our.
Mr chairman and gentle lady is
that your question yes.
Is that clear.
Well I don't let me take a stab
at I think there are about.
Forty to sixty thousand stripper
wells.
Currently meeting the definition
in New Mexico isn't that correct
or is it a high.
She.
That's nationwide but it's I can
get that for you but it's it's
not a.
it's about fifteen percent of
our total production comes from
the wells and now I'm thinking
about I think it's it's are like
twenty five or thirty thousand
is the.
Right thank you Mr Mr chairman
and Representative are
amortized the two or thirteen
thousand five hundred and
seventy three stripper all wells
and option number stripper gas
wells.
Thank you Mr chair for an
information I also do sit on tax
so I kind of do you feel Mr
chair that this is a tax
question
that that helps me put things in
perspective thank you thank you
Representative small.
Thank you very much chairman the
representative Mr chair
representative
the we went what is the number
that thirteen thousand.
I guess I did have a question
about the number of of what it
considers for per in New Mexico
now.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
number that we were just give
them up.
Is thirteen thousand five
hundred and seventy three
stripper oil wells and fourteen
thousand eight hundred and fifty
three stripper guests will so my
second guess of thirty thousand
was pretty close during the
COVID thank you very much Mr
chair and representative
And the.
Within this bill
roughly around eight thousand
three hundred some sort of the
Max if if they did the twelve
thousand.
credit for vapor recovery units
that would be the number of
wells roughly per year.
Chair just as.
Okay and Mr chair purses
Do you do we know how many wells
were plugged I guess in FY
twenty three or or maybe in
calendar year twenty two maybe
that's a better this is the
better time for.
I'm late for the mad person that
watching this from afar this
interest in me the answer to
that.
I haven't done it yet but as
soon as it comes in I'll tell
you thank you very much with Mr
chair representative of a
particular I'd love to see that
Mr representatives I want to say
thank you for for bringing the
bill want to say thank you for
for constructive for sort of
narrowing the bill Mr chair
representative I don't think I'm
in a position to support today I
do want to say though that this
well I I did have the office for
that part of one of the
questions
I think this is a very good
faith and and and very.
Positive sort of step forward
recognizing sort of New Mexico
facts on the ground there there
are a few questions particularly
in sort of how we look at the
quantification of emissions
reductions that I think could be
really interesting
and I also Mr chair
representative recognized that
there's a fairly short time
frame within a few years where
this may be particularly
applicable so
As I sort of think about my
willingness to.
Hello I'm looking and I just
want to throw that out there I
know that this isn't something
that can you know in ten years
time is going to be as relevant
as it is over the next few years
Mr chair representative.
Is the fifteen percent of
production is that still as our
production has grown
significantly is that still what
the the amount is so it's it was
fifteen percent Mr chair
representatives when production
was save seven million barrels a
month it's you think is it still
fifteen or so percent one more
over fifty Mr chairman and and
Representative I think it's
still correction the correct
because as you have the new
wells.
The you're you're adding to the
stripper will members even
though you're plugging some of
them that the life cycle is
going that direction so
I can't tell you that that's
absolutely true but.
I think directionally correct.
Mr speaker Representative truly
every will in the state will be
stripper well.
The.
Wall you Mr column from this new
production may be.
Sure thing if you will to reduce
that percentage.
Because of.
Well with an initial potential
of one to three thousand barrels
a day what Michael what Michael
plaza strip.
That.
The.
The new to the.
In the early years of his life
as a very very very steep
decline right.
So.
Fifteen percent may be
optimistic at this point are
probably.
My questions were to.
In terms of actual barrels per
day.
And I would I would venture to
say that a hundred two hundred
and fifty thousand barrels a
month would be perhaps a more
appropriate range discussed.
Okay thank you Mr thing
Representative that thank you
very much for the detailed
feedback and I appreciate also
sort the that trend in the
direction and sort of your work
hundred plus rigs that have been
here month over month for quite
awhile so
I think it to me one of the
things I take away from that is
again this is most applicable
over the next several years.
And
it's it's an issue that that
probably really merits our
attention as you are as use
Sanchez are really helping bring
so Mr chair representative I
think that.
There's a few outstanding
questions for me perhaps mostly
and then emissions reductions
space
but I I'm very interested I
think appreciate you bringing it
forward and I think it from the
New Mexico perspective and and
New Mexico's this is where we
all live in and love this is a
very very inappropriate
conversation to be having the
appreciate you sort of have that
with us thank you Mr.
Chair.
Representative.
If you look at that hundred
fifty thousand feral.
Seventy five dollars eight nine
percent that you're looking at
about a million dollars the the
pay up for the state is pretty
darn significant.
I think.
I did a quick hold on.
no I did that.
Yeah yeah yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you very much Mr there is
a small
A couple of questions
Representative with this bill.
Result in.
Fewer admissions.
With that decrease the amount of
emissions that are coming from.
absolutely Mr chair.
It.
Are they currently obligated to.
got these Papen you.
So I mean there's a.
Maynard my understanding was
there is a mandate to do this
and I can afford it so what this
bill does I think it is order
that reduces the emissions it
just helps to pay for.
That's a that's a viable
argument
Mr chair the.
You have to remember that with
them having to make the decision
whether they're going to do one
or the other the income level of
the state is it a significant so
you don't want to force a small
operator who has no capacity.
Or no appetite to make that kind
of investment in the depleting
whale.
You don't want them to do that
fairly if it's going to cause
him a significant problem in the
next year
Balancing our budget that that
would my point is is can we do
to get it done quicker.
Is it worth getting done quicker
and does that bring value to the
state that was my point
reason tells me just about that
this so me I heard and
discussion that.
Income for each will was very
low and that they were very
marginal.
So.
It sounds to me like income for
if you preach well to owners
very low.
That doesn't sound like a low
income to.
To the state just I wonder what
the yes or the return on
investment for the state is.
And for twelve thousand dollars
well I mean just to state.
This is they can get that money
back.
Mr chairman Mr the money.
Hundred thousand barrels.
It's seventy five dollars a
for it the person's got you're
you're mixing the high
production wells with low
production.
I know.
We don't believe is producing
about one point five million
barrels a day.
Representative Scott I I zero to
do and I apologize but let me
click on of the production will
how many barrels a day is that.
That would be less than ten
barrels a day we could use I as
an average okay so on a given
well listed in barrels of diesel
cost twelve thousand dollars
look out for that but one of
these on right until thousand
dollars just to subsidies.
Right so it's only how much
income is the state getting from
a.
Well that's producing ten rural
today tomorrow Sunday.
And rules of date the.
Similarly.
Times thirty times thirty times.
Two thousand and twenty five
dollars a month to month from
all these folks will present us
yes Sir.
As far expected so it's a six
month period up to the state
that.
This.
His hope for a long tough.
I would not ever call field
where from the moment company.
there is intended that's a fair
answers either the inactivity
there Texas corporation I think.
I don't know that much about
what the future should so I know
where they're where they reside
in the four corners area but I
have had no interaction with
them I don't know.
So the information information I
have we're talking about three
to all park three thousand miles
of oil wells gas wells the money
the top ten owners over half
fifty four percent.
Almost twenty percent itself.
The other owners include.
Patchy ExxonMobil chevron
ConocoPhillips Occidental
petroleum on top ten I mean
these are not these are not
small companies there they are
not the those that you.
Our
at addressing our.
Our names are not small
companies at the to first
degree.
So I think there is intense I I
think.
As Representative pointed out
that sort of missed
An opportunity there is a
suggestion on the F. I. R. from
in in the deeds of focuses on
small business facilities.
Which we get that that mom and
pop issues.
But since it's focused on
stripper wells and since.
Have to struggle stripper wells
our own budgets ten large
corporations.
Yeah.
Well I I I I would trouble of
to lose for subsidy for correct.
Chairman no no one was trying to
get a subsidy for Exxon.
That was not nor nor are they
asking for.
And if etcetera we have decided
we're going to hear health bills
on Tuesday if you want to see
that in the committee substitute
on Tuesday I'll be happy to
bring it right back to you
chairman
I quite honestly really don't I
know you don't what I'm trying
to get a bill passed.
Yeah I'm still we leave that one
there.
That's a further questions the
committee it is the brief
closing comments from the
representative.
I have a insert the parking
Chairman there are seventeen
hundred or funds on state.
State the acres two hundred and
nine have plugging orders
approved and two hundred twenty
have already been the but there
sites remain to be remediated so
But I think you're you're you're
Madam chair.
I think.
That we have the ability to put
our money where our mouth is as
a state and try to address
emissions this does that I'm not
trying to we want to
specifically exclude you know
bigger companies okay with that
but I think it's it's.
I was really just trying to
address the emission issue and
clean up and clean up what
people have been concerned with
and
I.
The process works and I leave
with the at the feet of the
committee.
I'm here to the motion for the
committee.
The past or did not pass on.
House Bill three fifty and a
do that all the of our resources
committee substitute for House
Bill.
The motion and second
Representative Priego yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rubio.
No.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend Here.
By your Sarinana.
No.
Chairman.
Nope.
Sixty five view of the US six
thank you Mr chairman.
we will needs to.
And we're joined up Joey what's
left.
