Here.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
vice chair Laura.
Yeah.
Sara de la Cruz, here.
Thank you. So before we start
with the secretary's uh
presentation represented Borigo
has an announcement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, and, uh, members and to the
public, um, if you have a minute
today, go to the east side of
the the capital. We have a
lowrider car show and an
electric car show, and we have
low riders from Albuquerque,
Espinola, and Santa Fe. So it's,
I just came from there. It's
really cool. I think today is
also transportation day, so it's
highly appropriate that they're
out there. So please go out
there and and check out our low.
letters.
And electric cars.
Thank you, Representative.
Secretary, are you ready?
Chairman, I think so. Please
proceed. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. If um,
Uh, you'll indulge me. I, I, I
mean, as you can always see the
room is filled with a lot of DOT
support, but if I can, um, if I
can be respectful here and
recognize that we have Mr. Tom
Taylor as one of the 6
transportation commissioners,
uh, former lawmaker, uh, for the
state of New Mexico and mayor of
of Farmington, uh, Tom, just,
uh, thank you for being here.
Really appreciate it. And a
great big thanks to everyone
else in the room that's here to
celebrate like the
representative said it is
transportation day. I believe
it's also a seca day and
Hispanic day and so, um, this is
going to be um and we'll see if
the roof doesn't uh come off,
uh, the Capitol today, but uh I
feel right at home, to say the
very least, um, I want to walk
you through this presentation,
um, answer any questions and
then I believe, uh, Joey, the
analyst for LFC is available as
well to uh discuss the process
that um yields a house Bill 3,
which moves through this
committee for consideration.
Um, just a little bit of
context, as you may or may not
be aware, the Department of
Transportation is um develops
its budget slightly different
than other agencies, uh, the
Department of Transportation
does not receive any recurring
general fund, um, with the
legislature, uh, the role of the
legislature is to essentially um
allocate the resources that come
to the department by way of fund
categories. And so we receive
our budget from two primary
sources, that is our federal
apportionment and our.
State tax distributions. And so
if you'll go to this first
slide, I'll show it to you
because I don't believe it has
uh a number at the bottom
because the table is pretty
large. This, uh, easy to read
and very simple to understand
table here shows you the primary
tax, uh, distributions that
support the revenue to the state
road fund.
The, um, starting at the top,
you'll see that the gasoline tax
for the state of New Mexico is
17 cents per gallon. And if you
move over to the right, you'll
see the highlighted areas that
move left to right that
essentially represent the
portion of funding that the
state road fund receives from
the total revenue generated by
that tax and so for gasoline tax
specifically, you'll see that we
receive about 76% or about 13
cents of that 7.
cents. If you move down the
table on the left hand side,
you'll see the various taxes and
funds that support the state
road fund, it generates about
$550 million of revenue a year.
And so, as we have discussions
on an ongoing basis, like we
have for the past two years
about increasing revenues to the
Department of Transportation,
specifically the state road
fund. We're talking about these
are the existing triggers, and
then the
The alternatives, of course, are
creating new distributions to
the fund.
On page 3, it's titled Funding
Overview. You'll see here again,
we reiterate that um the
transportation operational
budget is supported by those two
primary sources of funding the
federal government and the state
road fund.
Here what we like to highlight
is the 4 primary tax
distributions that support the
state transportation or the
state road fund. The first is
gasoline tax at about 111
million special fuel tax at 129
million weight distance tax at
105 million and then vehicle
registration fees at 87 million
together those four tax
distributions make up nearly 85%
of the state road fund revenue
coming in at a uh
5th place in terms of total
revenue generated, you'll see
here on the pie chart, the
orange slice represents motor
vehicle excise tax, 12% of the
state road fund at about $61
million.
Um, now that you understand kind
of those 4 primary revenue
sources we work with the um
revenue consensus group, um,
economists to essentially
forecast where the state road
fund is gonna be for the long
haul.
And so on page 4 we're showing
you essentially what's happening
to our four main revenue sources
between now and 2050. So as you
can see here between 2025 and
2030, there is going to be some
peak in fuel tax revenue by
about 6%.
But what your fundamentally see
between 2030 and 2050 is a 20%
decrease in state road fund
revenues.
And that's driven primarily by
fuel efficiency in vehicles, um,
right now, there's only about 3%
of total vehicles registered in
the state of New Mexico are
electric or hybrid. And so
Prominently what's causing this
downturn in revenue is the
efficiency of gasoline vehicles,
which has been growing steadily
over an extended period of time.
On page 5, Mr. Chairman,
committee members, titled State
Road Fund Long Run forecast.
What we did was we combined
those 4 revenue sources for the
state road fund to show you
fundamentally how large those
revenue distributions are and
how they can essentially effect
long-term revenues as a whole
for the state road fund. So the
red line here shows those total
road fund revenues will decrease
after that 6% increase in 2030
to a 20% decline.
revenues between 2030 and 2050.
What we're showing you in the
blue line here is road
construction costs and they're
expected growth of 160% from
2023 to 2050. And so over the
course of the last several
interims we've shared with you
that since the pandemic,
conservatively, conservatively,
the cost of construction has
risen by about 20%. And as you
see, our revenues have stayed
essentially flat.
And so what that amounts to from
uh an operational perspective is
we're fundamentally able to do
20% less work today than what we
were able to do 5 years ago from
dollars to um cost kind of
perspective. And so slide 5 here
definitely shows the exposure to
the state road fund over an
extended period of time.
Mr. Chairman, members committee
on page 6, what we're showing
you here is the um op butter
request for the Department of
Transportation just to show you
here on the far left, column A,
what we're functioning with in
an FY 25 operating budget.
Again, just to kind of skip to
the bottom and then I'll get to
the bullet points. You'll see
here from 25 to the executive
request for FY 26. Again, flat
revenues, about $30 million
increase, BIL does provide for a
small year over year.
increase, which is um which is
extraordinary compared to other
transportation funding bills.
And so again, our revenues here
supported by about 556 million
in the state road fund, um,
about 579 million um of federal
revenue on top of 103 million of
restricted funds and 10 10.8
million transfers from the TRD
and DFA.
Um, major differences between
the executive rec and the LFC
recommendation, of course, is
the LFC is recommended that the
Department of Transportation
budget, $53 million of our state
road fund balance and um just
below that, they've identified
where they'd like to see that
revenue or that um fund balance
budgeted into the agency's
operational budget, and I'm
gonna hit on that in just a
little bit. We are reducing our
contractual services and other.
to match FY 25 payroll levels
and um again going back to my
initial comments about um the
difference between how DOT
budget is generated and other
state agencies, we work through
what's called the tech group,
which is a group comprised of
DOT, LFC, and DFA. We work
collaboratively to essentially
prepare a budget that comes to
you all in the form of House
Bill 3 that then gets
incorporated in house transport,
um, house appropriations into
House Bill 2. And so in
addition,
You, um, budgeting, um, the
revenues for the department. We
also are working collaboratively
on uh bar language for the
department, given some of the
work that we do and how it
differs from other agencies.
And so just to touch, Mr.
Chairman, on the budgeting of
fundal.
So, um, our agency allows for
fund balance to carry forward
from one year to the next, and
we typically like to maintain a
fund balance of at least $30
million and that provides us
with opportunities to match
federal fund awards when they
come in. And so if you take $30
million as representing 20%
match of federal awards, that
gives us the capacity to very
quickly match up to $150 million
of federal grant awards.
And receiving that much money is
not extraordinary for DOT. In
fact, if you go back over the
last 4 months, we've been
awarded over 2 $200 million in
federal awards and as I reported
out to you all, Mr. Chairman,
just a couple committee hearings
ago. Right now we're waiting for
over 340 million of federal
grant awards to be executed in
light of some of the federal uh
transition memos and, and pauses
on, on obligations. So keeping
fund balance to the tune of 30
million.
Dollars provides us with
immediate match funds, although
typically we'll see more than
150 million in match need. So
that's when we'll start to make
shuffles within the state road
fund and that then again calls
for some of that bar authority
that we'll be asking you for,
um, probably on Thursday.
Um, the other thing to point out
is the extent to which we're
growing in our need for payroll
expenditures at the department.
right now our, our vacancy as an
agency is about 15%, just a
little under, which is lower
than the statewide average, as
you all heard directly from
district engineers we have
districts with a vacancy rate
less than 9%, which means that
they're doing a phenomenal job
hiring and keeping employees,
and that's not just about
compensation, to be quite
honest. I think it's about the
culture.
that our districts um create for
our workers. But we've had to do
a lot of strategic things from a
financial and budget perspective
to first bring up the pay for
our in the field workers at our
patrols right now we don't hire
anybody in our patrol at our
basic positions for less than
$20 an hour, which we're proud
to talk about.
After that, we had to make
significant changes and
investments in how we were
compensating all of our
employees who are licensed
engineers or working within the
engineer's salary pay. And so
last year after you all approved
in the governor signed a 3% pay
increase for all state workers
for our engineering staff or
those in the engineering salary
schedule, we add an additional
10% to address, um, uh,
vacancies in that area as well,
secretary, just, let's try that
different mic.
kind of feeding in and out. I
don't know if it'll be any
better.
All right.
And so what we're working on, of
course, is trying to right size
the budget that we need to run
our personnel services at the
agency understanding that we
have a couple of main priorities
sitting in front of us. One of
them is we are going to make a
conscious effort to address pay
inequities that are rooted in
gender disparities at the
agency. We believe that uh we
have some work to do to address
difference in pay from men and
women at the Department of
Transportation.
But we also have a project that
we believe costs $7 million to
address appropriate placement at
the agency as well, which will
help align all of our staff
based on their total years of
experience in and out of the DOT
given the job description and
classification that they're
sitting in.
And so we don't only want to be
competitive, but we want to be
equity in what we're doing at
the agency across a number of
metrics, gender especially, and
of course based on years of
experience and what they do at
the agency. So, um, with that,
Mr. Chairman, I'm gonna leave
you with just a couple of um of
important notes that.
You know, don't get touted a
lot. The Department of
Transportation for the past 5
years and we're excited because
um just push the mic back a
little away from you. They,
they're recommending that. You
got it.
Uh, the Department of
Transportation, which you all
can see because it's public
record for the past 5 years, has
had extraordinary audits,
managing 1.2 billion plus of
operational budget over 2
billion in annual expenditures
given our ability to manage
projects across the fiscal year
and so it's been impressive and
I want to recognize Mallory
Montana as her team, but really
it takes an entire agency to
ensure that the work we do in
spending $100 million a month is
done so within appropriate
accounting practices and
And, you know, um, and, and the
procurement code. And so the,
the ability for this agency to
be good stewards of federal and
state funds, I think is
demonstrated in those audits
which, which we invite you to
look at. But the other thing is
just about 5 months ago, we
reissued um about 500, 600
million in bond debt going back
several years, and at that time
we have an S&P, um, A plus
rating our bond rating is
exceptional at the department,
which.
shows that we have capacity
there as well, um, and of course
our cash flow balances, our cash
flow is healthy. So I just want
to underscore that we're not
just an agency that um puts a
tremendous amount of money in
roadway infrastructure, but we
do that in a very responsible
way and that predates me. I want
to underscore that as well too.
I just wanna um make that point
for the committee.
Thank you. Before we go to
member, you're, you're done,
secretary, right? So before we
go to member questions, Joey,
did you want to add the LFC
perspective?
I, I, I'll lean back a little,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Joseph
Simon. I'm the analyst for the
Legislative Finance Committee,
and I, I believe you have a, uh,
uh.
A summary of the LFC
recommendation for
transportation here. I won't
walk through this because
actually, you know, Mallory and
the secretary did a pretty good
job on the last page of their
presentation and going over some
of the areas where um where we,
we were, I will just say, Mr.
Chair, um,
You know, so the LFC
recommendation had a little bit
uh for uh personnel costs.
Secretary mentions some of the
reasons uh we're gonna have to
keep looking at that as part of
the tech group and make sure we
arrive at a at a good personnel
number for you all, so, uh,
that's something we're actively
uh discussing, um,
And you know, with that, I'm Mr.
Chair, I'll just stand for any
questions.
Thank you. First, we have
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
thank you presenters for the uh
presentation, did have a few
questions as you imagine that I
would, um, like to start, uh,
Mr. Chairman is LFC uh going to
be trying to budget cash
balances in this budget.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the LFC
recommendation did include $53
million in uncommitted road fun
balance based on a projection
that was available. So
Mr. Chairman is LFC budgeting
anybody else's cash balances in
the general appropriations Act.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
there are some examples of fund
balance, uh, appropriations in
some parts of the GAA.
Mr. Chairman, I'm talking about
cash balances specifically
within something like the road
fund.
So Mr. Chairman and schools,
anything like that, Mr. Chair
and
Representative, uh, there is,
for example, in the
Public school Insurance
Authority. I know for example,
there's a recommendation from
both the executive.
And the LFC for uh partial fund
balance. That's true in the
general Services Administration.
There are isolated places
throughout the
The GAA where uh either
The executive recommendation or
the LFC recommendation or both.
Uh, budget fund balance.
So let me ask Mr. Chairman, let
me ask the cabinet secretary.
Uh, last time I looked carefully
at your budget, it was much
higher in terms of what the
federal match would be for
construction.
And I'm looking now on the last
page, page 6, where it talks
about the state road fund, 550
million for FY 25. That's what
we use to match the federal
government with.
Is this based on some kind of a
continuing resolution number we
got from the feds, or is this
something that you know we're
gonna, we're gonna actually
match at that $1 for dollar.
Um, Mr. Chair Representatives,
so the 550 million in 25 in the
556 just to the right of that
line 11, page 6. That's the
total state road fund revenues,
a portion of the state road fund
is used to match what we
identify as being about an 18%
for our federal apportionment.
And so if we were to calculate
and I imagine Mallory's doing
that now, she's gonna calculate
what percentage, about 11%.
89 million. So if this 556
million, about 90 million of
that is used specifically for
our match requirement on the
federal funds. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Secretary, are you
anticipating that there could be
a change in that federal level
of match.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
thank you for that because um I
don't think I was clear about
that, uh, with regards to the
fund balance necessary for
match.
What we need to anticipate is
that we're going to receive a
federal grant award, right? And
so the 90 million that I just
talked about is necessary for
our federal apportionment match.
If we receive $100 million grant
um on July 15th with a 20%
match, we'll need an additional
20 million then to match that
award and so if we have 30
million left in fund balance,
2/3 of that would go straight to
that first grant, and so our
capacity to
match grants is contingent on
our ability to secure federal
grants. And so that number, it
fluctuates, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairpresentative. Chairman,
I would be very cautious about
the LFC recommendation in using
cash balances that we are going
to need for federal match
purposes. The other question I
had, um.
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Secretary.
So when we're looking at these
hard to fill positions and you
heard the committee talk about
that before.
Uh, are we looking at vacancy
savings to pay for this or how
are we gonna pay for it?
recommendation.
Sure. uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, so one of the
things that we are going to be
looking at between now and
Thursday, you know, quickly
things work is.
I anticipating what it's going
to cost to fill all of our
vacancies, taking into
consideration increases to um
health benefits that are gonna
be considered over the course of
the next, you know, 40 days or
so, and then anticipating what
we may need to do some of those
um salary measures I talked
about like uh pay equity and um
appropriate placement and
internal alignment.
And so we're going to try and
cook that up and get a really
good number for what it's gonna
cost to staff the agency.
We know that on top of filling
existing vacancies, we need to
increase our overall capacity,
as you may be aware, and
hopefully we'll hear about soon.
We're introducing um House Bill
145, which would give the state
transportation commission about
1.5 billion in bonding
authority.
What we're hopeful for is the
revenue to support that bond
debt service so that we can use
existing debt service revenue to
add to our capacity to build
projects, to bring projects to
production and get them to
construction quickly.
And so we know that that will
save us money on what we spend
with a lot of uh with some
consultants, but we'll still
rely on our contract community,
our consultant community, but we
have to staff the agency in a
way that right sizes us to spend
that amount of money.
So Mr. Chairman, what happens if
the bond bill doesn't pass.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
again, the figures that we'll be
bringing forward in our budget
for 26 will be to fill existing
vacancies and to address
existing staff parity.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I also had a
question as I'm going through
the information that was
presented, I'd like to
understand a little better why
there's not a section 9 or a
section 11 in the.
In in this recommendation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Lindstrom, so
typically, um, well, we can
present that if, if that's the
wishes of the committee, we can
certainly look at that, uh,
recommendation. I do want to
extend appreciation to the
governor, her executive re did
include a 320 million plus of of
special section funding, the LFC
I I believe it was about 350
million and so if um if the
committee wishes when we bring
the the final budget to you all
on.
Thursday, we can do a side by
side on those special
appropriations, um, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr. Secretary,
what I'm, what I see under
section 11 of Special
Transportation Appropriations is
very minimal.
We're talking about 12 million
to be split among among 6
districts for equipment.
That's $2 million a pop.
That's not very much money when
we saw those equipment budgets
that were presented by the
districts.
Mr. Chairman, I'm also looking
at um.
The uh Department of
Transportation needing 188.
000 for
Or or million for right of way
acquisition and Department of
Transportation fund at 100
million.
I thought we funded that
differently, Mr. Chairman, on
the transport.
For local governments
Mr. Chairman Representative, so,
um, if you're looking at the uh
LFC recommendation they did, um,
recommend 18 $88 million for a
road construction projects,
which would include right away
acquisition planning, design,
uh, there was an additional 100
million one-time appropriation
to add to the transportation
project fund right now, the
annual distributions for the
transportation project fund
yield about $53 million and so
for FY 26, it would bump that up
to 150.
$3 million and um the executive
rack did include um 300 million
for maintenance and construction
combined with some additional
funding for rural air service
enhancement programs. Mr.
Chairman, I see that in here in
50 million is going to wildlife
corridors.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
yes, that, that's correct in the
LFC recommendation, that wasn't
in the uh.
Department's request, you know,
Mr. Chairman, I think it's
important and we, when we look
at special transportation
appropriations that had come
from this committee.
This is the transportation
committee.
This is the committee that
should be making those
recommendations, uh, to go
forward and I'd strongly
recommend that, um.
That this committee makes those
kinds of recommendations instead
of waiting till it gets to HAFC.
Or that it just be based on
staff recommendations. Nothing
against what the staff has to
say, but as the committee that
is supposed to be expert in
transportation, we know our
districts, you know, we know
what our concerns are, and I
think that um it's super
important that this committee
takes charge of that. The other
question and final question that
I have for the cabinet
secretary.
I I'm looking on page 5 or 6,
line 13, the state
infrastructure bank.
That's a restricted fund, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Secretary, is it
restricted? Is it a federal
initiative or is that a state
program?
So Mr.
Chairman, um, uh, Mr. Secretary,
if this committee decided we
were going to put funding into
it specifically for P3s.
Did that happen, representative,
so it's a loan program, so, um,
entities need to apply for for a
along with this. So is it a loan
program or is it also a grant
program. It's Mr. Cha, um,
represented the loan program. So
Mr. Chairman, I think we could
look at that as a potential
source. Our next uh item on the
agenda is talking about public
private partnerships. I don't,
I, and it's specifically for
transportation and broadband, it
makes sense that those
transportation.
E3s come out of this fund.
And if there's a problem with
that, you guys can tell me
later, but I'm certainly going
to be advocating to the chairman
for that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
members. I don't disagree with
what much of what you said.
We're going to explore that.
Uh, we were having a little
sidebar conversation, the vice
chair and I, but we'll discuss
that a little further. Thank
you.
Next week I represent Boergo.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
and good morning all. Um, thank
you, Mr. Serna for your
presentation and just, I didn't
catch your name, but.
All of the other folks, um, so
your total budget for the
department is 1.2 billion is
what you said from the road
fund.
Um, and I'm just wondering, and
maybe everyone else knows this,
but I don't.
Um, how do you divide that up
amongst the districts and how or
what are the priorities that set
those budgets for each.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, great question.
So the, the state wrote the the
federal apportionment funding
that we received can be cannot
be used for maintenance, and so
it's used predominantly for
construction. And so each year
there's a, there's been a long
standing formula that identifies
what portion of our federal
funding is going to go to each
district. We call it their
federal share.
Payroll target measures and so
each district knows what they're
going to receive every single
year, and then they plan their
construction schedule around
that.
Um, the federal funding is then
also used predominantly for
construction design right away
acquisition, and so, uh, from
our chief engineer staff to our
design teams, they essentially
are preparing projects that are
going to be federally funded and
that's where the bulk of our
federal funding goes, it doesn't
support really anything except
federal construction projects.
The state road fund on the other
hand, is used for everything
from operations to maintenance,
and so the 556 million of our
state road fund pays for our
salaries. It pays for
administrative operations and
oversight. It pays for
maintenance at our districts and
it can pay for construction, uh,
although I believe that we
really only have one
construction project in the near
future that will be 100% funded
by state dollars.
And so nearly all of our
construction projects um are
funded that, so the maintenance
is then split up through our
highway operations, identifying
what we have in total for
maintenance and equipment and
then working through the
district engineers to identify
how we can essentially extend,
you know, um, the dollars in our
maintenance budget to get as
much payment preservation miles
out of it as possible.
Thank you, um, and that helps
clarify some of it, but um
obviously the districts that
have more population, have a
higher um.
Ha, I mean, they, they, they,
um.
They put more money into the
road fund.
Because there's more population,
right? But I guess you're bored
probably determines how much
money would
would be needed for each
district.
Um, Mr.
And so, um, so it's driven by a
few factors, population, of
course, would be one, but so
would Lane Miles, Interstate
Miles, um, you know, secondary
road miles, um, keeping in mind
that, uh, more rural districts,
you know, um, would have more
lane miles in rural parts of the
state, some districts spend uh
more state personnel resources
on snow removal. Others can do
more construction throughout the
year because they don't have to
do winter suspension, so the
apportionment takes into
account.
the number of factors that
don't, that aren't driven
primarily by population density,
uh, across the state.
OK, thank you. Well, that helps
clarify a lot.
Um, another question is, uh, the
city of Albuquerque and Bernlio
has a long-range major street
plan. Do you guys utilize that
as part of your planning
process.
uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
Department of Transportation has
a number of planning documents
from Complete Streets to Target
Zero, the, the quick and the
quick and dirty schedule of
Project Priority would be our
ski plan, which is available,
um, made available to the
public.
And the step uh is important
because, um, all the way going
all the way to constructors uh
con contractors, it shows
predictability. It shows what
projects are coming up in the
queue and then from there you
would move to our letting
schedule, and that would then
tell you months in advance, um,
this is the big picture and then
this is the schedule of when
those big picture projects are
going to be and and open for
bid.
OK. All right.
Thank you members. We don't have
any other questions, uh, we'll
anticipate.
having this for a vote on
Thursday. Thank you. And Mr.
Chairman, of course, I want to
invite you all, um, downstairs
where we have a number of our
departments and partners
available to answer questions
and give you free things and
then we'll be, um, we'll be
doing a press conference at
11:30 to talk about DUT
legislative priority measures.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Rep Representative Lindstrom,
Garrett, uh, you ready?
Yeah.
Representative, please proceed.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair. I
really like this room better
than the old room.
Congratulations. We do too.
And it, it's been made warm by
the health education.
Committee just to let you know.
Uh, so Representative Lindstrom
and myself are here to present
House Bill 276, the
public-private partnerships
funded program.
This spill creates the
public-private partnership fund
and program and we'll abbreviate
that P3 for public private
partnership, and we also have
sponsors, uh, Representative
Brown, um, Huckman B Hill and De
la Cruz on this.
This is at least the 12th year
that some versions of this have
been presented, and we hope that
uh it passes that committee in
the house as it has in the past
3 years.
And we have high hopes for the
Senate this time.
Our state
It's an official public private
partnership framework.
Uh, more than 35 states in the
District of Columbia already
have these, the advantage is
that it attracts funding from
diverse sources, not just within
the state, but out of state.
And it
He shepherd major infrastructure
projects, uh, to be completed, I
first heard about these from
actually Representative Brown
when some of the gas and oil
people wanted to contribute to
improving the roads in southeast
New Mexico, and we didn't have
this type of framework to do it.
Uh, so this will really help uh
drive construction, it's limited
to broadband and transportation
projects, and it's definitely a
fundamental economic driver in
concert with some other related
bills.
Um
Take over, or do you want me to
explain it?
OK,
OK, so I'm just gonna point out
a few things. Section one,
creates the public-private
partnership fund and as
definitions in section 1C, it
talks about the public-private
partnership program, which in
this bill would be administered
by the local government division
of the of DFA.
Um, they would provide the
grants for broadband and
transportation oversight and
consultation.
With the New Mexico Finance
Authority, this is on page 4,
lines 1 to 4, the division would
evaluate project proposals.
Focusing on cost benefit
analysis, is this the best way
to finance a given project.
Uh, financing and the likelihood
of the project completion.
A section, uh, section, um.
When E limits the projects to
broadband related and
transportation-related. This is
not for every sort of project.
Uh, section F directs the local
government division, uh, to do
the rulemaking on how to
administer the P3 program, and
it defines the procedures to be
included uh in the application
process. Section G on page 5 and
6.
He finds the role of the New
Mexico Finance Authority.
Um, in this process.
Uh, in section 2A.
Uh, the bill adds the P3 fund as
an eligible recipient of public
project revolving fund.
Uh, that it can be used for P3
purposes.
Section 2B on page 7.
states that the NMFA New Mexico
Finance Authority and the DFA in
coordination with the NMFA
oversight committee.
Good
Include this in recommending
annual amounts to be
appropriated.
And then section 3.
Page 13 HH lines 12 to 14 makes
the public-private partnership.
A program exempt from the
procurement code.
Uh, so that's just an overview
of the actual bill.
Um, and I'll turn it over to my
co-sponsors representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So in
a.
Kind of high level
Review
P3 program would be put into the
local government division.
The financial evaluation would
be done by the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
And the public project revolving
fund.
Would
Open up to allow for P3s as
eligible.
So it would be for
transportation and broadband uh
development purposes only.
And um.
I mean, basically.
The um fiscal oversight would be
done by the New Mexico Finance
Authority. They have always been
our infrastructure bank for the
state of New Mexico, they would
evaluate risk.
Uh, in terms of cost benefit
analysis.
And uh Miss Chairman, as I'd
mentioned earlier with the
previous presenters here.
It makes sense that for the
transportation piece of P3 that
it be put into the
transportation budget.
One of the issues that you see
here in terms of significant
issues is that we're cutting the
P, the PPRF fund smaller.
making the pie smaller.
By adding this new beneficiary.
If we added.
We're asking for 75 million
through the general
appropriations Act.
If we took half of that and put
it into that SIB portion, I
think it was line 13 in the
transportation budget,
specifically for Pres.
As you heard the staff say,
well, it's just for loans.
That's what P3s are.
At the end of the day, if the
private partner comes forth.
And funds the project.
It is a long relationship. It's
not a direct grant relationship,
and it can be written that way
inside of the agreement between
the private and the public
partner.
I think that's something we
could talk about as a committee,
uh, before the budget is
approved to go to HAFC.
Because I would assume, uh, New
Mexico finance Authority is
concerned.
About governmental gross
receipts tax revenues, that's
what pays for the public project
revolving program.
So it's places like the Bernal
Leo Water Authority that is
taxed that goes into that fund
that we spend on infrastructure
throughout the state.
The difference is is that um you
know, not all these enterprises
that government set up are
necessarily.
You know, running at peak
performance.
So I don't know if we're
collecting everything we could
be from these various
enterprises. So it's
governmental gross receipts tax.
That is paying for public
project revolving fund projects
and we want to add P3s as an
eligible beneficiary to that
fund.
Uh, for two purposes,
transportation development and
broadband.
And we think that it's
appropriate not to have all the
um procurement stuff in here
primarily because broadband is
not a governmental function. I
don't know if any government in
the state of New Mexico that
runs a tele a broadband program.
And if there are y'all can
correct me, but none of them run
broadband. That's a private
sector activity.
So we, we know that we need that
badly, particularly Italian real
New Mexico, where we're dying on
the vine for that need.
Particularly in places like
Gallup where we don't have good
redundancy.
So with that, we'd stand for
questions, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representatives. Do
we have anybody in the audience
uh in support.
Raise your hand.
If you wish to speak, please
line up behind the presenters.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington and I, I have been a
lobbyist for almost 30 years and
I have seen this legislation.
Over the past several years, and
I want to make some personal
comments on behalf of several of
my clients that would benefit.
City of Santa Fe, Pueblo of
Laguna, Gallup McKinley County
School District.
Villageicchama. I could go on
and on and on, and but I think
what's important to note that
even though the public of
Laguna.
For example, in the Navajo
Nation, they are not political
subdivisions of the state.
What we're talking about here is
too critical networks in our
state, the network of broadband
and the network of our
transportation system, and they
are not siloed.
So any beneficial changes that
are made anywhere in the state.
It helps with the connectivity.
Of all of our Indian lands and
broadband deployments like the
number one priority for the
Pueblo of Laguna. So, I, um, I
think this bill is, is overdue,
and I think it's going to be
beneficial to every sector of
the state, because these are two
of our most critical networks
that we need to improve. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the Mexico Associate of
Realtors and for the American
Property casualty Insurance
Association. Both stand in
support of the bill. The bill
does have a missing piece to it,
and that is a requirement that
the projects be supported by
payment and performance bonds,
spoken with the sponsors, it's
usually in the bill, and they
are agreeable to sticking in the
bill, these types of projects
are super important to the state
and supported by payment.
performance bonds, I think you
guys should definitely pass this
bill. Thank you very much.
Members of the committee and
chair, my name is Alison Riley.
I'm the policy director at the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
We're here in support of this
legislation. We feel it's an
important step to foster
economic development, job
creation, and infrastructure
improvements across the state.
It's a proven way to leverage
private investment to accelerate
these critical projects like
broadband expansion and
transportation upgrades that
cannot be ignored. By reducing
reliance on taxpayer dollars,
the bill allows for more
sustainable infrastructure
investments while maintaining
local and state.
oversight. Investing in
infrastructure is key to New
Mexico to keep us competitive in
this evolving economy, and we
encourage your support on this
bill to help us create a
stronger and more connected New
Mexico. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Matthew Suarez. I'm with the
Western States Carpenters, Cars
Local 1319. We stand in support
of this bill. We are hoping to
include some language with the
sponsors, promote prevailing
wage on the public works aspect
of this bill. Thank you, sir.
Thank you. Do we have, oh, I'm
sorry, I didn't see you back
there. Hello,
dela um members of the
committee, I'm Danielle Duran,
I'm from Los Alamos County, and
you would might think Los Alamos
County doesn't need bills like
this, but we do need
connectivity, getting in and out
of Los Alamos, especially in
cases like wildfire and other
emergencies is absolutely
necessary. We are not in charge
of most of the roads around our
county.
And in terms of broadband, there
was one line cut in Santa Fe a
couple of years ago in Los
Alamos with was without
connectivity and cell phone
service for over 24 hours. So
finding a way to make sure the
entire state has redundancy and
resiliency is of paramount
importance for the state, and we
also see that many of our
neighbors need this kind of
funding ability in order to
bring their
Um, infrastructure into the
modern world. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody on
Zoom that is in favor?
Yes, Mister Chair.
Enrique now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Enrique Nell and I'm here today
on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We do support House Bill 276.
It's time to allow state and
local governments to partner
with private businesses to
complete public projects. A
majority of states have already
done this.
Uh, these so-called P3s will
help us start and complete
critical infrastructure projects
throughout New Mexico, and will
also help create and secure jobs
along the way. In New Mexico,
these partnerships will
especially help our rural areas
with critical projects like
access to broadband, as well as
repairs to bridges and highways.
The legislature has worked on
this legislation for more than a
decade, and these partnerships
will help New Mexico leverage
federal infrastructure dollars.
Therefore, we respectfully do
ask
For a do pass on House Bill 276.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
else?
No, Mister Chair.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience in opposition?
Raise your hand.
Is there anyone on Zoom in
opposition?
Yeah.
Thank you. We'll go to member
questions now, Representative
Hoffmanihi.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. I
want to commend the sponsors for
their tenacity and never giving
up on, I think.
One of the most important bills
that we continue to hear, um,
and I know that we understand
the importance of this bill, um,
in, in our chamber, and I hope
that my colleagues in the other
chamber are listening as well
right now. Um, I'm just gonna go
over, Mr. Chairman, uh, members
of the committee again, why this
bill is so important, why public
partner public private
partnerships, say that 10 times
fast, are a critical part of
advancing New Mexico forward.
So Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, there are simply some
infrastructure costs in which
there is not enough money in it
to build to um generate the type
of profit that the private
industry would need to see to uh
make it attract uh attractive to
them to pursue. And then there
are other parts of our
infrastructure that are simply
too hard or too expensive for us
to pursue publicly on our own,
thus the necessity for the P3s,
uh, broadband.
infrastructure is a perfect
example of this last mile
infrastructure, those houses in
which they are as one house
within a 10 mile radius, it does
not make sense to spend hundreds
of thousands if not millions of
dollars to bring fiber optic
cable to those homes. The same
issue also uh exists here in
transportation. We have been
dealing with it for many, many
years and the only way to deal
with it in a way that makes
sense is through a public
private partnership. I do
understand the reason for.
the anti- donation clause, I
think most of us, all of us do,
but um there are circumstances
in which it makes sense to, um,
to allow for these types of
partnerships to happen and
accrue in New Mexico, it's the
only way that we're gonna
advance the state forward and in
a way that we have been needing
to do for several years now.
I've been in this body for 7
years and we've been certainly
needing to do it since the first
day I stepped foot in the
roundhouse, so I really hope
this is the year, um, I'm.
Happy and willing to help in any
way that I can with members in
the Senate. Again, hope they're
listening and thank you very
much for bringing this bill.
Thank you, Vice Chair Lata.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for uh presenters. This is, this
is something that I really like
and that I support, I think it's
gonna benefit my constituents
greatly, but I do have a
question though, uh, when it
comes to the procurement code,
which, which.
E3 projects would be exempt from
that code, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
we're asking that all of them
that are part of this program
would be exempt because we're
building this piece of
legislation to have.
Uh, procurement code exception.
And Mr. Chair and
Representative.
There's a process of application
process, so there's vetting
before they're accepted.
Thank you for that. I, I
appreciate that. I was just
curious as to which if there was
some projects that would be and
others that wouldn't, but
according to what Representative
Lester telling me is that all of
them would be.
But they also go through a
vetting process, correct?
OK, thank you. That's all I
have. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for bringing this
forward once again. I remember,
uh, as a freshman, uh, this was
Larry Larry Yaga's bill.
And, um, and he talked me a lot
about the bill.
And, and I voted against it the
first time.
And I, it's one of my votes I
regret the most, uh, I think
this is really good. This will
be something that we could do
faster infrastructure.
We could with
the game
Um, everyone's always willing to
get things done faster, uh, and
better.
When you have uh teeth in the
game. So I, I just want to say I
appreciate uh this bill. I'm
gonna vote for it.
Um, all the way through and hope
that uh we can finally get it
across the finish line. Thank
you for bringing it forward, and
I'm actually going to go sign on
to the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, this
looks like to me like it's a
great bill. Um, I've worked a
lot with private public
partnerships, and I kind of feel
like uh a Leader Armstrong, I'd
like to sign onto this bill to
also help you, um, move it
along. Um, I also worked, um, I
managed public private
partnerships with the city of
Albuquerque, and I just
Want to know, um,
How do you keep
The money and the rural areas.
So that it's not like the city
of Albuquerque influxing for
this funding.
Chairman and Representative, the
way that we envision that the
pro uh program would work, it's
housed inside the local
government division. We'll just
use my community as an example,
as a rural community, if they
had a.
Broadband project, they would
come forth with the private
partner and they would apply uh
for support that there is a very
extensive.
Uh, agreement process that
happens, has to happen between
the private partner and we'll
say my.
Gallop as an example.
That has uh that lays out all
the cost benefit analysis, it
lays out clawback uh
requirements, uh, what those
payment structures would look
like.
And then the New Mexico finance
Authority would review that and
do all the due diligence on the
financial piece and then at that
time the approval would happen.
So it would be based on
communities coming forth because
this is for public
infrastructure needs if it's
transportation and private
sector, if it's broadband.
So I think it's gonna all depend
on the strength of the
application that's made.
What the cost benefit analysis
is, uh, pay, uh, the payment
process, so I don't think it
would eliminate at all rural
communities from coming forward.
As a matter of fact, I think
they'll be first in line.
For this, for this funding for
the support.
Thank you, Madam, um, um, Mr.
Chair, um, and thank you
Representatives for bringing
this forward. I actually
I worked in telecommunications
for 10 years at the city of
Albuquerque helped establish the
telecommunication ordinance and
um I worked a lot with, you
know, the different providers. I
see a huge need and I
When I visit my mother, I can't
get any reception. It's just
crazy up in Espinola, um, Santa
Fe is, I mean, we're seeing that
Mr. Chair and members in some of
our subcommittees, and I keep
Thinking, you know, we just had
more antennas, maybe we would
have better reception, and I, I
see the need.
As they improve roads or putting
that broadband in, you know,
that that infrastructure.
As we develop the road system.
So thank you for that.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representatives. I
can certainly see the need in my
rural district for for this uh
bill to go forward and as a
relative newcomer to the
legislature, I have a rookie
question when I hear that.
A bill is being worked on for 12
years.
I, I wonder if there's a short
answer to this.
Why do you
see that this is not um.
There's not been an agreement
made on this bill in 12 years.
My experience with it, Mr.
Chairman, has been, um.
At one time when we were talking
about P3s, it was everything was
vertical and horizontal
construction. Now what we have
is, it is very much now focused
on two different things,
transportation and broadband.
So once you get into the entire
gamut of construction.
That opens up a whole different
can of worms and currently we do
not have anything that
authorizes the state of New
Mexico to get into P3
agreements, but it's happening
all the time anyway.
Predominantly with charter
schools.
Charter schools have entered
into a number of P3 agreements,
um, we had, I don't have that
listing with me, but it, it's
happening.
We think that if this gets
established at least for 2
infrastructure purposes.
That you'd have better
oversight. We have a lot of
confidence, Mister Chairman in
the New Mexico Finance
Authority.
When it comes to what a local
government can afford.
Um, and charter schools, other,
others that might take advantage
of this, but we, uh, started out
big, which was representative
Larry Naga's bill. It had
everything.
A horizontal and vertical uh
through the years we decided we
better take one bite of the of
the apple at a time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Lindstrom.
Another basic
Question.
From a, from a healthcare person
to a transportation person.
Tell me what you mean by
vertical and horizontal, please.
When you think about uh vertical
construction.
You're going this way, you're
thinking of a horizontal you're
going this way, this is
pipelines, this is roads. This
is things that go into the
ground and when you think about
this way, it's your buildings,
it's convention centers, it's
bridges, you know, things like
that, so um in the in
Larrysville it was everything
and so we had this big elf
projects and it opens up, uh,
just a whole different
discussion when you.
We, we just feel like we need to
take, as I said, one bite of the
apple at a time.
Thank you so much. It, uh, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Lindstrom, I really appreciate
that. I know it's, it's basic,
but that in my district is
everything in my rural district,
we don't build high rises, you
know, we don't have a lot of
bridges, but, but just basic
need for roads, good roads, and
and access to, to communications
is, is everything, so I really
appreciate your continuing to
work on this. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you sponsors, um.
I mean, I've I've probably voted
against this more than I voted
for it. I think I voted for it
last time on the floor, um,
because I, I keep going back and
forth on it and I'll get to that
in a moment, but like, for me,
it seems like that Bob Dylan
lyric, like I was so much older
than I'm younger than that now.
Um.
But
I, I did have a question because
in the um
DFA analysis for the pill, um,
we talked about, you know, all
these projects not being subject
to the procurement code, um, and
that it's gonna fall on the
finance, um.
authority to do so, um, but on I
think it's the 3rd page of their
analysis in the administrative
implications. They talk about it
not being within their capacity
to
Um, handle, um, all that we're
tasking them to do with these
claims, and I was wondering uh
what's your thoughts and
opinions are on that.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
it's true, and, and this is what
happens consistently with almost
every piece of legislation that
we carry every department will
say and they generally don't
have the manpower to do a lot of
what we ask him to do.
What we're hoping for is that uh
the representatives is working
with HAFC on uh.
at this time we've asked for it
since last summer.
Uh during the budget process
that a portion of this could be
used for administrative
purposes, there's no way this
will be successful without it.
So we, we recognize that.
Every agency's in the same boat,
uh.
They
Help.
And, and Mr. Chairman and
representative, and, and I do
understand that and I appreciate
it. I just think with the scope
of what we're talking about and
with with the type of public
money and the fact that they're
admitting and we saw kind of the
industry professionals come and
say, yes, we do want this and we
support it. um.
I guess my concern has always
been how do we make sure that
that money is spent
appropriately and do we have and
I'm certainly hoping because I
do plan on voting for this, that
we do keep in mind that we do
need government folks in these
positions because they're going
to be tasked with the oversight.
So if we want to make sure that
our tax dollars that our public
money is being put to good use
as well. Um, we need to make
sure that we finance government
um in a way.
It's appropriate, so I certainly
hope that's something um that
you all mentioned, you all are
continuing working for and work
as diligently on that portion,
as you all have for the belt.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to Grips Garrett and
Lindstrom for, I think it really
good clear presentation.
I I think one of the things that
um I most uh pleased about with
this new version of the bill.
Is that it will um bring in NMFA
in a really neat way. We're some
rulemaking.
And honestly, I think a lot of
the work we did in previous
bills provided the steps.
That might, you know, that would
be probably.
Are they recommended for
filmmaking itself, so.
NMFA knows how to do this, um,
does it day in and day out.
So I think that's, I think
that's a much simpler bill.
rulemaking
and making sure we have
protections there cause.
Take this out of the procurement
code we want assurances that.
Safeguards.
He
And I'm, I'm pretty confident
that will happen.
Um, one of the things Mr.
Chairman, that I, I really like
about P3s is I think there's a a
desire on the part of a lot of
private investors to help.
government projects, this would
give them a way to do that and
as was referenced.
Mr. Chairman, uh, in my district
years and years ago, um, some
oil and gas companies were
worried about the condition of
the roads.
There weren't any a cell or
deeling yet to the various uh
plant locations
And they were willing to say
we're gonna
pay for that, but it was sort of
like, well,
is gonna really be helpful.
those types of things.
Um, ultimately, Mr. Chairman and
representatives, I think this is
an economic development bill.
It's going to produce jobs.
good jobs
And um
We're gonna just see some
So infrastructure upgrades where
they need to happen and.
I had this discussion in
Carlsbad, we've done some
downtown.
And we're gonna need parking
garage.
To accommodate all the people
who are gonna be in the fence.
And so this would open the venue
for private investor to come in
and help the city probably does
not have the money and
under a project in full, and
this would allow
Investors with private capital
to come in.
And um put the money up front to
get the the uh.
The structure built, and again,
I'm not making decisions for the
city council, but this has
certainly been the discussion.
And uh there'd be fee generation
for using the parking garage and
so the private company would
have a reason.
Justified
The same Mister fair is true, I
think with Balloon Fiesta.
They have limited land there.
There's a professional soccer
team.
To one side
So how do you get to build up?
parking grudge.
Possibly, I just wanna, Mr.
Chair, thank the representatives
for uh.
Being here today and presenting
the bill and I.
I said it last year. I'm hopeful
this is the year that it passes.
And I'll say that again. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Like it was a turban and I do
apologize, uh.
Have like a runner's cough.
The first day of basketball
practice.
Um
Um
Mr. Chairman and um.
Presenters, um, are there states
around us that have uh E3s.
Mr. Chairman,
Uh, particularly Texas, Arizona,
and you in Colorado, they all
have a P3 authorization uh
legislation.
In-law
German, um.
Resenters are uh.
Representatives, I, uh,
Maybe this is probably something
um offline. I, I definitely
would like to see how tribes in
those states, the, the, the, the
tribal nations, uh, operate with
those P3s like, uh, hearing a
lot of good things, um, I, I
think this is a a really good
opportunity for the 23 tribes
public of nations, um.
Mr. Chairman
um, representatives uh
That the is is is a difference
between last year.
Um, just uh focus on two sectors
of transportation and
And broadband is
That's the difference between uh
previously and, and what, what's
being presented today, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, last year's bill
was very similar. It was very
similar. It focused on
transportation.
Infrastructure and broadband
infrastructure.
For the last few years it's been
focused like that, um.
Go ahead.
And Mr. Chair and and
representatives.
The spill has passed the house
several times, just so you know,
um, it's been stuck in a
specific committee.
In the Senate
Um
And Senator Padilla is our
Senate sponsor who's already
signed on to it to work on it.
Mr. Chairman and representative,
what seems to be the, the, the
one question of why the
committee on the Senate does,
does not.
What or it's not taking it on.
was true. You answered that.
I'm gonna be real diplomatic.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
partly it's time, uh, frankly, I
sat during the 2nd COVID
session, I sat in one Senate
committee for 4 days, and there
just was not time.
And sometimes people um have
misunderstood the value of P3s,
but increasingly the Senate
members are understanding it.
Mr. Chapman, I'm gonna, I'm not
gonna take up any more time. I
support this initiative. I want
to do everything I can to help
support it. Thank you.
Thank you presenters, we were
joined by Marquita Russell. Did
you need her to win?
But
Thank you. What is the will of
the committee, Representative
Hockmanville.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, I
cheerfully and gleefully move do
pass on house bill.
right now.
276.
We have a motion by
Representative Hoffman Hill and.
Was it ranking member Brown?
She beat me too, we'll do now,
please.
Representative Armstrong, yes.
Representative Barrago.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Doll.
O
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes
We
Representative Romero, or
Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vice Chair Laura.
Yes.
Ara de la Cruz.
Yes
Looks like we have a cleared
bill.
So
Thank you. And if anybody wants
to sign on, we will notify the
clerk's office that you have
permission to sign up.
Thank you, Representative.
Next we're going to move to HB
314, removal of motor vehicle
hazards.
Represented
My friend Mel Mejia.
Welcome, Representative.
Welcome, uh, presenters uh the
chairman had to step out really
quick, so, uh.
Taking over duties, if you would
mind, uh, uh.
Visiting the, the uh
belt please.
Um
Representatives, this is a
simple bill, HR 314, uh, it's a
safety bill. This bill
authorizes law enforcement
officers in the Department of
Transportation employees to
remove hazards.
From Broadways, the bill will
allow law enforcement officers
and DOT employees to remove a
motor vehicle vehicle.
Cargo or debris from the public
roadway or highway right away,
only when it constitutes an
immediate public safety hazard.
This bill ensures better use of
law enforcement officers and DOT
staff time, particularly in
rural New Mexico. They will be
able to immediately remove a
hazardous rather than waiting
around until the public hazard
is removed by another entity.
Mr. Chairman, I have with me
today, Mister Major. Alex
Rodriguez from the state police
as my expert witness.
I would like Mr. Rodriguez to
share a little bit more about
why this.
Good morning, Vice Chair and
members of the committee. Um,
again, my name is Major Alex
Rodriguez with the Mexico State
Police, um, so what we're
talking about here is trying to
move vehicles of debris that are
causing hazards in the roadway
that are slowing down traffic
that are forcing traffic to
change lanes and things of that
nature prior to causing either a
crash or what we call a
secondary crash. So for
instance, we can have a minor
fender bender on the highway or
or something that disables the
vehicle where the vehicle
remains in the lane of travel,
it closes down that.
Lane of travel.
Um, for every minute that lane
of travel is closed down and
increases the opportunity for a
secondary crash by about 2.8%.
Um, over about 36 minutes,
you're virtually counting on a
secondary crash. So a secondary
crash is gonna be that, that
follow-up crash. So traffic is
slowing down, someone's not
paying attention either uh a
personal vehicle or a commercial
motor vehicle isn't paying
attention, comes up and hits the
vehicle, uh, hits the vehicle
further down the line.
Um, the second thing that those
hazards do is for every moment
uh for every minute rather that
that lane of travel is closed
down, um, it actually impacts
traffic and delays traffic by
about 4 minutes, uh,
statistically, um, until that
vehicle is cleared. So if it's
closed for that lane is closed
for 5 minutes.
we're looking at about 20
minutes' worth of, of traffic
backup.
So what this bill does is it
allows officers when they get on
scene and they start assessing
things, if we are able to move
the vehicle, we can move the
vehicle. We can get it off to
the side of the road into a safe
location where our record
drivers when they arrive, are
less likely to be hit. Um, it
puts them in a safer location,
um, somewhere in the
neighborhood of 20% of
firefighters that are killed
every year are by vehicle
strikes are responding to calls
like this. Um, it makes it safer
for them because we get stuff
out of the roadway, um,
accidental, uh, strikes by
vehicles um are the second
leading accidental cause of
death for officers every year as
we respond to these crashes, um,
so this makes it safer for
everybody. It gets everybody off
the road. It gets the vehicles
or debris off the road where
we can actually deal with it. A
record driver can pull up, they
can get off the road out of the
lane to travel, um, hook up that
vehicle and motoring, um.
Motoring traffic is it's coming
through, isn't experienced that
same issue with secondary
crashes.
Um, and ultimately secondary
crashes oftentimes are, are more
injurious, uh, far more severe
than the initial incident, the
initial thing that slow traffic
down in the first place.
Mr. Cher
After that explanation, we stand
for questions.
Peter, I'm sorry, did you have
anything to add? No?
Thank you for that. Uh, do we
have any members in the room who
are in support of.
Bill House Bill 314.
OK, if you please, uh, stand.
In line and the sergeant will
hold the mic for you, uh, just a
friendly reminder that we have
one minute for public.
Thank you. Major Robert Algar
with the New Mexico State
Police. Obviously, we stand in
strong support of this bill. Um,
ultimately, at the end of the
day, what this boils down to is
if we want to save lives in New
Mexico, this is appropriate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Rikkierner Department of
Transportation, uh, supportive
of this legislation as well, not
only, um, are we concerned with
the traveling public restoring
access on our roadways, but also
the safety of our men and women
who oftentimes are on standby at
the site of a crash or a stalled
vehicle ensuring that with law
enforcement a tow truck is there
to help. So we ask for your
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Jim
Garcia, executive director for
the Associated Contractors of
New Mexico representing the
contracting community. We're
facing a lot of hardships on the
road. One of the other bills
that's going to be coming up is
red cameras in road projects,
um, another one that's gonna be
a safer for the public. We, the
contractors are behind this
bill. Thank you.
Anyone else in support of the
bill in the room?
Do we have anyone in support of
the bill online.
No.
Mr. Chair
Thank you. Do we have anyone in
opposition in the room? Anyone
in opposition online?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
We have Amy Varela.
Miss Marilla, please proceed.
Good afternoon committee. My
name is Amy Barrella. I am
speaking against this bill for
the New Mexico Touring
Association. It is our first
intent to provide safety for all
law enforcement in our roadways,
but this July 19 on page 2, only
opens up liability if the
officer hooks up to a car with a
chain and causes more damage,
line 19 says they are not liable
for any damages. That means the
service will be accused of
causing these damages, opening
up liability for them. I think
it's going to cause further
problems because record services
are going to refuse to tell.
But after it's been moved
improperly. Thank you.
Thank you for that, and now we
will go to member questions.
Thank you, Vice Chair.
Uh
First we have Representative
Hoffman v Hill.
Thank you very much, much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative, is
this your first bill
presentation by chance?
Mister Chair, I, Representative
Hatcher. Yes, it is just, just
wanting to confirm you're doing
a great job. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, um, those sponsors,
thank you for bringing this
bill, um, as the
Prior chair to this committee.
This was an issue that was
brought to my attention by state
police, a couple of different
times. Very glad to see that
we're doing something about it.
Um, we did hear some testimony
in opposition to it. I, um, I,
I, I think that.
We need to address the point
that um in our small state, we
don't always have the resources
to move sometimes, uh, hugely
consequential wrecks from large
motorways like I-40 and a small
amount of time, so we did need
to enable law enforcement the
ability to do this, um, I also
liability issue that was pointed
out, um, by opposition and I'm,
I'm hoping that maybe uh you and
I as co-sponsors of this bill.
There's a couple of um ideas
that have been floated around,
so I, I urge support of the bill
from other members on this
committee with the
acknowledgment um of that issue
as it's something that really,
really needs to get done because
we can't have these uh wreckages
languishing on the roads, um,
but at the same time, we can do
it in a way where we still uh.
our towing partners that, um,
you know, we're not causing more
problems and we're trying to
fix. So, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think
this is a, this is a great bill
I wanted to make the motion for
a due pass, uh, when you're
ready.
Noted. Thank you.
Next we have Representative.
Uh, ranking member Brown.
I almost left that out.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So,
I, I do generally support the
bill. I think it makes perfect
sense that if, and here's the
key language in the bill in my
opinion is it's an immediate
public safety hazard.
Mr. Chairman and
Representative, we know that
sometimes
You know, a tow truck's been
called, but it can't get there
for a certain length of time and
so we just keep that lane
danger, do we keep it closed?
What do we do and I think Mr.
Chairman, my confidence is in
law enforcement please to safely
move the hazard off.
The roadway and um.
Have to confess, Mr. Chairman,
there have been times I've been
driving in the middle of
nowhere.
And I noticed a rock fall right
ahead of me.
I don't stop and call a tow
truck. I just get up and move
the rocks.
Because it's a, it's a hazard.
If someone isn't paying
attention.
Secondary acts likely happen. So
it is uh um at bottom, I think.
Public safety issue.
Um
Mr. Chairman, I, I do share the
concern that rep Hoffman B. Hill
has mentioned about the
liability issue.
If someone is negligent in
removing, say, a vehicle that's
blocking the roadway.
And causes further damage to the
vehicle, then I have a problem
with that, and it almost like to
see a negligent standard woven
into the bill.
So that um
The property owner has some
protection and arise.
Uh, but for right now I do
support the bill. Um maybe you
would consider.
Possibility of a little
amendment to
And a little extra
But I do support
Thank you, ranking member. Next
we have vice chair Latta.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation I have.
Um
I, I understand the
Uh, the need to move the
vehicles when there's an
accident.
But how, what I have, what's the
timeline with stall vehicles.
There's plenty of times our
driving on the interstate and I
see the stall vehicles on the
side of the road with the red
sticker on it.
And I'm wondering what the
timeline is on those before
they're actually removed.
from, from the roadside, Mr.
Sher.
Um, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair, um,
excellent question. Um, it it
kind of depends. So if um a big
thing that we're uh restricted
to is whether or not it causes
an immediate hazard for the, for
the motoring public. If it
doesn't and it's off the side of
the road. Um, we don't have the
authority to just remove the
vehicle.
Um, or they even call a record
to remove the vehicle. It has to
be causing some kind of some
kind of uh.
Um, essentially impairment for
travel has to cause some kind of
hazard for the roadway for us to
even get a record out there to
to remove it.
Thank you for that. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair, because, uh,
I've heard of instances, you
know, back home where where I'm
from.
That, uh, those stall vehicles
don't last long on that road
because somebody comes and pick
us up.
That is not the owner and it's
not a tour company.
And they go to this, so they go
to the chop shops and get the uh
the um,
you know, thing they take it
apart. So I was just curious as
to how long, how long that
process takes and and uh other
than that, you know, that's,
that's really I didn't have
anything else. I was just
curious about that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, we don't have any
further member questions, we,
uh, we need a motion
Representative Lustrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I would
move for.
have a motion to do pastor, we
have a second?
Representative Boyer was the
2nd.
call, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Orego.
Yes.
Representative Brown. Yes.
Representative Fernandez? Yes.
Representative Hoffman Hill.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Representative Lata.
Yes.
Perfect. Thanks chair.
Pa.
Thank you. Looks like you have a
old bill.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman, members
of the congratulations thank
you.
Thank you. We don't have a
They don't have to sing here,
right?
Oh, OK.
everybody
Thank you. That concludes
today's meeting. Thanks
everyone.
We have the committee done.
Yeah, oh,
members don't forget it's the
trans the transportation dinner
tonight.
Where, where is that?
Escondido tonight Escondido.
6 o'clock, right? 6 o'clock.
