Roll call is closed.
We have
A quorum
Will the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Little, please lead us in
today's invocation.
A truck Schnahan said that could
tell me wash it sitsika.
I am Charlotte Little. I
represent House District 68 in
Northwest Albuquerque.
And creator
I pray this morning I begin by
thanking you for all that you've
given us.
For the snow that came
yesterday, the moisture that we
needed so badly.
For taking care of our families
while we are here.
Our communities while we are
working hard to serve them the
best that we can.
We think you all for the
guidance, the wisdom and the
energy that you.
That is shared with us.
We ask that you continue to
guide us.
To hear, to see.
To speak in a good way.
To hear those pleas.
That are coming from people who.
Have no voice or the voices are
limited.
Help us to do our best and take
care of our family.
In our communities in this great
state.
Nitra
Thank you.
person, will you please remain
standing for a moment of silence
for the victims of the uh
horrible air traffic accident in
Washington DC yesterday.
Thank you.
Religion lady
From
Chavezurer Roosevelt
Representative Reeve lead us in
the Pledge of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
And well the gentle lady from
Britain and the representative
Thompson lead us in the pledge
to the New Mexico flag.
And lady from Santa Fe Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Good morning members.
Um, just as a reminder, we've
got, um, our photographer in the
house lounge today and tomorrow
for our composite photos, uh, by
the end of the day tomorrow your
financial disclosure forms are
due, uh, by a show of hands,
the, the rookies in the room.
Are you OK? Are you, did you get
it figured out? I'm, I'm seeing
thumbs up.
OK? If you have any questions,
any issues, the, uh, Secretary
of State's office is in the
lounge right now. Also, you can
reach out to to our team if you
need any support getting that
done.
Uh, announcement from
Representative Duncan, uh,
Monday, February 3rd, there is a
sportsman caucus meeting at noon
in room 318. Again, sportsmen
caucus meeting at noon Monday
the 3rd, uh, in room 318.
Also
legislative Finance Committee.
Has a new member training
workshop for capital outlay.
Let me repeat this again, LFC is
hosting a new member training
for Capital Outlay on February
5th from 7 a.m. to 8 a.m. in
room 307, even though it's for
new members, anyone can attend
and if you're anything like me,
10 years in, I will probably
attend.
Because it's a really, really
confusing process.
Um, it's gotten better, but it's
still confusing.
Let's go to the gentle lady
farmer.
San Miguel and Torrens.
Who has a memorial.
Was it
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that House Memorial 6
be removed from the speaker's
table and be made the next order
of business.
See an objection, it is ordered.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point?
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house Memorial 6 on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate amendments
or substitution generally need
to explain the memorial.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to,
uh, announce House Memorial 6 in
recognition of New Mexico meets
a day at the legislature here in
the House of Representatives,
um, New Mexico Mesa on your
desk.
of information, um, but
collectively we have a 106
schools across the state of New
Mexico. Here with us today in
the Roundhouse we have 24
schools and over 350 students in
the gallery with us today, um,
all celebrating STEM education,
education, um, if one of these
students is one of your
constituents, you'll be
receiving letters of support,
um, talking about not only
educational issues, STEM issues,
but also issues that are
pertinent to them in their
communities, um, these are our
young leaders.
tomorrow and I would like to, to
thank all of my colleagues here
for hosting us today, hosting
them today, um, and also just to
give recognition to all of our
students here in the audience.
Fantastic, gentle lady, thank
you for doing that. And, and
we'll, we'll introduce some good
folks and, and we'll introduce
the folks in the gallery here in
a minute, uh, but would you like
to, uh, yield to your co-sponsor
and then we'll go to the
memorial debate.
Mr. Speaker, I, so we'll go to
the gentle lady from Catherine
Socorro Valencia and Sierra
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I would just
like to thank you all for being
here for Mesa Day. It's an
important, uh, part of our lives
every single day. Uh, my
grandchildren that I have 12 of
with number 13 on the way, uh,
take part in in Mesa in Socorro
and all across the state and in
the uh leadership academy in uh
in Albuquerque.
So I appreciate Mesa Day. I love
their, uh, their mission,
empowering and motivate and
motivate New Mexico cultural
diverse students with science,
technology, engineering, math,
and enrichment. I have several
letters. They're actually
really, really, uh, empowering,
Mr. Speaker and body, uh, uh,
Desiree is concerned about her
roads in Berlin, New Mexico,
and, uh, and giving ideas on how
she
thinks they, they could be, uh,
do better, um, and then, uh,
Julian also is talking about his
school in Berlin and how he
wishes the community would be
more involved in his school
district and so I appreciate
that and totally support your
memorial and thank you for
bringing it forward. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker lady,
anyone else wanting to debate
the memorial.
The gentleman from Valencia,
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
I do so yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I too
rise in support of the uh
memorial for me so has a 32 year
educator, um.
I can tell you the huge impact
that Mesa and other programs
have had in our in our students
in our schools.
The, the students that are
participating in these and other
activities are the future of
this state.
You guys are the leaders, the
businessmen and women, you guys
will be the ones to help.
Continue the
Direction and the change for the
better for our status of New
Mexico so I commend you.
I encourage you.
And I ask the dream and continue
to
On that path that you are
towards making New Mexico a
better place, so I thank you,
uh, Mr. Speaker, and I thank all
you students who are up here and
I look forward to hopefully
meeting some of you. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Uh, is there more debate on the
memorial.
Generally from Valenza
representative Mirro Moya, I'm
sorry, I'm gonna, I'm gonna try
harder. I'm always like this.
That's like I said last time,
it's, it's, it's hard because
I'm a little short, so those
monitors are, are, are perfect
there, but I got a voice. I'll
let you know. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Will the gentle lady
yield?
Yes, I will.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
100% stand up for Mesa as a
science teacher, um, uh, many of
my students are here. Um, I am
not the Mesa sponsor, thank God,
because I don't have that amount
of time, but um our wonderful
sponsor at Berlin High School is
amazing and uh the, those
students are in good hands, but
many of the students that are
here today that I got to take
pictures with and, and run
around and try to find stuff
with, um, because they're doing
a um um some uh scavenger hunts
and stuff. Um, they were my
physics students last year, so I
love the fact that um we are
putting a focus on on science
and engineering and math and and
um and all this technology stuff
because uh like I agree with uh
Representative Baca. these are
our future and what Mesa does is
train them even more to
question, to collect data, to uh
to uh think of a problem and
figure out a solution. So these
are our, uh, hopefully there'll
be some of them that will be uh
in.
one of these seats in a few
years, uh, because they're the
ones that are solving problems
where they're at right now, so
I, um, I commend all of you.
Keep questioning, keep, uh,
collecting that data, keep
trying to figure out what you're
doing and when you run up
against a wall, question some
more and figure out how you can
either take down that wall or
get around it, so don't stop.
Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady for the
debate on how's Memorial 6, we
have the gentleman from
Katherine Grant and Hidalgo,
Representative Terrazas. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady please yield.
Yes, I yield.
Thank you gentle lady. You know
this is this I had a group of
kids, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
running around all over the,
well they were all over the the
the roundhouse and I ran into
our rooms, uh, Snell Middle
School, and they came to see
myself and Senator Ramos. I'm,
I'm sure they wouldn't to see
other people, but.
I hope that you guys got some of
the letters I did from Mesa. It
was really, really nice to hear
from the students from their
sponsors, from their parents and
so we, we hear how what impact
it's having on their children,
their confidence levels, then
the I, I read some stuff that
they were, uh, doing better and
how uh in health and science, I
think it was science and
mathematics, excuse me, and they
were talking about engineering
and so forth parents are are
saying that this this program.
their confidence, the kids are
saying that this the program
helps to meet new friends and
give, give them the confidence
they need to to move forward,
so, uh, Mr. Speaker, this is a
wonderful program. I'm glad I
was honored that they would go
out of their way to try and find
me out there in the annex and,
and give me a letter uh of what
this program does from thank you
so much for bringing this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
gentlemen. It's for the debate
on the memorial.
See no further debate, later to
close. Mr. Speaker, would the
chief clerk please read the
memorial.
Certainly
quick to read.
House Memorial 6.
Introduced by a representative
Armstrong.
A memorial declaring January
30th, 2025, New Mexico Mesa day
in the House of Representatives
whereas New Mexico Mesa
incorporated is a nonprofit
organization and a mathematics,
engineering and science
achievement program. And whereas
New Mexico Mesa in partnership
with schools and universities,
promotes educational enrichment
for pre-college students from
culturally diverse communities.
And whereas currently New Mexico
Mesa is in almost 110 schools
statewide and has grown
dramatically since its
introduction in 6 schools in 18
in 1982, and whereas New Mexico
Mesa provides thousands of
middle, junior high and high
school students with year-round
support and career guidance.
And whereas New Mexico Mesa
activities include tutoring,
advanced study, college and
career counseling, field trips
and academic competitions,
leadership workshops, summer
programs, scholarship
incentives, community service
opportunities and teacher
professional development.
And whereas New Mexico Mesa
provides support not only to
students, but also to their
teachers, families, and
communities and whereas through
the efforts of New Mexico Mesa
participating students received
the educational enrichment
experiences and practical help
that they need to achieve
academic excellence and prepare
for college majors in
mathematics, engineering, and
science.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
January 30th, 2025 be declared
New Mexico, Mesa Day in the
House of Representatives.
And be a further resolved that
New Mexico may still
incorporated be recognized and
applauded for its dedication to
preparing minority students for
careers in mathematics,
engineering, and science.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the New Mexico
Mesa Incorporated.
Thank you, Madam Clerk.
Seeing no further debate
generally to close.
And moved that House Memorial 6.
Do you now pass?
And you ask unanimous consent.
That the record show that all
members present voted in the
affirmative.
See no objection. It's so
ordered.
We are on final passage of House
Memorial 6. The vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's Memorial 6
has duly passed this house.
Gentle lady, this is when you
sing.
Oh goodness.
No,
Well, you know what? Why not?
My vocal abilities are, you
know, not to be imagined, but
since it's this my first
memorial on the floor and in
good spirits with all my uh my
Mesa folks in the audience. What
shall I sing? um.
Knowing that it is coming to me
is uh let's do some Selena.
Anyone?
Karaoke is not my strong suit.
Comola Flor.
Mary said to
Marri Chico, that's even the
right word, but that's what
everybody knows.
I think that's all you get.
You all in good fun, yes. Right.
There's a meeting of the karaoke
caucus at 7 o'clock tonight.
See the uh whip for details.
Um, in the spirit of mess a day,
I wanna also uh introduce guests
in the gallery of many of us,
many of you who are here, we
have over 350ESA students from
all over the state, um, I think
many of them are up here don't
leave yet. I'm gonna recognize
you so you can rise and be
recognized. We have ACE
leadership High School, El
Dorado Community School,
Albuquerque High School, Socorto
High School, Berlin High School,
Taylor Middle School, NextGen
Academy Alamo Gordo High School
Saracino Middle School, Harlem.
Middle school, Mountain View
Middle School, Valley Height,
Centennial High School, Anton
Chico Middle School, Oregon
Mountain High School. Cardinals
Mil Middle School, Snell Middle
School, Espanola Valley High
School, Zia Middle School,
Memorial Middle School, Crown
Point High School, Mesa Visa
Millan High School, Crown Point
Middle School, West Las Vegas
High School and West Las Vegas
Middle School and if Magdalen
Reyes is in the gallery, please
rise to be recognized from
Albuquerque High.
Congratulations.
As students, thanks for being
here.
I'm almost as good as a
lieutenant governor.
Run for his money.
Uh, let's go next to the
gentleman from.
Where is it?
San
Gentlemen from.
from Sandoval, uh, you are on
deck. We're gonna go to the
gentleman from Colfax Mora Rio
Riva San Miguel Entas,
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh, I
just like to announce that a
gift in front of you in purple
is from uh STEManopy.
Uh, you'll find information, uh,
regarding them stemsanoe focuses
on science, technology,
engineering, and mathematic
programming for pre-K through
post-secondary students
statewide tackling the issue of
providing quality STEM learning
opportunities for our
particularly underrepresented
rural communities.
In a state abundant with STEM
careers and experts, um.
Stemsano bridges the gap for all
youths to feel curious,
confident, and courageous when
pursuing their dreams cradle to
careers is their vision.
Leanna McClure, executive
director, is leading the team
with the new vision and focus on
indigenous expansion and
internship growth. These gifts
were made by their current
interns, stems out of and they
hope to have support from many
from the House of
Representatives in this chamber.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentlemen.
men from Sandoval Representative
Hernandez.
I believe you have a
certificate.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, so
today is New Mexico SBDC Day in
the legislature, um, SPDC
provides um integral training
for small businesses across the
states, um, in their, in all
their years they've helped over
10,200 businesses, uh, in New
Mexico and have been involved in
creating more than 40,000 jobs.
So I would like to introduce my
guests at the rostrum we have
uh.
Glenn Walters, who is the
director of operations for NMBD
SBDC.
We have Russell Werick, who is
the state director for SPDC.
Uh, Juliana Gutierrez, who is
the database analyst for NMSPDC.
And Patrick Vanderpool, who is
the executive director of the
Regional Development
Corporation.
Thank you gentlemen, um, I'm
gonna go to a gentleman from
Donana because he also has a
special shutout for these good
folks.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I, I
appreciate that. I would also
like to recognize the folks from
the SPDC SBDCC, uh, they, I, I
can personally attest, Mr.
Speaker, that Mr. David Avalos
in Southern Park has really,
really gone above and beyond.
Supporting small businesses in
Soland Park and it's a Teresa
and I just wanna acknowledge
that. Thank you for all your
hard work. Thank you for your
support thank you thank you
gentlemen, and I believe we have
a certificate, gentlemen from
Sandoan.
clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
5-seventh legislature first
session 2025 recognizes New
Mexico small business
Development Center Network Day.
Whereas small business
development is vital to New
Mexico's growth and prosperity
and whereas New Mexico
celebrates the generations of
small business owners who embody
the spirit of entrepreneurship
and the strong work ethic that
are the heart and soul of the
American dream.
And whereas small businesses are
the lifeblood of New Mexico
which salutes small business
owners, entrepreneurs, and
employees for enhancing
communities, urban and rural,
and expanding opportunities for
all.
And whereas the New Mexico
legislature and the state of New
Mexico encouraged the continuing
development of new small
businesses for the wealth of all
residents.
And whereas in New Mexico small
business development center has
been an integral leader in
developing small businesses
across the state since 1989.
And whereas in New Mexico's
small business development
centers assistance to
entrepreneurs has contributed to
the creation of more than
40,0050065 new jobs, 142,170.
$55,00491 in capital infusion
and more than 10,214 new
businesses.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that the
New Mexico small business
Development Center be recognized
for its contribution to the
state's economy.
And be it further resolved that
January 30th, 2025 be proclaimed
New Mexico's small business
development center network Day
in the House of Representatives
signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you, um.
gentleman from Chavez, did you
want to speak on this item. Yes
sir, I got distracted. Thank you
very much, Mr. Speaker. Um, I am
a small business owner and I
really salute the the small
business development center. Um,
I've created a number of small
businesses over the years. My
principal one, of course, is an
oil and gas exploration
development but also uh have
created uh technology companies,
uh, together with other small
businesses, um, and, uh, it
would help from, uh, some of the
national labs which are real
gems and
in our state. So I salute the
small business development
center and, and thank you for
all of the good work that you're
doing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Generally from Katherine Sierra,
Socorro Valencia representative
Armstrong. Uh, thank you Mr.
Speaker. Well, the gentleman
yield?
Yes, ma'am. Uh, thank you,
gentlemen. I just want to stand
in support of the small business
development centers across New
Mexico, uh, they are thriving
and encouraging entrepreneurs
across the state and without
businesses we have no jobs, so
we appreciate you so much and
thank you for all you do. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
um.
I get a lot of texts, uh, saying
please click here for an SBDC
loan. I probably shouldn't click
on those texts, right? PSA don't
click on the text. It's probably
spam. These guys will not.
These guys will not spam your
inbox.
Uh, folks, I want to add my, uh,
gratitude to all of you, um, the
work that, uh, your agency does
is critically important in all
of our communities, including my
own, uh, and I wanna thank you
for being here on this special
day, um, and thank you,
representatives, uh, from Donana
in Sandoval for pinch hitting
for the other gentleman from
Sandovalt this morning. Um,
welcome and thank you for being
here.
Folks, we've got some guests,
uh, on the rostrum as well from
a wonderful organization called
Meal on Wheels, which I believe
many of you, if not all of you
are very familiar with, and I'd
like to introduce a few of them.
We've got Shawna Frost, the CEO
of Meals on Wheels. Thank you
for being here.
We also have
Ms.
She's a board member and chair
of government affairs for Meal
on Wheels. Welcome.
We have Will Beetto board member
of Meals on Wheels. Welcome.
And up in the gallery we've got
Megan Ellett, communications and
marketing manager. Welcome to
the house.
We also have William Townley's
institutional giving manager.
Welcome.
And last but certainly not
least, we've got Tandja Jenkins
chief operations manager.
Welcome to the house. Thank you
for being here and thank you for
all that you do for our
communities, especially our
seniors, um, as we try to keep
them, uh, comfortable in their
homes. Thank you for being here.
Uh, we've got guests in the
gallery of Representative
Johnson, and I'd like to
recognize you as well. Please
rise to be recognized. I've got
educator fellows for Joso
Academy from Zuni Pueblo,
Cameron Babala and Stephanie
Vicenti.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Berley or
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanna introduce my uh shadow for
today, uh, David Trujillo, he is
a graduate of Berna Leo High
School, go Spartans, um, he
former employee, part-time
employee with the chief clerk,
and he is now working with the
Veterans integration Center and
the Dolores Huerta.
Day of service he is applying to
CNM so I just wanted to welcome
my shadow. Thank you. Welcome.
OK, any other announcements?
Gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I like to mention to the body
today that today's border
economic development day, uh,
our friends from the border
Industrial Association will be
here today, uh, I just want to
highlight a few things that are
happening in Santa Teresa. San
Teresa exports doubled between
2023 and 2024, setting a new
record at $6.9 billion.
Santa Teresa is the largest
export region in New Mexico. The
region is responsible 64 69% of
all the state's exports.
1.6 million square feet of
industrial space was completed
or began construction in Santa
Teresa in 2024.
5B companies started their
operations in Santa Teresa in
2024. Louis Louisiana Pepper
Exchange, Monty.
Uh, metal fabrication Franklin
Mountain packaging, Ross Dress
for us, and Admiral Cable.
Santa Teresa generates $2
billion annually of economic
output in New Mexico according
to 2023 study by Arrowhead
Center and the Center for Border
Economic Development.
Santa Teresa supports 7,246 jobs
in New Mexico according to the
same study.
So that Teresa generates $47
million in state and local taxes
in New Mexico according also to
the same study and Mr. Speaker,
um,
Border Industrial Association
has, has a gift.
Uh, a small bag with some honey
in your, uh, at your desk, uh,
Miguel Nortena Meldaguacante,
and Milel de Mesquite. so please
enjoy those and and and and once
again, uh, please remember that
border economic development in
Teresa.
Also has an event in the
invitation is inside your packet
inside the little bag, please
look at it and I hope to see you
there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. And if you didn't get
one, I guess you're not invited,
so I didn't get one. I guess I'm
not invited.
If you haven't had a chance,
folks to visit the, the, the
border, uh, the border plaques
down there in Santa Teresa. It
is amazing, amazing, great work
happening and uh I believe like
the world's biggest
manufacturing plant of gummy
bears or something of that sort.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, that is,
uh, uh, and the world's largest
gummy bear factory on the other
side of the of the border with
uh our Mexican friends, uh,
helped contribute to that so
that's another thing I'm, I'm
glad you mentioned that, Mr. Mr.
Speaker, you know, the cross
border trade is so, so important
to New Mexico and our
relationship with our our
partners in Mexico is essential
to the success to the economic
success of our state. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Any other announcements?
The gentleman from
Colfax, Curry Harding Quay, San
Miguel, and Union,
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
The, uh, you, no one, I will
yield to you. Yes, sir.
No, we're not on a, a memorial,
so you're, you're good, we're on
announcements.
Oh. And no one got yield to you,
sir. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'm good. I wanted to brag on
the border authority a little
bit more, but I, I, I, you my
time. Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Uh, any other, uh,
announcements. We are on
announcements.
OK, the gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m.
The houses will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journals
show that all those present in
this morning's session are
present in this afternoon's
session.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
Business Committee.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, we've got a little bit
of housekeeping to do, a little
bit of intro that we're gonna do
this morning, and then we will,
um, uh, come together and
enjoying session with the Senate
to hear for more from two of our
US representatives, uh,
representatives.
Um
Melanie Salisbury and Gabe
Vasquez.
In addition to a little bit of
intro, we're gonna hear some
committee reports, um, and I
believe if we can get through
that and the joint session, we
might be done, so.
That's a good thing. You guys
can clap for that.
Thank you.
OK, any announcements before I
go to committee reports, OK,
gentle lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I mean we go to that
order of business committee
reports is ordered.
to read.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 47 has headed under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 47 do pass and he referred
to the taxation and revenue
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson
chair?
Mr. Speaker, with adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House Bill 47, but a favorable
committee report for House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 47, all those in
favor probably say 9.
name the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Joint Resolution 1 has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. D Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We're on adoption of a
favorable community report on
how his joint resolution one.
All those in favor, senior
probably say aye.
Paul's name, the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House joint resolution 2 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We're adoption of a
favorable report on how joint
resolution to all those in favor
of 59.
Opposed.
Yes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 36
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended, and
thence referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
36. All those in favor 259.
All those supposed BI have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, Health and Human
Services Committee to has been
referred House Bill 40 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
community report on House Bill
40. All those in favor signified
byA9.
But I suppose have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to whom
has been referred House Bill 42
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
Move adoption.
We're on adoption, uh, we're on
adoption of a favor community
report in the House 42. All
those in favor see say no.
Posted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services committed team
has been referred House Bill 52
has headed under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the taxation and
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 52. All those in
favor signify by saying 9.
Opposed name. The committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 54
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the Education
committee, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson's
chair. Move adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report on
House Bill 54. All those in
favor signified by saying 9.
Although supposed, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to me
has been referred House Bill 55
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair, move
adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report uh
for House Bill 55.
All those in favors and your
father say I.
Opposed name. The ISI at
community report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Service is committed to
has been referred House Bill 56
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
community report and how it with
56. All those in favor, if I say
a 9.
Boney.
the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 58 has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass and then refer
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson's
chair. Move adoption. We're in
adoption of a favorable report
house 58. All those in favor say
a
I suppose
the ISI community report
adopted.
And Mr. Speaker, I want to point
out that the House Health and
Human Services Committee is the
hardest working committee in the
place.
Members take note.
clerk to read on committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 19 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and he referred to
the Taxation and revenue
Committee respectfully
submitted, Doreen Y. Gallego's
chair. Mr. Speaker, of adoption.
We are adoption of a favorable
report in House Bill 19. All
those in favors, and you
probably say no.
Suppose they the ISA can be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
team has been referred House
Bill 49 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and he referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Doreen
Waallo's chair.
We adoption favorable report in
House Bill 49. All those in
favor and if I say 9.
Opposena, the Iabic committee
report adopted.
It
Mr. Speaker, your energy
environment and natural
Resources Committee team has
been referred House Bill 109 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Matthew
McQueen, chair.
tion
an adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
109. All those in favor, and if
I say I.
Zoppo's name, the I have
committee report adopted.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
House Bill 228, introduced by a
representative Alan Martinez.
An act relating to property and
acting a new section of the NMSA
1978 to limit County municipal
restrictions on certain battery
charge fences with alarm systems
located outside of areas zoned
exclusively for residential use,
amending a section of the NMSA
1978 regarding county and
municipal zoning, providing
definitions, House Bill 228.
House Bill 228 haven't been read
twice by Tidal is order printed
and referred to the House Rural
Development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee, the
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 229 introduced by
Representatives Doo, Lujan, and
Ferrari, an act making an
appropriation for the New Mexico
grown approved supplier program,
House Bill 229. House Bill 229
haven't been read to us by title
is order printed and referred to
the house.
Agricultural, a secas and water
resources Committee then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 230 introduced by
Representative Sapanski and
Thompson.
An act relating to medical
cannabis, clarifying when drug
testing for cannabis is a law
for employees who are qualified
patients pursuant to the Lynn
and Erin Compassionate Youth
Act, providing protections
against adverse employment
actions, providing requirements
for determining impairment,
requiring the Department of
Health and the workforce
solutions department to develop
guidelines for employees. House
Bill 230.
House Bill 2:30. Have a been
read to us by idlers or printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 231 introduced by
representatives Pettigrew,
Nicole Chavez and Reeb, and acts
relating to crime victims,
amending the crime victims
Reparation Act, including
assault, battery, criminal
sexual contact, and armed
robbery as enumerated offenses
for which reparation to victims
may be made. House Bill 231.
House Bill 231, haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house. Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 232 introduced by
Representatives Lujan.
Rubio Parhon Aanornu, and
Ferrari, and act relating to
property.
Prohibiting a homeowner's
homeowner association from
assessing a fee on the sale of a
law or real property by a law
owner in the association's
development. House Bill 232.
32. Yes, sir.
House Bill 232 haven't been to
us by title is or printed and
referred to the house, commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 233 introduced by
representatives Joshua Hernandez
Thompson and Eleanor Chavez and
act relating to insurance,
amending sections of the New
Mexico Insurance Code, the
health maintenance Organization
law and the nonprofit healthcare
plan law to require coverage for
certain durable medical
equipment for the treatment of
active diabetic foot ulcers.
House Bill 233.
House Bill 233. Haven't been
there twice by title. His order
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, thence the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 234 introduced by
Representatives Jones and Dow,
an act relating to childbirth
require medical care for all
infants who are born alive,
defining born alive and infant.
Mandating reporting, enacting
penalties, enacting civil
remedies, creating the task
force to monitor born alive
births. House Bill 234.
234 House Bill 234. Haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 235 introduced by
Representatives Jones, Nicole
Chavez, and Reeb, an act
relating to firearms prohibiting
an in an undocumented alien from
receiving transporting, or
possessing a firearm or
destructive device providing a
penalty. House Bill 235.
House Bill 235 have been by
titles or the printer referred
to the house, consumer and
public affairs Committee thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
See an objection is ordered.
Members, we are going to go into
a joint session.
Uh, to hear an update from, uh,
two of our esteemed
congressional representatives.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker.
The chair recognizes
Representative Sainsky unanimous
consent that the speaker appoint
a committee to invite the
Honorable President Protem Mimi
Stewart, and honorable members
of the Senate to meet in joint
session with the House in this
chamber for the purpose of being
addressed by the congresswoman
from the first congressional
district of the state of New
Mexico, the Honorable Melanie
Stansbury and the congressman
from the 2nd congressional
district of the state of New
Mexico, the Honorable Gabe
Vasquez,
the chair will
Point Representative Andrea
Romero, Nathan Small and
Jennifer Jones to invite the
honorable President Pro Tem,
Mimi Stewart, and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet
and join session with the House
for the purpose of being
addressed by our distinguished
guests. Speaker.
The chair recognizes
representative Saanski. I ask
unanimous consent that the House
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair and that the
rules be suspended to allow the
seating of guests in the chamber
during the joint session. the
House will send in recess
subject to the call of the
chair.
The current session
Yes
So I asked I asked
about her.
12.
52 or this.
I
How are you?
Yeah
Yeah
got the other er
Yeah
Yeah
Lady
To be
Yeah
Yeah.
That
Mr. Speaker, the sergeant at
Arms.
The Honorable President Prote
Mimi Stewart.
And the honorable members of the
Senate, the sergeant at Arms
escort the honorable President
Pro Tempore to the rostrum.
have over here
And
Joint session of the House the
Senate will come to order. What
is the pleasure of the joint
session.
Madam President,
Chair recognizes Representative
Shipansky. I ask unanimous
consent that we resolve
ourselves into
A committee of the whole House
and Senate to be addressed by
the congresswoman from the first
congressional district of the
state of New Mexico, the
Honorable Melanie Stansbury and
the congressman from the 2nd
Congressional District of the
state of New Mexico, the
Honorable Gabe Vasquez.
If there's no objection, it is
so ordered.
Leave the whole house and Senate
will come to order.
Madam Chair.
She recognized his
representative Hoffman V. Hill.
Oh, no, Representative Japansy.
I ask unanimous consent that the
chair appoint a committee of 6
to escort Congresswoman
Stansbury and Congressman
Vasquez to the House chambers.
If there's no objection, the
chair will appoint.
Senator Hamblin.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Tobiasson.
Representative andres Romero.
Representative small.
And representative Jones.
To escort Congresswoman
Stansbury and Congressman
Mm
So
Madam Chair,
Sergeant
Sergeant of arms.
The Honorable Melanie Stansbury,
congresswoman from the first
congressional district of New
Mexico and the honorable Gabe
Vasquez, congressman of the 2nd
Congressional District of New
Mexico.
Welcome, Congressman.
Congresswoman stands bearing
Congressman Vasquez on behalf of
the New Mexico legislature.
So
The chair recognizes
Congresswoman Melanie Stansbury
for remarks to the joint
session.
Good afternoon.
It's wonderful to be here with
you this afternoon, Madam
Protem, Mr. Speaker, leaders of
the House and the Senate
legislators and friends. It's so
wonderful to be back. I miss
you.
And I'm especially grateful to
have the opportunity to be here
today amongst all of you and my
good friend, Representative Gabe
Vasquez to address the House and
to celebrate all of the work
that we have been doing here on
behalf of the people of New
Mexico.
As we stand here this afternoon,
I believe that we are at a major
inflection point in American
history. Just one week ago, a
new administration took office.
A new Congress began its work
and the New Mexico legislature.
Ushered in a new era, swearing
in the most women in the history
of our state.
And the largest
Female
Legislative majority in
American history.
Girl power and as I was thinking
about it driving up here to
Santa Fe this morning.
I was thinking about how when I
took my first oath of office as
an elected in this chamber just
6 years ago, my class was the
first female Democratic majority
in the House, and now look how
far we've come. It's amazing.
It's inspiring, and when you
look at everything you've
accomplished in just the last
few years, it is truly
extraordinary and
transformational for our state.
We have made New Mexico the
first nation to guarantee early
childhood education, free
college for all to protect
Native American voting rights to
protect civil rights and LGBTQ
rights.
And even though it's not a
legislative accomplishment. Our
lobos are currently number one
in the Western Conference.
What this means is that we have
set New Mexico on a path to
deliver on a promise that is as
big as bold, and as beautiful as
the people of our state, and I
couldn't be more proud of all of
the work that we've done and
everything you are about to do
during this session. And as I
said to many of you the other
night, you are the history
makers, the dragon slayers, the
change makers, and
leaders who are going to
continue to keep this state
moving forward.
You can clap for that.
As a native New Mexican born and
raised in a working family from
Farmington, New Mexico to the
North Valley of Albuquerque. I
believe in the heart of my heart
that we must continue to chart a
course forward with a bold
vision for our people and to
always keep our communities at
the center of our work.
And that is why when I took my
oath of office to become your
congresswoman just 3.5 years
ago. I thought it was critical
to show New Mexico and the world
that our communities would be at
the center of my work. In fact,
after my election in 2021, the
Speaker's office in Washington
DC called and asked how I wanted
to take my oath of office,
because members in Congress can
take their oath on any document
they they choose.
And so I immediately called the
state historian, who many of you
know, and we discussed the
option of my using the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalco.
Because
The significance of that
document, not only for how our
people became a part of the
United States, but also because
it is the living document that
ensures the rights of our
people, not only to citizenship,
but to the lands and waters of
our state.
But there's a twist in this
story because when we went to go
look for a copy of the treaty, I
called a friend of mine who
worked in the library of
Congress, and when they went
down to the shelf to find where
they thought the copy of the
treaty would be, it wasn't
there.
And so I decided as many
countless generations of
Congress people had done before
me to take my oath on the US
Constitution because you really
can't go wrong there. And I
started to get ready to head
down to the floor and just as we
were leaving my office to go
down to the house floor, a
gentleman showed up in white
gloves with a box.
And when he opened the box
inside of it was not only a copy
of the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo. It was the actual
treaty from 1848 on loan from
the Mexican government. They had
taken it out of a case. And so I
walked down to the floor as he
carried it with his white
gloves.
And as I raised my right hand, a
copy of the US Constitution, the
treaty sitting on top of it.
I raised my hand and just as you
did here in this chamber last
week, I took my oath of office
before the Speaker, our creator,
the American people on the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, and
the US Constitution, and I
committed on that day as I do
every day, that I would spend
every single day I am in office
working on behalf of the people
of New Mexico and the promise of
building a future that is as big
and bright and beautiful as we
can possibly imagine.
And so we, here we are today,
3.5 years later, and I am so
deeply proud and honored every
day of all of the
accomplishments we have had on
behalf of the people of New
Mexico and Congress and here in
this body, and I want to share
with you some of the things that
we have been doing in public
safety, we've delivered millions
for our state and local police
to tackle crime and the opioid
epidemic, we funded and led
efforts to invest in our
behavioral health system and
addiction recovery, legislation
to curb the flow of fentanyl
into our communities and made
historic investments in public
safety infrastructure, including
building new fire stations in
the East Mountains, Sandia
Pueblo, and Valencia County that
will literally save lives across
our rural communities.
We've secured millions to invest
in healthcare and housing,
including in Albuquerque's very
first veterans housing campus to
help veterans experiencing
homelessness. We've worked with
state, local, and tribal
partners to secure funding for
health clinics, housing
programs, and food pantry. We
helped pass the largest
expansion in veterans benefits
in decades to help millions of
our veterans who brave
ve ly fought and served for this
country, who were exposed to
burn pits and other stocks
toxins through their service
with the PAC Act.
And we passed legislation to
revitalize our economy, invest
in New Mexico's homegrown
businesses and entrepreneurs. We
passed the largest
infrastructure bill in American
history, the chips in science
act and trades bills that are
investing millions of dollars in
New Mexico's economy, bringing
American-made manufacturing, not
just back to these shores, but
to New Mexico, helping our
people and
our businesses and our
entrepreneurs grow and thrive in
education for our kids, we
passed federal legislation to
support New Mexico's early
childhood education fund, which
you, Mr. Speaker, and countless
others in this chamber spent
over a decade working to get
through this chamber. We've
secured hundreds of millions of
dollars to rebuild schools
across the state, including over
$100 million to
build the Tohajale Navajo Nation
chapter community school. We've
secured tens of millions of
dollars for early childhood
education for Mescalero Apache,
Sandia Pueblo, the Pueblo
cultural Center and Riaoso, and
in land, water, and climate, we
passed the largest climate bill,
not only in the history of the
United States but of any country
on planet Earth and our
delivering literally
millions of dollars to our
electric co ops, our utilities,
and New Mexico's homegrown clean
energy businesses. We funded
millions in water infrastructure
and pipelines across the state,
and we worked alongside you here
just as several months ago to
help secure funding to help in
the devastating wake of the
fires in Riodoso and Mescalero,
and I could not be more grateful
for our communities for your
work. We are also championing
legislation to restore the Rio
Grande and to protect our water
rights to fight for our tribal
and our pueblo water rights here
in New Mexico to return and to
protect the sacred lands of our
sovereign Pueblo and tribal
nations to make sure that our
land grants can access their
historical lands, and we are
championing to get the RIA
radiation exposure Act not only
reauthorized but expanded.
So that our
People
can finally get justice and
compensation for what they have
endured.
And every day.
All across New Mexico, myself
and my staff who are here with
me, are on the front lines
working for New Mexico,
traveling the state, meeting
with our communities, delivering
through our casework to
thousands of New Mexicans who
are struggling with their Social
Security, their disability, and
so much more.
This is the work that my office
does every single day on behalf
of New Mexico, and I want to
thank all of you and all of our
state, local, tribal and
nonprofit partners who are
literally on the ground making
it happen every day, and I want
to take this opportunity to ask
our guests who are sitting on
the rostrum and in the audience
to stand and be acknowledged
because without local leaders
like you, our state would not
move forward.
You are also the change makers
and dragon slayers.
But
We know that we still have a lot
of work ahead of us.
Even absent, the political
climate and the challenging
times that we find ourselves in
the needs of New Mexico's
communities are great, and we
must continue to deliver for
them to protect them and to
protect the values that we hold
most dear, and to do so will
mean that we will have to work
here together in this chamber
and across all aspects of our
government and local leadership.
We will have to reach
across the aisle, we will have
to pass legislation. We will
have to use the courts. We will
have to use our local
communities and where we can, we
must continue to move forward
and to protect our democracy.
And as your congresswoman, I
could not possibly be more proud
to be on the front lines of that
fight in Washington DC, not only
serving New Mexico's first
congressional district and the
entire state. But now serving in
leadership in the House as the
new ranking member of the Doge
Subcommittee and in the Natural
Resources Committee.
The work of these committees
will be enormous, daunting and
difficult to wrap our arms
around, but I know because I
grew up in the North Valley. We
are ready for the fight.
So
I want to leave you all with
this. We know that there will be
many difficult days ahead, and
that we must remain clear-eyed
about the scale of the
challenges we face.
For those of you who are feeling
scared and uncertain about the
future of this country. No, that
we will fight to protect our
communities and especially those
who are most vulnerable. We will
work to ensure that New Mexico
remains a safe haven for
everyone across all of our
communities.
Whether you are an immigrant or
your people have lived here
since time immemorial, whether
your people came up the Camino
Real, whether your people came
here as homesteaders or as
buffalo soldiers or as members
of the AAPI community. Happy
year of the dragon, everyone.
Uh, whether your people hail
from the north, the south, the
west, or the east, whether you
identify as LGBTQ plus or not.
We
will defend the rights and the
freedoms and the democracy of
all New Mexicans, and this is
your home.
And so I say to all of you, do
not give up hope.
Because we have to continue to
keep showing up to keep doing
the work because justice will
prevail and we will continue to
bend the arc of history towards
justice.
And for those of you who are
embracing the changes you are
seeing right now across our
country. I ask of you.
Do not lose your humanity.
Remember that we are your
neighbors.
Remember that there are people
in our communities that need
you.
Remember that you took the oath
of office to serve all New
Mexicans, and we will continue
to do this work together.
And my commitment to all of you
is your congresswoman, just as
it was on that day in June 2021,
when I raised my right hand and
took my oath of office on the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and
the Constitution. My promise to
you is that I will work
fiercely, relentlessly, and with
every ounce of grit,
determination, and heart to
serve our people every single.
day in our nation's capital and
here in New Mexico and to fight
for that big bold and beautiful
vision we have for New Mexico
and our people. So let's get out
there and do this New Mexico.
Mhm
Thank you so much, Congresswoman
Melanie Stansbury.
The chair recognizes congressman
Gabe Vasquez for comments before
the body.
OK
When I started in Mexico,
Gabriel Vasquezicoguo.
My name is Gab Vasquez. I am so
proud to be your congressional
representative for the 2nd
district of New Mexico, and
that's not just the Democrats,
that is to Republicans as well.
Thank you for being here. Those
that attended, I greatly
appreciate it.
The roundhouse
As many of you know,
Represents
The opportunity for us to come
together.
To discuss and advance
legislation that shapes our
state and the future of our
people.
It means unity.
And so in a time of deep
division,
In our nation, New Mexico
continues to be an example for
the rest of the nation. Here our
history runs deep.
Our people are proud and even in
disagreement.
We work peacefully to find
common ground. We uplift all of
our communities, and we work
towards a future that benefits
us all because there's one thing
that we all have in common.
A lot of people up here in the
North, they call it querencia.
E.
It is a love for the place that
we live.
And each of us is responsible
for representing the hopes and
the dreams of the people of New
Mexico.
With this unity and this shared
purpose, I know that we can
achieve remarkable progress
together.
Reflecting on my first term
serving you in Congress in the
2nd district. I'm proud to say
that my service to my district
and that this state has had one
singular focus.
To improve the lives of New
Mexicans.
That starts with the basic
building blocks of healthy
communities, infrastructure
improvements that benefit
everybody, and we've secured
some game changing federal
investments in congressional
district 2. Now just this month,
working closely
With our Secretary, a former
secretary of transportation,
Pete Buttigieg, who by the way,
his parents are Aggies, Go
Aggies, we have a yeah we get
some Aggie love in here.
I like the love suit, uh, but
Uh, Secretary, former Secretary
Butigge's parents actually met
at New Mexico State University.
Now, I'm not saying that's the
reason why we got a $61.8
million grant for the city of
Las Cruces, but it may have had
something to do with it. And the
important part of this is that
that $61.8 million dollar grant.
Paves the way for affordable
housing, citywide connectivity
and road improvements that are
going to spur economic growth.
Now we also secured a $36.1
million grant for calls back.
To improve road conditions for
oil and gas workers, folks that
are traveling in and out of whip
and other conditions, and that
was also a personal ask that I
made of the secretary.
So I want to thank Las Cruces
Mayor Eric Enriquez, who's here
with us today, Mayor stand up.
I want to thank Mayor Pro Tem
Joanna Bencommo, and city
councilor Becky Curran, who are
joining us today as well, please
stand.
And I look forward to working
with you to continue to bring
progress and more jobs to the
region in Donanana County. I'm
also incredibly excited to have
worked with Secretary Buttigieg
to bring $63 million and
actually the two largest
transportation grants of this
type to bring commercial vehicle
charging stations to the
communities of Vado and
Lordsburg. You, you do know
where Bravo is, you guys.
And I'm so proud of that work
because if you don't know your
district as a representative,
you cannot bring these
investments home and for those
communities, these jobs are
going to mean a lot for those
folks that need the construction
jobs and also need their place
in this transportation corridor
that we are building from east
to west.
Now I'm also uh proud to have
spent my time traveling my
district and listening directly
to the needs of our families,
our youth, local governments,
and find ways to improve the
quality of life for our people.
That's why I'm investing half a
million dollars.
To reinvest in the Lordsburg
Community Center.
To fix their bowling alley. It's
a community center for young
kids, but look, we don't even
have a bowling alley in Las
Cruces, dude? You know what it
means? You know what it means
for Lordsburg? It means a lot to
their kids that have an
opportunity to do that. And so
for Hidalgo County, I showed up
because that's what local folks
told me was important to them
and so I'm gonna continue to
support communities like
Lordsburg and that half a
million dollars is going to go
to make sure that kids have a
healthy life in Hidallu County.
Thank you.
Now we're also going to break
ground soon on a modernization
of the food pantry in Hatchie,
Mexico. The Chile capital of the
world, of the universe.
Now this is a targeted
investment of $300,000 300,000
dollars that addresses food
insecurity in Northern Donana
County and thanks to the great
advocacy of our local
representatives thanks to the
great advocacy of Casa de
Peregrinos, we were able to
secure this funding and this is
funding that right now
potentially will be held up in
the federal government, but I'm
going to fight to make sure that
this funding makes it to the
ground, and for that I have to
thank Lorenza Alva, uh, Lorenzo
Alba, who's the executive
director of Casa de Peregrinos,
Lorenzo, if you could stand up,
you all know him.
He's no stranger to this body.
I know when he's done his with
his job at the food pantry, he's
gonna teach lobbyists how to
actually do their job, right?
He's good at getting money.
Uh, but those are just some of
the projects that I'm I'm proud
to champion. Uh, in my district,
we funded wastewater facilities.
We funded, helped fund a new
boys and girls club center in
Las Cruces. Roads and bridges,
but I'm especially proud of my
team's commitment to serving all
New Mexicans and so much of that
is resolving issues with federal
agencies.
Now to date, in my first term,
we resolved over 1200 cases
returning more than $3 million
directly to New Mexicans from
helping veterans secure that the
benefits that they've earned
working with the IRS to get
major unrealized returns to
people and resolving Social
Security issues we've shown what
it means to put people over
politics in this district and so
regardless of where you come
from, you're always welcome in
my office. Now we have one
gentleman that is here today
that is joining me. Somebody
who's become a good friend.
Mr. LJ Baker Jr. who is the
chief of human resources and
strategic initiatives at Sierra
Vista Hospital in Truth or
Consequences. LJ, can you stand
up?
For the service that you do.
Thank you, sir.
Now LJ has been an exemplary
member of our rural community in
my district.
And when LJ's office contacted
me and said that they were at
risk of losing funding that
would impact their operations to
serve Sierra County and the
surrounding areas, we're able to
return more than $2.8 million to
provide healthcare for the
residents of Sierra County,
right, LJ? Yes, sir.
But we can't talk about our
future without tackling head on
some of the serious concerns
that are related to public
safety.
I'm looking forward to seeing
this body bring forth solutions
that create safer, healthier,
and more prosperous communities.
This is an opportunity for
everybody to work together in a
bipartisan way to address the
short and the long term needs to
address crime, mental health,
and judicial reform.
New Mexicans understand that the
path to safer communities begins
with addressing the root causes
of crime and public safety.
And that includes poverty,
domestic violence, addiction,
gun safety, homelessness, and
the lack of economic
opportunity.
So we have to prioritize the
solutions that help our folks
get back on their feet and lead
healthy and productive lives.
That means making smart,
accountable, investments in
education, health care, and
housing as critical components
of a comprehensive public safety
strategy.
So I'm working in Washington to
secure federal funding for
programs that enhance behavioral
health infrastructure, expand
access to mental health care,
especially in our underserved
areas. We also have to ensure
that our law enforcement
agencies have the resources that
they need to keep our community
safe.
That's why I made a $500,000
investment in a new mobile
command center in Luna County,
right in the heart of Demming.
I provided funding for
Albuquerque's real-time crime
center and provided support for
communications upgrades to the
New Mexico State Police and
rural areas. These investments
and those that you will make
during this session.
And power first responders to do
their job effectively and
efficiently.
We must also face the
recruitment crisis.
That we have in local rural, and
tribal communities.
They're struggling to find law
enforcement officers and often
face direct competition with the
state. I'm sure many of you have
heard that.
That's why I've championed the
bipartisan Invest to Protect
Act.
Which would bring additional
funding to small and rural
police departments to recruit
more officers and improve
training to ensure police in our
communities have the personnel
and the skills to be effective.
While they differing opinions of
how to tackle crime issues.
Across New Mexico and the things
that we face head on today.
We have to remember to never
ignore the voices of those
families and those individuals
who have been victims of crime.
Violent domestic property crime
and more. Those who have been
adversely impacted and have a
powerful role to play in this
conversation. We have to listen
to them.
Now, I also represent the
entirety of New Mexico's
US-Mexico border.
And I'm no stranger to the
challenges that we face with our
nation's broken immigration
system.
I grew up on both sides of the
border. I didn't learn English
until I was in 3rd grade.
And I didn't know how to
identify myself when I was just
a 12 year old.
That's why in this very tense
national political environment.
I remain committed to achieving
common sense.
Immigration reform that treats
people humanely and that
modernizes what we're doing at
the border.
I think we can all agree that we
can face and tackle this issue
of crime at the border, the
coyotes and the cartels.
Which exist in Southern Park in
Columbus and in Deming, and we
cannot ignore that. But at the
same time we also have to make
sure that the legacy of
immigration and immigrants who
contribute to our community,
have a fair shot at residency
and citizenship in this country.
And for everybody in the
chambers today, I think you know
the truth that unless you're
Native American, you're an
immigrant too. You're an
immigrant to this country too
and to the state, just like me.
But I do want to make it clear,
mass deportation operations and
the proposed changes to
birthright citizenship are going
to harm our state's economy.
They're going to violate who we
are as Americans. They're going
to violate the United States
Constitution has already been
proposed by President Trump.
Hardworking immigrants
contribute billions, actually
trillions to our economy, from
family farms in my district to
rural small businesses and
emerging industries. I'm going
to continue to find solutions
and not be part of the problem
that is happening in Washington
DC.
Now today I'm also joined by
Minna Lascano. Uh, Mina, will
you stand up? Are you back here,
Mina? Thank you for joining us.
Now Mirna has, she's called New
Mexico home for over 20 years.
And like tens of thousands of
immigrant workers in New Mexico.
She and her husband are
essential workers in key
industries in New Mexico's
economy, including our energy
industry.mira is a domestic
worker and an early childhood
educator. Her husband is a
construction worker, but she and
her husband are key members of
their communities. Vina has been
civically engaged as an APS mom,
a volunteer, and member of El
Centro de Gualal.
Derechos since 2006.
And Mirna's daughters are
following in her footsteps.
And she and her family
epitomized the invaluable
contributions, contributions
that immigrants make to our
state's cultural, economic, and
civic fabric.
I thank you for being here.
And so as we continue to have
this conversation about
immigration enforcement and the
border, uh, which I'm sure you
all see every day when you wake
up on the news and this focus on
violent criminals and not
tearing apart families, and
disrupting local economies. It's
up to all of us to work together
to make sure that that happens
here in New Mexico.
Now there are things that we can
do to stop the flow of fentanyl
from coming into our
communities. And so I'm not
going to drink the tea or the
Kool-Aid from either party. I'm
going to find the solutions that
actually stop fentanyl from
coming into our communities.
And that's why in places like
the Santa Teresa port of entry,
we now have nearly 100%
inspection rate of fentanyl that
are coming into our country as a
part of a pilot program that
should be expanded to every part
of every port of entry so I
introduced a bipartisan bill
called the Stop the fentanyl at
the Border Act.
Working with Republicans to get
this done and guess what?
The administration didn't want
to hear. They didn't want to
actually solve the problem. And
so to my Republican colleagues,
I urge you to help find the
solutions to help support the
technology at the border that is
actually going to stop the
fentanyl crisis from reaching
our communities, our
neighborhoods, our families, and
that we all deeply still care
about. We can do that together.
Now we also face another part of
the immigrant crisis in New
Mexico. We, uh we have uh
Because of our federal dollars
and federal investments,
especially in my district that
places like Halman Air Force
Base, or the federal law
enforcement Training Center in
Artesia or the Otero County uh
detention center or even the
Cibola County Detention Center.
We know that some of our
facilities in our counties and
in our state are going to be
used for detention of migrants
and immigrants. Well, look, one
of the first things I did when I
became a congressperson was uh a
surprise visit to the Sebola
County Detention Center, and I
can tell you that some of the
condition.
that folks are living under
should not be conditions that
any of us as Americans should be
proud of. That's why I sponsored
the Humane Accountability Act to
make sure that anyone that is
detained in the state is treated
with respect, dignity, and the
humanity that they deserve.
And so we have a unique
opportunity as New Mexicans.
To lead by example, showing the
nation how collaboration,
innovation, and compassion can
address the complex challenges
that we, that we face today.
While honoring our immigrant
heritage and strengthening our
communities.
Now speaking of bipartisanship,
and my colleague and good friend
Representative Stansbury talked
about this.
There's never been stronger
bipartisan support in Congress
for the expansion and the
extension of the radiation
exposure compensation Act. We're
going to get RIA done, guys, we
will.
Now in the last Congress we had
Senator Mitch McConnell.
The former leader of the Senate,
we had leader Hakeem Jeffries,
and we had uh uh our leader in
the Senate, Chuck Schumer, all
agreed.
Enrica, there's one person that
stopped it.
As Speaker Mike Johnson.
Now, when we talk about the
original RICA and the exposure.
Of our nation's nuclear testing
program and mining, the fact
that New Mexico was left out in
our original legislation when we
bear the brunt, when our
communities bear the brunt of
that research, of those first
bombs that were set off here in
our state is unfathomable to me.
And so we know that our tribal
communities, uranium miners,
downwinders, and others that
have been impacted by our
nation's nuclear programs have
faced devastating generational
illnesses like cancer and
respiratory diseases that have
been ignored by Congress for
decades. So I want to thank
today.
My friend Tula Rosa Mayor Cookie
for joining me. You're a strong
supporter of John Winers, and I
know that we're in the fight
together to get RICA passed.
Thank you, Mayor Cookie, for
being here.
And there's larger health care
issues that we have to address
together health care delivery
and affordability in New Mexico
is a complex challenge.
That touches the lives of every
New Mexican.
At some point in our lives, we
will face moments.
Where we have to step away from
work, whether that's to welcome
a child to our family, recover
from illness, or care for a
loved one.
Yet for far too many, these
moments come with a crushing
burden of financial insecurity,
and this has to change, and
that's the reason that I support
paid family and medical leave in
this session and this
legislature.
It is a vital step forward to
bring the dignity and the care
to our state's workers and their
families. It's a moral
imperative and it's a practical
solution that strengthens our
families. It builds healthier
communities, fuels our economy,
and so by joining the growing
numbers of states that are
actually leading on this issue,
New Mexico can affirm its values
of compassion and equity.
Thank you all for, thank you to
all the advocates that are here
who are also leading on this
issue. I really appreciate it.
Now lastly,
In the last few days, we faced
some difficult times. I was just
in Zuni Pueblo. I was in Grants,
New Mexico. I was at Laguna
Pueblo two days ago. Yesterday I
was in Albuquerque talking to
homeless providers, and we had
an agenda of what we wanted to
talk about. And a lot of that
was about federal grants and
federal support. What we found
was complete chaos and
dysfunction at every level from
people trying to make sure that
they get their Medicaid benefits
to grants that were coming down
to homeless and housing provider
services that weren't sure if
they were going to get their
federal
dollars and so we know that
what's happening right now with
the administration is a huge
threat. I want to ensure that
everybody in here that serves
veterans that serves any type of
uh community service that our
entire New Mexico delegation is
going to stand strong in the
fight against this
administration to freeze any
federal funds that are coming to
our communities. You can, you
can count on that.
And so the last thing I want to
mention is I represent one of
the largest oil and gas
producing districts in the
country.
And we have to ensure that those
folks who are working in oil and
gas are valued not just for
their labor.
But for their lives, their
families and their contributions
to their communities. I
introduced in the last Congress
the energy workers Health
Improvement Compensation Fund
Act.
Because the workers who feel our
energy economy deserve the same
access to healthcare benefits
that the executives and the CEOs
also enjoy.
And these workers
They face occupational risks,
their health and safety should
be a priority and not a
bargaining chip, and we can't
stand by as these essential
individuals are denied the care
that they need while
corporations prioritize their
out of state profits, profits.
And so this legislation that I
introduced ensures those who are
powering our energy economy in
the Southeast are protected and
afforded the same rights as the
shareholders and the out of
state CEOs who are in Texas
enjoying the bounty and reaping
the benefits of New Mexico's oil
and gas industry.
Now
Now today I'm joined by Alonso.
Alonso, you're here? If you can
stand up, thank you, Alonso.
Alonso has lived in Artesia for
21 years.
And he's been working in the oil
and gas sector for 2 years in
Congress, I'm making sure that
Alonso and his families and
other energy workers have a
representative who's going to
fight for them and not for the
companies. So thank you, Alonso
for being here with us today. I
appreciate you making the drive.
And so now more than ever, we
have to take action together to
make sure that every family in
New Mexico can thrive without
the looming threat of some of
these, uh, actions we've seen
from the administration from
hunger insecurity, from lack of
economic opportunity from water
that's contaminated.
So as we look ahead, I'm
inspired by the resilience and
the determination of the
Mexicans, our shared values,
family, community, and a
commitment to justice will help
guide us in this work. Let's
continue to break down silos
between federal and state
governments.
Working hand in hand to address
the challenges we face and seize
the opportunities before us.
Thank you for your dedication to
our great state. I'm honored to
serve alongside you muchas
gracias Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you so much Congressman
Gabe Vasquez.
Madam Chair
She recognizes Representative
Shipansky.
I ask unanimous consent that the
whole House and Senate rise and
report progress.
The joint session of the House
and Senate will come to order.
Madam Chair.
The chair recognizes
Representative Japansky. I ask
unanimous consent that the joint
session of the House and Senate
now be dissolved.
If there's no objection, it is
so ordered.
Oh no
That's
only once a week right now.
You know that, you know, you
know the 3.
This is every day.
This one.
I got, I got 10 new ones.
I never wear the same one. Must
be nice to be a one percenter.
Ma, be nice to be home for a
raise your taxes.
I don't
so
6
How did it go?
Did anything
makes it interesting, I
23
Members don't go anywhere.
Please stay.
In the vicinity while our guests
exit, we will reconvene
Rachel Bs, I'm with Albuquerque
Healthcare for the Homeless.
Thanks for all your work.
Right, folks, we're still in
session. We, we have to, um, we
have to res at some point, um,
can't just stay here all day.
Although you're welcome to.
Uh, thank you to our
distinguished guest, uh,
Congressman Gaby Vasquez and
Congresswoman Melanie Stansbury
for that, uh, wonderful report
back to your legislature, uh,
and of course a big welcome to
all of your.
Guest here on the floor,
dignitaries, city councilors,
mayors.
Law enforcement.
Advocates and others.
Gentle lady from
Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we go
to the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered
announcements.
The committee meetings.
Gent lady from Berlio, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the House
Health and Human Services
Committee will start right on
time at 8:30 if we get bodies in
the room, so I'm begging you to
be there 307
other announcements?
OK, uh, members, uh, I've got,
uh, a couple of items.
House Bill 43.
was referred to how health and
how government at the request of
the chair of House Health.
We will drop the health referral
and instead add house consumer
public affairs. That's House
Bill 43, sponsored by
Representative Keats, re
referred to house Consumer
Public Affairs.
Thence House government
elections and Indian affairs.
I also have another, uh, bit of
news, but before I go to those
news, the young lady from Los
Alamos and Santa Fe with an
announcement. um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I just want to remind
everyone that your house
judiciary Committee will be
having an informational meeting
tomorrow starting at 1:30 in
room 309, and also for the
members' information and yours
as well, Mr. Speaker, we will
start hearing bills next Monday.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker
announcements.
Familio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
labor veterans and Military
Affairs will be meeting today at
1:30 in room 315. Thank you.
Thank you members take note.
Members, we will not be meeting
on the floor tomorrow.
Thank you.
But I do know that committees
will be meeting in the morning
and in the afternoon, so, um, I
guess not technically a day off
for most of us, for some of you,
I guess technically a day off.
Um, so I hope you enjoy, get
some rest, be safe out there.
And uh we will see you on
Monday, gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. Monday morning.
The house will stand in recess
until 10:30 Monday morning.
