Presentative Armstrong.
Representative Gorigo.
Representative Brown.
Representative Doe,
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vice Chalata, here.
De la Cruz here.
Start again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Chairman, we're here,
uh, we're here in Hospital 23
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members.
HP 3 is, is, uh.
Seeking to create a new category
of license plate for.
Vehicles that are only
occasionally used, they are
typically used in parades.
Or for shows
Right now, New Mexico has a
plate that.
Is specifically for trucks and
cars.
That does the same thing as this
proposed bill would do, and I
brought a sample of what the
horseless carriage place looked
like.
So that's it there.
And
We have
Over 60,000.
Motorcyclists that are
registered in New Mexico, not,
not registered but that are
insured. So that's just drivers
so that's a significant amount
of vehicles, motorcycles, out in
the public.
Many of them, and I'm, I'm an
owner of.
1982 Harley Davidson.
They call a shovel head, and it
would qualify, and I know so
many.
A classic motorcycle owners that
would benefit from having this
plate.
And, and the reason that the
original horseless carriage was
enacted, it was because.
The state recognizes Mr.
Chairman, that.
that
We want to preserve classic
vehicles. We want to preserve
whether they're trucks or cars
or even heavy vehicles, big
semis are sometimes classified
in the same category.
And so Chairman, this would do
the same thing.
Uh, for motorcycles, there is no
mockup, but this is roughly the
size of a motorcycle plate.
And the only difference is that
it would be the horseless
carriage. I'm sorry, the iron
horse.
Mr. Chairman, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We will
go to public comment.
Anyone who is in favor of
Hospital 23 in the audience,
please raise your hands. Anyone
in opposition?
Do we have anyone online that is
in opposition to HB 23.
No, Mister Chair,
we have anyone that is in
support of No, Mister Chair.
Thank you. And now we will go to
committee questions.
Representative Westrom.
Chairman and Mr. Chairman.
So basically all you're asking
design is that.
Or you're gonna actually have
the.
plates printed.
They will need to be printed,
Mr. Chair, uh.
Representative Lindstrom, it's a
modest amount if you looked at
the FIR for for implementing
this.
Particular plate
But it's, it's, I think it it
really recognizes that we want
to preserve. So I, I was just
curious because I read the first
couple lines, Mr. Chairman, and
it said,
For the new design.
But, and I didn't catch Mr.
Chairman what you showed us
there. What is, what is that?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We
don't have a mockup. There's
just a size. Oh, I see the size
of a motorcycle. I have no idea
what it might look like, but.
If you look at the classic
vehicle car truck plate. There's
nothing particularly different
about it except that it says
horses carriage.
I suspect that the motorcycle
will look exactly like a
motorcycle plates, except we
have.
Iron Horse
I see. OK, thank you.
Any other comments from the
committee?
Questions? No. Do I have a
motion?
I'll move a do pass, Mr.
Chairman.
We have a duplicized portion
from Representative Rora. Do you
have a second?
from Representative Armstrong.
of the world,
please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Rego.
Representative Brown.
Representative Dell
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Hochman B. Hill.
Representative Jones, yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Chalata? Yes.
De la Cruz.
Yeah. OK, Mr. Chair, you have a
do pass.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
members.
has asked me to continue, so
we'll continue with uh HP 99.
Our repairable vehicle
certificates. I don't see
representative.
Gregor nor representative,
OK, so we'll continue. We'll go
down to house.
I
Mr. Scala.
Oh, OK,
just walking.
Thank you, we'll just pause for
a moment.
Representative Porego.
Re
Good morning. Sorry, I was a few
minutes late.
I was in my office trying to get
out of there, um, so, uh, the
bill before you.
Um
Uh, presented by, uh,
Representative Anna Nornu and
myself is for non-repairable
vehicle certificates, um, Mr.
Chair, and, uh.
Mr. Vice Chair and members, we
presented this to you last week,
and here she is.
And uh we did make some
amendments to the bill. So you
do have an amendment
before you. Thank you.
So we have 2 different
amendments.
Which, which one are we looking
at if you have the number for
that one, please.
OK, so the amendment.
we adopted the men today we are
adopting the amendment to one.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you for the clarification, and
if you could please explain the
amendment.
Thanks. So we, after speaking
with.
The members of the towing
community that had issue with
the first draft of the
amendment, we came to this
agreement together, so after um
on page 11 line 1.
We are inserting the language
after paying applicable towing
and stowing charge storage
charges and shall be available
only for private beauty and um.
Thank you, Representative uh
committee, do we have a motion?
I move the amendment for
discussion.
Representative Ramirez both the
the amendment for discussion.
OK, 2nd Representative Hackman.
Any questions?
Committee, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
only question I had, it sounds
as though you made the
corrections that the committee
had raised at the last meeting.
So
When you're ready, I'd move for
adoption.
Representative, please.
But
Mr. Chairman, I've moved for
adoption of the amendment.
I have a second.
Seconded by Representative
Romero.
You have an amended bill.
I
But we, we did public comment,
uh, the first time around on
this bill, so now if we we go go
to uh.
Any questions that committee
members may have?
OK.
Peter Armstrong.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you uh for this amendment,
so um.
You excluded commercial
vehicles.
Is that correct? And, and
thinking.
was at the request. OK.
Thank you for that. I, I just
wanted to make sure that was.
Thank you. Any other questions?
No, OK.
committee, do I have a motion?
Rivers of Lustrum has moved to
Du pastor I have a second.
Oh, I submitted, I'm sorry.
Do I have a second?
Fuck it.
Seconded by Representative
Hernandez.
I have a role.
Representative Armstrong. Yes.
Representative Borigo.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative Do.
Representative Hernandez. Yes.
Representative Hochman B Hill.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Vice Chalata.
Yes.
De la Cruz, yes.
Representative
Do have a due pass as amended.
Thank you.
Thank you, Vice Chair.
Moving on to HB 148 autonomous
Vehicle Act, Representative
Hock.
Go ahead and begin when
Mr. Chairman, members of the
House Bill 148, which would
enact the autonomous motor
Vehicle Act.
Um, the pills and ultimately uh
commercial operations of
autonomous vehicles designed to
um enable us to have both a
regulatory, um, scheme that
would.
That vehicles would be under and
then also establish um safety
and reporting requirements for
those vehicles. So, um, it does
5 core things, uh, first it it
uh establishes testing and
safety plans that need to be
submitted to DOT to allow for
these types of vehicle
operations, uh, requires for um,
it creates the a commercial
driver's license endorsement,
uh, it would require a specific
insurance requirements, um, that
would be and it would also.
uh require the presence of a
human operator in the in these
vehicles until the year 2036 to
take over and us being in the
cab to take over, uh, when the
time requires at dispers to on
my right who are gonna.
Please introduce yourselves.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Mike
Steers, I'm an attorney in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Thank you, member's question.
Oh, let's go to the audience
first. Is there anyone in favor?
Raise your hand.
If you wish to speak, please.
Lined up behind the presenters.
Mr. Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Andrew
Palmer. I'm the secretary
treasurer of Teamsters Local
492.
I represent 2800 hardworking
warehouse people as well as
drivers in the state of New
Mexico.
We are in favor of this bill. We
strongly support this bill. It
will keep
The public safe during the
testing phase, and it'll also
keep drivers in the seat of
wheels of behind the wheel.
Those drivers depend on this job
to support their families, and
we strongly
Ask for your we strongly
recommend.
This bill for your consideration
and your support. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the Committee John Liputes with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor, representing over 40,000
workers throughout the state,
both the public and private
sector. Uh, we have been in
support of this measure for the
last number of years, um, and
had a chance to talk to a number
of committee members about this
over the years, um, as stated by
my colleague, uh, Mr. Palmer,
uh, we really view this as a
public safety measure more than
anything, uh, you know, we're,
we're talking about vehicles
that weigh.
Tons that uh are are going down
our streets and um the, the very
thought that potentially
something could go wrong with an
autonomous vehicle and have
nobody in a cab to correct the
error is terrifying. Um, I would
imagine all of you would agree
with that as well. We are not
talking about stifling any
industry or or suppressing any
new technology, but, uh, we urge
your support of this measure.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of
committee Juliana Ku with the
New Mexico trial Lawyers
Association, um, Mr. Lipshut
stated it really well. Our
members are seeing um cases that
are horrifying result in
lifelong injuries with these
semi-vehicle collisions, there
isn't data in New Mexico to
separate out which ones are
driverless and which ones
aren't, but this is a common
sense bill to try to prevent
what we're seeing in other
states, which is driverless
technology.
That isn't quite there, where we
just need a human being in the
cab to take over if something
goes wrong. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online that wishes to speak in
favor.
No, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Do we have those in
the audience that are in
opposition to the bill.
Please, uh, if you wish to
speak, line up behind the
presenters.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Rickie Lee
Chavez, and I'm here today on
the.
That's like
autonomous vehicle industry
association to express their
concerns with House Bill 148.
The association appreciates the
work of Madam Whip and her
dedication to the state of New
Mexico. For multiple years now,
New Mexico has supported AV
deployment under a statutory
framework that authorizes AV
operations as AV deployments
expand this framework as
positioned New Mexico to attract
the many safety, mobility, and
economic benefits of AVs.
Unfortunately, House Bill
48 would erase the progress New
Mexico has made and would set
the state back by imposing a
clear ban on Avis and permanent
restrictions on AB trucks, AB
companies cannot scale their
technology with these
restrictions. ABs have built a
significant safety record
through more than a dozen years
of deployment and development,
and vehicles operated by our
members have driven more than 70
million autonomous miles on
public roads in the US alone.
The safety record is supported
by data collected by the federal
government. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Hi, good morning, chair members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, public policy
director for the Mexico Chamber
of Commerce here to express our
opposition to House Bill 148.
Autonomous trucking helps fill a
growing gap in the workforce
industry. The American Trucking
Association estimates that right
now, there are 78,000 drivers
short, and by 2031, there'll be
160,000 drivers short. So
autonomous trucks are here to
complement, not replace human
drivers, handling long haul
routes that are difficult to
fill, while allowing truckers to
focus on shorter, safer, higher
quality jobs. Banning autonomous
trucks will put New Mexico at a
disadvantage compared to
neighboring states that are
welcoming this technology with
major freight quarters like the
I-40, we should be attracting
this investment. States that
support AV trucking will see job
creation while New Mexico will
be left behind. Autonomous
trucks improve safety. A recent
study showed that over 3.8
million miles driven without a
human in the driver's seat
resulted in zero fatalities and
76% fewer accidents compared to
human vehicles. We're not saying
the technology is perfect, but
it is far safer than humans.
New Mexico already has a strong
regulatory framework for
everyone.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico ADA, the statewide
economic development
Professional Association, and we
do stand in opposition to the
legislation. Our members work
hard throughout every community
to attract investment and create
jobs here in New Mexico, but in
order to do that, we need to
remain competitive in our
regulatory environment. Uh, this
bill makes you New Mexico
unique, but not in a good way.
It goes beyond federal
standards, it goes beyond
standards that other state or
neighbor states have. And so we
really do have
at the end of the day, this will
deter investment in New Mexico,
uh, from these types of
companies investing here,
creating jobs here, doing
logistics here in New Mexico and
just to, to add on to the point
Miss Riley had too. We made
investments in the I-40 trade
corridor, uh, this will really
set that back. We want to
attract to that investment
again. We do stand in
opposition.
Good morning, Chair de la Cruz
and esteemed committee members.
My name is Hope Ledford and
representing Chamber of Progress
and respectful opposition to the
spill, Chamber of Progress is a
tech industry coalition
advocating for the progressive
future of tech and inclusive
access to that future, our
partners include innovators like
Aurora, Wemo, and Zux, but they
do not have a vote or veto on
our positions. We respectfully
urge you to oppose HB 148, which
would severely limit AV
operations in New Mexico, like
to echo the concerns of those
who spoke before me and um
beyond safety.
expand transportation access for
New Mexicans with disabilities,
Avis could mean greater
independence and access to jobs,
education, healthcare, and more.
Um, a study by the National
Disability Institute found that
widespread adoption of AVs could
connect people with disabilities
with over 4 million jobs, um,
for these reasons, we, uh,
respectfully ask you to.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online that's in this
opposition? Yes, Mr. Chair, we
have Larry Sontag. Good morning,
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, Larry Sontag here on
behalf of the New Mexico
Business Coalition. We oppose
this unnecessary bill that would
repeal work that was done in
2021. Since then, autonomous
vehicles have established an
incredible safety record in our
state.
They've been safely tested in
New Mexico roads for years
without a single injury, so it's
hard to understand why this
will, this bill would be
necessary.
New Mexico's already benefiting
from autonomous technology. The
recent article in Santa Fe, New
Mexican announced
Uh, accompanied by the name of
Kodiak has done
Tested driverless truck.
Trucking service on private oil
and gas roads in the Permian
Basin. These trucks are already
creating jobs in New Mexico and
this company Kodiak, plans to
add 2 people in the Permian
Basin by the end of March.
Additionally, other trucking
companies have announced plans
to operate in New Mexico this
year, bringing efficiency and
jobs. We encourage you to vote
no on House Bill 148. Thank you.
Mia
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Mia Peterson. I am the
executive director and CEO for
the New Mexico Technology
Council.
NMTC represents over 147 members
across industry verticals
throughout the state, and we are
the voice of technology for the
state of New Mexico.
We are in opposition to this
bill for reasons similar to um
what others have already stated.
Um, you know, this pill really
does limit our ability to be
competitive um with industry and
also with workforce development
as we continue to move into a
progressive era of technology
that will enable people with
disabilities to have access and
provide high paying jobs. We are
concerned that HB 148 limits New
Mexico's potential to
stay current.
With those
Capabilities. Thank you for your
time today.
That is all we have, Mr. Chair.
Actually, we just have one more
that came up.
A Demoy Hill
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Sarah Travis. I am the
National Federation of the Blind
of New Mexico president and our
organization uh represents
around 100+ blind New Mexicans,
and as a blind person, I use a
guide dog and if the bill HB 148
is passed, the requirement for a
licensed driver to be in the
vehicle would
Cause potential discrimination,
uh, against me and my guide dog
as I currently have with uh Reer
companies, and I really opposed
this HB 148 bill. I strongly,
strongly recommend that this
bill is is voted no, um, because
it would prevent uh continued,
um,
Restrictions and lack of
independence for those of us who
are are blind.
Thank you.
That is all we have missed your
chair.
Thank you. That concludes our
public comment, uh, members, we
have a representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um.
No.
Whip
For the villa. OK, so I, I.
I just have some questions.
So this, I heard the
presentation, some people who
were opposed talking about them
wanting this delayed during the
testing phase.
Do you think 2036 isn't a why
2036, that's over a decade.
Of what we're defining as a
testing phase.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, represent.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Doo, um.
When the federal government
evaluates vehicle safety. They
Look at the number of deaths,
uh, caused by crashes for 100
million.
vehicle miles traveled. And so,
I think one of the uh statistics
that was thrown out there a
couple of minutes ago was that
there's been 3.6 million vehicle
miles traveled.
Without um a reported crash
which
We don't really have the data to
support that because there's no
requirement for these companies
to submit the data.
But I think the the 10 year
requirement is, um, is a
reasonable time to uh
To allow for that testing to
happen.
Um, so that we can have the,
have the data to be able to
evaluate uh safety.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. I'm Adam Whip, and
why not just change, why not
just require these organizations
to submit the results. So
they're testing with less,
within a shorter time frame
rather than a decade, more than
a decade.
Um, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
um, Representative Dao, um.
I think that
But the idea is just that these
vehicles are unproven. They,
their safety is unproven and um
having the requirements, there's
a human in the, in the vehicle
as a backup, just uh as a
reasonable safeguard so that
In the event that there is a,
there's a failure of the system
that there's somebody there who
can take over because we, there
have been incidents.
Not, not reported in New Mexico,
but in other states where there
have been.
Uh, people trapped underneath,
driverless taxi cabs, um,
driverless Ubers have been have
run over people reported
recently where there is a glitch
in some
Um,
driverless taxi cab that started
spinning around in circles, just
driving around in circles.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's,
that's a lot more than I asked
for, but thank you. So that you
just, this is the alternative
that you want to do. Um, and
does this bill put any
restrictions on the current
testing that we have in New
Mexico is a stop.
Cause I, I remember
something, it's been a while and
Representative Lindstrom's area
where we were going to test.
Driverless vehicles. Is this
gonna change current law and
prohibit the type of testing
that we've been doing.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative I
know it does not prohibit
testing.
It continues to allow the
testing of driverless vehicles
and driverless semi trucks. It
just requires more.
Um, transparency and
accountability by these
companies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, whip. Um, I had looked at
some handouts that I was
getting, so San Francisco, Los
Angeles, Phoenix and right
shortly behind them is Austin,
Atlanta, Georgia, Washington,
DC. I'm just thinking about
their population density versus
ours. I mean, I think my
district is like 2 people per
square mile. You would think
that we're exactly the right
place to be doing this kind of
testing or trying this stuff
out, um, but I think what
convinced me the most was the
federation, the National
Federation on the blind. I had
not thought
the perspective of mobility and
how important this is for people
having independence, and how,
how many barriers they have with
traditional transportation. And
how do you respond, Mr. Chair
and whip, to the folks that are.
Finally finding this mobility
and the freedom to travel in the
ways that we take advantage we
take for granted, um, when
they're visually impaired or
have other barriers or service
dogs or those types.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, uh, this bill would not
prohibit the testing of those
vehicles. Uh, as far as I know,
there are no commercially
available services, uh, as far
as autonomous, um,
Taxi cabs or, or whatever the
case may be for, for blind
people and maybe I, maybe I just
don't know about them, but um.
This bill is certainly not
prohibit that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd like
to thank the whip and the panel
for the presentation today, but
I, I need to be very clear. I've
got some major issues with the
bill, Mr. Chairman, and if I, if
I may, I'd like to start with
the um.
Disco impact report. I'm looking
on page 3, you guys have, have a
copy of that. Um,
Representative Len's term, we
do, yes. OK.
Thank you. Um, I'm looking at
the second paragraph where it
states the bill includes a new
commercial driver's license,
endorsement for autonomous
commercial vehicles. So, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, I'd like to ask the
um
Expert
The defined specifically how the
federal law classifies
commercial AV as standard class
A, B, or C vehicles.
Because the way this reads, Mr.
Chair, is that everybody in any
of those classes are gonna have
to have a driver's license, so
can you please explain what the
differences are.
differences and
so, uh, 26,000. Excuse me, Mr.
Chairman, what it says here is
federal law classifies
commercial ABs as standard Class
A, B, or C vehicles.
Um, when, uh, stationary,
meaning drivers with the
appropriate class endorsement.
And operate them without an
additional AV endorsement under
the federal rules.
So Mr. Chairman, I'm asking the
expert.
For examples of Class A, Class
B, and Class C vehicles in New
Mexico.
The changes are the, the, the
classifications under the
current law are the same. There
is no current endorsement for
autonomous vehicles.
Class A driver can be a Class A
truck while it is being tested
currently.
That's not what I asked Mr.
Chairman, but I asked is the
present if they, if you don't
know that's OK, I'm just trying
to get it around, get my head
around it when the federal law
classifies autonomous vehicles
as standard Class A, B, or C
vehicles, I'd like to know what
those vehicles are in the state
of New Mexico.
If they're semis and they're
class A, just that's what I'm
really looking for is I'd like
to know what those are.
And if we don't know it's OK,
I'm just trying to get my head
around it, Mr. Chairman,
OK is normally a box truck,
something is smaller, a class A
the weight.
And she said it's based on
weight.
Anything under 26,000 pounds
OK,
so it would
or C vehicles, it would be
something like aedex van or
something like that be more of a
FedEx fan of of the uh a box or
a small uh with the continued
paragraph says is.
When stationary, meaning drivers
with the appropriate class
endorsement can operate them
without an additional Ay
endorsement under the federal
laws, this the state specific
endorsement would not provide
any practical benefit and could
create regulatory misalignment.
Do you have a comment on that
experts, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
Representative Lustrom, the, uh,
federal government does not.
Currently have any driverless
vehicles. That's correct.
Um, there have been several, um,
Recommendations though by uh
some federal agencies, I believe
it was um.
uh
I think it was the National
Highway Traffic Safety
Administration.
That recommended the states of
vehicles.
And uh states do have the
specific discretion under 49 CFR
section 383.93.
Um, to create additions like
this.
OK, so you would basically in
this bill, Mr. Chairman, be
asking that.
An additional driver's license
for AV be done in conjunction
with what the feds are doing.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Lungstrom, not an additional
license. OK, what, what, what's
the difference, Mr. Chairman?
Um, I'll defer to Mr. McCarty.
OK, thanks. I, I possess a CDL
outside of a uh bus endorsement,
but being in a in a autonomous
vehicle doesn't mean that I am
qualified. I would need specific
training to that to be able to
take over should something
happen, that would. So you're
saying, Mr. Chairman, uh, expert
that
There'd be an additional
training that would give you
that endorsement on top of your
other CDL
endorsement. it's a hazmat air
brakes pass. OK, so Mr.
Chairman, I, I think one of the
major issues that I have here,
and I do believe that um a 10
year period is suppressing
technology.
The way technology moves today,
I mean, just think about how
quick it moves with this.
Just think of how quick it's
been moving with all computer
technology to say that we would
have um.
A 10 year sunset on something
like this.
Makes me believe that the states
that surround New Mexico would
be far more advanced in their
technology and their testing.
I think 10 years is a lifetime.
I mean, when it comes to this
kind of development.
It, it seems to me that.
It would be suppressing.
And we, as a, as a state have
promoted as one of our
competitive advantages. Now all
of a sudden, all of a sudden
we're saying no, we've chairman,
we would be looking specifically
at everybody else around us.
Already Mr. Chairman, seen as a
bridge state for things, uh,
there has been testing, Mr.
Chairman, in New Mexico at one
time, uh, there was a company
out of Albuquerque that was
testing on I-40 I-40 east.
It wouldn't do testing, uh, to
the west because of all the
delays we have on I-40.
As I mentioned to this committee
a few weeks ago, we've had.
Uh, as long as 11 hours that
people were stranded on I-40.
Uh, just because of delays, we
can't test them.
Uh, because nobody's moving.
But uh I, I am very concerned
about that piece, Mr. Chairman,
and again, I, I guess I didn't
understand the reason for 10
years, and if we could have one
of the experts talk about that.
Um
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Langstrom, that the reason for
the 10 years is to provide an
additional uh a reasonable time
for uh testing of these vehicles
before they are commercially
deployed.
Um, so that we're in this phase
where um if there's a failure of
the system.
There's a backup, a human drive.
So, Mr. Chairman, do we really
think that the surrounding
states are going to take 10
years before they certify, I
think that's not a reasonable
amount of time. I think
technology changes every hour of
of of our life and um I think
that's way, way too long, Mr.
Chairman and committee.
When it comes to technology
development, um.
There's significant issues that
are raised on page 3 on the FIR.
Um
I just think, Mr. Chairman, that
this is the kind of thing that
would be very good to look at in
the interim.
Uh, we all want safety. Let me
put that out there. We want
safety.
Everybody does, but I think that
when we're looking at
suppressing technology, not
clear on how this would be
regulated.
Um
I, I just feel like it might be
best if it was looked at during
the interim. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, presenters.
Representative leader from
sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
thank you to the presenters for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
do you happen to know if we have
data, um, that shows a shortage
of truck drivers and.
the state or in New Mexico
specifically.
Through the church don't have
any specific data. There's
always a.
To help drivers in the state
maintain their jobs
well.
This bill would take the wing.
Actually, Mr. Chairman, we have
a shortage of 78,000 truck
drivers.
Um
Ross.
I'm not sure if that's in the
state, but
I know that there's, there is a
shortage and so Mr. Chairman,
um, Madam Whip.
Um
What do you think about the
You know, in New Mexico passed
the statutory framework for
autonomous vehicles just 4 years
ago.
And so uh with lots of
stakeholders at the table.
And now we're coming back to to
change it before we're actually
even getting started on the on
the um.
On the whole process of making
sure that we can do this. Uh,
this multi-year process was
through um and enacted through
the formal rulemaking process
and, and all the contributors
were there.
Uh, one of the things that I'm
concerned about in the FIR is.
Um, the insurance that's gonna
be required, uh, specifically.
Or uh EVs or for the autonomous
vehicles.
And you talk a little bit about
why the change?
Um, Mr. Chair, Leader Armstrong,
um.
The New Mexico Department of
Transportation already has
regulations that require these
companies for semi trucks.
Um
To have $5 million of insurance.
And so that's already the
requirement and most of these,
all these companies that are
operating in New Mexico.
You maintain $5 million. Mr.
Chairman, um.
Uh
Representative, the bill amends
this section of the current law
requiring drivers to have
insurance to include coverage.
So we're adding coverage.
Um, Mr. Chair, Leader Armstrong,
I'm not sure what you mean by
adding coverage. Um, it would,
it would
Raise the statutory amount, um.
Or driverless semi trucks to $5
million. Uh, that's something
they already have something
that's already required under
the state regulations.
OK.
Um
And Mr. Chairman, um, I wanted
to go a little bit further into
the the creating of the new
endorsement.
And how would that it looks it
looks like a.
The bill would require taxation
and revenue to create a new
endorsement. And do we have
anybody who does that
endorsement now in other states
or do other states require this
endorsement?
your chair, Leader Armstrong.
I'm not aware of any other
states that currently require
this. It's something that was
recommended by the
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration.
Um, and a report several years
ago, uh, I think New Mexico
maybe alone. I'm, I'm not.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, pardon me. Thank you,
uh, Madam Representative.
Thank you, Peter Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Whip and your guests.
Um
You know, as I think about this,
I mean, I, I never thought I'd
be sitting up here talking about
driverless vehicles. Um, it
really is kind of a sci-fi into
the future, sort of thing, and
it's really a learning
experience for me because I
didn't actually when I saw this
bill, I didn't even know that we
had this happening in New
Mexico, um, one of the things
that I think about uh and
thinking about was the
technology for this type of.
industry, um, probably being out
of state.
And how we attract that
technology into into New Mexico,
so that we're not just um
benefiting from this whole
type of industry, but we're also
bringing the technology, um,
center stage to New Mexico, um,
and I, I don't.
I, I have not heard and maybe
I'm wrong, but is there
technology like that in New
Mexico already that, you know,
accompanies that create this
technology.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brego.
Currently this bill does not
limit testing.
It doesn't limit the companies
from coming had a company called
Twerk as Representative
Lundstrom spoke earlier, who
tested from Albuquerque East.
But the whole time they tested,
there was still 1 or 2 people in
that truck all through the
testing. All this bill does is
to continue to allow a driver to
be in there and have that driver
trained properly.
To handle the technologies that
are gonna be put in there you
witness, um, I, I appreciate
that. I'm just asking out of the
thinking out of the box, um, and
I understand the bill doesn't
have that here, but I'm just
wondering if we've been, you
know, if our economic
development folks are thinking
about attracting more of this
type of technology into New
Mexico or is it something? I
mean, I think I'm just putting
it out there, Mr. Chair, um, I
be thinking about into the
future because this is sort of
the way of the world.
that we're going in, um, the
other question that I have, uh,
and I'm just gonna put that out
on the table. I, I just think
that that's something that we
should be thinking about.
Um, because we shouldn't be
depending on other states to
have that technology and
bringing it into our state. It's
also more costly that way, um,
but also, um,
The bill analysis and on page 3,
it says HP 148 poses the risk of
conflict with federal
regulations regarding the
operation and safety of Avis, as
well as with the classification
of operating operators under
federal CDL regulations, and I
just wondered if you would
comment on that.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Brigo, there are no current
federal regulations or laws, uh,
Specific to driverless vehicles.
So I don't know where that's
coming from. They would not be
in conflict with any federal
rules or regulations currently.
Mr. Chair, I mean, it's clearly
in our report, so I just, um, I
would really like to have that
clarified if
That concerns me some that.
If we, and, and, you know.
I think I totally support better
public safety and better uh
requirements for that.
Safety, but.
So I have no way of knowing
that.
There's not a conflict other
than you're telling me that.
Thank you for the questions,
members. I, I have a.
3 questions myself.
I would like a little more
clarity on.
Testing the quote unquote
testing phase, I heard the year
21.
So I'd like to talk about
testing in New Mexico in
general, but more specifically.
The larger picture nationally.
What kind of testing were these
vehicles.
has already occurred and
With the assumption it started
at some point and it continues.
What is the big picture of
testing.
these vehicles.
Um, Mr. Chair
I
Not sure, um, what you're asking
specifically. I know that um.
Testing has occurred in lots of
different states. There's lots
of different.
States, uh, state laws
regarding, uh, driverless
vehicles and the testing that's
allowed.
There's, there's a real broad
range of, of statutes and
regulations across the country,
um.
And uh many of the states
require some kind of permitting
process, uh, for the, for the
driverless vehicles to be
tested.
Uh, California has a permitting
process. Nevada has a permitting
process. Why are some of the,
the ones that I've looked at.
Um, and so New Mexico is behind
those states in terms of of
safety because uh you know, we
just allow these companies to
come in and and test.
Uh, by just giving 5 days'
notice that they're going to do
it. Um, so.
Um, having some kind of
permitting processes.
I, I agree wholeheartedly with
the uh permitting process. I
guess I'm just trying to
determine.
And along the lines of other
members, we're talking 10 years
as a potential continued
testing.
These
And
It seems to me that and I'll
allude to what Representative
Doo said it's.
10 years is pretty specific.
For a fairly rural state.
So I'm just curious if there are
other states that are far more
dense in population.
You know, Arizona is an example
or any other.
state of that that has
significant population where
they with their testing phases.
I'm not aware of any other
specific deadlines like.
Thank you. The other thing I
want to see if you can address
one of the panelists.
Um
Clearly we all want safety.
But I'm curious
What level of accidents have
occurred with these particular
vehicles in New Mexico.
If, if it is, if it is indeed.
A concern. I, I would like to
know what those numbers look
like, what do they reflect?
Mr. Chair, we don't have that
data and that's because under
the current law, those companies
are not required to report that
data to the state, um.
And so that's one of the things
that this this law would do is
require these companies to
report not only crashes, but
other incidents where.
There's some kind of failure of
the human backup driver is
required to take control of the
vehicle because there's um
Um, so we would have that
decision later on about whether
to allow.
Thank you, I
Again, I'll reiterate safety is
important to me.
It's important to every New
Mexican.
I'm, I'm just not comfortable
with the information that we
have at this moment.
With this particular bill.
Not to say that we shouldn't
look at this bill or consider
this bill.
But I can
Held by
Questions from the members and
the answers that were given that
there's.
There's a little bit uh
A little bit of information
lacking.
Uh, representative.
We
A can be Hill. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you to you
and all the members in the
committee this morning, um, for
a, I think a really important.
Discussion. Um, I love
Representative rego's commentary
in that, you know, this is the
future. It is coming, and that's
why it's um even more important
than it's ever been to.
Not only ensure the safety of
New Mexicans, uh, but that we
get this right. Um, and I know
it's important to me, I know
it's important to the experts in
the organizations that have been
working with me on this bill,
um, and so what I would like to
propose, um, is we may maybe
roll it for now, we'll do some
work on it, we will um look at
additional data, we will look at
the additional requirements,
clarification on the federal.
We'll just do, um, we'll do some
more work on the bill, we, we
think it's a good concept, we
stand behind it, um, but we
wanna make sure that, you know,
it's something that would be
good for the state and and that.
You and the rest of the
committee could get behind with,
so we'll roll the bill for now
and we'd like to come back at
another time.
Thank you, whip
Uh, I would encourage you to
visit with some of the members
that have spoken about the bill,
I think there were some ideas, I
think everybody concurs that we
want safety and we want to have
a good bill, so.
I think it's just wrong.
Thank you, we'll roll the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let me mention for committee
members and the audience and
viewing audience as well that we
will not be hearing HB 145
today. There were some
amendments that we could not
notice in a timely fashion, so
we will be uh rescheduling that
to Thursday, I believe.
We'll shoot for Thursday on.
Next we have HB 310 responsible
Electric car battery, end of
life, Ortez Romero.
Well, as everybody knows, this
is a very difficult time because
of all of the bills and members
having to be a.
At different committees
So, seeing no further business.
We will adjourn.
