Madam seen objection it is so
ordered.
And introduce Representative
House memorial seventy seven
introduced by representatives
Andrea Romero Lujan said auto as
a pesky.
House memorial seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Baca anymore L. declaring March
second two thousand twenty three
in New Mexico athletic trainers
day and house of representatives
Jennifer million.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the to the next order of
business
committee substitute for Senate
bill seven.
Senate bill twenty as amended
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety two.
amended without emergency
clause.
Senate bill three thirty five
with the emergency clause Senate
bill three eighty one with
emergency clause Senate rules
of business committee reports to
no objection it is so ordered.
house bill four one one has had
it under consideration reports
it was recommendation that do
pass respectfully submitted D.
Wonda Johnson chair Mr speaker
board opted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill four sixty nine has
had it under consideration
reports I was recommendation
that a do pass and is referred
to the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Supposedly the eyes of a
committee reported opted Mr
speaker government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee too was
the referred house joint
resolution ten has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation to do passed
resolution ten of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
As opposed to a the as of a
committee boarded up.
Mr speaker government elections
adoption we are not optional
favorable committed port and
Senator I'm excuse me house
resolution eleven all those in
favor say if I was in a.
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
this referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
D. Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are an
adoption of federal committed
for the Senate bill one forty
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
four oh one has had it under
consideration point seems
recommendation that it to pass
and this referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
Well as opposed to a test of the
committee reported opted Mr
speaker your Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
four eighty one has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house Education
we are on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill four eighty one but a
favorable committee report on
house Education Committee
substitute for House Bill for
eighty one all those in favor
recommendation that to pass
legislation we submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee report
we're not optional Federal
Communications of the bill one
amended has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation added to pass an
answer for to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Was supposed may be as of the
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker Education Committee
was been referred Senate bill
two nineteen as amended has had
it under consideration point a
with recommendation that it to
pass sentence referred to the
amended all those in favor
signify the same time.
Well suppose in a test of a
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee to ms been
Reduction we're on adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill eleven all those in
favor say about this and I.
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill three
oh eight to pass and is referred
to the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
Elisabeth Johnson chair move
adoption for an adoption of an
I suppose may just have a
committee boarded up to.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill three fifty
one has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that it to pass
was a nine.
All suppose may be as of the
committee reported up to.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill three
seventy three has had it under
committee report on house bill
three seventy three of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Posibles name the as of a couple
reported opted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee to miss been
Thompson chair option for an
adoption referral committee
report on house bill three
ninety three of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair move adoption where an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate bill
referred house bill three zero
nine has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair Mr speaker move
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill three
seventy four has had it under
consideration point so with
recommendation added to pass as
amended and is referred to the
those repairs and above is a
nine.
All those goals may be as of the
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
adoption of a favorable
committee report a Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill forty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Mr speaker I move to the next
order of business introduction
of legislation in addition it is
so ordered.
funds to brought to to provide
grants to defray operating
losses and start up costs of
rural health care providers and
facilities that provide new or
and referred to the house health
and Human Services Committee.
Senate bill twenty as amended
introduced by Senator Kernan and
years pursuant to the proper
procurement code allowing
eligible employees of southeast
New Mexico college to
participate in the alternative
retirement plan conforming the
Senator Kernan Senate bill
twenty as amended amended twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee.
pharmacy act to expand
pharmacists scope of practice
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety two Senate Judiciary
Committee subs to present
ability to having been read
Ivy Soto and Representative
Harry Garcia an act relating to
courts clarifying probate court
administration and jurisdiction
clerks of the probate court and
their duties specifying each
county's financial obligation
for support of the probate
court.
Specifying records retention
of date probate court statutes
Senate bill two forty eight as
amended introduced by Senator
Ivy Soto and Representative
Harry Garcia.
Senator devoted as amended have
Hamblen an act relating to
livestock defining equine and
substituting that term for our
revising procedures for equine
as strays amending the livestock
one as amended administered by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the house
agriculture us against and water
resources committee.
Senate bill three zero two
the conduct or character of
justices judges or magistrates
Senate bill three zero to
introduce by Senator Stewart
Senate Bill reserves to having
been read twice by title is
introduced by senators serve on
days Stewart and worth an act
relating to the constitution
creating a constitutional
senators serve on days Stewart
and worth Senator three zero
eight as amended without an
emergency clause having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee thence
to heck and act relating to
elections delaying until two
thousand twenty five the
implementation of the local
election act as applies as
an emergency Senate bill three
thirty five with the emergency
clause introduced by senators
Ortiz the penal and to heck
Senator.
eighty one with emergency clause
introduced by senators Rodriguez
and Representative small an act
relating to severance tax bonds
pertaining to the bonding
capacity allocation for the New
Mexico housing trust fund
declaring an emergency Senate
bill three eighty one with
referred to the house taxation
and revenue committee.
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate joint
resolution one as amended a
Commission for the state school
board to set policy and direct
the public education department
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate joint
resolution one as amended.
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the house Education
Committee.
Can pool ladies gentlemen from
Is it gentleman from Chavis or
Senator.
Can you please remain standing
Sir there you are.
Members please.
parents singer first grand son
Edward pricing hybrids born at
twelve fifteen PM.
One AM and weighed in at six
pounds fourteen ounces
congratulations Sir thank you
over there shortly
congratulations.
Mr speaker I think that
Representative Nibert should
Have
you have the for a two year to
have the
Congratulations.
Any other announcements related
news on the fate.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to give a thank you to
the gentle lady from.
just about to call my my
daughter because I reminder to
drink their milk so thank you
very much for the given to
created thank you Mr speaker and
are known for down there in our
area Mr speaker and I hope
everybody can see this bag but
it does say on there
I did have my little canals on
otherwise they will be killed by
the Forest Service but I do want
to take thank the a dairy
producers of New Mexico there is
also a block of cheese in there
speaker thank you very much
thank you ladies Representative
one thank you Mr speaker and to
the lady from Chavis I did
Mr speaker I rise to thank K.
white foot in Beverly is saying
go for always supporting that
industry in New Mexico and for
substantially decreased and and
that's certainly a big impact to
our community and we hope that
maybe the pricing structure in
cheese plants in the world in
eastern New Mexico the Clovis
cheddar cheese plants out the
Clovis between Clovis and
Batali's produces cheddar cheese
contributor to our economy and
we appreciate that very much the
gentleman delay from Chavis and
Mr speaker one more thing along
the same lines that
Representative night but was
first off I want to quit called
if I may.
Ladies and gentleman of the
house how many of you all are
involved in agriculture.
question do you Mr speaker the
rumor is going around that there
will not be in Ag feed this year
can you verify or deny that
together and they feed everybody
up here in the people's house
generally I would be
disappointed if there is not an
not only our state but our
country in the world thank you
very much Mr speaker the gentle
lady the gentle lady from
objection it is so ordered
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Matthews are you
ready on item number twenty one.
is Sir for placing House
Judiciary Committee subs to
browse with two thirty four has
been taken it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
Of
house bill two thirty four is a
very focused response to the
disturbing and frightening
explosion of shoplifting in our
off with substantial amounts of
drugs while terrorizing shoppers
and employees of the stores just
be two thirty four responds by
thousands of dollars worth of
product it does this by allowing
the aggregation of the value of
the items stolen from the
retailer's second it creates the
gangs and third it creates the
crime of aggravated aggravated
shoplifting a third degree
felony to punish those who use a
deadly weapon in skating from
We have rob black who is the
president of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce.
I have Sean Sullivan who is
currently with the state
attorney general's office and
this is the a prosecution
Division which prosecuted of
these kinds of crimes and I also
have
And with that will I will stand
for questions there is a
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
that last year there was an
organized retail crime bill
introduced to do sign on to it.
Mr.
session is that what you're
speaking about.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes Mr
speaker gentleman I did not sign
on but I did talk with the
Mr speaker
I started working on this issue
well over a year ago.
go ahead and look at it and see
organized retail crime like I
introduced last year thank you
Mr speaker thank you John
there's a lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
and lady from Bernalillo I just
want to give you an opportunity
to
talk about how.
We.
Worked in the interim and then
apprehended under this statute
or whether somebody there might
be and a double jeopardy
situations created and I was
wondering if you wanted to
elaborate a little bit for the
Mr Mr speaker of gentle lady I
would be happy to do that and in
the process I should probably
mention that in developing this
the second judicial district I
work with both the outgoing
Attorney General in the current
Attorney General I worked with
the public defender's office and
I worked with the sheriff's
speaker gentle lady was we had
originally
there's a there's a hole in the
interoperation just you and of
and it's been there for about
if the in the state from
a fast and when we first looked
when we try lady I'm gonna
separate there I you need to be
facing me and the debater onsite
Inc you consignments to speaker
inadvertently under the
children's code it turned out
that any juvenile that was
arrested in connection with that
would be charged as an adult
that was never our intent Mr
shoplifting it is a second
degree felony.
I'm sorry a third degree felony
I'm thank you Mr speaker in lady
the aggregation of the retail
market value for one.
Large part not purchase but that
period of time they can also be
charged separately by just one
incident
state and from the merchant and
that will create a second degree
felony.
We also Mr speaker emitting from
Madam speaker Mr speaker Mr
speaker.
I think.
Mr speaker.
I know you're Mr speaker
a provision for making this a of
racketeering crime but we
deleted that for simplicity sake
Be clear about why it.
It's not a double jeopardy which
is that a person is in charge
Mr speaker madam
I'm sorry I keep seeing these Mr
and I see madam Mr speaker and
bill so that it's clear that
while you could charge both
shoplifting and organized retail
crime you can only be punished
for one and that is to
protection against double
Where the charges can be brought
it's
and I just want to confirm this
it's is it any county in which
the merchandise swish shoplifted
Bernalillo I just wanted to.
Everyone an idea of how hard it
is been to craft this and how
time.
In courts corrections and
justice and then while we're in
session trying to get it right
and I just want to thank you and
There's a gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
We I know that you've worked.
Diligently on this bill for for
Of some issues were brought up
in committee and and basically
things and number one of.
If I understand.
Bill.
Activated shoplifting only
Mr speaker General Fund yes that
is correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of.
It just seems to me that one of
We want to determine not only
shoplifting but the behavior
this man exhibited in the I
They seem to be more emboldened
today the may be the just the
person that talked something in
their pants pocket or whatever
and I thought that the part of
we need to really come down hard
on it and and so I I see
aggravated shoplifting as as
part of this bill and and a
crime and I appreciate that.
Is observing the shoplifting
trying to prevent the
shoplifting and they get bowled
over as the.
it's not just shoplifting but in
it involves physical action
before I would even say a threat
of physical action very barley
was disappointed that we didn't
cover that situation and
aggravated shoplifting is only
if they have a the economic of I
believe it says a deadly weapon.
other thing it seems to me that.
When you have a deadly weapon
involved.
with a deadly weapon it's a
third degree felony.
Yes Sir charged with robbery
it's a second degree felony is
that correct.
It seems to me that the.
We ought to have an aggravated.
Shoplifting charge where they
and and it seems to me that the
charge should be consistent with
robbery and should be a second
degree felony and so of those
Committee substitute for House
Bill two thirty four at this
time and I believe
the clerk as of making passes
passed out what'll you give it a
minute thirty seconds and then
we'll have you explain the
amendment.
Gentleman to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
amendment the first seven
paragraphs of the amendments are
centrally some clarification
a discussion in Judiciary
Committee and just trying to
clarify that these.
clarify those things the the the
guts of of the amendment.
Farm paragraphs eight through
a couple things number one it
provides for aggravated
shoplifting.
Would consist of the lawful.
avoiding apprehension
immediately following
shoplifting.
So it clarifies my situation
where they're running out of the
The second part is is further
down and in paragraph the and
that is if you commit of.
that is an enhancement over what
we see in the existing bill as
it's drafted today and I think
that that would put it in line
and I think basically activities
shoplifting with the firearms is
robbery by definition but since
we're trying to send a message
message out and showing how big
of a problem we have and and
telling those that are engaged
in this activity they need to
Mr speaker it is not a federally
friendly amendment.
To debate on the amendment the
gentleman from Santa Fe Santa Fe
Representative McQueen.
against this bill in committee I
think we both had concerns about
some of the language and whether
we're really getting out what
think we're trying to do is is
aggregate
Multiple instances of
I think that's I think that's
the right thing to do but.
Mr Chairman by striking from a
single retailer is to leave the
single of cation.
think what it's intended to
address is the issue of you go
into one location one event and
we have a there's twenty five
hundred dollar threshold and
there's a twenty thousand dollar
what's the if you still three
five thousand dollar watches you
aggregate those in the charge
get you above twenty five
hundred but you're still below
twenty thousand my concern is
as a single location I think
that lease
That leaves ambiguity so Mr
speaker gentleman I I I
appreciate what you're getting
at I personally don't think
the aggregation initial be based
on the number of retailers or
the number of locations it
should be based on the number of
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you and and we did try to
address the.
Instances that you brought up in
in committee and and I agree
from a single location
That you.
Are going to.
Charge them with both the
period of time I am from in
either single or multiple
locations that you get to the
there but you can
That greeted those three
watchers I think under the
existing language that's on page
two line.
I I just think it the we're
we're we're advocating
in that instance is the amount
of merchandise stolen in a
different retailers we I mean
the concern is that it's
multiple thefts and I think that
the definition should hinge on
whatever the word is incident
way toward thank you Mr speaker.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
favor of telling the amendment
signify by saying aye.
It was a nice have it to
amendment is tabled from Travis
I do see a substantial of issue
that we're not sending the
breadth of the message that I
of.
Well run orchestrated
retail crime folks and I think
they become brazen and well to
problem and that is the
brazenness by which they're
exiting these shops going in and
just plowing people over with
their shopping carts and what
this concerted effort to steal
from our our retailers from
around the state it cost each
and everyone of us.
It is because I have to make up.
The loss prevention side of
things by increasing prices on
I believe the figures are maybe
two to three of three years all
that eight million dollars in
the Rossell Walmart questions
were unaccounted for stolen if
and buy a screwdriver you're
paying a few cents more for that
screwdriver than what you should
pay because of this very
activity that's going on and so
But I I will support your bill I
think it's a stab is just not
as.
Pharma step as I would prefer to
to
Shoplifting under your
definition.
It's a more possession for
having that weapon on your
possession get you to aggravated
shoplifting does it not.
Mr speaker of the gentleman give
Mr speaker I the gentleman of
For the crime to occur.
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
point me to the language that
So Mr that the actual Mr speaker
I.
I'm sorry I need a moment.
He is the word that used in
criminal law to indicate that
there is an economic.
And just one moment.
Mr speaker gentleman
the language of Salter striking
and so for that here in the in
the in the that if bill and
is and they're a New Mexico
Supreme Court decision that the
court is held that the the the
the victim must be aware that
there's a weapon.
remember in the original bill
for something and so I apologize
but that act assaulting or
struggling with a deadly weapon.
Mr speaker just give a moment
please.
the victims of this is not
robbery as such as aggravated
shoplifting.
Use of.
Force.
That's perpetrated on the
striking I guess the the another
could be any person in the store
I suppose but if the person
felony and robbery provides for
second degree felony so.
If you can clarify my money the
gentle gentleman
back in the nineteen eighties
our reserve court of appeals
decision that we looked at the
kind of situation you're talking
about and is that court
determined at that time that way
were all looking at the other
day and that's been low on the
state for roughly thirty years
and what we have attempted to do
third degree penalty without
that provision the kind of the
behavior describing Mr speaker
gentle and would be a fourth
more funds meant for that
individual but it certainly
doesn't get it to the second the
is a.
Mr speaker gentleman no it's not
and as I said it's been well for
about thirty years in the state.
maybe get our court a little
more this direction on what
robbery should be in the state
of New Mexico but gentle lady I
Bernalillo Torrance
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from I guess early
County.
Thank you Mr speaker so I have a
since I haven't heard this
before have a bunch of questions
for clarifications one of the
main question is.
If the.
Okay let's just be blunt Mr
speaker Representative they're
not gonna show up entities not
ninety nine dollars.
I don't understand how we can
make this bill work
because if they go in and they
still four hundred ninety nine
dollars.
Who's doing these crimes if
they're never getting arrested
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
all the A. P. D. from showing up
And they can show up but even
more importantly what we're
doing in the statute and this is
And that moves things into the
felony area they have
investigators who are watching
the situations and this will
Prosecuted as such.
the house so I know that our law
enforcement is stretched to
their limits and I know that
that's if somebody did
very tough crimes I don't see
them going all then there's a
two hundred dollar shoplifting I
need to leave this murder scene
and go.
Mr speaker gentle lady
this is first of all not just in
Albuquerque problem is a problem
throughout the state of New
Mexico
Second thing Mr speaker gentle
lady is.
There they will not still be
repeat offenders are because a
repeat offenders they can under
this.
Under this bill if it's passed
that tool we're left with
misdemeanors the way that you
avoid the misdemeanors for these
people who do this a lot and
there are a number of people who
do that Mr speaker gentle lady
not getting arrested law
enforcement extremely busy and
they're not arresting the people
how would we know who it is it's
continually doing these crimes
cameras and other things they
are able in cooperation with the
police to identify who these
people are I don't know Mr
there's pictures of these people
and so what we need is to change
the law to allow the proper
penalty the felony charge and
So Mister speaker gentle lady
you're going to be are you
saying that this is going to be
totally done by cameras because
I've seen some bank robbery
cameras I could tell you who
that person is Mr speaker gentle
lady.
will of the these videos are
really quite good and and add it
when you have time.
Gentlelady Mister speaker I'd be
participate in this meaning
there's a store that's been rob
they have to go and get some
high end equipment have security
that is guaranteed that it's
going to record it and then it's
data who is it it is are going
to be an assigned task force of
law enforcement that's going to
look and say okay yes this is
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady there is
in fact a task force under the
prior Attorney General others
now have a pet Task Force on
this shoplifting under the
data and information all the
time they arrest these people
had and therefore it is the the
know who they are they show back
up on the videos and so forth
catch the people who are doing
it but as I said before they
need the bill because they need
to be able to aggravate
aggregate the value so that
very busy they're not gonna have
the time to show up so let's go
to the role of our
Max the faces are covered
they're coming in the grabbing
stuff the running out is our
loss prevention now going to
stop them and detain them.
no they're not going to try to
stop of their not the police
force and that would be not a
good move on their part but they
can certainly take a picture of
speaker gentle lady again I
would invite to at some point to
come and look at some of these
videos these people are very
very identifiable.
Well Mister speaker generally
can still cars I could go in a
mask up and put a hat on my main
concern is that and less law
enforcement is involved in the
show up and exactly identify
this person
in a baseball cap on there's no
way to identify and so I'm
having a problem on on the
identification part and then I
get even more concerned about if
cells and danger so I'm having a
hard time wrapping my head
around this I understand I
totally understand because we
want them to be felons at the
same time I'm having a really
people up for two hundred
dollars after sorry four hundred
ninety nine dollars.
Yes I don't see that happening
and I know Chris criminal
trespassing that's not going to
despondent.
I could Mr speaker turn was of
their courses sametime so the
issue is is that we're going to
I want to go fix this and I want
to make sure these people get.
All of these crimes and
documented and I just don't see
how it's going to play out when
we have such as extreme shortage
themselves to put themselves in
harm's way I get return to do
with the problem is I I but I
guess in the end result if you
told me Madam Mr speaker and
going to do everything we can to
to make our area better air area
more enticing the law
enforcement had this great plan
can't wrap my head around how.
We take the time.
To look at a video when their
faces are covered and they're in
enforcement to feel guilty that
they can't make it to this to
try and help this and I don't
want to loss prevention people
either
trying to step into something
hundred dollars or sorry to
fifteen one four four ninety
nine
I think that's all the questions
I had on that
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
does the gentle person from
Bernalillo of yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo and
Sandoval.
Thank you I I I first wanted to
we need to approach all are
built with the entire community
and I really commend you for
not an attorney and so I have a
very basic question that came up
was listening to tonight's
debate.
If someone at the store had
Mr speaker of.
Gentlelady give me just a moment
it can accept can I ask a
intentionally hit you or in a
trying to escape from the store
on intent is without this bill
ever passing is that a crime.
Mr speaker gentle lady lady
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and and gentle person from
Bernalillo serve the purpose of
the bill is to address the of
weapon.
And they a fire arm and the
still assaults you with the
shopping cart that's a separate
the charge for the battery yes
thank you so much a clear for is
I am not an attorney and I just
wanted to clarify thank you much
very much Mr speaker for the
debate the gentleman from Katrin
All those counties thank you Mr
speaker thank you gently you
know first of all wanted to
thank you for bringing this on
this legislation.
I was reading on on some of the
store closures and I'm explained
what happened to me the other
day I I walked in to yield
For code he says I had for
codes.
I sold one they stole three.
How.
Three to five times a day into
your dealers here in Santa Fe
they're walking and taking
And so as of them and I'm I'm
tell you what I actually saw and
I asked him some questions and
those what I'm gonna ask you I
said I civil why don't they stop
guards can stop this person.
Does anywhere in this
legislation give them give the
store any sort of security in is
sort of ability for us a
Mr speaker gentleman now.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
I just
and I'm not trying to read a
draft your bill I'm just trying
in twenty nineteen had fourteen
hundred
incentives for the call of the
the police for theft and that
equates to about four times a
understanding on on some of the
stuff that I was reading Mr
speaker gentle lady is that New
Mexico alone is the New Mexico
it itself is losing the state
New Mexicans tax revenue
Gentleman just one moment.
Mr speaker gentle gentleman
particular articles and this
woman going to my question there
was a gentleman that that they
named have gone into the store
and had gone thirty times over a
bill what would what would cause
a Mr speaker gentle lady.
What the charged with I think
was a hundred and eighty days or
Mr speaker a gentleman gentleman
It would change the charge from
a misdemeanor to a felony and
with a sentence of three years
of with possible enhancements.
Okay so
so generally Mr Mr speaker
They're walking in and and some
more brandishing a weapon by a
gun sometimes a knife and so my
question is I also heard that
Mr speaker general gentleman
give me one second.
of the end of a dangerous weapon
and would lead to the.
The average the aggravated
chopping.
with of with a deadly weapon
charging their it would be the
shoplifting of course and then
it would be in addition
three years plus five years for
Mr speaker and gentleman it
would be an additional three
years.
So Mister speaker gentle lady is
just the last question I have
and use that what we're gonna
said deadly weapon whether it's
a night for a or like you said a
that that needle in particular
of the weapon and I forgot to
ask you one more question Mr
speaker gentle lady if.
This person is a person isn't
selling this use this this
stolen
merchandise what could happen to
a person that still the and can
you define that for me Mr
speaker gently.
that occurs that is a second
degree felony.
That implies not only just to
the Persian actually takes to
goods but who's part of a
felony I mean what is a what is
the threshold to to receive that
punishment Mr speaker and
gentleman the threshold is
twenty five hundred dollars in
hundred dollars over one year I
just wanted to clarify the
answer sorry.
Okay so that not one incident Mr
speaker gentle lady but it could
be really effective this is a
step in the right direction as a
as you know many of us wanted to
be
thank you Mr speaker phone maybe
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady from
Bernalillo you'll please.
If we don't do something Mr
speaker gentle lady all of our
retail shops are going to be
shut down they can't afford to
stay in business and that's the
people are afraid to go out
shopping anymore I have builders
in my particular area that don't
want to even go to the grocery
store for the threat of being
knocked down have their
And I don't want to see our
retail businesses hurt anymore
than they are right now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page three of your bill online
your bill for a deadly weapon.
I look at it this way a baseball
bat can be a deadly weapon the
deadly weapon in this bill
anywhere.
Mr speaker gentle lady of deadly
weapon is defined and another
statute thirty dash one dash
shown up someplace else but not
specifically in your bill that's
good to know there Mr speaker
gentle lady.
from lots of people tonight that
Albuquerque area it's not just
in your area.
There have been reports of my
area of these.
But Mr speaker gentle lady these
people are rolling from town to
town and they're terrorizing
even though these towns might
not be in the same county they
Lee County what happens if they
finally get caught over there
and something is done are they
going to be charged for the all
of those crimes in those
counties how does that happen
top lifted will I just gave you
an instance of three different
counties can you explain that
please madam speaker General
eighty
the way this works under the
locations and the pop
the prosecution side to charge.
Sorry this is.
in one county for the crimes and
all the other counties with an
aggravated value and if they
took over twenty five hundred
dollars in a year in goods is a
second degree felony.
Harm to businesses and to the
people that do frequent the
stores.
We have a judicial system that
understand that our judicial
system.
Needs to get on the ball they
need to go to work they need to
put these criminals behind bars
It is everywhere throughout our
state everywhere and just
sickens me.
Mr speaker.
would you agree with that
comment this bill is very
important.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
that this may be the most
important criminal bill we're
considering this session.
reaching emergency standards
right here in our state with
what's going on thank you for
your responses thank you Mr
speaker there's further debate
keep my comments short
will the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield to the gentle lady from
possible
and I am going to go just give
you guys a little bit of
background because some of you
guys don't know me
watched Albuquerque go from a
quaint little town to what is
now that we're seeing
during my time as city
the settlement agreement
and with the community
Albuquerque community policing
Council.
We were working on a retail
crime
strategy for the north west mesa
and counselor Pena was working
out how to address this crime
because this crisis is
significant this is not
something that.
We we can take lightly
prevalent just so first hand
when you you're doing a ride
ride along with officers.
our lack of police is such a
officers a hundred ninety eight
are assigned patrol that's it
for the entire state of New
Mexico
this is the other thing that I
would like to say is that
addressing this issue is and I
there are root causes of these
issues and some of those root
causes are poverty the lack of
jobs and addiction and until we
with the re have after the court
sentences of.
Okay whoever that offender is
that somewhere we can actually
start dealing with some of these
to to address this issue it's an
issue that we've been dealing
with with the Albuquerque
community policing that we have
divided Albuquerque up into
more officers we need more
technology and better technology
because we need to be smarter
than the criminals
look at those very clearly to
make sure that we make the
connections because if we're
missing those connections then
and remember sorry guys I'm not
preaching I'm a planner so I
I almost got run over by a guy
that walked I was standing at
the door waiting for a family
member and he ran out the door
right in front of me with two
you Representative Matthews
thank you for your boldness.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and into
the Representative Townsend.
Interesting debate I have
listened to this for a number of
years and I was reminded.
And.
At that time he was the a and
believe in the Albuquerque area
and he was talking about.
showed it off that around here
the show the decline in officers
and the increase in crime.
Mr speaker
generally give me just a moment
My experts commander Jones tells
me that from about two thousand
ten to the current time we've
stayed pretty much even in the
City of Albuquerque with a
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
sorry twenty fifteen to now not
twenty two.
And I believe it showed the
officers had gone from like
twelve hundred down to about
eight hundred and I see your
expert.
And my point is here we are to
do I mean.
As many of us remember.
Of Mr speaker and gentle lady.
and I'm trying to find out.
What happened in why do we
Some of this sounds real messy
to me Mr speaker and and gentle
lady about you know store now
has to keep the in home and and
speak to the body a little bit
about.
What has happened and why this
is necessary Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
Mr speaker Mr speaker gentle
gentleman weather has been a
reduction in resources
The differences.
officers we have can do a much
more effective job and the.
There's a difference between not
prosecuting misdemeanors because
this by this bill and the
officer tells me that that is
very very helpful.
Well Mister speaker gentle lady
I'm not an argue that point I
I mean of Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
When.
When I heard.
When I listen to the debate
If this body who is charged with
trying to keep public safety at.
At the forefront.
I mean.
It's going to make it better.
Should we be passing a budget
that that allows Albuquerque to
have more police officers so
they can respond to the gentle
respond now they don't I mean it
just seems to be
it seems to be that we're.
Trying to act like we're tough
on crime and what we're doing is
police officers and said what do
you need.
What we need to do to and so
gentle lady that's my point to
day I'm gonna vote for your bill
because I think it's going to be
Albuquerque it's problem that
that
Has hampered the state as a
whole but.
I don't think you're going to do
it until you get more.
the amendment and they're trying
to do the right thing but like I
said I'm a supporter bill but I
think we're playing with safety
and we're and we're not doing
Thank you Mr speaker this is the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you.
Yes ma'am we did in the
I don't know I think I think
they're just playing musical
chairs with me because I I just
keep moving on from there to
I guess my listen to the to the
discussion.
And.
One of my key concerns Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Is any requirement.
Once that person is inside.
Them whatever pronoun they go
by.
keep them in jail.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I I
All of the seem like I did for
the last year year and a half of
when I opened up.
The.
Albuquerque journal or look to
Booked and then released.
And before Mr speaker and gentle
lady that that person could see
lady I think I remember one
story where somebody had killed
three people before they
actually kept him in jail.
And so Mister speaker gentle
lady my concern.
The cat.
Where we.
When we both them where we keep
them in front of somebody.
In the state and until there in
front of the jury Mr speaker and
gentle lady for is that inside
your bill.
Before we answer the questions
element I don't think it's truly
relevant to the substance of the
bill I'll allow you to answer it
but I wanna re focuses on the
elements of this bill.
sixteen amendment to the
constitution
in terms release almost always
stay will be released
depending.
felony charges there is a
greater possibility of
through more punishment
on probation or parole this is a
tough for bill this bill
provides tougher penalties
frequency of this crime is just
terrorizing and devastating to
our communities.
Mr speaker and only first thank
you for your answer in response
gentle lady is is the crux to me
of the problem.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
glad that it's a tough for.
the response that I received Mr
speaker and gentle lady it
increases the possibility or
probability and I don't remember
speaker and gentle lady and that
was the whole point of what I
was talking about yes this
defines very specific items but
it doesn't talk about what
When I say that there's a second
step Mr speaker and gentle lady
and the.
As as I look at of the the
front of a judge in front of the
jury is has been minimal last.
And
not done anything to guarantee
that they actually receive the
penalty Mr speaker and gentle
lady I do appreciate the effort
that was put into this.
One of my
why retailers stand in my neck
of the woods.
This isn't what we want to get
it's it's better than what we
have.
respect for our law enforcement.
In matter how many black once we
put out there.
Thank you very much for the
If we want something different
to be happening in the area of
shoplifting then I would urge
you please to vote for this bill
it is an improvement over the
right house Judiciary House
Judiciary Committee community
substitute for house bill two
thirty four now we.
What's about to close.
Is now closed by one of sixty
two in the affirmative three in
the negative house Judiciary
Committee substance around
Representative how to make your
ready on item number nineteen.
I am Mr speaker could you get me
to that point that the record
reflect that election is if
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
the bipartisan House Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one seventy three child
forensic interviews which
reduces retirement invasion of
that for you now know thank you
Mr speaker I move that house
judiciary subcommittee for house
bill one seventy three do now
pass we are on final passage of
House Judiciary Committee
negative house Judiciary
Committee substance around one
seventy three has duly passed
this house and this is your
first availability regulations.
Sigillata from towels ready and
item number twenty thank you Mr
speaker will give it to that
point the record reflect that
election is search for placing
House Bill two zero nine of
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
bill will create incentives for
health care professionals to
stay in our state and come to
our state and it's a great bill
with that I stand for questions
of house bill two zero nine the
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
Those close by a vote of sixty
seven in the affirmative zero in
the negative house bill two zero
nine has duly passed this house.
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
In our vehicles and I will also
just note that this legislation
would also help a small business
in New Mexico to spend out of
state and international labs
amazing transition technology
this would allow the potentially
for that to be used in
windshields in addition to with
our markets for targeting which
Well the gentleman from Santa
please yield to the gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
But first I thought your bill
was a little shady.
The gentle lady again she
regaled on down.
Catching the Representative
process.
The speaker I yield to the
gentleman so Mr speaker really
my only the use of the seventy
percent is this a seventy
percent only you can have a
twenty percent as we are as it
And what this would say is you
could tend up to thirty percent
of the late so meaning seventy
Mr speaker German the vote for
provide services this is
essentially a window with a
clear phone put on it that's
for me I need to have I need to
have some some sort of film out
you're talking about the
windshield only Mr speaker.
Yeah Mr chairman we want about
Windows and you're about to
twenty percent that's perfect
thank you Mr speaker I just that
was my big deal because of my
eyes because I'm the opera I
move that house bill two eighty
six did not pass.
Final passage of house bill two
eighty six the vote is now open.
negative house bill twenty six
has duly passed this house.
Members in consultation with
leadership I'm gonna as it was
suspend the rules so that we can
the joint rules of the house and
Senate regarding availability of
propose committee amendments and
substitutes and executive agency
analyses.
that is so ordered.
Gentleman from Sunderland Santa
Fe.
Mr speaker house concurrent
resolution number one critics of
problem that we have been
in advance with this rule says
is that we send them out to the
committee were also send them to
Legislative Council Service and
it will be put on the website
it really just sort of corrects
our process.
Because too often we have people
testifying the public testifying
on a bill that's been changed
sponsor the gentleman from Lee
for a brief moment.
Thank you John thank you Mr
speaker the special legislation
and amendments upon which we are
acting upon which we're making
our decisions I believe it's a
step in the right direction
thank you gentlemen and I've
the tension you explain the bill
is there debate.
There's a gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
apologize Sen send of on Santa
Fe
My primary question is with
Mr speaker German yes once
materials place on the website
it will stay there indefinitely.
Gentleman and that works for
doesn't mean you necessarily
move it in committee.
But it was still be put up there
and so yeah there's a little bit
of potential confusion there but
I think that's probably the
better practice.
passed unanimously last year in
the center and take it up I'm I
believe they will this year so I
knew that house concurrent
resolution number one do now
pass.
Close.
resolution number one is we
passes house delayed from
earlier Representative Chasey.
We go to that order business
case somebody has lost a pair of
glasses they were lived here all
my of we just founded and owner
thank you Mr speaker.
agriculture as tech is and water
resources will meet tomorrow
morning at eight thirty in room
three fifteen.
Members take note gentleman from
million thank you Mr speaker I
have a house appropriations and
finance committee will meet at
one thirty in room three zero
seven number signal generated
not forget our seconds Committee
dinner will be tomorrow night at
five to
thanks for signal deleted from
Bernalillo Mr speaker I'd like
to make a motion that we let
Representative Hermio introduce
the grandfather the new
grandfather on the other side of
the aisle here should be part of
the chorus who eight Happy
Birthday songs he was really
and cultural affairs committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine AM and three oh nine
member state can note any other
announcements.
It is two two five.
Eight two four nine point one.
Again House Bill five thirty
eight.
house government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee is your
objection see none it is so
ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
recess until ten thirty tomorrow
morning March second.
Fifty one twenty three from St
Patrick's day.
