And if you would like to proceed
to the other.
Presentations or if you would
like me to stand for questions
or you want to do it manager
thank you joy were actually
experiencing a technical error
with the webcast so we need to
take just a moment to get that
figured out but thank you for
the presentation.
Test test.
Testing.
The.
Thank you anthony
does do we have any questions
from community members for mr
simon I know they have a
representative lenstrum.
But.
Page seven.
And lsc is basically budgeting
count.
What other agency.
And.
So a madam chair I think I could
get you complete list I can tell
you we're doing that for the
general services department
we're doing that for some of
some of the court um
appropriations as well.
Total budget I met a madam
chairman.
So we're asking this.
Medic manhunt chair and
representative we when we looked
at available cash balances we we
did.
Madam chair and representative
yes that that's part of the of
the recommendation I think th.
We have a road syst.
And we're taking road.
I'd like to know how much el.
Madame share the lfc
recommendation.
Is.
The.
Manager
and represent of the lc
recommendation is a two point
seven percent decrease due to
the use of the reduction and
fund balance from eighty one
million to twenty five million
issue using cash.
So met madam chair and
representative the
the wildlife crossings
appropriation is to the
department of transportation and
was based on one of their
nondashrecurring requests and
that's what I was.
To the operator.
Madam chair and representative
the lfc recommendation does
reallocate some vacancy savings
other parts of the operating
budget
the cash balance
is what happens when those
positions are filled if those
positions are.
So madam chair and
representative the lfc
recommendation did not include
all vacancy savings at all
include a portion of it so that
would be much
the lc recommendation was based
on one third of the you're
taking one third.
Isn't that a legislative intent
to get these positions built so
a matter madam chairman
representative again the lfc
recommendation would allow the
department to fill some
vacancies but if if the head
count were to go up
you're correctly would need to
re evaluate that in the future.
That those budgets up for
personal it's a legisla.
Savings t.
Doesn't make sense to me I know.
With much brother see the money
going to the roads program
i'd also like to ask you madame
chair joe what at the.
So mister chair and
representative for aviation the
left sea recommendation matches
the department's request for
a nine nine point five million
point five million and is that
over.
So
madam chair and representative
that's that's over the one
fiscal year with with the caveat
that typically the legislature
includes
reauthorization language to
allow the department to roll
over fiscal year encumbered
funds for projects so any
project that would be encumbered
out of the aviation fund would
be ready would be available.
This.
Ls section nine is so man shared
the lfc did not have a
transportation recommendation
in section nine the of seafunded
a special appropriation and
section f.
Firt for madame chairman
representative for forty million
dollars.
Million dollars in section five
of the budget w.
Madame chair that information
madam chairman representative
is.
This is on page eight year
packet so the total for the
twenty twenty two general
appropriation act was three
hundred and seventy three point
five million and the total for
the twenty twenty three act.
Announced down the forty million
madame chairman representative
that's correct
and how much of.
Madam chair and representative
of the special appropriations
section nine
so that has been
looks like it's seven hundred
and sixty one million
madame chair and and represent
if that's the yes that is the
the total from twenty nineteen.
This recommendation allows for
forty million section five.
As the budget.
I'm i'm very very d.
I am very disappointed.
Thank you very much.
Representative next we go to
representative latter.
Thank you very much thank you
enjoy for the presentation of
question on each sevent.
And so this are these expenses
manager
isolated or the.
Madame chair and and
representatives so we had some
discussions with the department
on the reasons for that I think
they might be better able to ask
that question if if you would
prefer.
Yeah absolutely.
Yes on p seven of the of the
hand out there is the tort at
the bottom outlining the
overtime expenses and my
question was manager is it is
this isolated or or specific
certain.
This is our overtime in general
just isolated.
More hours.
Thank you very much next we have
a base change here
but thank you manager
joined with the representative
talking about how can you go
number seven hundred.
In one before you explain that
you should go around on these
highways
the working on you know we just
had a an accident a couple.
And you know and then we're
talking about another thing
about the fifty one point eight
perce.
Leave people are scratching the
surface of put them with the
have and I will not cut over
seven hundred and twenty million
dollars that that's ridiculous
that even on outwards
near my number see the work
that that that's crazy we
reconnected here is a committee
and and that this happened just
you can't happen that we need to
remember you know the I would
department will the highways new
mix with a backbone a lot of our
state and we're not reading it
that we were treating the job
right now you know could this is
a rule slap in a fees it really
is you know no I know hope
people are listening out here.
You know an earthing joy and
wouldn't really fast an earth
enjoy did you guys take into the
considera.
You know look look at the price
of materials look at the look at
a new car what a.
And.
Back to the first question
you're hoping to explain a seven
hundred when.
Madam chair and representative
so you're you're correct the lfc
recommendation does not include
a large non recurring amount.
Those amounts are
varies from year to year but
that that was what ended up in
the lfc framework that's it's
just just a framework madame
chair there's always changes and
that's part of this process and
not going out of chair
let's take a process
then that is really terrible you
know I can understand.
Seven hundred million
dollars of a billion dollars.
Thank you very much most your
gracia next we have a rep.
Thank you madame chair what I
had been hearing priorities
meeting this morning and what
i'm hearing and convenient
confirm this morning is
incredibly concerning and I also
want to thank representative of
lunch from for depth of
knowledge
in in a lot of areas
particularly around finances and
particularly around the fact
that her district along with a
preventive garcia's and others
are highly highly dependent on
the mobility of vehicles to drop
on a road right.
So matter of chair I would like
to if it's okay with the
rebeller's representative lost
from if I ask for a couple of
questions.
Absolutely representative.
Thank you manager to go through
the chair thank you madame chair
manager representative lost from
you outlined some very
concerning items I would really
like you to expand on with your
depth of knowledge as a
legislator and in finance
matters what you foresee as a
potential problems with this
budget in their near future
forget the far future.
The first thing I think that is
a ma.
And what I mean by that is when
you're taking vacancy savings
from.
Reliable revenue.
That could be an immediate
problem the other thing that
bothers me is that the
department of transportation has
a response.
And your work program that they
said.
Some of these project.
We set up section ni.
Section five is one of those
field.
Section nine was specifically.
My other concern is is that
they've been cumbered everything
so far so what happens to.
The.
You look at the trip report.
Member was in.
I I guess i'm very very
disappointed.
Take not.
That the legislative legislators
are n.
Based on what you know from our
home
but i.
Madam chair representative
electron with a windfall that
the state is experiencing right
now and and will taper off I
guess my question madam juries
if not now when one of the
discussions that we had madam
chair was was perhaps creating a
legacy fund around road does
that now mean that that is
completely off the table because
as I said a minute ago if not
now when madam chair
representative less.
Last year the chair brought
forward.
We also.
It was to be modeled.
And now that that.
We would like to see the same
thing for transportation
infrastructure development.
Economic.
Roads also are the ba.
I think a budget like the one l
of c has.
Because what this budget tells
me.
So that means if you hear if
you're no growth.
There's no point for expansion
so we've been suppressed in a
state and that's how I see this
transportation but.
In terms of growth whether it's
all currently.
Thank you madame jerry
representative says she's
disappointed.
Seem like we were moving in the
right direction over the last
couple of years in office.
Really really concerned about
that being new to this process I
don't know what all the avenues
available.
I really think this is an
important issue especially when
you consider that we're supposed
to be moving forward with eves
and even charging stations and
everybody knows that they're far
heavier vehicles and they're
going to be harder and more
difficult on those roads and
making a ute turn per in the
pump pun thank you very much
thank you very much represented
in the cruise and thank you for
the answers representative lines
before I move on to our next
presentation because I know that
work do on the floor here I I
want to thank you joey I know
that this was a difficult
presentation to make a lot of
the comments from the committee
I share those same concerns you
know you and I have had
conversations about that but I
also want to have echo and
remind the committee something
that you said which is we are
still considered early in this
process negotiations are still
being held and I think that this
budget is a baseline for us to
express concern and we are going
to do everything within our own
legislative prerogative to a
fight do it we can't for
transportatio.
So I next we're going to call.
Uh if I would please.
The.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee uh joe.
But I didn't want to highlight a
couple of the key differences
between the recommendations.
Rotation.
Four million d.
Yeah.
The executive did not.
Outside of that one million
dollars that was re.
Additionally.
I'm aware of.
The recommendation was entirely.
Any questions from the.
Under section.
Any other comm.
Thank you very much
next secretary starter.
The.
Thank you manager if it's okay I
do have a pres.
Radio chair thank you for having
us I know it's not customary to.
Do you have from the agency
after the hearing the racks my
name is ricky sort of the
secretary of fuel permanent
transportation is no remote to
not as she's the a s t director
and she's going to move through
the presentation is want to
provide very quickly some
context.
The you know the the difficult
word to use and you're going to
hear it in our.
That the department
transportation through the
olivesy wreck is being defunded
just when you put a few things
that represented munstrom has
mentioned together like a fifty
million dollars your mark out of
the state transportation find a
site a forty million dollars
construction budget right you've
you know you get forty in in
your mark fifty and and and
melorie will show you of course
you're not even considering what
it's going to cost for our
legislative pay increases what
it costs to do business today
relative to a few years ago and
so like you are we're
disappointed adding to that
frustration the disappointment
of course is a year ago uh I was
four years in a four months into
this role and sitting with our c
as the question
why at that point was the seven
million dollars seventy million
dollar lfc reck so long relative
to prior years section nine
appropriations the response at
that time was it's difficult for
the olive sea to parcel out of
healthy section I if the
executive is budgeting out all
the money and not including
section nine in that
recommendation and so I spent a
matter of chair the the last
eleven months and i've been
providing you all with updates
over the interim i've spent the
last eleven months working with
our government to essentially
care about a section nine
allocation that gives you all
the framework for funding the
department of transportation in
a healthy way and that strategy
wasn't just reliant on non
recurring general fund that
strategy is joined with a
hundred and forty five million
recurring revenue from order
excise tax distributions and and
that legislation is going to
come up and so our response to
other sea was we will do what
you're saying we will ask the
executive to carbout the funding
needed for a healthy section
nine appropriation and now not
only are we met with a reduction
in section nine
allocations there's an entire
reduction of section they know
together and so the challenge
for us is in the challenge that
it is every single year which is
where do we find three hundred
million dollars.
Budget a section nine the
challenge in front of all of us
this year is how do we develop a
section nine now and from where
are we going to pull that money
and so we're we're we're excited
that the governor has supported
us above two hundred million
dollars when you include
beautification electric vehicle
infrastructure etc etc but we we
essentially are starting from
what we believe is a position of
being defined it through the l c
rec and malaria what move
through.
All right.
If you want to turn to page on
number two.
This is our finger chart I
believe though we might have
given you this forecast page
this is basically put into a
finger chart it does go over our
revenues out we receive on the
green columns and the next
little com shows the percentage
that goes into each one for
example gas lean tax the
percentage of the way it breaks
down the highlighting orange
rose show the seventy six point
twenty five percent goes into
the state road find and then it
shows how much money that went
to which is about a hundred and
fifteen million dollars
and then on the next slide this
year shows us how I budget is
broken up between federal and
state funds as you can see in
twenty five twenty four we have
file I go six point one of
federal funds and five hundred
and forty six of state funds
it's about a forty eight percent
federal fund and fifty two
percent state funds already on
the next page.
Page number four.
This goes over our federal
question.
The black bar on this page show.
The black bar on on this page
shows the amount usd gives to
the state of new mexico for
example in twenty twenty four we
received five hundred and six
point two million dollars
however of that amount they also
limit us on spending a certain
percentage so the green bar
shows how much the cap is so
that's four hundred and forty
five point four million dollars
though as you can see we can not
spend all our approach amount
amount given by the federal
government the green the grey
bars those are
redistribution amounts were how
redistribution works is any
entity that receives us deot so
it could be all state votes and
pose tribal entities they
receive us the o two dollars
whatever they do not obligated
by the end of the fiscal year
goes into a bucket then usd can
apply for that portion of money
put in that bucket i'm usd have
to qualify by obligating their
funds timely and dealt has been
successful for the past over
five years and obtaining a
redistribution so as you can see
and twenty twenty three we dead
receive sixty point five million
dollars additional a federal
funding.
On page number five
I kinda just want to zoom in on
here to go over our debt
service.
I assumed them on fiscal year
twenty twenty four and twenty
twenty five the first graph
shows our debt service schedule
it's broken out by fiscal year
and by funding source the grey
column is state road fund
contribution the green column is
federal highway contribution and
the blue column is a highway
infrastructure the total is the
amount we are expected to pay
annually so in five twenty four
works we have a debt service
payment of a hundred and ninety
four million dollars and in
twenty five it does drop down to
a hundred and eleven million
dollars the graph below to shows
that are portion met already
mean I will six are oblimate
will be four hundred and forty
five million and their debt
service payment for federal
funds is a hundred and thirty
eight million this just shows
that the instance we get our
federal funding we immediately
take out the federal portion of
to pay our debt service and fy
twenty five our debt service
payment does go down by the
eighty million dollars but are a
portion meant as not increase I
do like to note that federal
funds can not be used for any
maintenance activities such as
guard real repair chip on part
whole patching it's primarily
used for design and construction
projects
and page number six.
This is our article funds.
During the the twenty twenty one
special session the department
did receive a hundred and forty
two point five million dollars
of our prefunds designated to
construction projects the
projects are listed here for
districts one three four and
five we are expected to obligate
the construction I believe the
funds acquirely and entire but
however we're not going to be
able to meet the deadline to
spend those expenditures by the
deadline set per dfa however we
will meet the deadline set by
comprogress so we are asking for
an extension to be able to
expand our funds by the twenty
twenty sixth deadline.
And page number seven
this goes over the motor excess
tax we are asking for your
support on this this is the bill
that we supported last year the
split is seventy five twenty
five currently if you look at
the graph below
twenty one point eight percent
goes to state road fund eighteen
percent goes to the
transportation project one and
fifty nine percent goes to the
general fund we are proposing
that now seventy five percent
goes to the state road fund
which comes out to two hundred
and six point one million
dollars and twenty five percent
will go to the transportation
project fund and that's about
sixty eight point seven million
dollars and just to remind you
the tpf on is the funds that
where we are give grants out to
local entities so that they can
improve their roadways.
On page number eight
number eight showed him chair
members we've shown this light
before but we added some of the
current out of sea wrecks on the
top here this morning was
intended throughout the interim
to show members what we're
working with as it relates to
cost escalations and projects
relative to our budget and so
even though we've seen over the
past few years small budget
increases in our outboard we
point out that cost escalations
right are really what our
troubling us is an agency to
really have more financial
capacity and so an FY twenty
four you see our bud at one
point two billion we received
another for construction
maintenance etc two hundred and
thirty two in section nine for
those specific projects after
you back out average cost
escalations and earmarked
projects and pay increases over
the last four years our
financial capacity was at about
a billion dollars just over a
billion if you got the top row
for FY twenty five upbeard of
one point two billion now
section five funding a forty
million even if we were
successful with receiving motor
excise tax after you back out
average cost escalations fifty
million and earmarks for for
state road find an additional
pay increases that we anticipate
seeing our financial capacity
diminishes related to last year
and sold that's where we find
the basis and defunding what
we're keep a ball of doing right
and even though we see like now
the repointed out the
possibility of reallocating
eighty million from debt service
to construction projects we see
a limitation in that because we
can't use that eighty million
for maintenance right so there's
no increase to our budget we
have some capacity to reallocate
in some areas but overall we see
diminished capacity.
Page number nine this just gives
the overlap of column a shows
for the department today
columbia shows the dot's budget
request reply twenty five
calling sea is dfa's request and
column d is alive season request
the budget you have in front of
you and columbia is a one point
two billion dollar budget it is
a fifty five point three million
dollars decrease compared to our
fy twenty four operating units
and it supported by five hundred
and forty one point one million
dollars a state road fund five
hundred and fifty one point
seven million dollars a federal
funds a hundred and one
restricted revenue nine point
eight transfers from trd and dfa
and a four million dollars
request of general fund to
support the prc transfer deal
tease request does include the
elimination of seventy one
million dollars of a cash
balance in state road fund a ten
million dollars elimination of
cash balance and restricted
funds o increase of four million
dollars of general fund for prc
and increase and federal funds
due to the bill increase and
this would be the opportunity
where we would like to bring in
our fund balance if you look
online number thirty it's kind
of highlighted in red that shows
column a that we did add in
seventy one million dollars
enough I twenty four column b
and column see do not have
banadian and call him d has a
twenty five million twenty five
million dollar cash added by lfc
dfa's recommendation was
the
they felt that the state role
phone can support the prc
transfer so they just reduced
one program and put it into the
other program to support the prc
will be an over to dot alic
increased our budget again by
the twenty five million day
decreased two of our programs in
their salaries and added to prc
to offset each other and they
are also recommending that we
use state roughly to support the
prc transfer and the one in red
is showing the fifty million
dollars of our cash balance to
support while life quarters.
And the next page it's number
ten this kind of shows you
everything that dot has
requested the first one was
primarily for construction
projects and you can see it on
there we request a three hundred
million of general fund
appropriations and section nine
df came back at two hundred from
section nine and lfc has now put
forty million dollars in section
five the second request where
the utification program which is
also as little program we
request a ten million of general
find dfa has supported that also
has no recommendation number
three is a while life corridor
DO t request a thirty million of
general fund in section nine dfa
has supported that alypsy has
recommended for the department
to use fifteen million dollars
of our cash balance to support
while i've corridor I just like
to mention that if this
continues we will not be able to
operate at the levels that we
are operating today because we
will not have any cash to put
and are operating budget right
now with this number for the
purchase of equipment dealt
asked for ten million dollars of
capitally at least df analysis
handle recommendation number
five hydrogen filling department
ask for forty million dollars
that capital outlet ds analytic
handle recommendation number six
electric vehicle infrastructure
dealt he asked for fifty five
million of capital outlet dfa
came back with thirty million of
art of funds and alici is
recommended ten million of
capital outlet the last one we
are asking for is facility
improvements the department owns
all their facilities we have to
also maintain those buildings as
well as roads and we do not have
to receive any general funder
capitally when you for those
type of services so we are
requesting twenty five million
dollars of capital outlay DFA c
have no request.
Paid number eleven.
This gives you an overview of
other general fund and our
performance appropriations the
department has received since
two thousand nineteen as you can
see line number thirty six we
have received one point six
billion dollars of general fund
and are for appropriations as of
today we've encompared three
hundred and forty one million
dollars of that we've expended
seven hundred and fifty seven
point two million dollars and we
still have about five hundred
million dollars to go.
And the last page number page
twelve other priorities for the
department are then we're
working with executive leaders
is the letter pick up statewide
believe you probably have seen a
lot of contract out there is
picking up on later for us so
that still one of our priorities
the rule air service enhancement
fund
the saturday changes for the
transportation regulation
division rerun house bill two
seventy one and that's the car
accident requiring reports and
then we are also in support of
the of establishing a fund for
local tribal and other eligible
entities to apply for a match
and that matter terms and for
questions.
Thank you very much michael
representative address
madame
and
mrperiod secretary sooner
gimme mom and they expect to
have to speak great week cause
i'm very great upset
you know fight a six years ago
and I came in a came in this
department sat here that's a
what the hell am I doing here
in those years i've watched a
lot of stuff we've done together
as a state to make a difference
they said all the time I was
raised by accounts
anothers makes any d.
Angry
because we don't understand
you do the people who back you
do the contractors do
and we're destinating I hope
industry as if we can't keep him
in our state to working the
gunical somewhere else who say
fifty one percent increase and
we deplete the ability of hiring
the staff that we need it has to
be over time and in no rocket
science
and man I think we all need to
get a little more man and that
has been rolling and bending to
us a suggestions all time and
gets was a lot sooner
they find.
I never thought of my career i'd
be part of some selectors
definitely as the plan as long
plan where we are on the top of
our game in the oil and
everything that we can do with
it now I know we're all this
other money she's talked about
the word it's going and how it's
getting to the real bill you
would ask legislative for
another fifty million other
hundred million.
It's not useless manager
don't.
And i'll tell you that it's
gonna be a hard one it's gonna
be a hard one to get us all on a
pays right now so we better get
together group to get a tight
actually a stand together as we
are the representative smaller
contractors with all those
abundance and all these are
belleboard to get all the bigger
projects started and the smaller
contracts is a make up the state
a new mexico are the ones that
are gonna fill it to most the
cost of the hotels that cost the
food
the guest is the money they got
a spend to go back to fourth
causes you're gonna cut him
there so he guys will be let's
stay three days a week and then
might have to pocket out a year
pocket.
There is not new mexico
budgeting.
Thank you manager thank you just
to center
thank you representative and
dread next to go back to
represent.
Thinking out of cherry.
The end of the day when you look
at where they're.
And what we have the kind of
surplus that we do
it makes a lot of sens.
That is a contribut.
Connection
I think that.
Investing.
That is the countless.
It's a counterlisted anchor.
When we fix them and.
I've been down there.
And I just want to say manager
appreciate that you've brought
this to the committee.
A much sharper pencil for house
bill three and what comes out of
here and I appreciate your
you're wel.
Because the last thing we need
to have.
The.
Thank you madame characterical
all of the cinemas of all of the
all of my colleagues this
morning I do want to remind
everyone both of those in a
tenants and those that are
watching on the broadcast that
in all the things that the
stability school does in offers
to its citizen reinto the
taxpayers
I will just remind everyone that
while they are worthy an
important and necessary
functions of what we function
that we fund madam chair not
everyone will attend to museum
not everyone is going to go to
prison not everyone needs help
with behavioral health not
everyone isn't college
and while they are all worthy to
fund everyone madam chair every
single person travels on those
roads and if we can't maintain
those roads or we be fun the
very department and mdot that is
it is is in charge of doing that
work what service have we done
to the citizen we are just sim.
So I would incourage.
Legislative leadership and
executive leadership to
understand that the roads are
paramount now they are me
changing the future I don't
know.
We have representative
yeah
thank you manager
thanks for the presentation and
not on the side here and kick
the can down the road we are in
all the problem you know i'm
looking at the new mexico.
Forty million dollars in the
general fund in everything else
wasted and when they really
caught my eye was referred to.
We figure that you guys are
going to operate
in our state safely and
efficiently you know you can
occupy doing both projects with
bad equipment role equipment and
you know in the i'm not pointing
the finger to mister by normally
really but in the road
department will a highway
department this is just for
wrong that we really need to uh
take a real hard look at it your
assistant right there said we
keep on this we will be able to.
That's pretty
significant.
You know what you're far off
I don't chair by sure I mean
quite frankly the
you know a low rack I mean
definite department of
transportation quite frankly
makes it easy for us to function
because it's easy to say
it's easy to say no
when the department is funded
the resources that we have to be
the big brother to the state of
new mexico from fire and floods
no removal local project support
economic development related
projects it is harder but our
ability to do those things makes
new mexico better there's no
question about it and so what
we're looking for is the
opportunity not just to get the
bare minimum done is how do we
support the state in a way that
makes it healthier communities
are better for it and the state
has the infrastructure to
develop in a number of areas not
just unity quarters but in rural
parts of the state and so like
you all we saw the revenue
surpluses opportunity to do that
and I think the governor did to
and so with the equipment
specifically typically when
tears is meeting in our
districts every single district
engineer will provide an
equipment of this to twenty
million dollars
that means that we could provide
you with a list of more of a
hundred and twenty million
dollars of equipment needs in
every across the state answer
when we come with a reasonable
number like ten million we know
that we're going to replace the
worst of the worst equipment but
by no stretch are the men and
women in the field getting
exactly what they need to be the
most efficient and so like with
our strategy to find part of our
needs from non recurring general
phone and part of our needs from
recurring motor excise tax we
know that it can be all about
the department of transportation
but we also know that at this
point being in a position to
receive less funding that we
have in years is also a little
person.
I think mister
just say one thing to do a lot
of representatives of the police
under vehicles and no starting
bodies power into me and said.
Check your breaks on we need to
do that had a list every month
we've checked everything a night
turner on and told me know what
you.
You don't know what you told me
and I would tell me is I have
fifty.
What i'm getting that when
you're funding
if you don't have enough funding
you can not operate that that's
bottom like.
Eyes of what we didn't do that
is going to come back on us in
rumour use that accident two
weeks ago and in regular right
out of gallery you'll tend to my
recomm.
You hear about this happening in
new jersey new york not a new
mexico but it's happening and
that's a fact that life and if
we don't address it issue we're
gonna have more problems and
then we're going to be seen
while we should have to care
that
thank you
for being here thanks all the
deal.
And my cut in your budget while
leading cut it and we rephrase
it they got it.
And the the dollar acceptable
thank you.
Thank you mister
so
committee right right now we are
doing on the floor I just want
to bring a couple of things to
your attention there is a draft
of house bill three in your
binders we will be discussing
that on tuesday we have kind of
tight time frame to get that
turned around and off to have
see because of the conversations
that we have had today I think
it's clear that we have a lot of
work to do.
I do want to can it in this on a
positive no in that every single
person here it's very clear
cares about the people the state
of new mexico and the roads in
the state of new mexico we are
all here to do a job I have the
utmost fees that we can come
together and we can negotiate
and we can come up with
something that works.
Excited for that opportunity and
I think that's going to conclude
our business for today thank you
very much.
