Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Well, the gentleman from Colfax
Motor Rio Reba.
San Miguel in Taos
Representative Sanchez, lead us
with today's invocation.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh.
Uh, let us pray, let us ask our
Lord to, uh, bless everyone here
in the families, keep them safe
and uh just to uh.
Guide us so we make the right
decisions.
For our state in his name, Amen.
lady from Lee Representative.
Senna Cortez with the Pledge of
allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
And a lady from Berlio
Representative Borego with the
pledge to the New Mexico.
That sounded kind of
threatening.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, good
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Good
afternoon, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business. It
is so ordered.
Announcements, good afternoon,
members.
Good afternoon members.
Great to see all of you. Happy.
Cowboy boot Wednesday.
It's a new tradition, who's
wearing their cowboy boots?
There are 2 of us, OK, 3 of us,
4 of us. Good job, everybody.
Uh, before I go to
announcements, have a very
special announcement, um, many
of you know Adam Campos has
been, uh, our, uh, on site, uh,
shoeshine man for many, many
years. He runs the model
shoeshine parlor in downtown
Albuquerque. Uh, his father, uh,
uh, ran the shop for a long time
before him. Uh, he's wonderful,
he's incredible, and if you're
schoosing to be shined, you need
to go see him and get.
shoes, uh, shined by Adam.
Now, here's what I'm gonna do
and remember in this chamber and
every member of our staff who
goes and gets their shoe shine
by Adam. Tell him I sent you and
we're gonna cover your shoeshine
today.
Right? So just tell them I sent
you.
You keep tabs and then he'll
give me a bill at the end of the
day, um, so go shine your shoes.
I've seen some of your shoes and
they need to be shined.
your cowboy boots if you need to
shine your cowboy boots.
Yes
Well, I didn't know he did that.
No, just the shoe shined.
Gentlemen from San Miguel Taos
Gentlemen from San Miguel Tao
Riva Mora Colfax Representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I'd like to announce that, uh,
the desserts from, uh, Clau
Futis. I hope I said that right.
Our, uh, sponsored on behalf of
the New Mexico Society of
Professional Engineers.
And also uh the Society of Women
Engineers and I know a rep
Porego is also gonna say a few
words on behalf of them, Mr.
Speaker.
lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, it
is my honor to uh welcome, um,
the individuals who, uh,
Representative Joseph Sanchez
just mentioned, I just want to
mention that there is an exhibit
in the rotunda and one of the
one of the pieces to that
exhibit for the professional
engineers is women's History
Month, so I encourage all of
our, all of our members to stop
by there, uh, Mr. Speaker, I
also text you.
Uh, my guest up in the gallery.
If you would thank you for
reminding me, gentle lady, we
have in the audience, up in the
gallery, Jan Williams, Society
of Women Engineers, please rise
to be recognized. Welcome to the
house.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady, gentlemen from
Sandoval, Representative
Martinez. Thank you Mr. Speaker
today I rise, uh.
As a very proud lobo.
Our head coach, Richard Pitino.
Coach of the Year for the
Mountain West.
Right,
round of applause for Coach
Pitino, coach of the year.
And gentlemen, we play tomorrow
at noon.
That's correct, Mr. Speaker, and
we can see the Mountain West
Player of the Year, Donovan
Dent.
Love it.
Round of applause for Donha and
Dent.
And we play the winner of San
Jose State and Boise State.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Lee Representative Senna
Cortez. Mr. Speaker, on
everyone's desk is a little
something something from Lee
County, yours truly, and the
gentleman from Lee County and
Mr. Speaker, with your
permission, he'd like to add to
that.
I don't have anything on my
desk, but I trust it's good
gentlemen from Lee
representative.
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
doing multiple negotiations over
here. Um,
Mr. Speaker, uh, today,
Uh
Or, uh
Lee County Economic Development
Group has left a set of gifts
for everybody.
Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh
Body
The Lee County ADC was, was
formed in 1963, which happens to
be my birth year. I wonder if
there's some, some, uh, baseline
there. But, uh, one of the
things that I think is most
important to, for the body to
understand.
This organization
Continually brings business not
only to Lee County.
But to the state of New Mexico
and we've done that across the
board, a multitude of times.
As a reminder, this economic
development group.
Runs the economic development
for the county that brings the
most return.
On investment to the state of
New Mexico.
By population base.
Lee County in economic
development group in Lee County.
Brings more money per resident
than any other county, Mr.
Speaker in general and embody,
we only have
6 counties that are revenue
positive in the state of New
Mexico. Lee County leads that.
This economic development group
has done exceptional work in
conjunction with some work from
Eddy County as well.
We, we handle and we're part of
the negotiations with bringing
the website.
To Leon Eti County.
Uh, Erio now used to be uh
Louisiana Energy Services.
We have.
The first Greenfield nuclear
site in the United States and
over 35 years, 36 years now. So
Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh, body.
Our gift back to the state of
New Mexico and the
representatives, everybody
that's voting for all the
economic development work in the
state from our little part of
the, the world, we thank you for
everything that y'all do.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Berle
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. So I just want
to announce the biscochitos and
other goodies on your desk from
the um nurse nurse.
the
Nurse and and.
An aesthetist, I'm sorry, and I
was so excited about the lobos,
so they're the nursingesthetist
provide much care throughout the
state, but since we were on the
lobos, Nelly Junior Joseph was
also Mountain West defensive
player of the Year and true
Washington was 3rd team All
Mountain West, so we should be
very proud of our lobos. Big
round of applause for the lobos.
And the nurse
anesthetisthet anesthetist.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I
already have an accent according
to Saint Vincent, so it's hard
to get some words out.
So I, I'm just gonna make this
plug that we switch between
Senate and and um house for
Lobos and Aggies for the
basketball game because we wanna
be lobo sometimes too. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. So no objection.
It is so ordered. We are the New
Mexico House lobos from now on.
Unless Representative Landstrom
makes a motion to reconsider,
which she has not, so we will
keep it at Lobos.
gentle lady from Torrance and
San Miguel. Speaker, I just want
a big give a big congratulations
to a bunch of kiddos from my
district right now, uh, district
70 basketball is on fire, um,
today, we have our ecos Boys
versus Mode in the
quarterfinals, and this
afternoon we have an east-west
showdown between West Las Vegas
and Robertson quarterfinal boys
tomorrow, all of our girls have
made the semifinals, so Pecos
girls we.
Mesa Vista, Roberts and girls
will be playing Navajo Prep and
West Las Vegas Girls we playing
Santa Fe Indian School. So good
luck to my district 70 teams.
Keep an eye on that tournament.
Keep an eye on that tournament.
The gentleman from San Juan will
have live updates representative
Hernandez will have live
updates. Are you cheering for
Robertson or West Las Vegas?
Mr. Speaker.
I refrain from answering that
statement, um, my son does go to
Memorial Middle School and does
play as an 8th grader, so I do
not have to make high school
declarative statement anytime
soon, so I plead the fifth. All
of my students, I wish good luck
in the tournament.
Good luck to all the athletes
playing this week. Uh, there is
a bracket taped to the wall in
the lounge, uh, I'm assuming he
was uh courtesy of Hernandez. He
may have violated a couple of
house rules by doing that, but
he is forgiven as long as
there's no.
Betting being done.
Wink wink.
Just kidding, gentlemen from
Grant, I'll go catcher and
Representative Terazas you Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, can we
take a, a recess so I can go
home and get all my, my boots
and my shoes. I've got about 6
pairs that that I brought up
with me. You didn't bring boots
to the 60 day session 3 pairs of
boots that but I'm teasing you,
Mr. Speaker, and I might all
shine. We're funeral directors.
We have to have shiny shoes.
Mr. Speaker, uh, quick
announcement about, uh, tomorrow
they have the rosary caucus at
7:30 in the morning in room 326.
And then I wanted to share uh uh
something that we got a message
that we got from a doctor, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, it means a lot to
me because we had a similar
situation with my.
When my son some years back
where this story is almost very
similar of course different
condition, but um I wanna share
Mr. Speaker that uh and the
members of the house that uh
this is a story that, uh, of a
child that's 10 years old, whose
family was forced to leave New
Mexico and find a cure
desperately needed.
And this is the doctor's story,
Mr. Speaker. It's a young boy
that came to our clinic.
Uh, with swelling in his knee
and heart and, and hand. 2
months of pain, stiffness, and
difficulty doing things a child
should be able to do after a
thorough evaluation, uh, he,
this is doctor speaking. I
strongly suspected the juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis, a
condition that is, if left
untreated, can lead to lifelong
disability.
He needed to see a pediatric
rheumatologist urgently but in
but in New Mexico that wasn't an
option.
There was no available
appointment anywhere in the
state, not in Roswell, not in
Albuquerque, not even in Santa
Fe, nowhere we searched for
weeks. His family waited
helplessly watching their son
struggle while the clinic worked
to find an answer. We fought for
fought through the layers of
bureaucracy, insurance, prior
authorizations, out of state
exception forms acceptance
forms, logical hurdles just to
get them seen by the right
specialist. Finally, after weeks
of uncertainty, they were they
were able to.
secure an appointment in
Phoenix. His family had no
choices but to pack up and drive
more than 450 miles from Roswell
to Phoenix Children's Hospital,
so just so their son could get a
diagnosis and treatments he
should have been able to receive
here in New Mexico.
To the state children's uh
Phoenix Children's Hospital
remains his primary source of
specialty care.
And the doctor says he does
everything he can do to help
coordinate his medications,
treatments remotely, but his
family still makes that 900 mile
round trip for follow-ups and
advanced care.
Uh, this isn't just one patient
story this is happening every
day all over our state.
And so Mr. Speaker, you know, in
New Mexico, uh, we don't have
enough specialists, children
with complex treatable
conditions are being forced out
of state to get the care they
need if their families can even
afford to go.
many of them can't.
Many of them suffer in silence.
Uh, we've lost 248 doctors in
2019, making us the only state
in the nation with consistent
net loss of positions every
single year. This is according
to the Searchlight.
And so, um, Mr. Speaker.
Um
Um, we're trying to retrain
recruit and retain specialist
means that families are
traveling hundreds, sometimes
thousands of miles just to get
our uh access to basic care.
And so I, I'm sure this body
sees this as unacceptable.
Uh, New Mexicans, New Mexicans
deserve better. Our children
deserve better. We must act
before our families are forced
to leave their home just to
survive, Mr. Speaker, I share
that story because it, I had a
very similar situation. I'm not
gonna go through the story of
what happened to my son, but we
ended up in in Phoenix
Children's Hospital for some
reason. It meant a lot to me.
It, it, it, and uh I, I talked
to my wife about that this
morning I said I I I need to
share this story so we can see
the the struggles that we're
having we hope that the
legislature.
moves in the right direction
addressels. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, for, for giving me this
time to express our our
concerns.
Thank you, gentlemen, gentle
lady for Bern Lear,
Representative Garrett. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
you talked about printing and
supplies, doing something for
the body. Thanks to my handy
dandy to constituents, uh,
Deborah and Desiree Condon,
there is a thriller on your
desk. It's called shutter, and
it's by a New Mexican author,
um, this book, uh, Deborah and
Desiree Condon run the books on
the basket. It's an independent
books.
Do, it's actually in
representative Gurola's
district, but they're my
constituents, um, they have many
of you may know, Deborah Condon.
She's a long time uh lobbyist
who's had a dream for years to
open up an independent
bookstore.
And it's a place where like 700
people participate in everything
from crochet clubs to book
clubs, uh, they have author
nights they have everything, uh,
the book Shutters by Ramona
Emerson. She's a Dana writer and
filmmaker originally from
Tohachi. She's a bachelor's.
From UNM and MFA creative
writing from the Institute of
American Indian Arts. She was a
police department photographer.
In Albuquerque for 16 years and
she drew on that to write this
book. She's an Emmy nominee, a
Sundance Native lab fellow at
Tribeca Alexis grantee, uh,
shutter was longlisted for the
National Book Award for fiction,
a finalist for the 2023 Pen
Award. The list is too long to
read all of it, but she's an
incredible product of New Mexico
and Mr. Speaker, if you could.
produce, uh, Deborah and Desiree
Condon in the gallery.
So I was like you just did, but
I'll do it again, Deborah and
Desiree Conit. Welcome to the
house. Books on the Basque,
everybody.
Great, great bookstore.
On the west side of Albuquerque.
That's where I do my Christmas
shopping the last couple of
years. I get everything at books
on the Bosque. Um, I am not a
shareholder. I'm not paid
advertisement. I just really
like the bookstore.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Donana Sierra and Socorro
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, um, not, not as fun
as exciting as a thriller. It's
more like a nightmare that this
young child lived, a 5 year old,
I think some of you may
remember, uh, 5 year old that a
passenger on the bus, uh, just
felt something was off. The, the
parents, the, the adults with
the child didn't seem to match,
and it was just a case to see
something, say something, and
they, they reported to the
police and here was
Clinton, she uh had her family
left her on the bus and the
folks who picked her up were
offering her in exchange for a
fix. What is sad about this case
is how many times the law
enforcement had reported her to
CYFD and how many times there
had been 48 hour holds and how
many times there had been
voluntary care plans. I believe
she uh is safe today. I hope
she's safe today.
Um, there are many other
children who are not. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady. Any other
announcements before we go to
some housekeeping.
Go get your shoe shined. Adam
Campos out by the cafeteria.
Right as you enter from the
parking garage.
Shoshine
free for you.
of Duncan I've seen your shoes.
Go get him shined.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and when we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
an objection. It is so ordered.
Clerk to read
Miss
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 182 has
had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption of favor
committee report for House Bill
182. All those in favors Aina.
Well, supposedly, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 183 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan small chair.
Move adoption.
Mr. Speaker, we're at an
adoption of favorable committee
report for House Bill 183. All
those in favor of 59.
I suppose, the AAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 433 has
had it under consideration in
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for House Bill 433. All
those in favor signified by
saying 9.
Although supposed name BAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 101 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for Senate Bill 101 as
amended. All those in favor say
a.
I suppose nay, the committee
report.
Adopted.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business from Bern Leo with
special guest.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my
honor and pleasure this morning
or this afternoon.
To introduce some, some
gentlemen that have made an
impact not only on the city of
Albuquerque but the state and
the nation as well and the world
for that matter.
Mr. Speaker, this morning we
have some honored guests on the
rostrum before I get to that.
Uh, I want to recognize we have
a certificate now. I know we
can't read the certificate, but
we have a certificate for the
Jackson win.
MMA Academy in Albuquerque. Mr.
Speaker, this academy was
founded in 2007.
And it was founded by two
gentlemen.
Mike Winklejo, AKA Coach Wink.
And also by Greg Jackson, AKA
Yoda.
Mr. Speaker, also at the rostrum
we have the general manager.
And I'm going to probably say
this name wrong, and I'm gonna
give it my best. We have Mihail
like Beovov.
I hope that's close enough. AK
Micha.
Mr. Speaker, fighters from
around the world come to
Albuquerque, come to New Mexico
to train MMA fighting at this
academy, uh, because of their
storied history since 2007
haven't produced many world
champions.
And it is considered a top
training facility, Mr. Speaker,
I just will read one aspect of
this certificate only because it
recognizes some of the amazing
fighters that have come through
the academy.
Whereas the many notable
fighters who have trained at
Jackson Wink MMA Academy include
UFC light heavyweight champion
John Bones Jones, UFC
lightweight heavyweight champion
Rashad Evans. UFC welterweight
champion Georges Rush Saint
Pierre, UFC Women's Bantamweight
champion World Boxing Council
female world.
I'm gonna mess that up. Well,
uh, Mexico Sports Hall of Fame
inductee Holly Holm.
Hollywood star and women women's
mixed martial arts pioneer Gina
Carrano, Grand Slam champion and
invictor fighting championships,
featherweight champion Chris
Cyborg and two-time Olympic
medalist and five-time world
boxing champion Clarissa
Shields.
Mr. Speaker, these are renowned
people throughout the world.
And one of the things that warms
my heart about the Jackson Wik
Academy, Mr. Speaker, is that we
also have a special needs
program for children young
people that that have the desire
to train, improve their
confidence and this venue is
offered to these young people.
And also Mr. Speaker, I would be
remiss if it if I didn't mention
that my future son-in-law UFC
fighter.
Daniel Arguetta trains at the
Jackson Wayne Academy and he
credits much of his success to
these gentlemen.
And Mr. Speaker,
If, if you would indulge me for
a moment, I would like to yield
to my friend and gentle lady
from Bern Leo.
Gentle lady from Berlin. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Representative De la Cruz. I
also want to join in today to
make a special moment to honor
and recognize two very large
legends, as you said, in the
world of mixed martial arts.
Greg and Mike and the incredible
legacy of Jackson's MMA has done
so much for so many people in
this state and across the
country as they stated together,
they built um a gym out of a
tiny little building where my
son.
used to do the junior, um, the
junior training in middle school
off San Mateo, um, and it's a
place where champions are made,
but they do, they really invest
in values like discipline,
respect, perseverance, and
instill in every single person
that walks through their doors
that you can make a difference.
Their dedication to the sport,
their fighters and martial arts
community as a whole has shaped
careers, like they said, of so
many across the history.
Um, I know I was very honored
for years and years. We got to
travel the world with them, um,
as my kids would say with Uncle
Diego so we didn't mention Diego
Sanchez, but he's a legend built
here in New Mexico and we love
him dearly, but we got to travel
the world with these legends and
so I just wanna thank you, Greg
and Coach Wink, for your wisdom
mentorship, and inspiring
generations to chase their
dreams. I have seen the men and
women that they
accepted from across the world
for those of you that don't know
they house fighters from across
the world. They come with
nothing but a backpack and maybe
a pair of clothes and they house
them, they feed them, they have
bunk beds and they they mentor
them and teach them as they
coach, so you guys are wonderful
mentors for people across the
country. Thank you so much.
Thank you gentle lady.
Round of applause for Jackson
Wink Mr. Speaker.
And all of our esteemed guests,
gentlemen from Bern Leo back to
you Mr. Speaker, we
welcome our guests in the
gallery related to the academy.
Absolutely and um first of all,
I wanna add my words of
congratulations and
appreciation. By the way,
gentlemen, do you know where the
gym is?
Do I know?
Mr. Speaker, absolutely. It's an
art of how's District 11. It's
where I go train on the
weekends. I, I thought you
wanted the address. I don't have
the address, but I can tell you
it's on the corner of Broadway
and Martin Luther King. I, I
trained with these guys every
weekend and I'm getting, I'm,
I'm getting there from my first
fights coming up, uh.
Has the black guy the other day,
but look.
Uh, I'm gonna take Cha's
prerogative because uh this is
an indi individual who is near
and your hearts, many of us have
known him for a long time. He is
a staple of this building, and
that is Jim Jackson, who is an
advocate with disability rights
New Mexico has been for a long
time, and he is Greg Jackson's
father, uh, Jim, welcome to your
house.
Good to see you.
Back to you, gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I, I would
absolutely be on steroids remiss
if I didn't mention that coach
Jackson.
I also
An alum of Rio Grande High
School.
So I'm so proud of him for that,
although he's a little bit
younger alum than I am speaker.
With that, would you please help
me welcome them to the house.
Welcome to the house. Jackson
Wink.
Gentlemen, you and I are going
to grapple this weekend.
On the floor of the house.
You can put all your money on
him.
Any other announcements before
we go back to committee reports.
Generally from Zeno.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Because I don't want to read
that.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted. Derek
Jalen, the chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption,
please. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 249.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
I suppose signified by saying
nay.
The ICE havoc committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
to him has been referred Senate
Bill 201 as amended has had it
under consideration report and
with recommendation that it do
pass and the revert to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andres Romero chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
201 as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
How the supposed nay, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 280 has had
it under consideration report,
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Andrea wheelchair. Speaker, I
move adoption of the committee
report.
Oh, this is Senator Zel's bill.
Should we mess around with it?
Yeah.
I move to table the committee
report.
I think she heard that and I
hear her, she's on her way down.
He adoption a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
280. All those in favor probably
say I.
I was supposed, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 345 has had
it under consideration reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, respectfully
submitted Gans and wheelchair.
adoption of the committee report
of committee report for Senate
Bill 345. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
Well, the Sponey
I have a committee reported up.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Bill 155 as amended.
Introduced by Senator Maestas,
an act relating to embezzlement,
allowing a 12 month aggregation
of incidents or of embezzlement
to determine penalty, the Senate
Bill 155 as amended 155 as
amended haven't been read to as
my title is referred to the
House Judiciary Committee.
In a bill 45 as amended,
introduced by Senator Steinborn,
an act relating to health care,
amending the indigent hospital
and county Health Care Act to
allow additional authorized uses
of county healthcare assistance
funds, Cinna Bill 45 as amended
Senate Bill 45 as amended
haven't been read to us by title
is referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
the House of Reparations and
Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 53.
Introduced by Senator Sewell's,
an act relating to professional
psychologists, making the
professional psychologist act,
adding certain prescribing
psychologists with independent
experience in prescribing
psychotropic medication is the
definition of independently
licensed prescribing clinician.
Senate Bill 5353 haven't been
read twice by title is referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
Uh
Senate tax, business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 168,
an act relating to travel
insurance, recompiling a section
of the NMSA 1978, enacting the
Travel Insurance Act prohibiting
certain travel insurance
practices. Senate tax, business,
and transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 168.
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 168 haven't been read twice
by title is referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
The the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Bill 290 as amended,
introduced by Senator Trujillo,
an act relating to marriage
licensing fees, raising marriage
licensing fees, adjusting the
disposition of fees. Senate Bill
290 as amended.
Senator Bill 290 and they
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House of Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 170 as amended,
introduced by uh
Uh,
introduced by Senator Padilla
and others, an act relating to
economic development, revising
definitions in the New Mexico
Finance Authority Act aitting
permitted uses for money in the
public project revolving fund,
revising economic development
rates for gas and electric
utilities, providing for
expedited rate-making orders.
Senate Bill 170 as amended.
Senate Bill 170 as amended have
been read twice by title is
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate, Senate Joint Resolution
15 as amended, introduced by
Senator Ses and others. A joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 12, Section
6 of the Constitution of New
Mexico to provide for an
appointed state board of
education that appoints a
superintendent of public
instruction as the head of the
public education department and
sets policy for public schools
as provided by law and to retain
the elected public education
commission to serve as a
chartering authority for state.
chartered charter schools and
have other powers and duties as
provided by law. Senate Joint
Resolution 15 as amended. Senate
Joint Resolution 15, as amended
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House
Education Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 213 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez, an act
relating to motor vehicles,
enacting a new section of the
motor vehicle code requiring
vehicle drivers to yield the
right of way to a transit bus
that is displaying a yield sign,
defining terms, providing
penalties. Senate Bill 213. 213
haven't been read to us by title
is referred to the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
And Finance Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 376, an act
relating to state employee
benefits, amending the
contribution percentages for
state employee health benefits,
authorizing the Secretary of
Healthcare Authority to use
funds appropriated from the
healthcare Affordability Fund to
reduce or eliminate premiums for
certain government employees.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 376
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 376 haven't been
read to us by title.
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 105,
and act relating to
intergovernmental agreements
enacting the social work
licensure Interstate Compact,
admitting the scope of social
work prac practice amending the
social work Practice Act to
provide for state and federal
criminal history background
checks. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 105.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 105
haven't been read to us by title
is referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate tax, Business, and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 118,
an act relating to organ
donation, providing for the
motor vehicle division of the
taxation and Revenue Department
to create materials containing
information about the
application process for becoming
an organ donor for state
agencies to distribute to the
public. Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 118.
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 118
haven't been read to us by title
is referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
as amended, and act relating to
alcoholic beverages, authorizing
the issuance of special
independent theater dispensing
licenses for beer and wine.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
as amended. Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
as amended, having been read
twice by title is referred to
the House of Commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
Sinabel 221 as amended,
introduced by Senator Woods and
others. An act relating to
insurance, amending the New
Mexico Insurance Code to define
and prohibit an additional
unfair claims practice. Senate
Bill 221 as amended.
Senate Bill 221 as amended,
having been read twice by Tidal
is referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Joint Resolution 22
introduced by representatives
Nicole Chavez, Reeb, and Hall
the 2nd. A joint resolution
proposing to amend Article 2
Section 13 of the Constitution
of New Mexico to provide that a
court of record may deny bail
for a person charged with a
felony offense if the
prosecuting authority proves by
clear and convincing evidence
that release conditions will not
reasonably protect any other
person or the community and to
allow the legislature to
designate by law dangerous.
or violent felony offenses for
which a court of record may
presume that release conditions
will not reasonably protect any
other person or the community
and deny bail unless the person
charged with a dangerous or
violent felony rebuts the
presumption by the preponderance
of the evidence. Senate Joint
House Joint resolution 22.
How's joint resolution 22
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Thence the house judiciary
Committee.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m. The House will come
to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journals
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon's session.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
Business Committee.
Seeing an objection is so
ordered. Happy legislative day
16 everybody.
Almost done.
36 more to go.
Lots of, uh, bills to be
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee still.
And how health. Any other
announcements before we go to a
3rd reading of legislation.
Any other birthdays to
celebrate?
I don't, I can't really see out
of this part of my eye right
there, so.
Gentlemen from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. No birthdays,
uh, although Mr. Speaker, today
was supposed to be the day that
we get our budget back from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, uh, body,
we don't yet have our budget
back. We're staying, uh,
monitoring that, Mr. Speaker, I
want to commend again the House.
The HAFC members for working,
uh, we did all of our work in
public, uh, we're able to take
votes as we went through the
process on important steps.
We've yet to see that, although
we appreciate the work from our
Senate colleagues, uh, and we'll
be looking closely to make sure
that not only do they do their
work, but they also do their
work, uh, with respect to for
what the House has done in the
budget, so just trying to let
the body know. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
The
a very scary committee made up
of.
represent of small,
representative Chatfield and
Representative Dow to go get her
budget back from the Senate.
It would actually be pretty
funny if you guys walked in
there and asked for the budget.
Just saying,
and
Gentle lady from.
Sierra Socorro
Donana Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. We do have a
birthday today. It is, uh, the
young man named Representative
Jack Chatfield's birthday today.
Oh boy.
Happy birthday to
You happy birthday.
Happy birthday.
Happy birthday to you.
29 never looked better,
Representative Chatfield.
Any other announcements,
gentlemen from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew, Mr.
Speaker and, um, you may wanna
add, uh, the chair of tax to
the, the group that goes over to
the Senate with respect to the
budget. My understanding, Mr.
Mr. Speaker and body is that
they're waiting for us to pass
the tax bill before they pass
the budget.
Well, that's not how the statute
reads, so they can hope all they
want, but that's not how the
statute reads.
Those pesky statutes.
Gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
It is so ordered.
Gentle lady from Donana
Representative Gallegos, are you
ready on item number 9 on the
regular calendar. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I am ready.
That the record reflect that all
action is necessary for placing
House Bill 71 on final passage
has been taken, and it is not
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution of the gentle lady
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
actually, uh, give me just a sec
to get my witness in. Uh, you
all may know her, Secretary
Grodinski and um we will begin
in just 1 2nd.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, um, I'm pleased today
to introduce the early child
education and care fund Transfer
Act currently currently the
early childhood education and
care fund annually distributes
an amount equal to 5% of a 3
year average of the funds.
A year to end value of 250
million, whichever value is
greater this bill seeks to
increase the minimum annual
distribution, um.
That would allow ECECD to
increase access to services for
over 10,000 more. I, I stress
more children after endowing
this fund with 300 million in
2020 we have seen the fund grow
just over $9 billion to the
careful stewardship, but the
state investment council because
of the substantial growth of the
fund projections now, um.
Anticipate distribute
distributions could exceed 500
million by 2028 or 2029. This
bill speeds up the timeline to
see these much needed funds
distributed towards making sure
children in New Mexico are
receiving the best possible
education and care, uh, from the
day they are born and with this
Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
There is a debate. The gentleman
from Valencia, Representative
Baca. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, there's a gentle leader from
Donotta County Yield, please.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I do yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
just talk about what these
funds, uh, just a large kind of
bucket items these funds
support uh for for our students.
Thank you Mr. Speaker we the
fund support um early education
in um
Prenatal.
Pre-kindergarten
this one
There we go.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have a
list and I didn't know where my
list was. OK, we're talking
about school readiness, child
care assistance, uh, pre-K home
visiting pay equity for pre-K
teachers early in early infant
early childhood mental health
consultation, uh, family, infant
and toddler rate increase.
Uh, we also are looking at
doulas and lactation support
infant and early childhood
mental health services, Medicaid
children's physical behavioral
health and a tribal investment
strategy and grants coordinator.
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what year was this
fund created and what was the
initial investment into this
fund?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, it was in
2020 and the initial was.
300 million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, uh, gentle lady from
Donana. So as I, I did hear that
in 2028, this, this fund is, is
kind of projected to be over $10
billion. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, that
is correct.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, do, do you know
what, what funding is available
for it in House Bill 2, is it,
is it 500 million or is it 400
million or what do we know what
that number is, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady you Mr. Speaker and
thank you gentlemen, uh,
currently it is at 400.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I have
an amendment that I hope will be
friendly. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I'm not sure if they
have it up there.
Uh, we do have an amendment.
What is the number on the
bottom?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
number is 231-899.1. get this
passed out, uh, gentlemen from
Valencia and posted online. Why
don't you give us a minute for
that to happen and then I'll
come back to you to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker and uh general
gentlemen, I would like a roll
call vote on that please.
OK, you have a rope problem.
Assuming it's unfriendly.
But if it's friendly, I don't
think we need a roll call, but.
Your first friendly amendment?
Wow.
Alright gentlemen, it looks like
the amendment's been passed out
and it is posted online,
gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Thank you, gentle lady. This
amendment is really a very
simple amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this body on both
sides of the aisle have shown
its support for education in New
Mexico and early child
education.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
this amendment just, uh,
proposes that the $400 million
that has been in House Bill 2.
Uh, be in place of swan line one
on page 2 lines 19 and 20.
Strike the 500 million.
And in $400 million in its
place.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is
a friendly amendment.
Wow. Friendly Amendment from the
gentleman from Valencia.
Congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentle lady.
As I, as I said before, this
body has really made a huge
investment with these funds and
you know, um, kind of adding to
this fund, it allows the body to
also look and through the
interim to see and come back if
there's additional funding that
will be needed, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I thank you for,
um, accepting the amendment and
I yield the floor. OK, um, my
apologies, I forgot to adopt the
amendment.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment?
Seeing none, we have an amended
bill.
Gentleman from Valencia, you
have yielded the floor.
Mr. Speaker, I yield the floor
and thank you.
We have further debate. The
young lady from Berlio and
Torres, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from, uh, Dona Anna,
please yield.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I yield,
uh, to the gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Deli. So
I have some questions uh about
the trust. So it says, so the
information I have is that the
trust funds as of December 2024
was 8.7 billion.
And is going to expand to $9.6
billion and $10.58 billion. Does
that sound correct, Mr. Speaker,
with the trust is looking like
right now?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm proud to tell you that is
correct.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady have
I know, uh, when we started this
program, uh, we're supposed to
be getting data back and I'm not
in the education committee, so
maybe it went through that. Do
we have data that's coming back
so I can see where the money is
going to, how it's turning out,
what we're getting out of it,
uh, Mr. Speaker and young lady.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so LLC of course
does their report annually as
does um the secretary for early
early.
Childhood um education she does
the report as well so thank you
Mr. Speaker so, uh, gentle lady,
how long have we had this
program? I thought we just
started with the early childhood
education, was it a couple years
ago? How long did we start doing
this and funding this and
putting this forward in New
Mexico, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, uh, July 1 of 2020. OK,
that's what I thought, Mr.
Speaker gentle lady, I was gonna
ask you for long term data, but
we wouldn't have any. We would
just have the data. Do we have
anything yet that shows any
difference in our children that
started in 2020 versus children
that didn't start in early
childhood education versus how
they, uh, compared to other
students who, who went and those
who didn't, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
In New Mexico, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So, um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, UNM has started to do um
some, some uh.
What?
Preliminary uh um.
They're the collective research.
Thank you. I couldn't think of
the word, uh, preliminary
research and they are starting
to extract that, you know, and
the, the data that is coming
back shows that we are making a
steady progress and we are.
Probably first in the nation at
this point.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. That's what I'm looking
for because anytime we're gonna
put our money to something, um,
I would like to see what the
data is showing, so I do have
some questions, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So on this 400
million now, that was a friendly
amendment. Um, can you, because
I had some questions about some
things that were in this where
this trust is going from going
to, can you explain to me, uh,
there's like 67 million going
towards childcare assistance.
What does that mean, Mr. Speaker
and gent lady?
Mr. uh, speaker and uh gentle
lady it pays for child care
expenses.
Mr. Speaker Dili, and in what
sense, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, for providers on
behalf of uh families it it puts
teachers uh in classrooms. OK,
Mr. Pinker, thank you, and
gentle lady. And then when we
talk about child care quality
support. What do we mean by
that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
provides coaches and um it we're
constantly assessing the program
to make sure it's uh providing
the needs of the children in
those classrooms.
OK, Mr. Speaker, what is the
It's the there's 10 million for
the family, infant and toddler
fit program. Can you explain to
me a little bit what that is?
So Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
it's infants and toddlers with
developmentally uh developmental
delays, um, and those are the
probably the the children that
we need to help the most gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. I
appreciate when I get answers so
I can understand where the
money's going to. I think that
answers all the questions except
we have 600,000 for doulas. Can
you tell me what that is for,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, you
know.
do
are um they've been around for
generations and they provide
services for women, uh,
prenatally and, and after the
after a child's born very, very
important and it's a transfer to
the Department of Health.
OK, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate it
because I did have legit
questions because I didn't know
what some of these acronyms and
what some of these programs were
for. So thank you Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. There is
further debate. The gentleman
from Quay.
Colfax.
Curry, Harding, San Miguel and
Union, I messed up.
Representative Chatfield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, there's a gentlela heels.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, I propose to you
that this year I've seen more
friendly amendments taken.
than ever I have seen in the 7
years that I've been in this
building, and I think that is a
healthy House of
Representatives working like it
should do to work out problems,
starting with two varying
opinions and working towards the
middle to come to a, a good
compromise that helps everybody
out and does a good job. I, I
appreciate the gentle lady's
willingness to work with us, and
I, I fully ask everybody to vote
for this bill. It's a good bill.
Thank you.
Bye.
See no further debate, the lady
to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I asked
that the that we, I asked House
Bill 71 as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 71 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Vote's about to close.
Gallegos, don't forget to vote.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 66 in the affirmative, 3 in
the negative. House Bill 71 as
amended Hauli passed his house.
It's a gentle lady from Lee
representative Senator Cortez
ready on item number one on the
supplemental calendar, Mr.
Speaker, can you get me to that
point that all action necessary
for placing House Bill 197 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution that
general lady to explain the
bill. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my expert
is Tommy Hernandez, and he is
with the Alzheimer's
Association. Mr. Speaker, in
short, what this bill does is
that it adds to the
Alert. Mr. Speaker, right now, a
medical diagnosis is required to
issue a silver alert for anybody
who has gone missing. Mr.
Speaker, typically the person
has Alzheimer's or other
cognitive issues. This bill now
adds that the person merely
shows signs of cognitive decline
or impairment, we can issue the
alert. And more than anything,
Mr. Speaker, this bill will help
individuals who have gone
missing, just returned to their
family.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions. There is
the gentleman from Otero
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind, gentle lady, please,
yield.
Mr. Speaker, do I have to?
Technically you don't.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my dear
friend, the gentleman from
Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I did see this bill in
my committee and I think I
swiftly moved to Du pass after I
read it because it was so
awesome. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, can you tell me a little
bit more about the thought
process behind the bill, where
it comes from, why we need it.
Thank you so much for asking
that question, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Well, a New Mexican
was showing signs, but he
wasn't.
You know, medically diagnosed,
and he got lost here in New
Mexico into a further rural
part, and they didn't find him
till 24 hours later in another
city. And if we have this bill
in place, we'd help these
individuals make it home safely.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That's,
that's a good enough reason for
me to vote for it, and I urge
the body to do the same. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Thank you,
gentlemen. There's further
debate. The gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Duncan you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentle
lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I'd gladly yield to
the gentleman, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I thought this bill
meant something different.
And what it did
Um
the jokes, poor joke.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
wholeheartedly agree with this
in a, in a business that I own,
um, we're a lockdown unit and so
we don't have this very often,
but some of the folks in my
community that do have this that
aren't locked down units, they
have this, so this is a great
bill, but uh again, I urge the
body to pass it.
There is for the debate,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does
the gentle lady from the Guild.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So I, I see that
this, uh, that your bill expands
the silver silver alert
definition. Um, how far are you
willing to
Expand the silver alert
definition, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are you
proposing an amendment?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I am proposing an
amendment, but let's first, uh,
if I could discuss the
properties, you know, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady in New
Mexico that uh silver is uh one
of the commodities that are
Native American population, uh,
uses a lot in jewelry and som
speaker and gentle lady, I I've
been watching the price of
silver on the uh stock market,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
just in the last month there's
been quite a bit of volatility,
$33.38 is what it is today.
But within the last 30 days,
it's been down as low as $31. So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
have an amendment here that
proposes that uh if the price of
silver gets down to $25. That
that an alert would go out to
every investor who's invested in
New Mexico in silver, um, so I
just want to see Mr. Speaker and
generally if this is a friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, while I deeply admire
and respect the many years that
you have put the work in this
house.
That is what I want to preface
before I tell you that it is not
a friendly amendment.
Oh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, uh, I'd like to have a roll
call vote.
OK, no one raise your hands.
There you go. OK, Mr. Speaker,
maybe I can have a voice vote on
this.
Mr. Speaker, OK, I, I think that
maybe this might be called log
rolling since it has nothing to
do with the underlying, OK, so
I, Mr. Speaker, I would, uh,
revoke at this point, uh,
forwarding this amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
no
further debate generalator
closes. Mr. Speaker, I'm, I now
I move that House Bill 197 do
now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 197. The
vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The boys are close by a vote of
68 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. House Bill 197 has
newly passed this house.
Congratulations.
Generated to sing.
All right, Mr. Speaker, drink
them if he got them. And with
that, we'll get this party
started.
You guys can feel free to sing
along.
ver.
Bye
of
ah
This brassostra.
Just
there.
Get revolver
revolver.
Well.
Alright, congratulations.
Is the gentlemen from.
Sandoval in Santa Fe.
If you, if your bill passes,
will you also sing?
Mr. Speaker, no.
That I would ask.
Let's retrof reflect that all
action is there for placing
Senate Bill 5 as
5 times amended on final passage
has been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, members of the body
sent Bill 5 as 5 times amended
is the game commission Reform
Act. So as my colleague, the
lady from Brown Leo, put it,
it's Senate Bill 5,
Um, and I want to explain how it
got to be, uh,
So send Bill 5 started, of
course, started in the Senate.
We went through 3 committees in
the Senate side before going to
the floor and at each step along
the way, it picked up an
amendment.
So that was an amendment in Sa
rules that was an amendment in
saying conservation that was an
amendment in finance and finally
there was a Senate floor
amendment. So when it came over
to this side, we had a bill we
had, uh, 4 different amendments.
Uh, the amendments included
amendments to prior amendments,
uh, it was difficult to read.
So in house energy, we did
another amendment and the House
Energy Amendment was to combine
all the prior amendments into
one document and then we added a
couple of other minor changes
and that document appears in the
House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee
report.
So if you want to view the bill
whether you're in the chamber or
maybe listening at home, the,
the entire bill is as it
currently is situated, is
reproduced in the House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee report.
So that's the version of the
bill, uh, that I will be working
from today.
Just so everyone's clear because
it's a little confusing.
Um, Mr. Speaker, members of the
body, I want to thank my
co-sponsors on this bill. Um,
it's, uh, Senator Campos, uh,
Senator Worth, Senator Brantley,
um, and uh our own Chairman
Small and myself, uh, so we've
had bipartisan sponsorship on
this.
Um
Mr. Speaker, members of the, I'd
like to talk a little bit about
what the bill doesn't do.
Um
It doesn't
Change the focus of the game
department away from hunting and
fishing.
Hunting and fishing is
incredibly important activity in
New Mexico culturally, uh,
historically, economically, that
will continue.
The bill doesn't seek to end
hunting and fishing.
In any way.
Nor does it create a path to
ending hunting and fishing.
The bill doesn't repeal the
Jennings law.
So if there is wildlife on your
property, uh, that is a threat
to, um, uh, life or limb or
property, you can shoot it.
That's the Jennings law.
Um, the bill doesn't change the
E plus system.
How we award el tax.
Does not touch that.
The bill doesn't designate any
species as an endangered
species.
Nor does it give the agency the
ability to do so.
So the designation of
endangered, threatened or
endangered species is a federal
designation.
is not something our department
of game and fish does.
It doesn't allow the department
to designate critical habitat on
private land.
It doesn't regulate ranching.
Or farming
Or the ability to rancher firm.
And it doesn't require the
department to regulate every
species in New Mexico.
It does not do that.
So here's what the bill does do.
In my mind, um,
Uh, there are 4 parts to this
package.
Uh, there is the, the mission
mission clarification of the
agency.
There's the commission reform
piece and I'll go into this in
greater detail.
There is a fee increase which
hasn't happened in almost 20
years.
And then in a in in House Bill 2
there's separate funding to
allow the agency to do its work.
Um, so the first part, we're
clarifying the mission of the
agency, and I, I want to
emphasize that because the
agency already works on non-game
species and that's sometimes
people don't understand that
they think what we're doing is
we're taking the focus away from
uh game species and including
everything when the reality is
they're already working on
non-game species.
The bill seeks to give the
agency and the commission the
authority in the discretion the
authority to regulate any
species.
But the discretion not to.
So they're not gonna, they, they
don't won't have the resources
to go out and regulate every
species, nor is there the need.
You know, generally they address
species in decline.
And they do this in a way that
Our goal is to prevent federal
threatened and endangered
listing because once the species
gets listed, then really onerous
land use requirements and other
requirements from the feds.
are put in place.
So the agency is sort of our
front lines, our buffer.
And we want them to work on
species that may be in decline
and maintain healthy
populations.
To avoid federal listening.
The second part of the bill
reforms the game commission
itself to bring stability and
profession professionalism to
the commission.
Um, it provides for 3 at-large
seats and they have a geographic
and political diversity and one
of those seats, uh, must be a
tribal member here in New
Mexico.
Then there are 4 what I call
sort of position seats.
There's a rancher or farmer.
Hunter Engler.
The Conservationist and a
scientist.
All members of the commission,
all members, regardless of what
seat you're in must possess
knowledge of wildlife hunting
and fishing.
All of them
Uh, Mr. Speaker, members of the
body, there's been some
occasionally I hear the concern
that
It's the Department of Game and
fish or it would become the uh
Department of Wildlife.
And there's, why is there only
one hunter angler on the game
commission.
And the answer to that is that's
a minimum. It's not a maximum.
The history of this commission
is that it's been full of
hunters and anglers.
In the current statute has no
minimum.
So we're actually going beyond
the current statute and making
sure that we have that voice on
the commission.
But in no way would I expect
that to be the only.
Hunter or angler on the
commission, obviously, uh, the
rancher farmer could be a
fisherman. The scientists could
be a hunter. I mean, in the at
large members could be all these
things.
So we have a commission of 7
people with diverse backgrounds
and diverse interests and we
would not expect them to have
only a singular focus.
While on the commission.
The same is true for the A
position.
The we require at least one ag
person.
It's a minimum. It's not a
maximum.
The commission reformed piece
also creates a nominating
committee.
And this I think is really
important, um, not only for this
bill, but also as a change from,
from current law. Currently,
what happens is that the members
of the commission serve at the
will of the governor.
And so when we get a new
governor,
We get a new commission.
Um, and so as a result there are
these, these wide swings in, in,
um, you know, policy direction
management.
And what we're trying to do is
even that out.
And so we start with this
nominating committee.
Uh, the members of the
nominating committee are 4
members.
Uh, one's appointed by.
The same protem won by the
speaker.
And then by the minority leader
in each chamber.
OK, so we have a legislative
voice in the nominee, uh,
commission.
And it's bipartisan, so I think
that's really important.
Then the governor would make two
other appointments at large, and
then a 3rd appointment from the
governor who would be a tribal
member.
The nominating committee would
evaluate candidates and submit a
list of at least 3 candidates to
the governor for each seat.
And the governor would have to
select from that list.
And that means the most
important way that we're taking
politics.
Out of the commission.
Because we will have this
vetting process which is similar
to what we do with judges,
similar to what we do with
Regents similar to what we do
with the PRC.
We think we're going to get a
list of highly qualified people
for the governor to pick from.
Um, and then those members, uh,
Well, let me go finally the
commission reform piece.
Includes 4 new advisory
positions.
And this was actually started uh
as a request from uh
agricultural interests. They
wanted to have the Department of
Agriculture as an advisory
position to the commission.
And I thought that was a good
idea.
And so in addition to the
department of bag, we actually
have 3 others. We have, uh, the
outdoor recreation division.
The state land office in the
Department of Indian Affairs.
And the goal here is to increase
communication between the
commission and these other, uh,
agencies, these other
departments that have um
important business or an
important relationship to uh
wildlife hunting and fishing.
Mr. Speaker, the third part of
the bill in the is a fee
increase in the 4th part of the
bill is, uh, funding for the
agency and if I may, I would
like to yield to my co-sponsor,
Chairman Small to discuss those
pieces.
Gentlemen from Donana, thank you
very much, Mr. Speaker, uh, and
thank you to the gentleman from
uh Santa Fe and Sandoval, um,
Mr. Speaker and Bonnie, I'm
really pleased to talk about the
3rd element of uh this piece of
legislation. It starts because
our Department of Game and Fish
is doing a pretty darn good job
and an awesome state. Mr.
Speaker, uh, body, we're
actually the 4th most biodiverse
state in the entire country.
Second, when it comes to bird
biodiversity.
Mr. Speaker in body, but that's
a great example because for our
200 non-game, uh, bird species
and like many in this body, I
love to hunt quail. Turkey is
coming up, as we know, April
15th, but there's one biologist
for the 200 non game, um.
Bird species still our game and
fish does a great job on that.
But Mr. Speaker and body, um, we
have uh for over 20 years, we
haven't raised the license fees
that myself, uh, my family, and
so many others in this body pay.
Uh, when we apply uh and are
successful in applying for
purchasing over the counter
license fees. Simply put, uh,
Mr. Speaker and body our game
and fish department.
Our department needs more
resources, and after years of
negotiations amongst a wide set
of different stakeholders, uh,
from the backcountry hunters and
anglers to the New Mexico guides
and Outfitters, uh, the Mexico
Houndsman's Association and many
others, uh, the first part of
this bill is a modest adjustment
in hunting and fishing license
fees, Mr. Speaker, Badi, these
fees are stead in statute, so
the reason why they're in the
bill is because we have to deal
with.
with him in statute. Um, it is
very important. The department
is facing a situation where
potentially within 3 years,
they're out of funding and they
will have to start laying folks
off. They are in a place, Mr.
Speaker, body, where it's very
hard to recruit the high level
of talent that they need. And
so, Mr. Speaker, and body, um,
Again, after a great deal of
negotiation between the
department, hunters and anglers,
outfitters and guides, uh, in
negotiation that was based upon
looking at other similar states,
states act frankly, we're better
then. We have more biodiversity,
more hunting opportunity than
many of the other Western
states, uh, we bring a license
fee increase to the table, um,
the license free increases for
New Mexicans, which is I know
most.
important to all of us in this
body, Mr. Speaker, uh, about $15
a year. Pretty darn minimal when
you consider the kind of
world-class opportunities that
we have the discount and no cost
licenses for youth, seniors,
residents with disabilities and
others, uh, stay in place. Mr.
Speaker, uh, embody in addition
though to the license fee
increases that have been, uh,
negotiated amongst a wide set of
stakeholders
ers supported by the outfitters
and guides supported by the
Houndsman's Association
backcountry hunters and anglers
and others, we know there is
additional funding that is
needed. There, uh, we've done a
little bit of that already,
$2.75 million for species of
greatest conservation need that
come from the bipartisan created
um the uh in uh uh.
Landed in and it's a great uh
reminder, Mr. Speaker, my expert
is Doctor Brittany Fallon
reminded me the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund. That's
an annual amount that's going to
the Department of Game and Fish
working on species of greatest
conservation need, uh, and Mr.
Speaker Bondi, these are species
that, uh, have a great deal of
impact, uh, for their
communities for the ecosystems
that they inhabit. I know we've
talked a little bit about uh
beavers in this.
space, Mr. Speaker, and body,
but they are nature's engineers
and the amount of water that
they hold on to the land, uh,
helps fight forest fires. It
helps fish habitat. It helps a
whole lot of different things.
Mr. Speaker, and body, um, now,
in addition to that money that's
through the the legacy fund, uh,
we, I'm very pleased that we've
included an additional, um,
roughly $10.5 million that's
going to the gang, uh, the game
department over the next 3
years again for focus on species
of greatest conservation need
and in that case beavers. Mr.
Speaker, body, that comes down
to the fact that we know.
the department is doing a very
good job. They have a monumental
mission. They have the 4th most
biodiverse state in the country.
Historically, fewer resources
than other states. When you go
to surrounding states, their
license fees are going to be a
heck of a lot more expensive
than New Mexico. Those
departments in addition to
getting other funding from
sources like lottery funding and
other things. So, Mr. Speaker,
uh, and Bonnie, when we put all
this together, a modest license
fee increase that.
brings us closer to where our
pure Western states are, there
was negotiated amongst a wide
set of stakeholders, the 2.75
million every year that's going
from the land of enchantment
Legacy Fund, and then the uh
10.5 million over three years
through the grow appropriation
to the department. We're really
giving them uh unprecedented
tools to support uh our New
Mexicans in our New Mexico, uh,
uh, biodiversity.
world-class wildlife, uh, that
is under a lot of pressure right
now, Mr. Speaker Badi, I know
that we're, we all know, uh,
we're facing drought, we're
facing some pretty tough things
right now. The department is
going to need more tools with
which to voluntarily work with
folks. Mr. Speaker, uh, Bonnie,
I'll just close by saying things
like the open gate program, uh,
things like, um, uh, enhancement
of habitat working with
landowners or other land
stewards. In fact,
Mr. Speaker, embody the
association so soil and water
conservation districts supports
this legislation because there's
going to be more tools and more
funding for the department to
work with, uh, folks all across
New Mexico in support of our
magnificent uh state. So Mr.
Speaker, uh, thank you for that
gentlemen. Thank you for
allowing me to add those words
and I'll, uh, yield back to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, so just I want to
add just two things uh before we
open up for questions. First is,
uh, you know, I appreciate, uh,
the gentleman from Donana his
support, uh, and especially on
the funding piece. I've been
working on this issue for I
think 8 years. Um, I, I think
this bill is ready. I think it's
much improved from some past
efforts and I, I just want to
say that I can remember the very
first time I started to get
involved in this reform effort.
It was clear to me and to
everyone in the room.
That if we were going to clarify
the mission if we're going to
ask the game department to do
more. We had to change their
funding formula that that
additional work could not just
come from hunters and anglers
and from their, their fees and
federal match that we had to
bring more money to the table,
uh, and we've done that and so
I'm very proud of that and uh
Mr. Speaker, members of the body
I also forgot to uh introduce my
experts, uh, they are Judy
Coleman with Audubon Southwest
and Jesse Dubell.
with the New Mexico Wildlife
Federation.
And with that, uh, Mr. Speaker,
I would stand for questions.
Seeing no debate to close.
Just kidding. There's plenty of
debate. You settle in, settle
in. Got 3 hours of this. So
let's go to the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero County.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentleman from Bernayo yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are you?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
You know
I don't know if I've ever had
more of a, uh, flood in my inbox
in this legislation, Mr.
Speaker, and people from one
side to the other.
And, you know, a lot of the
people that don't know a lot of
my history is I am a hunting
guide. I work for lots of
outfitters and, um, you know,
game and fish.
They
They taught me my first hunter's
safety and, you know, I've, I've
worked with them pretty much my
whole
Adolescent life as well as my
adult life. And, you know, I
know that Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it's hard, change is
hard.
And
After being in this house, Mr.
Speaker.
I'm used to not getting my way
most of the time, and I have
learned how to compromise, and I
wish I'd had this experience
when I, when I, while I was in
my 30s.
But Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
One of the things that always
bothers me is when I hear the
word conservation.
And conservation means to some
one thing.
And some another.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I wanna, I wanna provide you
with a story.
In my district.
That
We'll segue right into this
bill, and I'll start my
questioning.
But whenever I was running for
office 3 years ago,
I met a family.
Call the Goss family.
And the Goss family, they were
very reserved with me and
I'm not for sure if they thought
I was a polished politician or
not.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as I
listen to their story.
They talked to me about
conservation.
And they talked to me about
endangered Species Act.
And they talked about wildlife,
elk being the main.
Topic
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
This ranch.
Used to run 1200.
Mama cows
And it was um it was a
generational type ranch.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Fast forwarding 30 years with
the word conservation.
Fencing all of their cattle off
a riparian areas.
And they're in the business to
put weight on the cattle.
And their cattle are having to
walk 3 to 5 miles to get water.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
The endangered Species Act.
The, the, um, the little
treasured mouse.
That doesn't exist over there.
They can't find him.
I've been over there.
I've talked to them.
They spent 10 days over there
trying to find the mouse. I've
never been mouse hunting before
ever or tried to trap mice.
But they did it for 10 days.
And I asked the gentleman,
After all, after their herds had
been cut.
In half.
More than half, they're at 500,
well, they're, I'll, I'll tell
you more of that story, so they
were down to 500.
And I'm asking this gentleman.
Out of the 10 days that you've
been here,
What kind of experience do you
have catching these metal mice.
And he goes, I'm the best, I'm
the best there is.
And I've been here 10 days, and
I put these traps out and I've
let them soak.
And I haven't caught one mouse.
And I said, OK, well, that's
good to know. So conservation.
Envi endangered Species Act.
Now
My constituents are down to 150
head.
They went from 1200 to 150 head
in the name of conservation.
Endangered Species Act.
And I haven't even got on the
elk yet.
Now, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I love elk.
I make my living with.
And like the gentleman from
Donana said.
We live in a world class place
to hunt.
I can show you my phone and I'll
show you a world class is.
400 class bulls.
Management
So I, I wanna make sure that
everybody understands that I do
love elf, and you could tell I
like elk at the end of hunting
season because I kind of smell
like one for about 3 or 4 days
until I can finally get that
stink off of me.
But Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
They're supposed to be somewhere
around 11,000 head of elk.
Over in the Sacramentos and some
of these big allotments, well,
all of area uh District 34.
Hunt zone 34 and
There's probably close to 10,000
over there. They're supposed to
be 1000.
There's more like 10,000.
We've had some of the scientists
come down from New Mexico State
University.
And the take that these animals
are taking, there's nothing left
for a beef cow. They're eating
it all. They're hung up in
fences, and I'm glad to know,
I'm glad to hear you say that
our E+ is still intact, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, because a
lot of these ranchers depend on
that because of how destructive
elk can be from waters.
To fences.
And trying to keep all those up.
So Mister Speaker and gentlemen,
I told you that I really don't
like change, but what's the
problem that this bill is trying
to fix, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um,
So first off, let me say, um,
uh, you know, I appreciate you
sharing that with us, um, and I
understand the um the burden
that you're describing and the
frustration that you're
describing, um, I, I would just
like to point out that when
you're talking about.
That kind of conservation that
endangered Species Act that
Meadow Mouse.
We're talking about federal law.
We're not talking about our
Department of game and fish.
You know, and so what, what,
what this bill is about and what
this bill is trying to fix is a,
a game department and the game
commission which has not been.
Um, performing as we would like.
Uh, there has been turnover.
Um,
Uh, there has been vacancies,
um, intern, not just like when
we get a new governor,
we can mostly expect to get a
new commission. But, but during
the governor's term, there's a
lot of turnover. There are times
where.
The game commission has been
unable to meet.
Because they can't make a
quorum, they didn't have enough
members.
Um, so we have this structure
where we have a game commission,
um, that oversees this agency.
And it's not working well, and
the reason it's not working
well, well, I believe is because
um there's too much politics
involved.
Uh, there's too much turnover,
uh, and this, this bill, the
combination of the nominating
committee, which I think, um, is
a big improvement from prior
efforts.
In a staggered terms, so 6-year
terms for for a commissioner and
staggering in such a way that
when a new governor comes in,
they can't replace the
commission commissioners can
only be removed for cause.
So I think once we have these
protections in place, I think
we're gonna have renewed
interest in serving on the game
commission. And I think those
commissioners we're gonna, we're
gonna get people who are
qualified and vetted and
professional and they're gonna
really dig into the job.
And I think we're gonna get
better results.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen from Berlio. So.
What is the makeup of the
commission now just for the
body.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
first of all, gentlemen from
Sandville and Santa Fe, uh,
definitely not Brio, just, just
so you know, um, uh, it's a 7
member commission, uh, there are
5 members that are selected.
Uh, from various groups of
counties.
Uh, there, uh, then there are
two at-large members. They're
also supposed to be two members,
one in acquisition and one a uh
someone who's been involved in
uh wildlife conservation those
appointments, uh, at times in
the past it's been unclear who's
serving in what position because
people have just been appointed
without saying.
You're, you know, in this county
area, you're the ag person or
whatever, um, but that's the
makeup. It's, it's 5,
groups of counties you have to
pick one from each, uh, and then
too large.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen from Sandoval and
Santa Fe. I apologize for that.
Um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
On the board that we have now,
the commissioners we have now.
What, what were their thoughts
on putting this new board
together, this reforming this
new commission.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
haven't had, you know, formal
conversations with the current
board. Uh, we've certainly heard
from many past uh commissioners
and we've had um
You know, a few conversations
here and there, uh, with current
commissioners just, you know,
you, you run, you run into him
in the hall and, and, oh, yeah,
you're working on that bill and
this is why I think that kind of
thing.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
why not? Why, why wouldn't you
ask them, since they've been in
the business for so long.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, first of
all, I, I don't think the
current Crofo commissioners have
been in the business that long,
uh, because of the turnover and
there are some, uh, there are
some vacancies. So we've had a
really good, uh, vigorous
conversations with people that
do have lots of experience, uh,
in the, in the department and on
the commission, uh, not as much
with current commissioners.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
I heard a, uh,
A phrase the other day called
mileage.
And
You know, when somebody, if you
walk onto a, an aircraft.
And you see.
The guy with gray hair.
And the guy with just dark hair.
I always feel a little bit more
comfortable with the guy with
the gray hair, because maybe
he's seen a little bit more, and
I call that mileage. That's my
new phrase now, mileage. I don't
want to call you elder or I
don't wanna call you
experienced. I'm gonna say you
got mileage and it seems like
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen that
Some of these commissioners, and
I know some of them, they have
mileage.
And I just would think that
their expertise would at least
have been brought to the table
to see what they thought about
this new reform that we're
talking about.
But since they weren't Mr.
Speaker, I'll move on.
Have you heard any complaints
about this, and I know that I've
had lots of people visit my
office.
For and against.
But have you had complaints on
it?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
complaints on what we're trying
to fix or complaints on the
bill.
Complaints on the bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
let me, let me step back a
little and go through what,
what's happened. Um, so first
off, you know, I personally been
working on this. I think it's
been 8 years. I have to go back.
It was certainly I knew the
Martinez administration.
Um, we, uh, you know, made some
progress, um, 2 years ago, we
passed a commission reform
piece, uh, with bipartisan
support.
Uh, that bill was pocket vetoed
by our current governor, uh,
that bill lacked.
The nominating committee
structure.
So I'm pleased that we're back
with what I think is a better
structure.
Uh, in the interim this year,
the governor's office, uh, to
their credit convened a large
group of stakeholders, uh, and
we had meetings up in the the
cabinet room up in the 4th floor
if you've been in there or seen
pictures, the giant stone table,
um, every seat around the table
taken uh chairs up against the
wall all filled.
Um, a, a wide, uh, uh, diverse
group of stakeholders, um,
conservation organizations,
hunting and fishing
organizations, agricultural
organizations, uh, the
association of counties, um, all
in that room working on this
bill.
Um, the
You're not everyone was in the
room, uh, you know, there are
some limitations on, on how many
people we include, but it was a
big group.
Um, we have worked out the
language in this bill with
Just about everyone.
Not everyone
But just about everyone.
And the holdout right now seems
to be the agricultural interest.
Um
And, uh, you know, that's,
that's their right. uh, I
respect that. I, I will say two
things about that, um, I, you
know, I, I think if you talk to
them,
Uh, they will tell you that I
was, uh, open receptive uh and
communicate with them about this
bill.
So I think that's important.
Um, I also, if you look at the
ag position.
Uh, there was concern about the
way that we had drafted that and
and we were taking that out of
existing law, and we didn't want
the ag position that some be
someone who, who bought a ranch,
you know, by the farm and just
it was sort of a hobby.
Uh, so we
Took their language, they
drafted the language that's now
in the bill to really require
that person to be involved in
production agriculture.
Um, we did that because we
thought that was the right thing
to do.
And then the, the last piece
which is new, of course, is
adding the New Mexico Department
of Agriculture, uh, as an
advisory position on the
commission.
So we haven't won over that the
agricultural interests, um, but
we certainly haven't shut them
out.
Let me pause you right there's a
been a request by the gentleman
for to take off the jackets.
See, no objection, approved.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
Would you agree that we get a
lot more done when we sit around
a table, like ladies and
gentlemen,
And talk things through, then
emails and people coming by our
offices and when we have all the
parties.
All the stakeholders looking at
each other in the eyes, would
you say that that is a more
productive meeting, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I, I, I would propose something
of a hybrid that is. Um, I think
it's, it's really useful to have
the meetings where everyone's
there.
But I also think it's really
important to have those one on
one conversations, you know,
come, come to my office and sit
and sit down, let's talk. Let's
go out to lunch and let's talk,
let's have breakfast, you know,
and that's, that to me has been
really useful and I've done that
in this bill and use that as a
way not only to develop that
relationship but but to learn
from that person like what's
really motivating you? What are
your concerns, you know, how,
how can I fit that in the bill?
And you know, honestly, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think
that's been that hybrid approach
has been really successful with
this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
So I've had that those same
meetings, however,
I'm gonna just tell you that I
feel like I've been given half
truths.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
And I've been given the good
things.
About the bill
And then the more I dig into it,
Then the possible things that I
might not like as well. And I'm
not just gonna say it's a bad
bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
because
I want to remain your friend.
I'm not gonna call you Bill bad.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
feel like I've been given half
truths.
And whenever I bring everybody
to the table.
And everybody's a little bit
more inclined to tell it
completely like it is. I'm not
saying, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that people are
lying.
They just don't give the whole
truth.
And, and for me, and as many
outfitters and ranchers that I
have in my district.
I have to know this bill front
and back.
In order to make a good vote on
it. And Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
The way
We've been paced this year. It's
really hard to just sit down and
focus on this bill.
Because
we have so many bills on the
floor, and we have so many bills
in committee, and there's not a
whole lot of time in the, in the
interim, and, you know, I'm
always amazed by how
We are able to debate these
bills and flesh them out and
make sure that we expose
everything, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
But one of my other questions
was, um,
Wildlife are located mainly in
rural New Mexico. Would you,
would you agree to that, Mr. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
first, just let me see if, if
you feel that you've had half
truth, you know, I would love to
know what that is. I mean, I
would love to be able to clear
that air, um, uh, I, I, I
certainly hope you haven't.
You don't feel you've received
half truths from me.
Um, and I'm happy to talk to you
about anything that's in the
bill.
Uh, in terms of, uh, wildlife,
you know, I, I, I think there's
wildlife throughout the city of
New Mexico. I think we have
incredible, uh, biodiversity. I
do think you have a better
opportunity to view wildlife in
rural areas. Uh, I would agree
with you there.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank
you, gentlemen, and just for the
record, I will say you have
always been truthful with me.
And, uh, one thing, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I was actually
taught something.
And it, and it taught me another
thing here in this house.
And I'm just gonna share this
with everybody so you understand
if you don't, if you go to
Chairman McQueen's.
Energy Committee.
Call and ask him or go to his
office and ask him if he has any
questions on your bill. And I
did that, and I was treated
fairly, and he did have
questions and matter of fact,
some of them weren't even that
they were bad ones for me, good
for him, maybe bad for me.
You've always been square with
me, uh, Chairman McQueen, I
appreciate that. Mr. Speaker
and, and gentlemen,
So, um,
Currently we have district
representatives on the game
commission. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
the, the current structure, uh,
yes, their, their districts in,
and they, they're sort of groups
of counties.
Um, but they are described as
districts.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen. So here,
here's one thing that if you
could correct this for me or
make me feel a little bit better
about it.
So under this bill, could we end
up with a game commission whose
members don't live near the
wildlife or citizens who
encounter them in our rural
counties.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't think so. Uh, and there
are a couple of reasons I don't
think that the first off is
within the, uh, at large
positions and within the
position positions each of those
people have to be from a
different county. Um, so it's
not all 7 different counties,
it's the 3 and the 4. So we have
some geographic uh spread that
way. Secondly, because we have a
single person making the final
selections.
We have the ability for that
person to consider where those
people are from. Um, and I, I
think back to the, um, the
season's redistricting
Committee, which was appointed
by a variety of people, each,
each person got to 0.1 person to
that committee and when I was
on, when the dust settled, there
were a lot of people from urban
areas, and I think it's because
no one was sort of looking at
the big picture. And in this
because we have the final
selections going to the
governor, I think the
or whoever that is, uh, can, can
look at that big picture and
the, the third thing I, I want
to mention that I'm probably
gonna bring this up a number of
times a day.
Is I want you to think about the
process for proposing and then
also think about the process
that's currently on the books.
So, so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
the process that's currently on
the books has these, these 5
groups of counties, um, and if
you look at the counties that,
you know, each of these counties
has some cities in it.
You know, you could, if, if you
were
If you weren't paying attention,
you could end up with urban
people from each of these
counties.
Um, so we've got, you know, 11
of the districts is Bernalillo
County.
You know, obviously, you know,
Albuquerque's in there. We got
uh Santa Fe.
Um, we've got District 3, which
is a group of counties, but
that, that includes Farmington
and Los Alamos.
Um, District 2.
Includes Donana, so Las Cruces,
uh, in District one, which is
maybe the most rural, but it
still includes Roswell Obbs.
Um, so you know, there is, there
is that sort of spread, uh,
that's 5.
different counties under this
structure, you know, under the
proposed bill, we have a minimum
of 4.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
I think our game commission, I,
you know, I think that's the
newest part of this bill. Is
that correct?
So, uh, section 5 is, is new in
this bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, just one
second.
So, Mr. Speaker, Section 5.
Which if you're looking at the
house energy uh committee report
is on, starts on page 9,
is new material, uh, and that
gets to a species.
So that's that you're we're
stepping away from the
commission, I believe.
Yes, that's the one I'm looking
at. So Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
The language in section A of
this bill says that in addition
to the species defined as
protected.
In chapter 17, the commission is
authorized to extend management
and protection by rule or policy
to any species of wildlife.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
correct, and that's the
authority I was talking about,
um, but also coupled with the
discretion.
To do that or not do that.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
thank you for that. So I'm gonna
ask you a question. I don't
expect you to tell me one, but
since you've been working on
this for so long, I'm sure that
you know, um,
As, as, uh, in chapter 17.
Which species?
Are listed and is that the ones
that does this legislature put
that into play that, uh, that's
the species that we're gonna
hunt and manage.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
One of the things this bill does
is it clarifies the mission of
the game commission and the game
department, and it does that by,
as I said, authorizing them.
To manage any species in New
Mexico if it's warranted. Um, we
do have a list of species
currently in statute, um, and
the list is.
In one sense it's broad in other
sense it's narrow, um, it's, uh,
it's brought in the sense in
that there's a lot of species on
here.
You know, that's true. And it's
narrow in the sense that it's,
if you're not on the list,
you're not on the list.
Um, so the, the list includes
things you would expect to see,
uh, elk and deer.
Um, it includes some things you
might not expect to see, uh.
Kudu.
Are you dad? I, I, I don't even
know what that is, um,
squirrels.
Uh, includes waterfowl, that's
kind of broad, um.
Uh, it includes some short or
some other birds, you know,
it's, uh, some fish.
But it's because it's
list-based, there's, they're
obviously emissions from the
list.
Um
And so
That's, that's
Uh, you know, in statute, so
they already have authority and
obligation to regulate their
species, um, there's also, they
can regulate species as a
species of greatest conservation
need, uh, which is not the same
as Federal endangered species,
but this is a species in New
Mexico, um, that might need uh
extra attention to help stay off
the federal endangered species
list, and I think there are
about 400, uh, species on that
list, and I believe that it
already includes insects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
So in this 2024 New Mexico
statutes, chapter 17, Gam and
fish outdoor recreation.
What
Does this legislature.
Team and fish.
That we can have these different
species on this list and your
new proposed board.
We'll be able to make that
determination and take the
legislature completely out of
that decision making.
Mr. Speaker and, I mean, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, well, I, I
mean,
Clearly the, the game commission
can't adopt the statute, right?
So they can't, yeah, they can't
add to the statute. The statute
is the statute. We can change
the statute. But the, the game
commission can, uh, by rule,
which is a public process decide
that they need to regulate, take
of another species that's not on
the list.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen, and, you know,
for the body.
One thing I just want to make a
plug is, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
You have a new Democrat caucus
chair, uh, with the sportsman's
Caucus, uh, Chairman Small and
you got a, a new Republican one.
Harlan Vincent. And so we want
to make sure that we are going
to bring some people into these
caucuses and start teaching them
about hunting and fishing. And
And just for the body, chapter
17 of New Mexico Game and Fish.
Right now
We, we recognize as game
animals, odd ads.
Um
I didn't know we recognized
Kudu.
But Ory, pronghorn or antelope,
elk deer.
Squirrels
Bear, cougar, grouse, and it
just goes on and on and on. Then
we have some birds, gra uh
quail, pheasants, wild turkeys,
cranes, and then we get into
some, some, uh, fish, some
trophy or uh some game fish,
trout, pike, catfish, white
bass.
And.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
think I heard what you said. Do,
does the legislature still have
some oversight over this, or
does the new commission decide
what's on this, this particular
list right here.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, because
this list is in statute, you can
only change that through the
legislature in a bill signed by
the governor. The, um, so the,
so this list, uh, would remain,
um, under, under this bill, the,
uh, you know, really as they
currently do.
The game, uh, commission could
decide that another species,
either through a species of
various conservation need or
otherwise needs attention and
they could regulate take of that
species. So, so one thing that's
been interesting as working on
this is
Sometimes, you know, we have
heard from the department.
We don't need this bill because
we already have this authority.
And I think there's some truth
to that, you know, they can
regulate species of greatest
conservation need and there's
this proposed list with 400
species. So that's longer than
the list in the statute.
Um
But what we're, we're trying to
do is clarify that, uh, that
language that they wouldn't
necessarily have to go through
the species of gras conservation
need, although that's still on
the books as well. So there's
really the sort of multiplicity
of ways they could get at any
particular species, whether it's
in the statute, whether it's a
species of greatest conservation
need or potentially pursuant to
the new, the clarified authority
that we would grant them in this
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen.
Does the commission currently
have the authority to manage and
protect any species of wildlife.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I would,
I would say no, um, they only
really have the authority to
manage species of greatest
conservation need and there's a
definition for that, uh, so it's
more limited than any species,
um, this, you know, again, I,
and I'm, it's, you know, we
could be here for a little while
and can be a little repetitive,
um, the proposal is they would
have that authority.
But they would also have the
discretion they need to that um.
to regulate those species that
are actually in decline.
Um
There is no circumstance under
which we would ask them to
regulate every species in New
Mexico.
We don't have those resources,
they don't have those resources,
it's not needed.
There are plenty of species out
there doing just fine on their
own.
And we're, we're not going to
touch this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. And the reason
that I asked that question.
Is back to those half truths.
I don't think anyone was trying
to mislead me or lie to me.
There, there was just I was told
that you were able to manage
like the, the game with fish is
able to manage any species of
wildlife right now this doesn't
change a whole lot. Thank you
for clarifying that.
Under this bill, any species of
wildlife would now be eligible
for management and protection.
Is this correct? in the new, in
the new language.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes and
no again. So because there are
plenty of species out there that
are doing just fine. They're not
in need of protection.
You know, so.
So, what we want the Department
game and finish to focus on our
species in decline species who
are perhaps at risk.
becoming threatened and
endangered.
Because we don't want species on
that list. And it's easy for me
to say that, that we don't want
speeches on the threat and
danger list, and there's,
there's two reasons.
One is that the restrictions
that come with that designation
are severe and that goes back to
the story you were telling us
about the Meadow Mouse, right?
I, I mean, I'm not gonna argue
that those restrictions are are
severe.
We don't want that to happen.
The 2nd, the second reason is
just, you know, I personally
would like to see healthy
populations of different animals
in our state.
You know, so I think that is
inherently good thing in and of
itself.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. And whenever I
that last statement that I made
under this bill any species of
wildlife would now be eligible
for management and protection we
talked about the protection part
of it.
What about the management part
of it?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
same, same answer, you know, um.
You know, we have limited
resources. We're not gonna
manage every species. We don't
need to manage every species.
We're, we're trying to help, uh,
species in decline. We're trying
to help species create
conservation need. We're trying
to keep New Mexico, the, the
ecosystem with, with all the
different critters, whether
they're, they're game species,
fish species, bird species,
whatever, keep it healthy and
functioning.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle, gentlemen, I
appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, I,
I am sorry that I forgot to, uh,
Introduce my my expert witness,
which is Tom Patterson from the,
uh, Cattle Growers Association.
Sorry about that, Tom.
Appreciate you. Um,
So
Under this bill, any species of
wildlife would now be eligible
for management and protection.
So my question was,
That would be everything listed
in section 5B. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
So I mean we're talking about
that statute earlier, there's,
that's a list, um, I, I, I don't
think we have a list, uh, I
think we have a list in here.
We're trying to define it
generally. I mean, that's
From a drafting point of view,
when I started listing things, I
know I'm leaving something out.
You know, so I try to use words
that are general and what
they're we're talking about is
is species. There is language in
here that uh you might be
referring to, we're talking
mammals, birds, reptiles,
amphibians, these are general
categories, of course.
In, in, again, you know, I just
got emphasize eligible for.
uh, management and protection,
yeah, eligible, that doesn't
mean it's gonna happen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So,
That would be everything listed
in section 5D. So it would, now
here's the, here's where I was
on this bill.
Because this is just my 3rd year
and everybody always tells you
how to read a bill, how to
dissect a bill. Well, I had
somebody teach me how to read a
bill backwards.
If you haven't never read a bill
backwards.
Words start to
They come out at you and I start
circling those words, so as I
was trying to get through most
of this.
So it would now include mammals
like rodents such as golfers and
rabbits and prairie dogs. Mr.
Speaker.
Do we take care of prairie dogs
now?
Mr. Speaker, um,
Yes.
I, I think there's
Mr. Speaker, yes and no. Um,
there are, you know, there's
some work done for prairie dogs.
Uh, I think there might be a
particular type of prairie dog.
I don't know, I don't recall if
it's in New Mexico that's,
that's endangered, um, you know,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I got
I got rabbits all over my yard.
You know, no one's managing
them.
No one's asking that anyone
manage them, uh, you know, my,
my wife is, is very diligent.
She comes home at night, she,
she pulls into the carport and
she pops her hood.
You know, so, so critters aren't
going in there nesting.
No one's managing those critters
and no one's going to.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
under this bill, any species of
wildlife would now be eligible
for management and protection.
So it would now include mammals
like rodents such as gophers and
rabbits or prairie dogs, so.
Mr. Speaker,
And gentlemen
If I, if I'm your next door
neighbor.
And those pesky little rabbits
are getting into my garden, and
I call game and fish or the
Department of Wildlife or
whatever we're going to call it,
do they have an obligation to
come out?
And manage
These pesky little rabbits.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
experts are telling me
emphatically, no.
Hm
OK, Mr. Speaker, and, and
gentlemen, I just want to make
sure because that's what I read
in this new, in this new
language that if I, let me give
you another hypothetical that's
more along my lines.
If I am on a ranch.
And those pesky coyotes are
eating my baby calves.
Because in this new language, it
says management and protection.
Do they have an obligation to
come out and help me with coyote
problem, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
think what you're getting at.
Uh, is the nuisance language,
uh, and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there's existing law that
requires, um,
The department to provide
services in response to wildlife
nuisance cases, um, we put
language in here, uh, at the
request of the department to
avoid expanding that obligation.
So if
If they are required by law
today to respond to nuisance and
it's, it's limited, um, they
would remain, uh, required, but
they would not be required to
respond to nuisance cases.
Uh, or a nuisance species, uh,
that the protected after, uh,
the, the effect of the, of this
act.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen, and I'm not
trying to split hairs, but what
is, what is limited conditions.
If I've got coyotes eating my
kids.
And I call Gaming fish under
this new language, what would be
a limited condition.
Uh, Mr. uh, Speaker, gentlemen,
I, I don't believe coyotes are
on the list that they respond
to, uh, if you got coyote in
your calves, you can shoot them,
um, calling the Department of
Game and fish to chase off the
coyotes probably isn't gonna be
very effective, uh, and it's
not, uh, one of their
obligations. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
So the other thing I want to
know is under this, so it would
all this includes birds.
Not just game birds, but any
kind of birds because I had the
bird watching people come by my
office as well. And I just want
to know, is, does our new game
and fish department or wildlife
department, do they take care of
all kinds of birds.
Or are they just gonna be taking
care of game birds.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, they
would have the authority.
To take care of any species to
regulate any species in the
discretion not to. So there are
certain game birds that are
already in the statue, that
would remain the same.
Um, there are plenty of other
types of birds that again are
doing just fine.
Uh, and there's some birds that
maybe the commission they're on
the species that gras
conservation needless that we
want the commission involved in
to make sure we maintain healthy
populations of those birds, so
they don't become threatened and
endangered.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. So on the
invertebrates this, this
includes worms and
All kinds of invertebrates,
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
personally am not aware of any
worms.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there are invertebrates though,
uh, and I know, um, I, I maybe
not in New Mexico, you know,
occasionally there's an
endangered butterfly here and
there, you know, endangered is,
you know, you trigger that
federal action, um, if we had a
species, uh, of butterfly, um,
the department could there was
in decline the department could
regulate direct.
Take
Of that species
And that's a really important
term which we'll probably talk a
little more about, um, direct
Take is your, your intending to
kill, harm, harass.
That insect. And there are
people out there that like, oh,
this butterflies, you know,
pretty rare. I better get one
for my collection before they
all run out, you know, so that's
the kind of thing the department
could regulate.
Um, they can't regulate.
Indirect take so that
butterflies, you know, flying
across your ranch, and you got,
you got cows out there, uh,
eating whatever that butterfly
wants to eat and one of those
butterflies get stepped on.
You know, that's, that's just
the circle of life.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. But so that
authority, it's not limited to,
uh, species in decline, is it?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
under Colonel law, it's the
species of occurs conservation,
which is in essence species
inclined. This would give them
broader authority, but again,
we're not asking them to
regulate every species. They
don't have those resources,
they're not going to go out and
regulate species that are doing
just fine.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen. I'm just,
and the reason that I ask these
questions.
I mainly because
I've known, and I just say my,
it's our but my game and fist
department, I've never known
them to do things like this, and
I just, I want to make sure, and
we're talking about insects as
well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, last
word to tell me that they, they
do some projects now that
involve insects. This is the
first time we're, we're getting
an insect on uh the SGCN species
of greatest conservation need
list, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I, I, I, I would
like, since my experts can't
speak on the floor, I would like
to relate, um,
A story that, uh, Mr. Dubell
told during House Energy and
that is he's a hunter.
Um, and he appreciates insects
because he, when he goes turkey
hunting.
He knows those turkeys that he
wants to go hunt or eating
insects.
So it's all connected, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
I wouldn't know this, Mr.
Speaker, but they eat corn and
stuff like that too.
So I, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
tells me for the 1st 6 weeks of
their life.
It's just insects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
learned something new every day.
Same here.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, are
there any limits on what the
commission can decide.
To project in section 5A.
Um, I mean, sorry, protect.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
In terms of limits, there, there
are a lot of limits on, in how
they protect the species.
Protect is a, I think a defined
term, they and, and what they
can regulate is what I mentioned
before, direct take.
Non indirect take, which means
they can't regulate private
land, private land use,
ranching, development, driving
down the highway, anything like
that. It's completely outside
the scope of their authority.
They can only regulate direct
take.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentlemen. I just had
something come to mind, so with
this new commission that we have
with this new department that we
have.
And they have the authority to
manage and maintain whatever
species it is that they decide
to to monitor and say, for
example, I'm gonna bring my Goss
family back into this. You take
a Goss family that has a state
lease.
And they're leasing state land
for grazing.
What happens if one of these
animals, what happens if your
experts or, or your biologist or
whoever's on this, this board
decides that we have a little
bit of a problem and, and we
don't want to put this species
on the list, can they make me
take my cows off of that state
land, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I appreciate you saying that.
Uh, I know, I know that my
constituency would be because
that's a lot of the phone calls
and emails that I've received is
With the endangered Species Act,
and I know it's a federal act,
but the way it looks like this
was moving that direction.
You know, could that happen in
New Mexico to where we're, we're
kicking ranchers off and moving
cattle, and I was, I had a
person come by my office and I
can't substantiate this, but
They literally said in one of
the committees that they wanted
to move cattle off of land. Do
you have any knowledge about
that, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, we
had, we had heard that, um, uh,
coming from, uh, the, the
groups, um, as far as I know,
uh, that was said, uh, once, uh,
by one individual does not
reflect.
Uh, the position of the
department.
And does not reflect the
authority of the department. So
the, the, the department has no
ability to regulate airline use.
They can't make you take down
the fence. They can't make you
put up a fence. They can't make
you move cattle. Uh, they can't
make you, uh, not mow a field.
That they don't have that
authority.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen, and
I'll just read this to you and
you can tell me if it's right or
wrong, uh,
And, uh,
It looks like in introduces
habitat protection language that
could restrict land use, so in
section 7G.
Definitions of management would
include acquisition or
maintenance.
Of land or aquatic habitat will
now be extended through section
5A.
And to vastly
Uh, to a vastly greater number
of species under the
commission's authority, the
commission will no longer just
have authority to protect game
species, the definition of
wildlife in 5D is much broader,
so.
Did, does that change your mind
at all or we still, we're not
going to kick cattle off of
anything regardless of what
species are doing what.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, two things.
First, they already, uh,
regulate some non-game species.
And second, they can't regulate
land use.
So again
You know, no new fences, no
tearing fences down, no moving
cattle.
You know, if, if you got a
federally listed meadow jumping
mouse and you're dealing with
the US Fish and Wildlife
Service, that's a different
situation that is not the New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen, that'll make our
ranchers fill a whole lot more
at ease.
Why isn't there, why isn't there
a provision in Section 5B that
says that, uh, making the
decision to manage and protect a
species, the commission must
consider the economic impact
that that decision's having on
the people who will be affected.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
The commission I believe makes
there in, in the department, you
know, goes on science, um, the,
the economic impact.
Um, because they can't manage
land use.
Um, you know, the impact that
they're attempting to have is an
impact on the species. They may
be limited in their resources,
and what they can do, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, it's a
major species example, but you
know, silvery minnow and the Rio
Grande when the Rio Grande is
drying, they go out and they try
to collect all the the illeary
minnows that are getting stuck
in pools that are drying out.
Um
Uh, you know, first off, that's
an endangered species, so it's
not a great example. But
secondly, you know, what the,
what the department can do is
work with the species. They can
work with landowners.
On a voluntary basis, if the
landowner wants to work on a
restoration project or something
like that. I mean that, that's
an option and that's a good
option and that and that's a way
of us all, you know, working
together to maintain healthy
populations.
But they can't, you know, just
issue an edict and say, you need
to do X, Y, and Z on your
private property.
That's not within their toolbox.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen, because most of
the ranchers that I know, um,
they, they are probably as good
or better stewards of the land
than anybody in the federal
government as well as in state
government. So I have, if they,
if they take too much from the
land, the land don't give back
to them and they can't make
their living. So, um, I, I know
that they would be happy to hear
what you said and
Earlier whenever I was talking
about the United States Forest
Service fencing off big riparian
areas where, where cattle
couldn't get water.
Could this, could this possibly
happen under this legislation,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, men, no.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I'd like to hear that
as well.
So let me move on.
I'm going to veer off just a
second, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, cause if I don't, my
train of thought, I'll lose it.
Yeah
We were talking about New Mexico
being world class.
And I believe that. I think we
are contenders to be world
class.
And one of the things that was
in this, this bill was the, the
rate increases.
And believe it or not, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I agree
with that. I think we should be,
you know, I, it's not uncommon
for somebody to spend 20, 25,000
on a world-class elk hunt. I
don't know why they couldn't
spin, you know, some extra money
on the license.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm sitting here looking at, you
know what, our non-resident
license fees.
And I wonder why on fishing.
We're at 90.
Colorado's at 10,240.
And on deer.
We're at 375.
In Colorado's at 494.
494 47 to be exact.
Antelope were at 400 in New
Mexico.
494 47 in Colorado.
Cowel, we're 550 here, and we're
82503. And then the last one
that I have is bull, which is
750 in its 82503.
Why did we decide on these
numbers. If we're gonna lead the
industry, why don't we leave it
from the top?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so the
The fee structure piece of this,
um, was at one point it was
separate legislation and what is
in here is largely, uh, not
entirely but largely what was in
that separate legislation that
separate legislation was worked
out by the department with
stakeholders, uh, with, uh,
in-state hunters and anglers
with outfitters and guides with
the back country hunters and
anglers, they
all had a robust.
Uh, process to work out those
fees, and they came up with
those fees, and those are the
fees that are in this bill. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yeah, I,
I appreciate what, what you're,
what you're saying. I think
there's some fees in here that
are gonna be higher than other
states, and there are some fees
in here, they're gonna be a
little lower than other states,
but those, those differences you
just read off, you know, I mean,
there are differences, but, but
they're not uh egregious. I
mean, those are, those are sort
of in the ballpark kind of
numbers.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentlemen. And, you know,
I've got lots and lots of
friends that are on Game and
Fish, and, you know, they always
look professional. They always
have good vehicles, but, you
know, whenever I hear Gaming
Fishers, you know, when they're
struggling, I would rather lead
from the top and be charging,
you know, charging up there
where, uh, Colorado is, and I
don't think that people would
really gripe a whole lot about
that. Now, there are the certain
folks that, um, you know, are,
are a little bit less fortunate
and, um, you know, I want to
make sure that, you know, when
they go to provide game meat for
their families that they can
get, you know, meat tags, you
know, kind of worth the money
and, uh, you know, it's not
breaking the bank, but a lot of
our, you know, trophy type
hunters.
It's, it's not no problem for
them to, to pay those, those
higher rates.
Mr. Speaker, can I point
something out?
Let's just speaker gentleman.
I'm sorry, would you say that
again, Mr. Speaker, John, uh,
you didn't ask me a question,
but I wondered if I could point
something out.
And, and that is, um, part of
the provision of this bill is
there is a 25% discount for SNAP
recipients. So supple nutrition
assistance program.
You know, if they want to go out
and harvest the deer and, and
use that to supplement their
nutrition.
They get a discount.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I appreciate
that. Uh, we always want to
promote people to go out and
hunt and get, you know, good
fresh protein back to their
family for a, for a good
discounted price.
So Mister Speaker and gentlemen.
Because
You and I are always square with
each other. I did propose
earlier an amendment for you.
And was you able to go over that
and did it even seem a little
bit warm and fuzzy to you, or?
Was it unfriendly?
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
uh, you did provide me a copy of
your amendment, uh, and, and
that was a very gentlemanly
thing to do. I appreciate that.
Um, I, you know, the parts of
the amendment I like are all the
parts you're not changing.
Um, the, the parts you are
changing, yeah, they're,
they're, uh, I appreciate the
spirit, but they're, they're not
actually quite friendly.
OK, well, just for the record,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is it
OK if I go ahead and propose an
amendment?
Absolutely.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I can't
stop you, and I wouldn't if I
could.
Thank you. Can I get a roll call
vote, please?
You have the rule called vote.
Give us a minute while we pass
those out and also get it up
online.
Gentleman from Lincoln and
Artero, as those amendments are
being passed out. Could you
please, for reference, uh,
identify your 0.23 number in the
bottom left corner of this
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
0.231825.2.
Yes sir, that's what I have and
uh give us a couple more minutes
as we pass those out.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Do you
want me to explain it or wait
till everybody gets it?
Let's, let's hold in place till
everyone gets to the moment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
looks like everyone has their
copy. If you can please explain
your amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So what
this amendment really does is
it's just
It's just reinforcing some of
the things that.
Need to be reinforced to make us
feel a little bit better about
the bill. So, um, we've been
told that section 5B is a set of
guard rails, the commission must
follow, uh, in dealing with
species to protect.
As I read section 5B, they are
not mandatory guardrails. And
what this, what this would do is
put in mandatory guard rails and
um.
Just kind of reinforce that and
then the second part of this
amendment number 2.
The sponsors have claimed that
SB 5 will have no effect on
habitat.
We'd like to make sure that this
is the case for our livestock. I
propose amending, um, let's see.
Section 5B3 to make that clear.
And I, that's why I didn't feel
like it would be unfriendly
because that's a, that's kind of
what you told me. And then, um,
the third part of this
amendment. We've been told that,
uh, commission decisions to
manage and protect the species
will have no impact on the
people it affects.
We'd like to make sure of that.
We propose amending section 5B.
3 to make it clear that such
decisions will have no more than
a de minimis impact.
And then the final part of it,
number 4.
We don't think hunters and
anglers license fees should be
used to subsidize the expansion
mission of the commission, and
we just want to make sure that
that doesn't happen as well, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Is that the extent of the
amendment, sir.
That is the extent.
Thank you. In that short time
frame, gentlemen from Santa Fe
and Sandoval. Did that change
your mind? Is this friendly?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
still not friendly, uh, I would
like to explain why.
Please.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
so first off in your amendment,
Uh, on the first page in in
section B, you've, you've
changed the list of, uh, things
to be considered from a broad
list to a narrow list because
you've, you've added child-based
decisions solely on these items.
There may be items that are
currently not on the list that
the uh game commission we need
to consider, uh, emergcies,
disasters, bird flu, I mean,
I, I don't want to limit that.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as
I've said, the, uh, the, the
department doesn't have
authority to order the removal
of cattle, um, so I think the
language you have included
there, uh, is not necessary. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, on the
next page, you know, when I read
this, when you gave it to me, I
was kind of curious about this,
um,
It, you talked about the rules
shall have at the minimus impact
on affected parties.
And Mr. Speaker, men, in my
mind, the affected parties of
these rules are the animals,
not, not the people. I mean,
because that's what the
department regulates. They
regulate, um, you know, taking
of animals and what happens with
the animals, not, not people so
since, since they, they can't
regulate land use.
Um, like I, I don't think that,
I don't think that's necessary,
um, and then, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that the last piece,
uh, this is something that,
that, um,
Uh, it's come up before I
actually had a discussion with
your expert there about this
issue. In the reality is,
The department already uses some
of the uh honey and fishing
license money in the federal
match that they get for those
licenses.
To do a variety of things.
And your amendment would, would,
would run contrary to the way
the department currently
operates and then, you know,
that includes things like um we,
we turn out the department when
someone's got an exotic pet.
Right, so someone's got an
alligator in the bathtub.
You know, who do we send? We'd
send the Department of Game and
fish. Um, that they wouldn't be
able to do that, uh, dealing
with infectious diseases.
They wouldn't be able to do
that. Uh, habitat restoration
after a fire or a flood.
Uh, that would probably get
ruled out, um, and also, you
know, we talked earlier about
that nuisance response, which is
in existing law. They're legally
required to perform that
service, that doesn't just apply
to game species. So, so the
last, the last portion of your
amendment, uh, really runs
contrary to the, the way the
department operates and for
those reasons, Mr. Speaker, uh,
unfortunately, your, your
amendment is unfriendly.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I was just
trying to put some guard rails
up to make everybody feel a
little bit better, and I, I
really thought that this was an
amendment that kind of
streamlined everything that you
had told me previous about not
being able to take cattle off
and all these amendments that I
had put forth and just literally
putting them into the bill to
where we had confirmation that
everything that we
spoke about on this floor
because Mr. Speaker, you know,
um.
If it's not in the bill, then
it's probably not going to
happen. So, um, in closing, Mr.
Speaker, while Senate Bill 5,
I don't know if there was any
debate on that. But while
sentiment of Bill 5 presents a
way to modernize New Mexico's
wildlife management in reality,
it raises serious concerns about
political influence, financial
burden on hunters and and
anglers.
And the future of conservation
efforts by our in our state by
Restructuring the game
commission, this bill risk
shifting control away from the
public and towards an unelected
committee.
Creating potential bias in
wildlife, decision making, and
additionally the proposed
license fee increasingly unfair
that targets those who rely on
hunting, hunting, and I will, I
will take that back cause I
wrote this early and I, I didn't
see the SNAP benefits and I
appreciate that, gentlemen. And
with that, I'll yield.
Are you withdrawing your
amendment? No.
Didn't think so. Uh, let's go to
the gentle lady from Taos
represented the Ortez. Mr.
Speaker, with the gentleman from
Lincoln and Otero Counties,
please yield.
I yield.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen, um.
I think the issue I have
The strongest issue I have with
this amendment is, is the part
about the licensing fees in
particular for some of the
reasons that uh the bill sponsor
mentioned, um, but really
because of um how.
The department sort of runs its
business. So can you tell me,
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen,
uh, how does the department use
the license fees that it
currently collects.
Well, they, they, from what I
understand, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, they are a, a
department that's completely
funds themselves and, and while
they're generating license fees
and, uh, fishing license and
things of that nature and all I
was saying, all I was asking
about, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, is why we are so cheap.
Why don't we charge a little bit
more. We've already taken care
of our snap people.
And they're going to be able to
get discounted license, but for
a lot of the people that have
been blessed with plenty of
money and want to come up here
and, and kill, you know, a, a
$25,000 elk, why would they not
just pay a little bit extra so
that we could give our, our
amazing game and fist department
exactly what they need.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen, um, I, I'm, I don't
have a problem with the increase
in fees. I have a problem with
um limiting those fees to um
The man to not being able to
manage or protect non-game
mammals.
Non-game birds are non-game
fish. I know that the department
uses Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
would you like to respond to
that?
Yes, ma'am, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, I'm glad I just
looked at that because what,
what I was saying in that last
part of the amendment is, I
don't think that hunters and
anglers ought to be.
Subsidizing this new uh group of
people that we have that are
going to manage butterflies and
bugs and things like that. We
would rather on the backs of the
hunters and fisher fish, uh,
anglers.
You know, restock lakes and, and
put better habitat in and put
some more drinkers in, you know,
that's gonna, uh, we, we
With all due respect, I don't, I
don't really wanna.
Paid for the butterfly, Mr.
Speaker, I'm just being honest
with you Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, I care about the butterfly
quite, quite a bit, um, and so
do, uh, hunters and anglers all
around the country, so can you
tell me, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, how other wildlife
agencies and other states what
they do with these license fee
dollars.
Do you think that they
Fund wildlife management work in
their states. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I would not be able
to tell you that. I haven't
looked at other states. I know
that this state has done really
well. And we are recreating the
wheel pretty much. Uh, we're
just extending it. They, we, you
know, our, um, our hunting and
fishing has been phenomenal
around here for decades. And,
um, you know, like the gentleman
from Donin, he said, we are the
Mecca. We, we are.
world class.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, agreed,
wholeheartedly agreed, we are
World Cup. We have incredible
biodiversity in this state, but
every single state that has a
wildlife agency, uh, they
manage, uh, non-game species
every single state and they do
that with their licensing fees,
um.
For all wildlife, right? Not
just game and fish. That's why I
have.
The problem with the way this
amendment uh is is drafted, uh.
All wildlife habitat that
putting money into restoration,
that's important for, uh, for
game and fish that are that are
hunted and fished. That's just,
that's just a fact. Those
pollinators, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, are important for our
game species, you know, you
heard the, the gentleman, uh,
the sponsor of this bill recount
a story, you know, from one of
the, one of the advocates about.
Turkey, um, we need to ensure
that this agency has the funding
they need for.
Habitat restoration as well,
which is, you know, not only
important for the non-game
species, but incredibly
important for um for wildlife,
um, as well for for game species
as well.
Can you tell me a little bit,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, how
this.
Amendment, particularly
S, um, would affect the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
on your last response, so we
were, we were taught before I
move on to the question you just
asked, um,
As far as the hunters and the
anglers.
Having to shoulder a lot of this
cost for
Our, our new
Expansion. Why, why wouldn't the
state of New Mexico do that?
Why, why put it on the backs of
hunters and anglers.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
I think that's what the land of
enchantment, uh, fund actually
does. It, it takes off, takes
off some of that burden by using
our, you know, our, uh, general
fund dollars and the, the
dollars that are in that fund to
support, uh, some of those
species but in every other
state, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Fees from from uh hunting and
fishing support habitat
restoration protection of
non-game uh and game species can
you speak on that a little bit,
Mr, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, why
you wouldn't want that to happen
with us.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would you rephrase that
question?
Sure, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
In every state.
The licensing fees from hunting
and fishing go to support the
wildlife agency. They do a
variety of things, uh, which
includes, um, protecting habitat
for game and non-game species
for um.
Staffing up, right, hiring those
conservation officers that they
do all the uh the law
enforcement, um, they, you know,
for hiring invasive species
management folks, you know, the
folks who go after illegal, um,
illegal pet trade, um, that
happens in in every other state,
um, that the money that they
collect from fishing and
hunting, uh, supports.
All wildlife, so my question to
you and and the and restoration
of habitat, why would we be any
different, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, why would New Mexico
be different?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
We, we haven't had that
expansion. We've been doing just
fine. This is all brand new and
like earlier I stated,
You know, I, I don't really
like, um, I personally, it's
just my opinion and it means not
a whole lot, but I don't like a
whole lot of change. I'm not
saying that this is all
completely bad, but a lot of
these, you know, a lot of the
compromise that we have to make
in these chambers is just some
reassurances that, you know, our
cattle are gonna be OK and
they're not going to kick us off
of riparian areas and there's
gonna be guard rails on certain
things and, you know, this
doesn't really change a whole
lot of anything. It's just
stating it's just narrowing the
language to make everybody feel
a little bit better.
Mr. Spe and Mr. Species, Mr.
Speaker.
I don't consider you not an
invasive species, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen
Thank you. I, I, I unders I
understand that um but we would
be taking away with your
amendment we would be taking
away and a really important
funding mechanism to protect
habitat for all wildlife, which
is critical for game species as
well and I don't wanna, you
know, keep beating a dead horse,
but that is what this amendment
does. It takes away the ability
of our state to manage, uh,
riparian habitat, and I think it
is important we talked before,
Mr. Speaker and
gentleman about um fencing, you
know, and on another topic in
another, in another room, um,
and I, I understood you and I
heard your, your concerns. I've,
I've dealt with that in Taos
County myself, um, so I, I can
appreciate where you're coming
from, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, but.
We need funding for the
protection of wildlife and
limiting it the way that you're
doing here with this amendment
is I think we'll have a.
Incredible, terrible impact on
the game species and which you
include elk, uh, deer, um.
For, uh, javelina all the fish
that you that you uh go for as
well that it we need that
healthy habitat.
So that we can
Uplift, you know, this, this
industry that you care about.
Can you speak on that, Mr. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that was really broad, but yes,
I can. I, I.
Again,
We have been
Under charging for a long time
and I, I, I want to lead the
industry. If we're gonna have an
amazing industry, then we need
to lead from the front and, you
know, it costs a lot of money to
start stock our lakes and gaming
fish, they do an amazing job.
And the, if you see the elk and
I know you have elk in your
area, but in my area, they are.
They're just thriving. They're
almost doing too good, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, they're
everywhere. They call them
traffic jams and where I'm from
because you might be driving
down the street and there might
be 25 head of elk just kind of
cruising down the street, and
that's our Lincoln County
traffic jams. That's the kind of
traffic jams we have, so.
I'm not gonna completely
disagree with you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. I, I just say.
I just say that, you know, it
would be nice if the state of
New Mexico could pitch in a
little bit, and if we want to
expand this division of game and
fish or the wildlife, whatever
it's called, um,
Maybe they could pitch in a
little bit and, and pick up
those FTEs and, and.
Let those people, you know, do
whatever it is that they're
gonna do, just not on the backs
of hunters and anglers.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, I don't have a problem with
the with the fee increase though
I am concerned, um, I, I think
that the sponsor said that uh
the the conversations about fee
increases and the schedule that
they set, um, were, were pretty
heavily negotiated. It was
something that had been
discussed for a while with lots
of stakeholders, uh, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, did you
have conversations with
similar stakeholders when you,
um, amended 3 year amendment
with increasing the fees.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I have been working on
this. I would not say
diligently, but I have been
working on it whenever I do get
some spare time whenever we do
get that kind of spare time, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and a
lot of our guides and
outfitters, as well as our
hunters and anglers, not one of
them really wants to go up, but
they didn't really, they didn't
push back on it either. They
knew that if we're gonna have
I, I, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I fish all over the place.
My wife and I are tournament
fishermen, and what she does
fish better than me. I'm not
gonna lie. That does happen. But
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
know, we, we go to Elephant
Butte and we do pretty good over
there. And then, you know, when
you go over to uh Texas Lake,
they are fairly comparable. New
Mexico, I wouldn't say that they
grow bigger.
bass over here, but
They're, they're very, um,
comparable to the bass that
we're catching over there. So
we're doing, uh, we're doing a
good job.
I just, I just think that, you
know, some of these fees,
knowing the outfitters that I
personally worked for a lot of
the other outfitters as well as
anglers, they're not going to
give you a pushback on going
straight to the top and, and
charging as much or more than
Colorado.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank, thank you, gentlemen. Um.
I, I appreciate that that
conversation. I'm sure your wife
is an excellent, uh, fisher
person.
Um
I really, uh, what I object to.
Most of all in this amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is,
is what I've talked about before
and I don't believe.
That
That this department or that the
protection of habitat which is
critical for game species as
well, um.
You should be born on the backs
of, of hunters and, and anglers,
um, they're doing their part,
but we're doing our part too,
uh, our budget does its part to
um bring money to the table, uh,
to support habitat restoration
and taking away this really
important aspect of, you know,
of the bill and that the fee
structure, how the money, the
licensing license money is going
to be used. I take, I think
takes out a huge part.
of what we do in the state to uh
to protect wildlife in general
what we do in the state to uh
bring in tourism so many
millions and millions of dollars
coming in from hunters and
anglers from around the world to
come to this day and they are
relying on investments that
we're making that as a state
that we're making, not just from
the licensing fees that they're
paying right for their fishing
license or their hunting
license, but what we're making
as what we're bringing to the
table.
a state, right? And so limiting
that and taking away, you know,
a pretty significant source of
income for the department to
make sure that our habitats are,
you know, restored to the best
of their ability that we're able
to protect, uh, pollinators
which are important for our food
production as well as also, you
know, also for, you know, baby,
uh, turkeys and you know, and
other animals. I, I just think
it's really limiting and it's
um.
It's just not something I can
support. So Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I, I really, I, I
urge the body to reject this
amendment um for really for this
reason I'm sure there might be
others, but, um, I, I'm sorry
that I can't, I cannot support
it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Let's,
there is more debate. We have
the gentleman from Colfax, Moa
Ria Riba, San Miguel, and tells,
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, to the
gentleman yield?
I yield, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, uh.
I know that the northern New
Mexico stockmen's Association is
adamantly against this, uh, so
the cattle growers. Does your
amendment work to uh address
some of the concerns, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen, it,
it actually the first one that I
offered literally fixes all of
their problems, not completely
all of them, but they could, it
would make it more palatable.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
do you know who makes up the
Northern New Mexico Stockman's
Association.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe the Native Americans?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, this
associate association is made up
of uh many uh people from a
traditional Hispanic communities
throughout northern New Mexico
this is uh.
Northern Santa Fe County Mora
Ririba Taos.
Colfax and other counties also,
uh, it is made up of uh many
tribal members throughout
northern New Mexico.
And uh I guess my biggest
concern is, uh, I keep hearing
about how uh they have a lot of
stakeholders and uh they've
worked with them.
And uh my biggest issue with
this bill is uh.
To me this is an important
stakeholder that they didn't
work with.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
I like you, I got hundreds of
calls on this emails, and I have
a lot of friends that uh are for
this bill and has a lot of good
things and uh I really support
those those issues my biggest
concern is uh.
I know, uh.
Some of the, the reps from uh
Sanofi or uh Las Cruces, they
don't have this constituency
that uh of people that have
cattle or stockmen or uh have to
make a living like myself. I
have like 30 heads of cattle.
I'm Mickey Mouse. I'm not like
these guys that have a lot more.
But um
I guess when we talk about
bringing stakeholders, I think
this is a really important voice
that we're disenfranchising, uh,
that we're not considering.
And uh
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
I really think we need to hear
their voice and uh I really
wanna thank you for bringing up
these concerns, um.
Uh, I think your, uh, amendment
does some of this, uh, I think,
uh.
Uh, like I said, uh, somebody
has to speak up for these
people. These are my neighbors,
my friends. I'm a hunter. I hunt
every year when I draw, it's
hard to draw these days all my
friends hunt, do you know what I
mean? Like I'm an avid hunter.
But uh I just wanna thank you
for bringing up these concerns
and uh thank you for the thank
you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen, there is
for the debate. The gentleman
from Dona Anna County,
representative Small. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with
the gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero yield.
I yield to the German from
Otero. I mean, uh, sorry.
Donna.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, looking at
the amendment, I want to go
through a few places, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, first, uh,
is it your sense that may or
shall is stronger.
Shall is definitely stronger.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
uh, that's my understanding as
well. And so, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when I look at the
bill, uh, section 5B. what I
read, um, and your amendment
sort of think as the gentleman
uh from Santa Fe, uh, in
Torrance, uh.
To
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no more.
Just send the Santa Fe. Santa Fe
and Sandoval, um,
he sort of referred to it as
shrinking. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when I read the
original bill, what it says is
when determining whether and how
to protect the species of
wildlife, the commission shall
consider. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that seems to me to
be clear, good, strong language
that um
Clarify that that is, that's not
squishy at all. It says this is
what they shall consider, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
that's why at the it says base
uh base a decision to protect
solely on.
So it's just more clarifies it.
I don't think it's really
changing it a lot. It's just
clarifying.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
appreciate that. I think, uh, as
I look at that, I think this is
sort of a, a fair place where,
uh, the bill as it stands now
has clear, strong language. I
think we can agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you're proposing sort
of what I would look at in terms
of sort of narrowing of that
language, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think, uh, that
clear language giving them uh a
They, they shall take these
three factors into
consideration. It leaves their
discretion. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, uh, it relies
upon their expertise and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I
respectfully, on that point, I
appreciate sort of the, the move
on your end, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think I could
imagine a situation where
You get a certain commission
under a certain governor, even
though we're building a much
better uh nominating commission
here, other things like that.
They could interpret that solely
to be really narrow and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it may not
end up, uh, capturing what, what
ultimately we'd want. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I want to go
on, uh, here to, um,
The
When, when we get into uh sort
of the end of the amendment
that, well, uh, another quick
question, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, my understanding and
my family, uh, you know,
they're, they're, the small
ranch still exists out, uh, in,
in Sabola County. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is it your
understanding that a permittee,
a rancher who owns a permit, do
they apply to the game and fish
department now for a permit to
graze.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
A lot of times it depends on
whether it's uh deeded land.
And or state land and
From what I understand, there's
a, there's allotment owners, and
then there's a lattes, so
allotment owners.
Owned the allotment.
If that makes sense. It does,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh.
I, I, I asked the question, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, because it's
my understanding that it
certainly the uh that the, the
land ownership, uh, but if
somebody is applying for a
permit, whether from the state
land office, whether from the
state, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
for state land, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, whether from the uh
Department of Interior for BLM,
the Department of Agriculture
for the Forest Service. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I don't know
the case.
Where, uh, a, uh, a rancher or
somebody else who's doing a
commercial, uh, agricultural
activity. I don't know of
another case where they're
applying to the game and fish
department for any permit, uh,
the, the, it's either the state
land office or the federal
government or maybe Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on sovereign tribal
lands, obviously, the sovereign
tribal nation. Is that your
understanding?
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentlemen,
the land management agencies,
uh, US Forest Service and BLM
incorporate state rules on
wildlife into their land
management plans.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
they
Uh, they, they have federal
rules and regulations, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, I think
it is very much the sort of the
situation now and the bill
doesn't change that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, there's no
extra permits that would be
required or managed by the
passage of this bill in either
form, with or without your
amendment. Is that your
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, correct.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. So
understanding sort of your
approach on that part, but
again, respectfully, um, the,
uh, permittee, uh, the allotment
owner, they're not applying the
game and fish now for a permit.
Under the bill, they won't have
to apply to game and fish, uh,
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
moving to the final piece, um,
The this is the uh I have sort
of 22 kind of points and
questions, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, first, it's my
understanding and, and obviously
I uh opened with this.
Uh, the, now there is an annual
2.75 million that'll grow slowly
over time, annual disbursement
from the um land of enchantment
Legacy Fund that goes to game
and fish. Right now it's, excuse
me, 2.75 million. Is that your,
and it'll grow over time
annually. Is that your
understanding?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
understanding as well that's one
of the few non-license fee, uh,
in non Pittman Robertson's
sources of money for the game
and fish department. Would you
agree, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes. Great, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, me too. And so when
we take that 2.75, uh, is it
also your understanding that in
this year's budget in HB 2,
there's an annual 3.
$5 million additional general
fund distribution going to game
and fish.
Mr. Speaker and chairman, I
don't know how I remember this,
but yes. Hey, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's because you're
working hard in the committee
like all the committee members,
like we all do. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when I add those up,
2.75 plus that, uh, uh, 3.5,
we're at 6.25 million new
dollars that are separate from
license fees that are now going
to go to the department.
Uh, so, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's a great source of
revenue, $6.25 million that are
non-license fees going to the
department, really focus on
species of greatest conservation
needs. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I would contend we
are sending more money to the
department and in fact, I've
been in meetings with your
expert and many others where a
fair point was made. If you're
gonna expand some of the
mission, you should offer more
funding, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
would you agree that the 6.
25 million, uh, that would be
total this year, that's new
funding not related to license
fees going to Gam and fish.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
but, um, are you saying that we
shouldn't give them license fees
or and we should just fund them
or, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
no, thank you for that question.
No, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
I'm saying there is pointing out
that in addition to the license
fee increase, we are doing
exactly what you're proposing.
We are sending additional money
to the game and fish department
for uh their, their additional
management needs. So Mr.
Speaker.
gentlemen, that amount of new
money is, uh, unprecedented in,
in game and fish's history.
Speaker, gentlemen, they've been
uh an enterprise agency. They're
getting general fund now. It's a
huge credit to the entire
legislature, uh, for us to be
sending that. But finally, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the reason I
can't support the amendment.
All goes back a little bit in
history, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
are you, uh, Gould's turkey? Are
you familiar?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Right. turkey, one of the 4
subspecies, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, found in the
southwestern part of the state,
um, they sort of a remnant
population in New Mexico that
was used to uh grow the
population in Arizona. The
speaker gentlemen, for a long
time, that population was so
small that you couldn't hunt
them. Is that your
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, my same understanding
even now.
No, it's very limited. As I look
at the amendment, if we were to
adopt this amendment, we would
be telling game and fish forever
and into the future that they
couldn't work on a project like
a Gould's turkey because that
wasn't yet, you weren't able to
hunt it. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I wanna go through a
couple other examples, the Gila
trout.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're now recovered them in a
way where, where we can fish for
them, and now you can actually
keep a few. Would you agree, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, yes. Speaker,
gentlemen, super exciting and
awesome feature. And Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, my
understanding of the amendment
were we to adopt it is that it
would uh bar game and fish from
working on a similar type of
species that we may have a
chance of harvesting.
in the future, but if we can at
that moment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, finally, uh, there
are projects, uh, sort of across
the state, including in the
northeast part of the state
where Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, the game and fish is working
on non-game species, um, in
order for, for grassland
restoration, and then finally a
very big excuse me, importance
for us, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um, the, uh, prairie chicken.
Down in the southeast part of
the state, uh, or other species
my understanding of the
amendment would be that the game
and fish would not be able to
work on that if
Uh, OK, my expert tells me the,
the prairie chicken is a bad
example, uh, other, but just
those examples, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I was, I think I was
3 for 4 on that.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
wanna just close. I, I wanna
urge the body respectfully to
reject the amendment, uh, uh,
I'm noting, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, council of Outfitter
and guides, Mexico Houndsman's
Association, uh, a broad
constellation of groups, the
soil and water conservation
districts support the bill as
is. I do appreciate the dialogue
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think hopefully the body is
getting a pretty clear sense
that even if there's some sort
of focus
is on, on a few distinct parts.
Overall, this has come a long
way, brought folks closer
together who don't always sort
of sit at the same table.
They're all sitting, um, at the
table, and this speaker
gentlemen, part of that, even
though obviously respectfully in
opposition. I know uh cattle
growers and others have offered
amendments that have been
incorporated into the bill as
is. I think that's a good
process. It may not be the
perfect bill, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh,
I think it's a respectfully
again, have to um stand in
opposition to your amendment,
deeply appreciate your
knowledge, uh, and work though.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment, uh, gentle lady from
Katherine Sierras Secorro
Valencia, minority Leader
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Well, the gentleman
from Lincoln and Ontario yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, um.
This is a a been a, a real, um,
thorn in my side to, to put it
gently, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and, and on your
amendment, can you talk?
Um, a little bit more about #3.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
Yes, stand by just a second. Let
me read that.
Mr. Speaker and generally, there
was a lot to this bill and, you
know, they're, we're just trying
to streamline everything, make
it a little bit more palatable
for everybody to, to take, but,
uh, the commission's finding
that economic impacts such as
decisions to protect a species
impacted and, and just not be
held harmless, is that what
you're talking about? Uh, no,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, I'm
talking about the uh portion
that says, um,
The rules and management
programs that would potentially
accompany protected status
provided by a rule that shall
not authorize the direct or
indirect removal or displacement
of livestock or species habitat
including from pasture river
spring stock tank, or stream.
And so Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I think that, um, if
they don't have that authority
already.
Then why would we not put it in
statute?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I completely agree with that.
And the only thing that we're
trying to do, and if you heard
the story that I told at the
beginning with the Gosses. Do
you think they feel good about
this? They've already got hit
from the federal government now,
Whether it's going to happen or
not, it's still in their
crosshairs that the state might
do the same thing to them. And
it's literally bankrupted them.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, you know, uh, my
husband and I, um, have a, a
cattle ranch, uh, where we've
chosen that way of life, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, we've
raised our 4 children on a
Forest Service lease.
Um, and then we've expanded Mr.
Kind gentleman, uh, to we about
12 years ago we had the honor
and the privilege to be able to
buy uh a larger private ranch,
and Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
it has a conservation easement
on it. I know that word
conservation
kind of makes the hair on the
back of your neck stand up. But
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, the
reason that we have, we, we were
able to afford the ranch because
it has a conservation easement
on it, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen.
And what that means for the
rural New Mexico way of life,
the rancher way of life is that
it can never be subdivided, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, and I'm
OK with that because I want my
13 grandchildren to be able to
go out to that ranch. I want
them, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, to be able to go out
there and, and target practice,
hunt, um, shoot coyotes,
whatever it is, uh, as one of
my, my grandchildren calls it
give a coyote.
dirt now. So Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, I, uh,
We are conservationists.
We have water and pipelines that
we have run all over that ranch.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, we
have a 200 resident elk herd
that that's their home.
Big calf on our, our private
ranch.
We respect that.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, a
lot of people in here may not
know, I, I'm an archery hunter.
We're in unit 13.
A lot of people don't understand
how the whole unit's work, but
unit 13, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman, is primitive only.
For elk.
You can hunt with a muzzle
loader or you can hunt archery.
Well, I'm an archery hunter, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentleman, and I'm
pretty good, pretty good at it.
Uh, and I thought, I find it
more challenging than
Mazzalloder. I'd prefer not to
hunt muzzle loader.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, my
13 grandchildren.
Are also archery hunters. No,
well, not all 13 of them. Some
of them are too little.
Um, but my little 3 year old
grandson that wears around with
his cowboy boots. He's a pretty
good shot.
And Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
I wanna bring to your attention
what one thing that I'm worried
about that your amendment
actually touches the concern of,
and that is the expansion, uh,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentleman of,
of the endangered species or or
species of most consideration,
whatever the wording is, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, we have
the Mexican gray wolf that has
moved in onto our ranch because
of the black fire over in the
Gila area.
Yeah.
And Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
when you're driving around your
ranch, riding your horse around
your ranch, whatever it is.
And you see a baby calf.
That was just played with to
death.
Not eating
But just played with to death.
And we cannot
Do anything, Mister Speaker,
kind gentlemen.
To mitigate that except for.
Shoe them on to the neighbors.
Because our ranch is massive, of
course, we never, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, catch him in the
act.
If you catch them in the act,
you can shoot him.
But you can also go through a
lot of stuff if you shoot them.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, the
other problem
I, I'm not going to scare them
off to my neighbor.
I'm gonna scare the wolf off to
my neighbors so that they can
eat their baby calves.
So that they can eat their
barrel horses in a corral.
Kill a barrel racing horse in a
corral, 100 yards from the
house, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
it's also this.
Oh, I, I will live with the
wolves.
But I don't want my neighbors
to.
I will also tell you, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, that I
am regulated on my private
ranch.
That I bought and paid for and
we worked our tails off to get.
For the Western way of life that
we choose to live because it is
a known wolf habitat. I can only
use certain traps on my ranch,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, for
predator control.
I am regulated and so my biggest
fear, and I think every rancher
in the state of New Mexico's
biggest fear is that they will
be regulated because of the
expanding authority of the game
and fish or or whatever the new
name is, I can't remember right
now to, um,
To be able to choose.
Pick and choose what, what
species might be.
They want, they, that they might
want to regulate.
I can't shoot woodpeckers. I
hope people in here know that
you can't shoot a woodpecker. It
doesn't matter if it's pecking
on your house and tearing up
your house. You can't shoot
them.
You can't get rid of them. You
just got to let them peck on
your house. Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, and so the the.
Ranching lifestyle.
That we lead
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen.
We have 5 families that work for
us, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen.
We are creating economic
development we raise beef
cattle.
And it's not only about raising
cattle. It's about.
Providing jobs for people in
rural New Mexico, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentleman.
Their livelihoods are at stake.
Change is hard, yes, there's
some good things in this bill.
But yes, there's some bad things
in this bill, and Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, I will be
supporting your amendment, and I
will be doing that for every
single rancher in the state of
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Lee County, Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Otero in Lincoln
County, Ill.
I yield to the gentleman from
Lee County. I appreciate that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
listened to your lead in to
Your amendment
Very well done. I, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I feel like
through the conversation that
you had with uh the gentleman,
uh, the bill sponsor.
I'm pretty well hit on agreement
on just about everything. Would
you agree with that, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
do agree with that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
with that said,
And knowing your personality.
Is it safe to assume that
everything inside this amendment
is consistent with the
agreements that you received.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
Lee.
The main reason for these
amendments is because of the
story I led in with. There's
many more, we just didn't have,
we don't have a whole lot of
time for those. But Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen,
I don't know how many times in
this, in this.
Chamber as well as in our
committees have I heard the word
guard rails.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
because everybody, and you just
heard, uh, the
The leader lady talking about
She wants some guard rails.
The, the guardrails are just to
make sure that our cattle are
left alone, and that we
streamline everything and that
we have
A guarantee that everything that
we've talked about here,
Is going to be put into the
bill, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
would you agree or would you
disagree and, and point out to
me something that may be inside
of your amendment that you and
the gentlemen and the bill
sponsor, uh, brought to the
table and your discussion.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, are
you, would you rephrase that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
looking at an amendment from you
that goes
6 pages
7 pages long.
And I listened to an
introduction and a discussion
between you and the bill sponsor
that lasted somewhere around an
hour, and I feel like you
covered.
Just about everything inside of
this amendment.
But I wanted just to make
verification that because Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I had to
step out a few times. Maybe I
missed something. I feel like
you covered everything inside
this amendment, and you got
agreement on it.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
You know, mainly what, what
this, this amendment did was it
based decisions solely to
protect.
Species on which just clarifies
that, um, it, it protects our
livestock.
And streams like streamlines
that.
Uh, it, it, uh, talks about the
commissioning commission, sorry,
finding that the economic impact
of such a decision, uh, to
protect species doesn't impact
our constituents.
And our, our Western way of
life.
And finally, it talked about the
licensing fees. Why?
Anglers and hunters should,
shouldn't be.
Shouldering all the costs for
this big expansion that uh
that's being proposed.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that. Those were 44
separate points, and I feel like
you covered those in your, in
your discussion and your lead in
to your amendment. Would you
agree with that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would agree with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, would you
also agree that the bill sponsor
didn't really disagree with you
on anything you had to say.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, maybe
just a touch, but not much.
Paquito
Mr. Speaker, in gentlemen, um, I
appreciate the way you let into
today. I appreciate the
amendment and I appreciate the
effort we all have constituents.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um.
Older than you are and, and got
to enjoy hunting hunting, you
know, 56 years more than you
have. Um, I don't do it to the
extent that you do now. I don't
guide people, but trust me,
every time I draw out and in my
opinion, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, when we went to the
job it was the worst thing you
could do to, uh, New Mexico
resident.
But that being said, that's the
law now and we abide by it.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I am curious.
If you were to tell me where
wildlife are primarily found in
New Mexico, how would you define
that in your opinion?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would say way, way rural, and it
just depends on how aggressive
you want to get, and, um, you
know, if you are driving down
the road and you're in a very
rural place and you look at the
top of the mountain.
If you really want to put the
work in and you go 3 ridges
over, that's where they're at.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would agree with you. And Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, would you
agree that those same areas are
where
Our ranchers
Keep their cattle, their, their
livestock.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
sure hope so, especially on the
Forest Service land.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
quite possibly.
It's the terrain is set, right?
probably where we put our crops
to.
And with that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen with
the, with the
The bill and then with your
changes that you tried to work
through on your amendment.
Can you help me, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, tell me how you feel
like your amendment secures
For our farmers and ranchers
their ability to take care.
Of their crops.
their livestock in accordance
with existing law.
Uh, gentlemen, you know, it, it
just kind of streamlined again,
um, protects solely on, so we
know what they're protecting
because we've talked about a
very broad spectrum of what
they're going to protect. And
Mr. Speaker, it just, it makes
sure that our livestock is not
gonna be displaced and that our,
our constituents know that
whenever we're voting on a bill
like this that we're putting
some safeguards and some guard
drills in there that they're
gonna be
The physical impact of uh impact
on them is gonna be very
minimal.
And then, uh, it just goes back
on to, to find, uh, the
commission's finding and the
impact on such, uh, a decision
to protect a species on
impacted.
Deinus
And then finally,
You know, I, in this, this is
kind of on me. I don't feel like
I want to have to, I, I would
rather that all these licenses
if you're getting an elk
license, then you'll put it back
into the elk population. If
you're getting a fishing
license, put it back into the,
into the fishing side so that we
can manage, maintain, and enjoy.
Everything that the outdoors has
to offer as well as game and
fish.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and I
agree with that. And I think we
ought to come up with a day use
license for people that wanna,
wanna hike and just go up and
maybe overnight camp but do
nothing but hike so that we can
put that into all of those.
And we can start, because right
now, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
The hunters and fishermen in the
state of New Mexico carry
Oh, and now with House Bill 2,
oil and gas carry the weight of
the cost for game of fish. Would
you agree with that, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I would agree with
that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I've,
I've, I've watched.
As we continue to put more and
more requirements on hunters and
fishermen.
Um, the ability to enjoy the
outdoors.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, where
I was at
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we're, we're I grew up and was
taken by my father to go fish,
um.
Up in the Pecos wilderness all
the way up into the upper ecus
where the mines are at that they
don't want anymore, um.
That helped build that whole
area, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
is um
The more and more I watch.
The more and more I watch with
what game and fish is doing the
less and less I see them
actually managing the
responsibilities that that that
they have. And that kind of
frustrates me and we see that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen with
our ranchers.
And the requirements that
they're placing on our ranchers,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
watched.
A very
Twice
A lady speaking from your area.
Where there
Livestock count has continually
been reduced because of the
Elkhart.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
watched.
And I saw the pictures of where
They would fence off an area.
To show
That there's no cattle there,
but it's the elk herd that's
actually destroying the land.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
you probably know the name of
those people. You're probably
very close with them. You
represent them and in this
To me is a further extension of
doing just that.
Keeping our farmers and ranchers
from being able to utilize the
land that they either have as,
as private or their fee land.
But they've had for land
forever, but we continue to
remove that capability. Would
you agree with that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
I would.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I appreciate your amendment. I
know there's a few others that
would like to talk about the
amendment and how they feel
about the amendment. And I know
there's some people that would
just talk about the basis of the
bill. I don't want to continue
this. I appreciate the time and
effort, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I remember a group
text that was sent out late
early fall of last year.
When, when this bill was first
introduced in committee.
And afterwards
Where, you know, you were gonna
be the dog on the hunt with
respect to this, and I
appreciate.
The effort
And being the dog on the hunt
and standing up for our farmers,
ranchers, and for our game
areas.
And I thank you very much for
that. Thank you.
There is further debate on the
amendment. We have the gentleman
from Chavez, Eddie and Lee
County's Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind gentleman from Lincoln,
Ontario on the floor.
Mr. Speaker, I yi.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I'll
keep mine really quick. I want
to stand up in support of this
amendment.
For
Oh, most all the reasons that
have already been spoken of, but
I have one question.
The rules and regulations that
the game and fish.
What, whatever we're calling it
now,
the new regulations. Will they
pertain to the private
landowners also?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Uh, that's what I read into it
and uh
You know, it, uh, us with our
small ranches like I have and
stuff, you know, we, we, uh.
We try to abide by all the laws.
We, uh,
The main
Thing that I didn't like, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
And I feel that you're in.
Addresses this is the expanding
of the
The, the power.
that the commission has.
By rules and regulations with no
input from us as legislatures.
Is that true, Mr. Speaker? I
mean, Mr. gentleman.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, with that I yield the
floor.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Sandoval and Santa Fe
representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, Teman, this is
gentleman you.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I've been listening to the
debate on the amendment, and I
had a couple of questions, uh, a
couple of questions, a couple of
comments that I thought would
clarify it.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
have said several times
That we should not fund.
The clarification of the
mission.
To non-game species on the
backs, that's the phrase you've
used of hunters and anglers.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
We agree on that.
And that's why we didn't. That's
why we're bringing money to the
table. That's why the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund is there
to the tune of about $3 million
a year. That's why they grow
money is coming in through the
budget to tune about $3.5
million a year.
We knew that wasn't right.
So we didn't do that. So I want
to be very clear on that.
That this is not on the backs.
Of hunters and anglers.
Secondly, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I've heard you, you
shared the story.
Uh, the minority leader shared
the story.
Uh, there, there have been other
discussion about
Severe land use restrictions.
Her size restrictions.
Um, other restrictions on
private property.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in
each case,
That has been federal action.
That has been meadow jumping
mouse, federally listed Mexican
gray wolf federally listed. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, do you have
any examples?
Of the New Mexico Department of
Game and fish.
Including a land use restriction
on private property.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm getting good at listening to
two people at the same time. So
I'm gonna try to, I'm gonna try
to answer that. So, um, on.
SB 5.
And it's gonna be on subsection
G.
7 G
So it says that management
includes acquisition or
maintenance of land or aquatic
habitat.
You identify.
And on uh
OK
Page 11, section D,
the new definition is endangered
species.
It means any species of fish or
wildlife whose prospects of
survival or recruitment within
the state are in jeopardy due to
any of the following factors.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't want to be really clear
cause this is really important.
That's existing language.
That's not new.
It's amended to read, and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the State
Department of Game and Fish.
Has no ability.
To designate a species as
federally endangered.
Strictly a federal law.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, but
now it, it applies to all these
new species, correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
Mr. Speaker, not federal but
state.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there is
no state designation of
endangered. There's species of
various conservation need when
there is a species of great
conservation need, the
department can work on that
species, they still don't have
authority to designate critical
habitat.
They have no authority to order
fences taken down or put up.
They have no authority to remove
cattle.
They don't have that. All of the
examples.
have been discussed in this
chamber to create effect.
Because there's significant.
Have been federal.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentlemen.
Would you say that they're doing
it right now with trapping?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't
understand the question.
Let me move on.
So on page 9.
Uh, section A, Section 5.
A
It says new material in addition
to species defined as protected
in chapter 17 NMSA 1978, the
commission is authorized to
extend management and protection
by rule to any species of
wildlife.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
management and protection of the
species. They can manage direct
take.
This Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
you're, you're giving that
information.
The department doesn't have
authority to regulate private
land use.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to Table
House for Amendment number 1 to
Senate Bill 5,
We are on a motion to table
House Floral Amendment number 1
to Senate Bill 5 is 5 times
amended.
The vote of yes, the amendment
would have been tabled a vote of
no and we're back on the
amendment.
32nd book clock.
The vote
is now open.
The voices are closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 29 in
the negative. Houses for
Amendment number 1 to Senate
Bill 5 is 5 times amended has
been tabled.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero, you still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I really thought that was gonna
be friendly, and man,
I like to win and I'm not
winning a whole lot this, this
year.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so I
had a few questions.
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so, um,
I had a couple of questions on
the Pittman Roberts findings.
Let me sign this sheet real
quick and I'll be right back
with you. OK.
So
Do we get funds from the US Fish
and Wildlife.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, are
you aware that if one penny of
these funds go to conservation
of a butterfly, we lose all
funding for 3 years.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, my
experts tell me, uh, the
department is using uh their fee
money and their Pitman Robinson
matching money, uh, they use it
for these existing purposes, the
department is well aware of it.
It's not a violation.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, can
you guarantee the body that not
one penny of the US.
Fish and Wildlife funding will
go to anything other than game,
wildlife, and sporting fish.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I am
highly confident that the
department will act in
accordance with law.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate that.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
I have another amendment for
you.
Just one more. I got to give
this a try. I want you to at
least try to accept this cause
I'm not feeling I have to look
at this one.
OK, Mr. Speaker, you should have
the amendment.
Can you, um, give us the number
on the bottom left. Mr. Speaker,
the amendment number or
0.231878.1. All right, we'll get
that passed out.
And then we'll get it online and
I'll take a roll call vote if we
Gentlemen, the amendment has
been passed out and it is posted
online, gentlemen, to explain
the amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. What this amendment is
gonna do is we, you know, we
just, our farmers and ranchers
deserve the safeguards.
And the guard rails to know that
none of which authorizes the
direct or indirect removal or
displacement of livestock from a
species habitat, such as from a
pasture spring stream.
River or stock tank.
It's that, it's that simple, Mr.
Speaker.
Let's go back to the bill
sponsor. Is this a friendly
amendment?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, may I ask him a couple
of questions?
Certainly, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um,
So, uh, it's a little deja vu
all over again, uh, I've seen
this language before because it
was in the Last Amendment, which
we just wrote down.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when we
were debating that amendment, I
asked you a question.
And I don't think I got an
answer.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
give me an example of the State
Department of Game and Fish
ordering livestock removed from
private land.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no, I
can't in the state, but under
this new language, I, I don't
know. That's the, that's the
assurance that I want to give
our, our farmers and ranchers
that says exactly what you and I
have already agreed on, and I
think that the, we pretty much
agreed on everything in that
last amendment except for based
a decision to protect solely on.
If I would have left.
that out, I'd, I'd have got the
trifecta for sure, but this one
here is just
It's just making everybody feel
good. It's just a compromise
saying, hey, we're gonna put
some guardrails on there,
ranchers and farmers, don't
worry, we got you. We're not
gonna remove your livestock.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the, the
amendments unfriendly. The
reason it's unfriendly, not only
do we just vote this language
down, but it's not necessary,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, if you
have an example of the State
Department of Game and Fish
acting in this way.
That would be front and center.
It's not.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the, the
bill doesn't say.
It does not provide for
Well, your expert is afraid it
provides for and is telling you
that it provides for.
It doesn't do that. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the, the
amendment remains unfriendly.
Is there a debate on the
amendment to generated from
Sierra Donanacorto
Representative now. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, you know, I've not
only have I been listening to
the debate, but I've had a lot
of conversations with people
that I trust on that are
supporting and the industries
that are supposing and that are
supporting and opposing the
bill, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
is that the case for you as
well?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes. Mr. Speaker, and uh
gentlemen, whenever, um, the
sponsor of the bill was talking
his primary focus was on the
changes to the commission.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
but a change of the commission
could be a five-page bill. This
is, this is substantially
longer, dozens of pages. And,
uh, the large percentage of it
is new language, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, and what, what we're just
mainly what I'm trying to do is
The farmers, the ranchers, the
guides, everybody that I've been
talking to this is just giving
them an assurance, mainly the
ranchers that we're going to
protect them. We got them. This,
we're not, we're not gonna do
what the Forest Service did to
the Goss family, state of New
Mexico is not gonna do that to
Mexi to New Mexicans. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, and, and
I heard them say that that
Um, the ag interest is still
holding out. That, that.
Cattle growers and farm bureau.
That, that's, that's every
single one of our districts. I,
I think even Bernna Leo, even
Santa Fe and even Donana farm
and livestock bureau and cattle
growers, they should have a, we
should have, they should have
our ear.
If we eat 3 meals a day and we
want it to be affordable, high
quality.
And we want it to be reliable
source of food. Every single one
of us should pay attention when
farming livestock.
And when cattle growers say they
have a concern, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
I've heard a lot of disingenuous
things in this chamber, but
asking farm and livestock Bureau
to define the definition of a
rancher.
Our cattle growers and then say
that they had input in this
bill, that feels disingenuous to
me, does it to you, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen? Hold on, hold on
a second. I think we're way off.
uh, let's stick to the amendment
and let's not try to impute any
motives to uh build drafting or
debate, please. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Giving a definition doesn't seem
like enough input.
The definition of a rancher is
perfectly described.
That, that doesn't go far
enough.
I'm just going to read what I'm
concerned about, and it starts
for those of folks, if you have
the substitute in front of you
and you want to understand what
farmers and ranchers in the
state are concerned about,
please get out the bill and turn
to section 5.
In section 5, this is a new
section. This is not existing
language. It's a new section,
and it's wildlife to be
protected.
A, in addition to the species
defined as protected in chapter
17 NMSA 1978, the commission,
the commission is authorized to
extend management and protection
by rule to any species of
wildlife. Now, that's section 5.
It's very complicated. This has
5 subs. You must now turn to
section 6 to see.
Maybe at section 7, you've got
to turn to section 7 to see the
definition of wildlife. That's
on page 13 letter in, I think if
I have, I'm looking at uh
amendments and context. The
definition of wildlife means
A non-domestic mammal bird,
reptile, amphibian, fish, or
invertebrate species, including
a living animal or any part egg
spawn or offspring of the dead
body or parts thereof. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, am I
tracking, are you tracking with
me so far?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, 100%.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
section 7 is talking about
existing law, that is the
section of existing law from
NMSA.
Um
And that
talks about the federal
endangered species on the list
that we do every, every, I think
they have to do it every 10
years, but I think we do it
every 2.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I think
it is too. OK, so
In this section.
The areas of concern where we
are now giving authority to the
commission, a new state
definition.
Is talking about endangered
species within the state,
overutilization for scientific
commercial or sporting purposes
in the it's number 4 in this
section. Um, I'm not even sure
what recruitment of wildlife
means, but there are some terms
that are struck. um, may also
include
Federal
Endangered Species Act.
Federal, the word federal is
underlying.
And then you've got to look at
where they're striking and
changing language there to give
new authority.
And when those shells and made
that are being struck and
replaced.
Starts on page 12 B through 11
section when the director
believes that a species may be
threatened or endangered, and
that consists of a formal
review.
That's not
new language, but it's expanded
authority, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is it expanded
authority?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes. Mr. Speaker, they expanded
authority that they now have the
authority to work on is F. This
is where farmers and ranchers
are concerned. If you're looking
at the amendment, it's on page
12, where the commission will
have new authority to, to
protect on F land or aquatic
habitat interest means interest
of real property or water rights
consisting of fee simple title,
easements in perpetuity.
certain easements, long term
leases and short-term leases.
Management, and then we get into
management means the collection
and application of information,
if you go through there, they
strike, but not limited to.
Including but not limited to
research since law enforcement,
promulgation, acquisition or
maintenance of land or aquatic
habitat interests appropriate
for recovery of the species. Now
in this recovery plan, which is
line H, it means designated
programmer method
methodology reasonably expected
to lead to the rest restoration
and maintenance of species, and
it's a habitat. So,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, can
you read your amendment again?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
rules and management programs
that would potentially come uh
company protected status,
provided that a rule shall
Not authorized the direct or
indirect removal or displacement
of livestock from a species
habitat, including from pasture
river Spring.
Stock tank or stream.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Why would something that's never
gonna, doesn't happen, and under
this expanded authority is never
gonna happen, not be a friendly
amendment.
Well, Mister Speaker and gentle
lady, I've always been taught to
document, document, document.
And if we put the language in
there that we know that it feels
good, it's palatable. Our
farmers and ranchers are going
to feel a little bit better
about it.
But the minute that we make this
unfriendly, it just looks like
we're not being transparent to
them. Speaker and gentlemen,
when I've talked to the folks
that I trust.
That our friends and, and we're
usually their allies that have
conceded to this compromise.
This is their concern.
They are
Happy to have the increases on
the fees for wildlife. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
they're even excited that uh the
wildlife.
Agency is gonna have adequate
funding. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
some of them like the changes to
the commission because there
won't, there's one vacancy right
now, but some of them like the
change to the commission because
they believe that they can do
more work and be more effective
and, and have a bigger impact.
Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is correct.
one of the people that I've
talked to that are supporting
it.
are concerned about your
amendment. The amendment that is
in your hand right now that
you've offered to this body. And
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
it's not happening and it's
never gonna happen, why not
adopt the amendment and give
Northern, um, the Northern
Cattle Growers Association, the
assurance they need and give
cattle growers association, the
assurance they need and give
farm and livestock Bureau, which
touches every single county of
this body, the assurance.
They need that we're not going
to restrict wildlife or
livestock, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it just seems, I, I
don't understand why it's not
friendly if it's a given and
it's understood, why not put it
in plain print?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
that's, that's why I've been at
this for a couple of hours now,
just trying to make this a
little bit better to be fully
transparent with everybody that
does not like this bill, and it
seems like that we are making
progress and we're, we, we have
a compromise. We're just not
willing to put it on paper, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
urge this body to vote yes on
this amendment. If it's the one
thing that you get to take back
to your constituents.
You protected cattle. You
protected livestock in your
district. There's no reason to
vote no on this amendment.
Everything else stays in place
and we're protecting one of our
most important agricultural
assets in the state, and I look
forward to supporting your
amendment and I sure hope that
it passes.
And I went from Donana small on
the amendment.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
thank you, gentlemen. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the,
would you agree that the um
Soil and water conservation
districts do a great deal of
work with, uh, different folks
including grazing Permits, uh,
and other folks.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
Donna. I'm a big fan of them,
and yes, I do too, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, one quick
question. Would you agree, and I
know and I deeply respect and uh
and in a lot of admiration for
your work as a hunting guide,
uh, Madam, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, my, my sense is that
there's actually a number of
outfitters and guides who are
also ranchers and, and farmers
and, and, and other
agriculturalists. Would you
agree, Mr?
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
I would agree with that and
cowboying is one of those
skilled laborers that it
cowboying and ranching is a
romance.
And if you don't own the land
and you're having to try to make
cattle and pay for the land,
it'll never work. And it's a
generational thing and, and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
appreciate that answer because
if we don't take care of our
ranchers, one of these days
they're gonna be gone, and
there's not gonna be no more,
not a whole lot of beef to feed
us all. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, thank you for that,
and I, I know, uh, and again in
in deep respect and a lot of
admiration for.
uh, what I understand your
personal story there. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the reason I
want to stand respectfully in
opposition to the amendment, uh,
as we've gone through so it was
addressed earlier, but Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, my sort
of real strong understanding is
both before and after this bill,
um, the game and fish department
won't be in the business of sort
of deciding any permits this
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
doesn't give them any more
authority, which they don't have
now.
And they don't have the ability
and they won't have the ability
in the future to deny those
permits. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, also just
respectfully sort of putting out
there uh as a reminder that, uh,
the swill and water conservation
Districts Council of Outfitter
and guides, uh, Houndsman's
Associations, others which I
know there's a lot of great uh a
lot of crossover though not
exclusive. The the their support
for the bill as is, I think
reflects a great deal of the
work and gives me the
confidence, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
And I appreciate very much, uh,
your continued work in this
opportunity to visit. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
There's debate.
Colfax, curry Quay Harding, San
Miguel and Unan, Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, there's a gentleman
and gentlemen, there's a
gentleman yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr. Speaker,
You know, I like this, uh,
amendment, but there's some
things I don't like about it
because I think it falls short.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, you know, as I
look around this room, I don't
see the Department of Game and
Fish. I don't see the executive
director.
Of the Department of Game and
Fish set in here and I've
worked, I know who he is, I know
who his staff is. I've worked
with him a lot, and they're not
here.
And I don't, and I don't know
why we just debated the bill
with the concerned ECECD.
The secretary was here. We
review agencies all the time.
The secretary is here. This
bill, the Department of Game and
Fish executive director and
staff are not here.
Uh
So I would have liked to have
heard from them and maybe they
could have added to your
amendment a little bit.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
something else your amendment
does not deal with is a, we've
had a board of 7 people for many
years.
We cannot fill that board. It's
been vacant and vacant and
vacant. So how does making
changing a board from 7 to 9, a
board you can't fill at 7 to 9
members.
Fix it. You're not decreasing
the board, you're increasing it.
That's not dealt with on your
amendment.
Um
The words make a difference
whenever you pass a bill like
this.
Uh
The words in this bill say say
that they will be broadly
authorized and directed to make
rules to make rules about the
size, the trend, the migration
patterns availability of
habitat, Conservation actions
and take actions as necessary.
Those words matter. That's not
dealt with in your amendment. So
there's a good amount of things
that, that are not in your
amendment that uh
Did I have a problem with and I
also, I think it's a little bit
too big of a bite to change all
these things at once. That's not
dealt with in your amendment. I
mean, this is uh
is changing.
Fees rulemaking, it adds
species. It changes the the the
members of the commission.
Once again, those things are not
dealt with in that amendment.
It's too, it's too big a bite.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, how
do you deal with a species
without dealing with habitat.
Uh, you have to deal with
habitat. It has to be a part of
it. And I keep hearing the the
the word private property,
private property. 47% of New
Mexico is not private property.
We have a variety of properties
with a variety of uses. We have
4 service land. We have, uh,
National grasslands, uh, the
bankhead Jones farm tenant that
created the national grasslands
and they are to be used for
grazing. They have a, an
extensive population of
grassland birds and such. So it
doesn't, we're not just talking
about.
What
We're not just talking about,
uh, private property. We're
talking about many, many classes
of land, uh, the BLM multiple
use sustained Yield Act. We
graze those lands, um.
State land
Uh, state land is not public
property. It is property that's
held in trust by the state, and
it's only used by the public in
certain places at certain times
for certain reasons. So it could
enormously.
Affect
Our grazing our mining, our, all
the things that we do in New
Mexico, drilling for oil, all
those things are affected by
wildlife, wildlife species. I
know I live out there. So many,
many ways have, how would, would
you be able to change
Um, you're
Amendment to help deal with
habitat. Is there some, is there
some way that we could add into
this amendment something that
deals with the habitat.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm,
I've really been reaching all
day trying to find a deal. And
uh I, I just can't quite make
the deal yet. And I think that
habitat would be that, that
would be a fair amendment.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know the bankhead Jones or the,
uh, Pittman Robertson, uh,
funds, they deal with habitat
and they, they help put habitat
on the ground and it's something
that we've found.
The, uh, over the years is that
managing for a single species is
not very effective. We don't
manage for deer. We don't manage
for a butterfly. We don't uh we
managed for all things, good
habitats, good habitat. Uh,
there was an area where we
pulled out the non-native
invasive species.
Almost immediately, we got back
deer, elk, black bear, cougar,
turkeys, uh, butterflies, all
those things live in good
habitat, uh, beaver came in and
ate down a bunch of my
cottonwood trees that, that we
were rehabilitating that area
with. Uh, there's tons of them
in there now because the willows
came back and, and Beaver Z.
Willis. So, uh, good habitat is
good habitat. I don't see how
you manage.
Uh, for any species without
dealing with habitat.
And a lot of that habitat has
cows on it and, and ranchers on
it. And that's why it's good to
have a tat because we take care
of it.
Um
I think that's getting down to
the
To the most of what I had to
say.
Uh, I will say that when they,
when they, when, when you're
looking at species,
They tend to
Very. I like quail. I've got
quail on my ranch.
Uh, 80% of quail die over the
winter, and they come back in
the spring, and 80% of them
down.
I'll have ears when I have lots
of quail in years when I don't
have so many quail. I heard a
while ago.
About the, the uh turkeys eating
bugs.
In quail, when they're born,
they eat little insects, little
bugs, and then
Uh, maybe some green stuff and
then by the fall, they're,
they're eating grains and that,
uh, you know, grass seeds and,
and that sort of thing.
And lastly,
And I did
is a non-native species.
Brought in from Africa.
From the Barbary Coast of
Africa, commonly known.
As a barbary sheep.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen gentlemen gentle
lady from Santa.
Mr. Speaker, this a matter
having been under consideration
for 3 hours, I moved to close
debate. We're on a motion to the
debate. All those in favor say
aye.
Postate.
Yeah, I have it debate is now
closed.
Gentlemen from San Santa Fe Clo.
Just kidding, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to Table
House for Amendment number 2 to
Senate Bill 5 on a motion to
table house floor amendment
number 2 to Senate Bill 5 as 5
times amended a vote of yes and
the amendment is tabled a vote
of no and we're back on the
amendment without time left.
So choose wisely.
The vote is now open.
The border is now closed by a
vote of 40 in the affirmative,
28 in the negative, House floor
amendment number 2 to Senate
Bill 5 is 5 times amended, has
been tabled.
Gentlemen from Sandoval and
Santa Fe to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, uh, gentlemen.
Um
This
touch a couple of real quick
things.
This bill is supported by
hunting and fishing groups.
clean outfitters and guides,
that kind of country hunters,
anglers.
Supported by conservation groups
throughout New Mexico.
Supported by the New Mexican
Association of Conservation
Districts.
This is an even-handed bill.
That protects hunting and
fishing.
protects ranching and farming.
It protects wildlife too.
And
Mr. Speaker, members of the
body, imagine if I came to you
and said,
I want to take away protections.
For game commissioners.
I want to make it so there isn't
a guaranteed seat for hunters
and anglers. I want to make it
so the new governor can
clear, clean house.
You would be appalled.
But that's the system we're
moving away from.
We're building in protections
for the commission.
Which will help the department
and there's been a lot of
concern about
Dire consequences.
All the dire consequences.
have come from the feds.
If you want to avoid those
consequences.
You want a strong department of
game and fish.
Because that's the agency.
That keeps our populations
healthy.
And a voids
Federal listing.
Mr. Speaker, with that, I move
the Senate Bill 5.
You pass
final passage of Senate Bill 5
What about clothes?
The border is not closed by a
vote of 42 in the affirmative,
26 in the negative. Senate Bill
5 is 5 times amended as Zuli
passed his house.
Gentle lady from uh Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports no objection. It is so
ordered. Clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 312 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to you Wana Johnson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of favorable committee
report for House Bill 312. All
those in favor of saying, but
say 9.
Oppose me, the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 7 has had
it under consideration reports
saying with recommendation that
it do pass, respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair.
Move adoption adoption favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
7. All those in favor of 5, but
say 9.
All opposing 8.
The IS have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 19 as amended, has had it
under consideration report, same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted. Do
you want Johnson, chair.
adoption
adoption report for Senate
Education Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 19. All those in
favor of C5 but say no.
On supposed name
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 47 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass, respectfully submitted.
Do you Wanda Johnson, chair?
We adoption. We're adoption of
fable committee report for
Senate Bill 47. All those in
favor say no.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government,
excuse me, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 70 as amended has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted to you want Johnson,
chair.
Move adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 70. All those in
favoring the vote but say I.
Capone.
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 75 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted to Wanda
Johnson, chair. Move adoption.
We are an adoption of favor
committee report for Senate Bill
75 as amended. All those in
favor of 59.
Well Bona. Yes, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred to Senate Bill 82 has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want a Johnson
chair?
Move adoption. We are adoption
of favorable report for Senate
Bill 82. All those in favor
signified by saying I.
I supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 113 as amended has
had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee. Ms. Buckley
submitted. Do you Wanda Johnson,
chair. Move with action.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
113 as amended. All those in
favor signify but say I.
All those opposed? No.
Yeah, have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 398
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but the
House Health and Human Services
can be a substitute for House
Bill 398 do pass, respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
of adoption.
We're an adoption of of an
unfavorable committee report for
house with 398, but a favorable
committee report for House
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for hours
with 398. All those in favor
signify by saying I.
All the suppose nay.
Yeah, I saw it committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 562
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report for 562. All
those in favor signified by
saying I.
I suppose nay.
BIAI committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 579 has
had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair. Move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
House Bill 579. All those in
favor signified by saying aye.
All those opposed signified by
saying nay.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred to Senate Tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 20 has had it under
consideration report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation and revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair adoption adoption
of committee report for Senate
tax, business, and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 20,
all those in favor signified by
saying ah.
All the supposed signify by
saying nay.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred Senate Bill 39 as
amended has had under under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair, adoption.
We're we.
Security, security.
Sergeant at arms.
Need help.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 39 as amended. All
those in favor signified by say
I.
I suppose nay.
Don't
Yes, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred Senate Bill 88
as amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations of Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair. Move adoption.
We're on adoption of favor
committee report for Senate Bill
88 as amended. All those in
favor signified by say I.
All the Boney
Yes, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred Senate Bill
252 as amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We are an adoption of favor 24%
of 252 as amended.
All those in favor, say I.
All the support signified by
saying me.
The committee reported up gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 52, Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 267, Senate Bill
302, Senate Bill 303 as amended
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry Delehan sent a chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 166 and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansson, a chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 219 as amended and request
the concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansen a chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the House that the Senate
has passed. House taxation and
Revenue Committee's substitute
for House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 47
with emergency clause and return
same herewith respectfully
submitted Sherry de Lohan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Seeing no objection, it is so
ordered.
Announcements before we go back
to 3rd reading, announcements
from the floor.
Announcements last chance to get
you shoe shined.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My, my
shoes are broken.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to tell you thank you for
getting our shoes shined muchas
gracias. You're welcome, young
lady from Santa Fe, Sandoval in
Los Alamos. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, just a reminder that
your House Judiciary Committee
will meet 15 minutes after the
conclusion of the floor session,
Mr. Speaker.
Me sick note.
Members, I have a generic bill
announcement. Everybody pay
attention. Genericc bill
announcement. This is House Bill
586, generic bill.
We are removing it from the
house rules and order of
Business Committee and referring
it to the House Judiciary
Committee. The point
231 number on the bottom is
0.231826.1.
Sponsored by Representative
Suppansy removed from the house
rules in order of Business
Committee and referred to the
House Judiciary Committee.
Again, this is generic bill
number House Bill 586.
0.231 number is 0.231826.1,
removed from House rules and
order of business and referred
to the House Judiciary
Committee, see no objection. It
is ordered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
See no objection. It is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, are
you ready?
On
House Bill 2:30.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point? that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill 230 is twice amended
on final passage has been taken
and it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, and
members. House Bill 230 amends
the Linen A and Compassionate
Youth Act, uh, to create a more
nuanced approach to determining
impairment by cannabis to
account for advancing technology
and impairment screenings or
drug tests, um, this will allow
for safe access for those um in
front line positions that need
it and with that I stand for
questions.
There is to be generally from
Catherine Sierrasoralena,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe yield?
I yield to Madam Leader. Thank
you, uh, Madam Leader, uh, I,
uh, I remember when we passed
this bill.
Uh, for the, the first time and
I, and I was really, really
happy, uh, when we passed it the
first time and we had language
in there, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, that said the employer, if
the employer deemed
Um
Employees work in a safe safety
sensitive position. So can you
tell me that's being removed.
Can you tell me, um, Mr.
Speaker, uh, Madam Leader.
How does this affect a CDL
driver.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and uh gentle
lady, so CDL licenses because
they are subject to federal, uh,
regulation as well, um, would,
uh, not, uh, be permitted to use
medical cannabis. This
legislation does not change
that.
Thank you, um, Madam Leader and
Mr. Speaker, and so what about,
uh, just uh.
A scenario of a company that had
service vehicles that serviced.
Uh, individuals' homes all
across New Mexico, how would
that affect those service
drivers that are driving a
company vehicle.
So Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and, uh, gentle lady, uh, what
would happen in that scenario as
the company could still set a
policy that no cannabis use is
permitted, um, and if they
suspected that a driver, uh, or
any employee was impaired if
they had that type of policy,
um, and certainly they could
institute a drug-free workplace
policy they could uh if they had
reasonable suspicion that the uh
employee was uh impaired in.
in some way or, you know, seemed
like they were intoxicated or
using cannabis, um, they could
order them to testing, um, and
they could take any adverse
employment action. They, uh,
felt was appropriate if that
person had indeed in violated
the rules.
So Mr. Speaker, uh, uh, Madam
Leader, you, the companies have
to implement the, uh, basically
a drug free.
Um, work environment.
Is that the only avenue they
could take?
Um, miss Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, it would depend on the
employer. So if an employer did
want to accommodate someone with
a medical cannabis card, um,
they could adopt a set of
policies that would, uh, you
know, ensure that that employee
employee provided a copy of the
uh current medical cannabis
card, for example, and have that
on file, they could also adopt a
specific policies that ensure
that if someone was using
medical cannabis that they uh
did that.
During, uh, within a window, uh,
for which, uh, they would be
sure that they were not impaired
when they showed up to work, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
you know, my, my husband is a
pilot and he is subject to uh
many restrictions and for
example, drinking, there's all
kinds of rules about um uh the
appropriate, uh, length of time
after you've had a drink before
you can get uh into the cockpit
of an airplane and.
So, uh, this is similar. this is
what we're trying to set up here
is similar to that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Madam
Leader, I, I think in my
opinion, it would just be easier
to leave the apply to an
employee who's employer deems.
That the employee works in a
safety sensitive position. If we
left that language in there,
then
It would give the employer the
ability to say this is a safety
sensitive on upon higher instead
of doing a broad.
Um
Sweeping
Drug policy
In the company, wouldn't this
be?
Easier on the employer and on
the employee.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so, uh, we looked at
that and certainly um over the
years this legislation has um
gotten more and more nuanced, so
the initial forms of this
legislation, uh, a few years ago
did just sort of simply remove
safety sensitive, um, one of the
reasons why we brought in the
Department of Workforce
Solutions is because the
technology around cannabis
testing is changing all the
time, and we want to make sure
that
employers know what the best way
to assess whether someone is
impaired or not is and they're
provided that information, so
DWS is required under this bill
to provide that information to
employers, um, and, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, in some ways this will this
will allow for DWS to instruct
employers to do uh like
psychomotor evaluation to
basically see like how is your
uh motor function in the moment,
um, so that you can rely on
that, for example, for an
adverse employment action if
that was required, um, but, but,
general, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, to get to your
original question, the reason
that we didn't want to just have
a blanket safety.
sensitive policy is because of
the intention of this bill,
which is to allow first
responders, um, to be able to
follow the recommendations of
their doctor if they are, uh,
recommended to uh use medical
cannabis for conditions such as
cancer or PTSD, and so, um, the
blanket provision of safety
sensitive has prevented um these
first responders from accessing
uh the uh the, the, this
medicine.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, it's
unfortunate that that's doing
that because what's happening,
what will happen is we pass this
bill is it's putting the
liability on the employer now.
And Mr. Speaker, kind lady, my
concern is that this is opening
up a whole can of worms for
lawsuits in the workforce to say
I wasn't treated fairly.
Because, uh, uh, so and so has a
desk job and their medical
marijuana card doesn't, it's not
safety, it's not a safety
sensitive position, but the
person running a dozer.
It is a safety sensitive and in
my opinion,
People driving service vehicles,
Amazon company vehicles,
anywhere, everywhere around the
state this is putting the
employer and the employee in, in
a very, um, vulnerable position,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, because,
uh, of the lawsuit part of it.
And Mr. Speaker, kind lady in
our business, if someone is in a
car accident, the first thing we
do is drug test.
And will we not be allowed to do
that, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, or
will we not be allowed to just
test for the marijuana.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so, um, in.
Uh, section one B of the
legislation, uh, if there is a
reasonable suspicion of
impairment.
Or an accident uh or any damage
to the property, um, we took out
the word significant in house
judiciary Committee in an
amendment, so, uh, any accident
causing damage, uh, certainly
harm to anyone else, um, that,
uh, uh, the uh the.
Test could be done immediately
at that time, so just as you're
suggesting and Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, we also adopted an
amendment in House Judiciary to
address the liability, um, I'm
not sure if it meets your, uh,
the, the concerns that you're
describing, but I do want to
point that out, so that's on
page 3, in the amendments in
context version, if you have
that, um, but we did add uh that
evidence of an employee's
positive.
of cannabis test, um, uh, cannot
be held against the employer,
uh, and increasing the liability
that they're found there because
we felt if we are allowing
medical cannabis patients to
access this medicine and utilize
it. We also don't want to
penalize the employer for
allowing their employees to
access that.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
Madam Leader, I, I appreciate
both of those, but I still fall
back onto um if, if EMS, if
we're doing this for EMS, which
I didn't know that that was why
we were doing it. And I'm very
supportive of EMS, but why can't
they implement policies where
they could have a medical
cannabis card.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so Bernalillo County has just
done that, um, but this is just
a standardized so that when we
have firefighters or other
emergency personnel moving from,
uh, city to city, etc. so that
this is there's sort of a
statewide standard, um, and Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we also
wanted the Department of
Workforce Solutions to be
responsible for providing the up
to-date standards so that all
employers, uh, if you have
employees working in multiple
counties, for example, that.
they're all sort of covered by
that uh DWS recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Madam
Leader, um.
I, I didn't bring this to you
and, and I apologize before
that, but I am going to
introduce an amendment, uh, Mr.
Speaker, to keep the.
Um
The section that I wanted kept
in there, um.
Uh, no, I don't.
And I, and I wouldn't like a
roll call vote, Mr. Speaker.
You've got a roll call.
Gentle lady, what is the number
on the bottom left?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, it is
231-898.1. Let's get this passed
out and post it online and I'll
come back to you to explain the
amendment.
Meanwhile, uh, gentle lady from
Santa Fe, do you, would you like
to introduce your expert?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have with me
Miguel Titman who is president
of IAFF Local 244.
Uh, firefighters union, excuse
me. Thank you very much, gentle
lady.
Yeah, it looks like the
amendment's been passed out and
it is posted online. The gentle
lady do explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, as I
stated before, um, it is, uh,
really just putting in back in
the uh applied to employee whose
employer deems that the employee
works in the safety sensitive
position.
Gentle lady from Santa Fez is a
friendly amendment.
Mr. Speaker and Madam Leader,
unfortunately, it is not a
friendly amendment, um, and I'd
love to just share a few
thoughts about why.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, this kind of gets at the
heart of the bill and some of
the folks that were really
trying to assist, particularly
firefighters who may be
experiencing um whether it be
cancer or PTSD, um, because it
it I put reinserting this
language, it would just allow
for that prohibition to continue
and what we're trying to get to
is a more nuanced approach where
that's worked out with the
employer and the physician.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would say that there's probably
a way to craft this to make it
more clear that if an employer
felt um.
That uh that we could maybe
describe some specific duties or
something like that that, you
know, I'm open to continuing
those conversations but for
this, this particular amendment
is not friendly.
Is there a debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
San Juan, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady guild.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Speaker and gentle lady, so I'm,
I'm.
Curious as to how
A employer.
could even
No
Whether or not
Um, someone has a medical
marijuana card.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it appears to me that employers
can be put in a ridiculously bad
position in hiring even for a
position where.
You're going to put people on
the road in vehicles with
traffic, the liability being on
the, on the uh employer, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Would an employer even be able
to ask if someone has a medical
marijuana card seeming that that
could be in my mind I I believe
that could be a HIPAA violation.
Do you, do you have any thoughts
on that, um, gentle lady. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, uh, kind gentlemen,
I believe it would be a HIPAA
violation unless it was offered,
um, by the employee, uh, or the
potential higher, um, I'm not
sure that we can ask that
question.
And Mister Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um, I'm, I'm curious as to what
Uh, recourse you actually have,
even if someone takes a job,
you, you maybe even explain to
them in advance that, um, that
you would have concerns with
them driving a vehicle, uh,
company vehicle, um, due to the
The liability concerns and even
suggest to them.
I, I, if I were in that
position, um,
gentle lady, I'm not sure that I
would volunteer.
That I have a medical marijuana
card.
I, I'm not sure that that would
even come to the mind of an
employee, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, you're not in a
position to ask.
And we would assume the employee
is likely not going to, um, I
can't imagine an employee would
tell you, I drink 1/5 of whiskey
every evening. It's legal.
And I, and I can have it, so I'm
Mr. Speaker, generally, I just
don't understand.
How
Without this amendment,
We could
Even consider
Uh, asking folks to go into
business, uh, where, where
you're gonna have folks, uh,
That you can't even drug test,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I'm, I, I think this is a
reasonable.
Amendment
That will allow folks to hire.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm, I'm concerned.
With what steps might be taken
by an employer. If you're in
this position in the future,
gentle lady.
How, how would you as an
employer try and ensure that
you're hiring folks that you
trust in, in.
In your company vehicles, uh,
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, we
would probably do a drug test
before hire and so Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, uh, it is a
concern of mine that we can't,
um, and according to this, I'm
not sure that we can test for
cannabis, uh, maybe in the with
the uh the new part of of the
bill, uh, uh, with Workforce
Solutions, but Mr. Speaker, kind
gentleman, I, I just really
wanna to protect both.
The employer and the employee
with this amendment, it puts it
on
they will know, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, if you're, if
you are, are applying for a job
to run a piece of heavy
equipment, they will know right
up front.
Um
And if you're getting, uh,
applying for a job that is not.
Safety sensitive, a safety
sensitive position, then.
Then doesn't really matter.
Um, but we would probably still
drug test.
Uh, because that's our policy,
but uh I do think, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, that this is
putting employees and employers
in a really tough position and
opening up, I think a can of
worms for lawsuits.
Summa speaker and gentle lady,
the, the language that the bill
sponsor mentioned about uh in
the bill that a higher liability
could not be placed on an
employer.
Is that, do you think that's
actually gonna stand up in
court, that provision, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, kind gentleman, not
nowadays. I, I don't think
anything in writing, anybody can
sue anybody for anything right
now. So, uh, but the, the bottom
line is, uh, it's fighting the
lawsuit. It's the cost to the
employer, possibly the employee
to fight the lawsuit and, and
the language which I appreciate,
I, I really don't know that, uh,
it's still gonna cost to, to
fight the lawsuit.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
let's assume the provision that
was suggested actually does hold
up in a court of law.
And you as an employer hired
somebody knowing
That they have a medical
marijuana card. Let's assume
that that, that is all, and you
know that, and you hire them and
you can't drug test them going
forward and then they were in an
accident.
The person that was involved in
the accident. What recourse do
they have now?
With that provision in there,
are they able to obviously if
they can't sue you because,
because the language we put in
here that you're not liable.
Who are they gonna go after? I
mean, does that family then who
is in that accident, have any
recourse at all if that
provision holds?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
um, I'm sure they can find an
attorney to do something
somewhere somehow, but as far as
your specific question, I would
think not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I think, I think
this underlying bill is
untenable without your
amendment. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. There
is further debate on the
amendment the general lady from
Berlio and Sandoval,
Representative Keats. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Uh, does our gentle
leader from the greatest amount
of territory of all our
districts yield. Thank you Mr.
Speaker. I yield to the kind
lady. Thank you very much. um,
so, um, I wanted to come back,
uh, in, when you, uh, read the
bill and you were looking to
amended, uh, Mr. Speaker and
kind lady, which did you, um,
did you find anywhere in there
that absolved an employee for
being under the influence during
employment hours.
Um,
Can, can you ask that question
again, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen? Certainly, Mr.
Speaker, and, and of course, uh,
ma'am leader, uh, I'm asking if
in the original bill, did you
find anywhere that absolved
employees for being under any
influence of any type of
substance such as any drug or
alcohol while they're under
employment, um, really, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, I'm just
talking about the amendment
right now and honestly, all I
wanted to
is
put the employee whose employer
deems that the employee works in
a safety sensitive position back
in.
Thank you. That that's really
what I wanna do.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and thank you, kind lady. Um,
uh, have you, uh, I'm, I'm so
sorry. I'm just trying to
understand so that you, do you
understand the process of
employment with drug testing,
uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, and,
and I too, I've run a business
with safety sensitive and and a
drug free workplace and so
that's why I want to make sure
that we are all on the table
here, the same thing, so this,
this amendment is saying for
safety sensitive employment.
trying to establish this bill
that is before us is for
employment drug testing. Is that
not correct, Mr. Speaker,
kindly?
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, this
This bill that's in front of us,
I want to amend to apply to the
employee whose employer deems
that the employee works in a
safety sensitive position. I
want the employer and the
employee to be able to say,
If, if it is safety sensitive.
You cannot have a medical
marijuana card. If it's not
safety sensitive, we're fine
with that.
So I'm worried about safety in
the workplace safety and getting
sued, Mr. Speaker, kind, gentle,
uh, lady from if they have an
accident in a safety sensitive
if they have a medical marijuana
card and they have an accident.
They are going to sue their
employer for unemployment for an
injury on the job and, and I am
trying to protect both. That's
what I'm trying to do. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and thank you
kindly. I'm sorry we're, we're
just not getting to what I'm
asking is, um, would you, if
somebody was um prescribed a
painkiller, would they no longer
be eligible for, uh, uh,
employment, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, with, with this amendment?
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, that
doesn't have anything to do with
my amendment. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, kind lady,
um, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, are,
are you aware of why, uh,
cannabis testing was taken out
of the bloodborne DWI bill that
was just signed by our governor
a couple of weeks ago from uh
Representative Reed.
That doesn't have anything to do
with my amendment, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady. I'll be glad to
explain why is because drug
tests and alcohol tests when you
take them, will tell you whether
or not you're under the
influence of those drugs or
alcohol and you're absolutely
right, they should not be
employed, they should not be
writing. But cannabis testing
the way we have cannabis right
now. Cannabis tell us it says
that you've had cannabis in your
blood in the last 30 days. It
does not.
Confirm that you were under the
influence that right now, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, that is why
the sponsor explained the
psychomotor skill test to
explain when that, that we will
still maintain that individuals
under the influence, whether
they're in a safety sensitive
employment or sitting at a desk
should not be reporting to work
under the influence, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, it just
leaves it very open to say I'm
going to be the judge if you, if
I think you're impaired.
And that is opening up a
lawsuit.
For the employee to sue the
employer to say, you thought I
was impaired. I wasn't. We got
tested and you're discriminating
against me. So that's my biggest
fear, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, is
that I, I just want a happy
workplace, whether you have a
medical marijuana card or not. I
want the employer to be happy. I
want people to be working and I
want the employee to feel safe
to come to work. That's all I
want, Mr. Speaker, kind gentle
lady. And uh, the main thing is
I really just don't want to open
this up to lawsuits, and that's
my biggest concern. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and thank you, kind
lady. Um, my biggest concern is
I would definitely want safety
in the workplace and in our
public safety as well. I don't
want to impaired drivers or
employees as well, uh, providing
services, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, but
Uh, the amendment
Is
stating that anybody with a
cannabis card is currently under
influence in the employment
setting Mr. Speer kind lady,
when an employee is getting drug
tested at uh at employment, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, is the
employer drug testing them? Are
they sending them to a third
party who determines that, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady. I'm sure Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, there's all
different kinds if they are, um,
Most places would send them to a
third party.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady and kind lady,
are you aware that when they do,
if there are substances in their
analysis, they will contact the
employee or the potential
employee directly and ask them
to provide them with any
prescriptions that might follow
onto that list so that they know
that they're allowed to have
those substance letting the
employer not being violating
HIPAA rights.
Are you aware of that process,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady? Uh, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, I'm not
aware of the complete process.
All I am asking as I've stated
several times, is that it be
something that goes between the
employee and the employer and
doesn't open up to lawsuits, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentle lady. I'm
really concerned that if as an
employer, I think you're, you
work for me. You, I feel like
you're impaired.
And I send you to get a drug
test and you, you were not
impaired.
Uh, am I gonna get a lawsuit for
discrimination?
Uh thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady. I do believe
that the bill that you are
amending is saying that they're
that that test is not valid for
that one particular drug which
is cannabis. Mr. Spear kind
lady, the technology that we use
in our state in the affordable
technology for employers right
now can test if there's cannabis
in your system, it cannot test
whether or not you were on an
influence of it right now and it
is why it was rolled.
out of our DWI, uh, blood porn,
uh, testing bill uh earlier this
session, Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, um,
All I, I keep repeating myself,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, but the
bottom line is whatever test it
is.
New or old, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady is I can require as an
employer, if I think you're
under the influence to be
tested.
And, and this bill is pretty
broad.
Saying
Even if you do have it in your
system, nobody really knows, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, what is the,
where is that everyone's
different weights, everyone's
different sizes.
Different amounts will affect
different people differently and
so Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
I believe that this is opening
up employers and employees to
lawsuits because of
discrimination or whatever other
reason, but Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
I would, I remember this bill
and I remember I liked that in
there because it gave the
employer the discretion. Now
it's putting all, everything on
the employer.
And if you don't cross your T's
and dot your I's and put the
comma in the right place, you
are going to get sued.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, kind lady. So if you
were a company who did
employment testing or, you know,
I, I ran a company that we did
all kinds of drug testing
because we did tons of
sensitive, uh, safety sensitive
employment as well, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
Um, do you feel like if you
felt uh an employee was under
the influence, whether or not
you thought that they had
alcohol in their system, maybe
you smell the alcohol, or maybe
you felt like maybe they had
marijuana in their system or
OxyContin, whatever it is. Do
you think that an employer of
that type of business would be
making the call, or do you think
they would have a third party
tester which including the
psycho
motor skills test, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, uh, we're just talking
about this bill, this bill only
uh my amendment is putting it
language back in. We're talking
about marijuana testing for
people that hold the cannabis
card. That's all we're talking
about right now. So I, I don't
think that that's relevant.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady. I just just to
wrap up, to say, I too am
concerned about employers
getting sued as well and if I
know
if I had um the care of a doctor
who prescribed to me with a drug
that I was not under the
influence of and my and I was
denied employment just because
of the drug that was in uh
prescribed to me, I think there
might be a lawsuit, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady from
Berlio and Torrance,
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from all of the
awesome counties of New Mexico
pleases your time. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, so.
We've been hearing a lot of bait
on your amendment, which I think
is an excellent amendment, um,
did you know that under the
general government
administration code from New
Mexico. I just found this under
1.7.8 0.7m a safety sensitive
position is a position in which
performance by a person under
the influence of drugs or
alcohol, would, would be
immediately or would be an
immediate or direct threat or
injury to
death of that person or another,
and that is also per state and
federal law. I did not know
that, Mr. Speaker De Lady. So,
I'm looking at this almost the
way we're reading this now, it's
almost non-compliant because I
know what you're saying. I'm
reading what we have already in
statute, and I think what you're
saying is, at least maybe I'm
misunderstanding, correct me if
I'm wrong, when we have a
position of something where
somebody is in a safety
sensitive position. We've now
removed that, correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
there was a reason it was
removed.
Why do you think that would harm
the state of New Mexico if that
was left out of here, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I just
think that it, it's harmful to
the employee.
And the employer, I think that.
Taking that language out, um.
puts all the, um,
Puts it all on the employer.
And Mr. Speaker John Lady, going
back to the fact that we already
have it, it's already defined in
here. It says a safety sensitive
position and there's a lot of
positions that are safety
sensitive. If, if you have
employers who have to drive from
one location to another, and
they're higher if you have, um,
anybody who's working on a
shuttle, taking somebody from
one location to another, we have
other people that can be harmed.
I think the reason that that was
all put in there because it
doesn't matter if it's excessive
codeine or if it's excessive
alcohol or it's high.
or if you test for cannabis, I
know people don't like high
because Mr. Speaker, generally,
we don't know how high is too
high to operate any machinery,
do we?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
that's my exact point is we're
all very different sizes and
shapes and.
It can affect everyone
differently.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm not anti-pot. If somebody
wants to smoke pot and stay
home, that's fine. If they're
using it for certain reasons,
but, but the issue becomes when
we're doing something as a
safety sensitive position that
makes all the difference in the
world. Now you have because I
know and
The issue becomes if it's a
safety sensitive position which
could also be a security guard,
somebody who is working in the
industry where they carry a
firearm, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, they should be tested
because you cannot carry a
firearm and be under the
influence of uh marijuana, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's correct.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, I'm
looking at positions that are
safety sensitive. This could be
somebody who has a firearm on
them, so that becomes an issue
because uh our federal law does
not allow you to purchase a
firearm. Also our state law does
not allow you to be under the
influence of anything, uh,
whether it be excessive drugs or
be any type of incapacity, and
that also includes marijuana.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
now we have an issue of somebody
who's in safety sensitive
position who no longer
needs to be tested and that
person could also have a
firearm, so it kind of goes
against everything we've been
hearing all this time of oh my
God, firearms are evil, and now
we have this exemption for that,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady. So
it's not just the fact that it's
also the employer, but Mr.
Springdale, it also goes back
and it says an employer may
require a drug test for cannabis
if the employer has reasonable
suspicion, but what is that
gonna show, Mr. Speaker Delaney,
on top of that, I mean, you
should have the right.
As an employer to test anybody
you want for anything. That's
how I feel, but you, you have
that luxury of having the job
nobody is saying you have to
have the job, you should be able
to test for that, and Mr.
Speaker, young lady, um, I agree
with this, especially when it
comes to the safe safety
sensitive position. Is there
anything else you wanted to add
on that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you know, uh, the other
concern of the entity that I'm
very concerned about is our
linemen.
Uh, that, that's a big deal for
me. We have a co op in in where
where I'm from and how is this
going, this law going to affect
our alignment. Uh, I'm very
concerned about that, that this
is really opening it up, uh, to
a lot of problems in the state
of New Mexico as I've said
before, I have full respect for
firemen and EMS and everything
else and, and I would never
judge if they had a medical
marijuana card fine but what
about all of our other entities
across the state of New Mexic
Mexico, um, every other business
in the state of New Mexico and
our linemen in rural New Mexico
co-ops, how is this law going to
affect them, Mr. Speaker, I
agree, and, and see, here's the
problem we have this fine line,
right? We have, we have
recreational marijuana. We also
have the medical card, which we
have deemed that that's legal
and it's still illegal on the,
on the federal level.
So where do you place that line
of that somebody in EMS are
saying that we want them to be
able to, uh, smoke pot for their
PTSD or whatever, but at the
same time on our end, we're also
looking at how do you look at
that one we don't know how high
is too high and why are you
taking the rights away from all
employers that if they have
something that's a sense of
position position. I don't want
to train conductor to be, you
know, smoking medical marijuana
or any of it, or anybody who's
doing anything.
It's a sensitive position
building a bridge or anything
else to be able to have any type
of drug in their system and
maybe I'm completely wrong in
that, but I look at it as we
made this law and now we're
trying to figure it out, and the
problem becomes, Mr. Speaker,
the lady that we should be able
to give this back at least on a
sensitive, uh, uh, safety
sensitive position for common
sense and New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, generally, would you
agree with that? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, I agree.
Miss Speer Donna, that's, that's
all I have in that. Thank you.
There is further debate.
The
Can't talk today. The gentleman
from Chavez, Eddie, and Lee,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gen la yield? Yes, Mr. Speaker,
I yield. So, uh, just
To make you say it one more
time. This is just to put in.
Language that
Say in safety sensitive
positions. Is that true? Ah yes,
Mr. Speaker, I'll say it one
more time. It's just adding that
language back in, uh, that's
being removed.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh,
I, I fully support this
amendment because we say safety
sensitive position.
Those people are in the position
to hurt.
Other people
Not just themselves by being
under the influence, is that
true, gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it, it, that could be
possible. Yes, sir.
You, uh, Mr. Speaker, you
mentioned our linemen.
You know, if there's two linemen
on a pole.
One of them does something
stupid.
The other 1 may be the one that
loses their life.
that true gentle lady? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentleman,
unfortunately, yes.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, another question, I don't
know if you can answer may have
to wait till we're back on the
bill, but does this allow us as
employers to do a pre-employment
test.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
as, as far as I know, you can
still drug test, but possibly
not for marijuana.
Well, I mean, it, uh, thank you
gentle lady. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh, that was, I guess,
more of my question.
And the gentle lady who was
brought up the other.
Prescription drugs that people
take.
The lady and Mr. Speaker, uh,
without.
We still contest for those
drugs, can't we, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, kind
gentlemen, this is, this is only
about medical marijuana card.
And so, uh, you can still test
for other drugs.
Thank you gentle lady. That's
all I had. Thank you.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from the gentleman
from Grant.
Hidalgo
And Katherine, Representative
Terazos. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
With the please yield. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, I yield. So Mr. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, and, and
before I go into the amendment,
does this affect both public and
private, right individuals?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
affects everyone. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, here's the problem
that I have, OK? It's safety, so
I, I, I'd like your amendment
and uh.
I see a lot of accidents.
That end up in bad ways.
And I'm the guy that they have
to call.
And I can assure you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that um.
I can assure you that if there's
an accident.
And an employer didn't, you
know, it's always, it's always
somebody else's fault, it seems
like anymore, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
And it's hard to be an an
employer you got a lot of moving
parts and then you got people, a
lot of people, and that's
probably the hardest part of of
being in business is is is a
people part because you've got
all these different
personalities, but at the end of
the day we have a
responsibility, let's just say
on the private sector or even if
you're running, it doesn't
matter what you're running when
you're putting someone on the I
have people on the road all the
time, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
This scares me
It scares me because I, it, it
worries about one of one of our
managers can't say, you know
what?
I don't know if
This guy came in
feeling too good today. Maybe he
just had a little too much. I'm
not a smoker or a
I don't take any of that stuff,
so I don't know how long it
lasts. I know it stays in your
system.
But how long do the, the effects
last do the last couple of
hours? do they last into the
next day I have no idea, um, I
would, I would venture that we
should have the ability to check
if our employee is OK before we
put that person in a position
that could kill them or someone
else, and that's why I support
your amendment.
Well, do you have any, anything
else to add to that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Uh, no,
not really, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, as I, I wouldn't know
the effects personally, so I
have no idea. Well, and, and I
guess, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
wasn't asking you.
Uh,
if you're partaking of the
Well, the funny plant, but what
I was saying is, is I mean as an
employer.
You have, you, you guys have a
responsibility when you put
somebody in that car in your
car.
And you put them on the road.
You know, I always pray for my
guys on the on the road because
I know that they're they're not,
it's not just their life but
they could another life can be
taken and it's just scary, you
know, because when safety is
important, very, very important,
so you know I, I just, I hope
that the body understands. I
know what they're trying to do,
but at the same time we also
have to have some checks and
balances, Mr. Speaker, General
Ey, to know if our employees, if
we feel that something's wrong
to take that initiative to test.
I don't think we should be.
I don't think we should be um.
Exempting any drugs.
Anything that's impaired, I
think even if it's a
prescription drug, if you see
that your employee is not doing
well.
And you will have the right to
say, are you under, you know, do
we need to, do you need to take
the the day off something's
wrong and if they refuse to do
that and say, well, I'm gonna
send you for testing.
That this would would be an
exemption to all that. It to me
it wouldn't matter what drug
you're taking, I think we as
employers have a huge
responsibility, uh, because I'll
tell you this is that employee
dies on the on the on the
highway or whatever they're
doing the family's gonna say.
What happened, you know, and if
the other employees here what
you did, you did, you heard that
you asked why didn't you press
him.
Why didn't you press him? Why
did you let him go? And that's
what, that's what I'm afraid of,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I
support your amendment,
gentlemen from Chavez E Notero,
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
our floor leader, uh, yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I've just got a
quick question because I, I'm
sitting here listening to this,
um, and, and I'm wearing some
different hats when I'm, what
I'm thinking through this.
Uh, but I've heard firefighter a
few times. And the one thing
that really worries me about
that is, is there's, there's
multiple things, and I think
you've pointed it out really
well. We're not really sure what
impaired means, which is a
terrifying statement in my
opinion, um, the second thing is
with some of these sensitive
jobs, you've mentioned linemen,
um, we're seeing what's
happening while we're having to
shut power down on high wind
days? What if somebody
Inadvertently flipped it back
on. Um, but when we're
specifically talking about
firefighters, EMS, things like
that. There's a lot happening.
In a split second they're
they're driving at higher rates
of speed. They're going through
intersections that they're
hoping are so so they're already
very, very intense moments and
if we're not able to figure,
figure out.
This piece, which it feels like
this is a pretty simple
amendment to put those back that
really bothers me because not
only are we putting their lives
in jeopardy, their crew in
jeopardy. We're putting the
public in jeopardy because as
they're going through those
intersections as they're
hurrying up to get to a scene to
rescue somebody. What if when
they get to that scene, they're
having to make decisions on the
fly if it's an incident, um,
where they're having to do
simple, uh,
Uh, what's, what is the word I'm
looking for, uh, medical type
procedures, um, and, and they're
a little impaired and we don't
know that.
Would this help solve that?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
my amendment, I, in my opinion,
would help solve it. Um, it was
stated earlier, Mr. Speaker,
kind gentlemen, that Bernalio
County's already done an
exemption. We'll let them do the
exemption at the local level if
that's what they want to do. Um,
I don't think we need to, to,
um, have a, a, a law and statute
that impairs so many, um, and
hurts a lot of employers and
employees when it sounds like
it's something that can be done
at the local level.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think that's exactly correct.
Just, just simply having a few
discussions I've had since we've
been talking about this bill.
That's the, the messages I'm
getting are, hey, this can be
solved at the local level. Let
us understand what we're doing.
Um, I, I think this is an
overreach, because I think
there's a lot of times when,
when we don't understand the
situations that are happening
and and we could put, put a lot
of lives in danger here, um, and
I fully support your amendment.
I fully appreciate your
amendment because without
Um,
This doesn't work, honestly,
this doesn't work and we're
putting a lot of folks in
danger.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, I moved to table
House floor amendment number 1
to House Bill 230 is twice
submitted. We are on a motion to
table House floor amendment
number 1 to House Bill 230 as a
twice amended.
A vote of yes and the amendment
is tabled. The vote of no, we're
back on the amendment. 32nd book
clock. The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by what
34 in the affirmative, 27 in the
negative. House floor amendment
number 1 to House Bill 230 is
twice amended has been tabled.
gentle lady from.
Sierra Valencia back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think
it's, um, you know, unfortunate
that that we're putting so many
uh employers and employees at
risk. When this is something,
Mr. Speaker, uh, uh, body that
can be done at the local level,
uh, once again, full respect for
EMS, uh, they're the people we
call on our worst day, uh, and
so it's not about that, it's
about everyone else, our
linemen, our employees.
Uh, and, and I think this is a
really, really harmful. uh, one
more thing, really, really
harmful for the state of New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate.
You find my list.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
in Sandoval sort of kids, I have
you debating the bill. Do you
wish to debate the bill? Yes,
Mr. Speaker, thank you very
much.
Um
Thank you Mr. Speaker, does my
gentle friend from Santa Fe, uh,
yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield, uh, uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you for bringing this forward. I
just wanna, uh, go over, uh,
some of the the is this only for
uh employment purposes, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, and gentle lady
Diaz.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, uh, gentle person,
and it's only for cannabis, it's
not for OxyContin or alcohol or
any other substance that you may
not want to be under the info,
you cannot be under the
influence when in a work
environment. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle person.
Mr. uh, Mr. Speaker and friend
from Bernoulo and Sandoval, this
is actually even more specific
than that because it only
applies to registered patients
with medical cannabis cards
under the linen and erran
compassionate Youth Act.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you, uh, gentle person
for, for clarifying that so it's
only for employment, uh, the
employment testing that occurs
and it's only for individuals
who have been medically uh
prescribed cannabis. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentleperson?
Mr. Speaker and gentle friend,
yes, um, and it's only regarding
uh the, the random drug testing
as well.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you, uh, gentle person for
clarifying that. Why
distinguished cannabis as a
prescriptive drug opposed to
other prescriptive drugs, Mr.
uh, Speaker, general person.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and my friend
from Sandoval and Bernalillo,
um, you know this is really
because this is a program that
uh was established uh back in
2007, um, and yet we still have
frontline employees that are not
able to uh access, uh, the, uh,
the benefits of something that
they're medical provider feels
would benefit them.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
think you gentle person. So if I
was prescribed uh a pill. I, I
don't know pills very well, but
well, we'll just assume it's
ADHD, Mr. Speaker, friend, um.
And, and so, um, you, I would
have been prescribed by a
medical doctor that this is
something that I need, Mr.
Speaker, General Person, and so
you don't want to limit what the
prescriptions are for me between
a medical provider and their
patient. Is that, is that my
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentle person? Mr. Speaker, and
uh my friend from Bernard Leo
Sandoval the uh every.
employee, particularly those
that have a lot of
responsibility have to ensure
that any medication that they
are prescribed is used
responsibly and that it doesn't
impact their workplace
performance and in addition, um,
many employers have drug free or
alcohol and drug-free workplace
policies where individuals are,
are strictly forbidden from
being impaired by any of those
substances which could include
Uh, other types of
prescriptions.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentleperson for clarifying
that. So it would be under the
influence, I guess, is the, the,
the, the statement in which he
made. So if I was prescribed
another drug and I didn't follow
my prescription and I was
impaired in a workplace, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that is,
uh, that would not make me
eligible to work in that place,
uh, uh, for safety reasons and
my employment.
Um, is that a fair statement,
Mr. Speaker, gentleperson?
Mr. Speaker, uh, in friend from
Sandoval, that's correct, so,
um, if you violate the drug and
alcohol free workplace rules,
um, any type of adverse
employment action could be taken
against you just depending on
the policies of the employer.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle person. I just wanted
to take a moment and say thank
you so much for bringing this
bill to the floor, especially
with our first responders, um,
who have, as, as they so
eloquent had put uh on this
floor earlier that they show up
on our worst days and we are so
grateful to them and we wanna
make sure that um they have the
access to their medical uh
provider and what between them
and their medical provider what
is necessary for them to be able
to serve our state so well.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle person. There is further
debate. The gentle lady from
Berlio and Torres,
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Will the gentle
lady from, is it Santa Fe County
police yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
lady from Bernna Leo in
Torrance. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I have a
question about this. I'm sorry,
I have everything in context.
I'm trying to grab this one. So,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
took out.
The portion on page 3.
That applies to employee whose
employer deems that the employee
works at a safety sensitive
position.
So I had addressed that earlier
that we have.
Uh, in the state.
We have some regulations on
that. We also on the federal
level, it says in federal law a
safety sensitive position was
one where an employee's
performance can impact the
safety of themselves or others,
potentially lead to accidents,
injuries, or even death
requiring significant
regulations and testing
requirements. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, can you explain to
me your thought process of why
you removed this out of the
original bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, that is a great question
because that gets at the heart
of the purpose of this bill. So
in working on this bill, um, we
have been working with um many
first responders, most
especially our firefighters who
disproportionately, uh,
unfortunately are diagnosed with
cancer who may suffer with PTSD
and other conditions, and
The reason that safety sensitive
was removed from the legislation
is because it basically is going
at a problem with a sledgehammer
when we're, we really should be
going at it with, you know,
maybe more of a screwdriver and
really fine tuning how to
address.
Um, these kinds of complicated
medical issues in a workplace
setting, so, um.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I would say that we are trying
to address these issues, um,
with up to-date technology with
the up to-date testing.
Asking work for solutions to
provide up to-date
recommendations on how to best
test for cannabis impairment,
um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we want to allow for, um,
our first responders and other
personnel to be able to access
medical cannabis, um, after
being unable to for more than 15
years.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I just want to let
everybody know that there's a
senator on the floor. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, I
was just we're dressed in the
senator who's now leaving.
Bye-bye.
Maybe finger tail lady, uh, my
question is.
And this is a very serious
question because I'm not saying
that people that have issues
should not smoke marijuana.
That's not up to me to decide.
What I'm saying is when we're
talking about a very safety
sensitive position, do we know
and, and please don't get mad at
me over there to your expert. Do
we know how high is too high or
how much cannabis is in our
blood system.
To operate.
A fire truck or to do first aid
to somebody, Mr. Speaker and gen
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I'm, I am so grateful that you
asked that question because this
is one reason why the impairment
testing is so important because
you can't extrapolate based on
the metabolites in the blood of
cannabis, how impaired somebody
is, so you could get a result on
one person, um, that if you had
that same result from a
different person who had a
different background, maybe had
been a long term patient or
struggled with the long term.
chronic health issue, they might
face a very feel a very
different level of impairment
than someone who, you know, has,
has been involved with this
maybe once or twice in their
life.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, and in terms of the federal
law.
Um, it is one reason why we
included in the legislation and,
and or uh left in the law, um,
the caveat that if failure to
follow this law would result in
the loss of any monetary or
licensing benefit under federal
law, um, the employer is not
required to follow this, um, and
additionally, uh, firefighters
in particular are uh exempt from
uh CFR 49.
B3-B 382, which uh specifies uh
safety sensitive, uh, uh.
positions at the federal level.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
see, here's where we're going to
agree, but we're looking at it
from two sides of this coin.
We don't know, right? There
could be somebody who's, and I
say pot, so sorry if that people
are offended. I say weed, I'll
say reefer sometimes. So there's
people who smoke pot, we like to
call it cannabis.
And they can smoke a lot and
they can still function.
The problem becomes for me if I
was employing people, I don't
know if this person can take a
10 mg gummy or can this person
take 50 mg of gummies a day. So
the problem is, until we get to
that part, I'm never gonna be
happy until we know the
impairment level and to me I,
I'm not looking at this as
anti-weed or anything. I'm
looking at from sensibility of I
don't know how much none of us
know how much and if I have
somebody.
Who was a first responder anyway
or anybody's offering who's
running heavy equipment,
anything, driving anything at
the end of the day, we really
don't know.
How much, how, how many gummies,
how, how high is too high.
And that's always been my issue
even more brought the bill
forward the first time to
legalize marijuana in the state
or decriminal legalized in New
Mexico is I don't know how high
is too high.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I think you look at it from that
side, I see what you're saying
and I understand that, but at
the same time, I'm looking from
the safety issue of where do we
say.
It ends up being a weird
fairness thing, right? How do we
know that that person who just
ate a gummy can't drive the fire
truck and can't go respond where
the other person had 10 gummies
or smoked a joint or blunt or
whatever you wanna call it. And,
and they can't function versus
can't function. So that's my
biggest issue on all the things
cannabis, Mr. Speaker, young
lady, and I'm also trying to be
fair and at the same time as
that people who use that for a
medical reason, how do we
distinguish between those,
right?
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when, when we have this part,
and that's, and that's the part
that bothers me about the safety
safety sensitive position, but
then I guess that also implies
to our firefighters and EMS. So
Mr. Speaker, generally, when you
talk about is there any
exemption in this.
position.
Sorry, in this bill, where you
have, you've removed.
Applying to an employee who's
employer deems that the, uh,
it's a safety sensitive position
and we're talk a lot about first
responders.
How does this imply to a
security guard, because I won't
say law first because I know law
enforcement have already their,
they're specifically they can
test.
But how does this apply to
someone who carries a firearm.
And their employment and it's a.
Safety sensitive position is
there an exemption to say that
if you're carrying a firearm
that we're gonna mandate that
you have to be tested for
marijuana, Mr. Speaker, Delaney.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
that would absolutely be allowed
because that uh is established
under federal law that
individuals uh may not use
cannabis whether medical or
otherwise, um, particularly if
they're required to use a
firearm in the course of their
employment, so.
It would depend on the type of
security guard and if they were
armed, but if they were armed
with a firearm, they could be,
uh, they would not this uh
protection for the employees
does not apply to them, and the
employer could conduct random
drug testing, uh, as they do
today. This doesn't change
anything for them.
Mr. Speaker, gen lady, is that
in another law or where is it?
Because I, I'm just seeing where
they're exempt, we're taking
everybody who's a sensitive
position. I know with law
enforcement like you have no say
over feds. I know that because
you can't because the federal
government could do what they
want, but if we had.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, that phone
call is very loud, um, Mr.
Speaker, young lady, um,
So can you tell me how that like
I was talking to state police
and other, they all tell me that
they cannot smoke marijuana and
be on the job even if it's
legal. So how does this, where
would I know as just a consumer
that if somebody's getting hired
and they carry a firearm, where
in the state of New Mexico or is
it on a federal level, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, that
they can be drug tested.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
we will look up the specific
citation for you. I know I, I
have it somewhere in all of
these papers on my desk, um,
it's OK, Mr. Speaker, if you
want to get it to me in a little
bit, that's fine. I understand
my desk looks like I killed 1000
trees. So, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, on, on page 2.
We talk about employees shall
not be considered to be impaired
by cannabis solely by the
presence of it, so I'm taking
that's just the blood work, Mrs.
Sin Deli, so.
They draw the blood.
So explain this to me, they draw
the blood.
shall not be considered to be
impaired solely because they
have, are you saying that
nothing can be held against them
if there was blo blood drawn and
they had a level because I don't
know how that looks on a lab
thing. I should have looked at
before. No matter what the level
is, you can't make a judgment
call upon that person. Is that
what I'm understanding, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, the key word here is
solely. So if you're only
evidence of impairment is the
presence of the metabolites, but
the person is, you know, is
performing their duties well
and, and there's no other
difference, um, then that is
what this bill would prevent
adverse employment action based
on but the operative word here
is solely, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and Mr. Speaker and
young lady, go back to the
question I had earlier so.
The person
OK, so it says you can't do let
me ask this one question for the
next one. So random drug testing
of an employee shall not be
include cannabis. So when they
do drug testing, you can no
longer look for any levels of
cannabis. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker Delaney?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
only for random drug testing,
so, uh, if there was if someone
appeared at work and paired, you
could do a drug test and a full
panel, um, and you would just
follow the workforce solutions
guidelines which could include a
drug recognition expert. So
that's someone who understands
how to administer a field
sobriety test. You could also
look for other signs of
impairment and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, on, uh,
section.
And
E of the legislation defining
cannabis impairment is up to the
employer. So we're still leaving
the employer in charge of
defining what cannabis
impairment is.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. OK,
so,
An employer may require a drug
test for cannabis if the
employer has regional suspicion
of the employee's impairment by
cannabis at work or after an
accident.
Involving the employer, OK, so
there's an accident or something
happened, there was a reasonable
suspicion the employer can say
yes, I want to get this person
drug tested. I'm walking through
this, so hold on. We're walking
so they can get tested and then
there's damaged property, etc.
The employer should follow the
cannabis and parenting
guidelines when tested, OK, Moa,
where do I find what are the
cannabis impairment.
Guidelines.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
you'll, um, look and if you're
looking at the amendments in
context, it's back in that
section E where we are asking
the Department of Workforce
Solutions to uh publish these
cannabis impairment guidelines
based on research,
evidence-based impairment
indicators, and so that is where
we're evaluating physical
symptoms of impairment, because
that's more trustworthy, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady then the
just relying on the
metabolites. OK, thank you for
walking me through this, Mr.
Speaker. I'm starting to
understand where, where you're
going with this. So, Mr. Speaker
Deli, so it also said I think
you had talked about.
The employer should follow, OK,
so we're following that, but I
thought you said something too.
About a
A field test or did I just hear
that because I could be hearing
things at this point, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle ladies
pretty late in the day and in
the session.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
back in that section E, it does
say evaluation of physical
symptoms and psychomotor and
cognitive performance. So one of
the ways to address that is sort
of a field sobriety test, if you
will, that's sort of a, uh,
everyday language, but, um, that
that's basically what that could
look like.
OK, so help me walk through
this, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
because I know one of the issues
that we've had, uh, with law
enforcement officers is that
they don't have very many people
to do that and it takes them a
long, a long time to get across
the state to, to get that. So.
If let's say somebody let's pull
something there're operating a
forklift on the job and
something happens, you wouldn't
call law enforcement necessarily
who would do that field test
sobriety testing, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Madam
Chair and gentle lady, uh, it
would be, you know, whoever,
many companies have a contract
with uh uh drug testing company
um in order to do those tests
and so, um, those companies uh
have the skills to.
identify uh some of the other
aspects of this impairment
testing, so, um, I would imagine
companies would just use whoever
the current contractor is.
Mr. Speaker Delaney, um, I think
that's gonna become an issue.
If something happens on a job
site and there's nobody to do
the field sobriety because I'm
trying to think.
Um, I, I don't wanna pick on
anybody, but somebody there's a
position there, the oil work or
something, they're out in the
middle of nowhere.
And they suspect that that
person was high and they want to
do their own testing to see if
that person was impaired. Yes,
they can get the blood work, but
they don't have anybody to do
the field sobriety test. The
only time that would come into
play is when there was a crime
committed. There was an
accident, something happened and
they'd be in law enforcement,
but it began, uh, and maybe, um.
If Representative Reeb is asking
questions, I can talk to her
afterwards is that there's,
there's quite some time before
we can get those people there to
do the field sobriety testing.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, when we go on on page 3.
And I'm, I'm looking at the
amendments in context we're
talking about evidence of
employees positive cannabis
tests that relates solely in the
presence of just the testing.
Um
So we're talking about, so it's
inimus, OK, so now we go on
we're saying and I'm, I'm, I'm
just telling you from a
realistic standpoint.
Getting that field sobriety test
without a crime is probably
gonna be pretty much impossible
unless you had somebody who is
specifically trained. Now you,
someone speaking Deli, I'm, I'm
looking at.
You're an employer, they got a
forklift, your Amazon, and now a
smaller company, Mom and Pop
Construction, they have to have
now have this person who's going
to do the field test for
sobriety.
And Mr. Speaker lady, I can't
make the leap.
Of where that person would get
the training and where that
person would be, what if they're
not on duty? What if that
person's inaccessible. What if
they're on the oil field they
can't get there. So Mr. Speer
Deli, how do you think that that
is gonna play out.
If they have to have somebody
who's trained in this and that
person's not accessible.
And they just draw blood because
you're saying it's in
inadmissible in a civil case.
So now how does that work out?
because if they can't have
somebody, I don't know, let's
let's say a school bus, uh,
school that would have probably
more regulation, right? But I'm
just thinking of anything.
Anybody who is transporting kids
to a football game and they're
high and they crashed the butt.
Well, see now that's criminal,
that wouldn't work. Um, OK,
somebody with a forklift crashes
in, knocks, bunched over, hurts
people, but it's not enough to
law enforcement called or
something happens in the oil
field, how do you anticipate
that all of these employers will
now have a
Field test sobriety expert, Mr.
Speaker and Joe Lady. So, that's
what I was trying to get to. I
went a very circular way to get
there.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
it could be as simple as having
a supervisor trained in
performing that test, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and the
minute that uh there uh is a
suspicion it doesn't even
require an accident if you
suspect that someone is
impaired, uh, you can
immediately order that where
whether it's a urinalysis, a
blood test, uh, as step one, and
then if, if you would like to do
the, uh, psycho motor evaluation
you could do that as well.
Well.
And Mr. Speaker Delaney, so here
again goes back to that quandary
of.
We want to allow people to use
marijuana for medical reasons,
but now I have a small business
and I suspect that my employee
was very high and they rammed
the forklift into somebody or
they knock things over or they
did something.
And I don't have somebody
trained there.
Now everything is inadmissible
because even if I get the blood
work done, Mr. Speaker Delaney.
This now means.
Every single employer, if I have
somebody and I have a company
where I'm shuffling people from
one place to another, and they
don't have a CDL because CDL
would negate that, right, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, what
I'm looking at is now I have to
have on staff at all times this
field tests sobriety person
because if they do harm,
And I'm a good person, and I'm
not saying anybody smiled,
please, let me take that back.
People smoke pot are not bad
people. What I'm saying is if
somebody you suspect.
I don't care what it is, if
they're taking too much out
there's too much alcohol, that's
easy test, right? If somebody
has, uh, drugs in their system
of marijuana, we can test for
that, but Mr. Speaker De Lady,
what I'm looking at is I just
had a person that I'm like, hey,
wait, this person did this. We
cannot smoke pot here. They
smoke pot. They were too high.
They didn't do something
criminal. I'm speaking to a
lady. I don't understand.
Now I have to have this special
person that has to be trained
somewhere.
And for a small mom and pop
bakery coffee shop Speaker, I, I
think now we're going into the
realm of
How much is this gonna cost?
Where are they getting the
testing? How are they gonna have
them because I don't want to be
held responsible if an employee
does something to destroy
another company or oil rig
persons smash on, you know, if
somebody smashes into a parking
lot, law enforcement never
comes, right? So if something
happened on a job site where
something, somebody did
something, I want to cover my
behind by saying, OK, we did
this drug test, but for me to do
that now.
I also have to get this field
test sobriety person. Otherwise,
according to this, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mice, the civil lawsuit is
dropped and that could also mean
if somebody was harmed as well,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
someone gets hurt in a civil
lawsuit.
So we're just talking about
lawsuits the other day and now
somebody gets hurt.
And I'm an
An employee or I'm hiring people
to employer.
Now there's a big burden on me
to say, oh, damn.
This person did this thing that
harmed another person.
And I didn't have one of these
people on hand.
And Mr. Speaker Delaney, now I
see.
This person not only suing that
person who did something wrong
but now suing the company.
Because you did not have.
This field test sobriety person.
So Mr. Speaker Delay, I, I.
I understand where you're trying
to go with this, but now this
portion right here is probably
the most problematic portion for
me.
Is that if I don't have all this
evidence to prove that my
employee was high when they
shouldn't have been in the first
place and they harm other people
now I'm gonna be involved in
this lawsuit because why didn't
you have this person there to do
that because I just lost my
civil lawsuit.
And I think about my friends
that were killed, uh, when the
semi flew off the road.
I can't imagine trying to tell
them sorry, but that company
didn't have that person. I think
about all kinds of people where
they do things out of state. We
don't have this person
available. So for all of those
reasons, Mr. Speaker, I, I don't
want to promote this or or vote
for this because I'm seeing it.
Until you can figure out a way
to fix this issue.
And bring back.
Uh, the safety sensor positions,
I, I can't support it as it's,
as it's drafted, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, thank you. There is
further debate. The gentle lady
from Bernalillo, Representative
Thompson.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, would the
gentle lady yield?
I yield to my friend from
Bernalia. And I apologize for
the awkwardness of that, but so,
so first, um, I am a co-sponsor
and I wanna tell you how this
bill came to be in the first
place some years ago a friend of
a friend who was a firefighter
called me and said, if you don't
have PTSD on your first day, you
probably will by your 2nd and so
I said so, so what do you do
with that? He said, our
supervisors advise us to use.
alcohol and I said,
whoa,
not really the best choice, so
we started talking and talked
about, you know, the benefits of
cannabis and all all the
difficulties around that so this
bill has been around for a
while, so, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, there's been a lot
of talk about testing, testing,
testing, and I will say Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady that in
um consumer and public affairs
for years we had a member bring
a bill.
to come up with a uh a legal
definition of what was impaired
and what was not in terms of
testing and we would always ask
him, you know, well, we're,
where, where do we get this test
from? Where do we, where do we
know the numbers are right, he
said, well, my friend in
Colorado is working on it and I
would say.
I don't think any judges are
gonna really like us putting
your friend in Colorado
scientific work into a law, so,
um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
how, how accurate or inaccurate
is the testing for cannabis in
terms of recent use or long ago
use.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
thank you for bringing that up,
uh, the just based on the
metabolites found in the blood,
it's very difficult to ascertain
whether someone is impaired or
not or when that usage occurred,
um, so and it depends on each
individual person and that's one
of the real challenges in
cannabis impairment testing is
just the metabolites, it could
have been yesterday, it could
have been a week ago as the
person impaired or not, it's,
it's very difficult.
to tell and it's, it's not the
most up to-date, uh, way to test
for impairment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, so, um, I think there's
been some muddling in the
questions. Does this bill
prevent employers from testing
medical cannabis cardholders for
cannabis impairment at work.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
no.
Mr. Speaker and gently, so if
there are some other signs or
symptoms, you said earlier or
solely, if it was solely on the,
the testing. So if there if
there was, um, I don't slurring
of words or falling asleep at
their desk or anything else that
could be the something to add to
solely, correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes.
OK. Thank you. Um,
And, and also if if they if they
smell of cannabis, if they have
red eyes, there are a whole lot
of things that, and yes, we do
have a a shortage, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady of um drug
detection, uh, I can't remember
what the.
Drug recognition experts I get
from behind me so yes there is a
shortage of those, but um.
I, I am madam Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, the I've heard from
a lot of firefighters that this
would improve their lives
markedly that they wouldn't have
to drink that they wouldn't have
to take um prescription sleeping
medications, um, all kinds of
things and so um I think with
that Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I will.
will quit, but I, I urge folks
to support our first responders
in a more healthy way than
alcohol. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigroup.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yield
to the gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
during one of your earlier
debates, one of the questions
that was asked was
This was only for employment
testing.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'd
like to clarify.
You're, when you answered yes to
that.
I'm assuming that yes goes
further than just pre-employment
testing, would that be a good
assumption or a bad assumption?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
applies to employers, uh, uh,
employers testing employees for
cannabis.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that.
I, I have just a few questions
just for clarification on, on.
What I need to share back with
my community should this bill
get chaptered.
On page 2 item B, and I don't
think your amendments adjust to
this, but let's clarify it. The
original bill reads random drug
testing of an employee shall not
include testing for cannabis
that has not been stricken by
any amendment, correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, correct.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
What is
My client requirements require
me to do that testing.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
if it was a federal.
Subject to federal rules,
licensing or regulation, this
would not apply, so random drug
testing could continue, um, and,
uh, if it was uh of a
contractual nature, uh, this
would apply.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
um, it was both.
It is contractual.
From a standpoint for our, our
MOUs are um our contracts with
all of our, with the majority of
our clients in Southeast New
Mexico have a complete zero
tolerance requirement.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
every employee.
Um
At the time of employment is
required to sign and
acknowledgement that at any
point in time that can be
tested. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that doesn't keep them
from having.
The
Um
Medical, uh, cannabis medical
marijuana, whatever you wanna
call it, uh, card.
It's just an acknowledgement
that if they test, end up
testing positive.
That that that creates an
employment issue.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so you're saying that if, if I
understood your answer
correctly.
If it's a contractual issue,
this law, this bill would apply,
and we would be
Therefore, breaking.
We would be required to break
our, our contracts with, with
our clients.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so if it was a federal issue, if
you'll look at section A, uh,
page 2, section 1, subsection A,
um, this legislation does not
apply. So if there was a federal
licensing issue, uh, any federal
funding, uh, any type of
monetary benefit, any federal
regulation or law that applied
to the work that you were doing
that precluded this, then, uh,
this does not apply, uh.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, also
employers can still require a
drug-free workplace, um, so if
there was a suspicion that
someone was not following that
they could be immediately
tested.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I didn't mean to bring the
federal aspect into this yet. So
I just want to make sure I
understand completely. If our
requirements.
If a company's requirements are
Uh, drug free.
Completely drug free.
Um
We would not if this bill were
to be chaptered, we would not
Be violating state law or we
would be.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so you
could still require a drug-free
workplace with this bill. This
doesn't change that. This simply
just changes the use of the
metabolite testing in that
process, but you could still
absolutely require alcohol and
drug-free workplace, um, and you
could enforce that, uh,
utilizing the guidance of the
workforce solutions department,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that's one of the reasons why we
wanted this to be uniform
statewide, so there wasn't a lot
of variation.
from county to county or city to
city.
Mr. Speaker, and um,
Gentle lady, this cannabis still
considered a drug?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I guess
it depends on who you ask.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, my
workforce solutions is cannabis
still considered a drug.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
not sure that Workforce
Solutions has a, uh.
Set of definitions in a drug,
um, of a drug, however, uh,
Any
Substance use in the workplace.
Um, it can be a particularly
anything that causes impairment.
Uh, the employer has every right
to state those conditions for
their workplace, so whether
it's, you know, some kind of
pain pill prescription or uh
whether medical cannabis card or
alcohol, all of those, uh,
substances certainly could be
thought of as things that could
potentially impact your
workplace performance.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
asked that question very
specifically because of your
response with respect to
Drug testing.
And the way I read section 2.
is inside of the random drug
screen, we would not be able to
Tests for cannabis.
And
Like I said, our contracts.
Require
Us to task for cannabis.
Along with a whole bunch of
other things.
Um, the whole DOT schedule and
you name it, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and that's, and
when I say that, when I say
ours, I'm talking about an
entire industry, OK?
In southeast New Mexico and.
And other parts of, of New
Mexico and
So I'm just trying to clarify
right now if this bill were to
be chaptered as written.
And I next month's randoms came
out.
And we tested
Along with everything else we
tested for cannabis or one of
the other companies in southeast
Mexico tested for cannabis,
would they be violating a.
Law once it gets codified.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
it would depend on whether those
requirements were derived from
federal regulations or from
state. And so, um, if it was a
federal DOT project then um that
could, you could continue that
type of random drug testing, um,
for New Mexico DOT, I think it
would depend on the source of
their funding and how they
applied that to this
legislation, so I think they
could actually, if
portion of the funding was
federal, um, they could
certainly pass that along to the
contractors.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that answer, but that
wasn't my question. Very
specifically, if I have a client
and I'm not talking about
federal or state.
I'm talking about a private
company or a publicly traded
company.
My contract requires me to have
a drug-free workplace. My
contract requires me, and when I
say me, I'm talking about
multiple companies.
Requires us to have a drug-free
workplace.
Random testing for all
employees, including owners.
Would we, if this bill was
codified would be we be out of
compliance with state statute.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would imagine that that would
require a contract amendment,
uh, on that issue, you could
still do the drug-free
workplace, alcohol and drug-free
workplace, certainly, but the
restrictions on the random drug
testing in this legislation
would apply, so I would imagine
that that contract would need an
amendment. It's hard to say
without being able to look at
the specifics of the contract,
however.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
pretty good with contracts and I
also know what um what, what
your answer just implied to me,
so.
I'm gonna move on from there.
Mr. Speaker, and generally, and
when you talk about DOT.
Um, on federal work.
Very little work from our state
DOT does not include federal
funding.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
also know that we don't.
Drug test
DLT
There's a whole separate issue
there that we're not going to
get in today. Your bill doesn't,
well, it does address this, but
it didn't necessarily address
this, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if we move to page 3.
Says the workforce solutions
department shall inform private
employers of this section and
provide information da da da da
da.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Does workforce solutions.
Oversee state government.
I'm sorry, this workforce
solutions.
Overseas state government,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, yes
sir, the question specifically
is this requires
We're for solutions to notify
private employers. I am curious
with all the employees that we
have in state government does
workforce solutions rules apply
to state government employees as
well.
uh better way of phrasing the
question back to the gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
so, uh.
They, I'm not sure of their
jurisdiction over the employment
policies of state employees, but
I think that varies because
state personnel office applies
to some categories of employees,
um, and then there are other
parts of state government that
are uh sort of governed within
their own rules, for example,
the judiciary and other
branches, so, um.
Partially, I think would be the
answer.
Mr. Speaker and generally, I
appreciate that answer.
And I asked that very
specifically because the way I
read the legislation.
From an act all the way to the
very end and the definition of
employer.
On page 3.
This applies only to private
employers.
Am I reading wrong?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the reason that that's in there
is we wanted to make sure that
workforce solutions had the
responsibility to proactively
inform private employers. We
didn't want private employers to
have to contact them and seek
out the information we wanted
them, the, the responsibility to
be on the workforce solutions
department to proactively get
that information out and make it
easily available, so that's why
that's specifically listed in
here.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that answer.
Let's focus on, on the question
if we, if we can.
The way I read this.
This is, this bill, nothing in
here implies public employee.
In my reading wrong or am I
reading correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
legislation would apply to
public and private employers.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you show me where?
Mr. Speaker, it's not limited to
private or public employees, uh,
I think the item that you're
referring to describes the
Department of Workforces for
solutions.
Uh, requirement to proactively
inform private employers with
public employers will have to
comply with this as well.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
nothing in your bill implies
that help me, is that hidden
somewhere else inside of section
26-2B9 NMSA 1978 being laws of
2019, da da da da da. Is that,
is that hidden somewhere else
gentlemen, I don't think it's
hidden. I think it's.
Implied in common understanding,
that's how I read it. Um, so I
don't think anything is hidden
in this bill. I think it's
obvious to me and if it's not to
you, you can proceed with your
line of questioning, but, um, it
is pretty obvious to me.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, I'm
Not too bad at reading stuff,
but when something's left out.
That typically implies that it
doesn't apply. And that's the
reason why I'm
Drilling specific to that with,
with that, I will move, move on.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um
4 years ago.
There was a bill that was passed
in the House, in the Senate, and
chaptered by the governor.
Well,
House 4 with respect to
Civil rights, so
Um
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
can you maybe step outside the
box a minute and tell me that if
we have firefighters, police
department, you name it,
whatever.
That
Um, would either one be tested
in a random or in some other
process for cannabis or um
Did something on.
say it's a fire or say, uh, it's
a rec scene and ultimately,
Something went wrong.
And they needed to be tested and
they were shown to be, um,
Uh, under the influence of
cannabis.
How would that how would House
Bill 4 and the statutes and the
rulemaking that came from that,
then the impact the municipality
or political subdivision. Can,
can, is that too much of a reach
for me to ask that question, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
No, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the Civil Rights Act doesn't
apply to any labor related, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
Civil Rights Act doesn't apply
to any labor-related claim, any
employment related claim
specifically excluded, so, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Civil
Rights Act would not apply and
um this is the reason that we
did this amendment in judiciary,
um, because the other way that
that an adverse action could be
brought would be if someone who
is hurt, um wanted to uh bring a
claim because there was a a drug
test.
based on metabolites and we
address that in House Judiciary
by protecting the employer from
the evidence of the uh
metabolites in the in the drug
test, so the employer, the
agency, the county or
municipality in your
hypothetical situation would not
be liable under this, and they
would not, they would also not
fall into the Civil Rights Act.
OK. Um.
I'll leave that alone for now,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I see a relation between this
bill
And a bill.
That was passed out of this
chamber a couple of weeks ago
with respect to how 11.
And the uh
Information that workforce
solutions is gonna have
availability too with working
with private employers and um.
This kind of takes it down a
scary road and, and I would urge
the body to seriously reconsider
this, considering, um,
especially if you own a
business, um, or are responsible
for any of that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I appreciate your
answers.
And I yield back.
There's further to be from Berly
representative of de la Cruz.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. There's a
gentle lady from Santa Fe Yil, I
yield to the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
I want to thank you first for
bringing the bill, but I'd like
to get a little clarification
for the body as well as for
myself.
Gentle lady, could you
encapsulate in maybe one
sentence or two sentences, what
this bill is about.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this is
about a allowing access to
medical cannabis for people who
are frontline workers who are
enduring some pretty intense
everyday stress.
Thank you for that answer. Let
me go on. Why is it important to
have, why is it important that
qualified medi medical cannabis
patients be allowed to use
medical cannabis. What kinds of
symptoms is medical cannabis
used for and to treat?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
there's a growing body of
research, but certainly many of
the applications include chronic
pain, um, MS, PTSD, depression,
anxiety, um, and then, uh,
certainly for nausea due to
cancer medications or other
debilitating conditions like
that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
earlier I heard somebody talk
about PTSD.
Who might have PTSD, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
certainly many different
occupations can um incur PTSD
but uh specifically what I've
been focusing on is with our
firefighters and first
responders who are the first to
the scene and may not know what
they are going to find there,
um, and when they have
experienced that and helped all
of our communities they have to
go back to their homes and, and
grapple with that.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, every, every day we, we
have a bit of a ceremony and we
pledge allegiance to the flag,
gentle lady, do you realize that
there are men and women in
harm's way around this globe at
this minute.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
young gentle lady, you didn't
mention it, but
Are you aware that many of those
men and women coming back from
Theaters, battle theaters around
the globe might come back with
PTSD.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, I
know that all too well.
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to close
with a little bit of a story.
It's a story that happened, uh,
to me that I was involved with
at the time that I was a county
commissioner.
There was a, a gentleman that
called me a constituent.
That constituent was calling on
behalf of his son.
His son was a
An officer at.
Um, at the Metropolitan
Detention Center.
Uh, mostly Mexicans are aware of
it, aware of this facility
because it's the largest lock up
in the.
In the state and one of the
largest actually in the nation.
And Mr. Speaker, that uh that
father of this gentleman was
calling because
Burlew County was about to fire.
And ultimately did fire this
young man.
This young man, Mister Speaker,
served honorably.
In the armed forces in the
Afghanistan theater.
He came back
He was hired as an officer at
MDC.
And he tested positive for
medical marijuana, which he was
on, young lady for PTSD.
And he was fired
And there wasn't a thing that I
could do for about it as a
county commissioner.
Because even had we not had the
ability to enact the law.
He would have been let go
anyway.
So Mr. Speaker, this is exactly
the reason we can mince it and
dice it and slice it and see
whatever the heck we want to
say, but at the end of the day
there's a lot of people that
need work that have served this
country honorably and that's
just a fraction and we're
talking about all of our safety
personnel, Mr. Speaker, I yield
back.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Montero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Would the kind gentle lady from
Santa Fe, please yield, and my
friend from government
committee.
I yield to the gentleman from
Montero.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So I think some of
my questions were already
answered, which is helping me
not have to ask them for hours,
but I think we have about an
hour and a half left, so.
I'm gonna work it out for me.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
do have some questions to start
out with when it comes to
Just some of like the actual
What the bill actually does. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
wondering when it comes to
This bill, how does HB 230
interact with federal workplace
drug testing regulations.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
in the legislation, uh, this
bill does not apply if there are
federal regulations, licensing
requirements, or funding at
stake.
Perfect. OK, thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
helped me on that question, and
then also, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I see in some of my
questions here.
I'm just wondering cause we've
heard a lot of stories and uh
different hypotheticals when it
comes to certain scenarios and
stuff. And I'm just wondering on
a general level, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, how does this bill
ensure public safety if it
removes
Random cannabis testing for
employees in safety sensitive
positions like, like a police
officer, an EMT airline pilot,
etc. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I
would, I would suggest in two
different ways. I think one way,
uh, is with the gentleman from
Bernalillo just mentioned, which
is that we have incredibly
qualified individuals who have
dedicated their lives to public
service who may have a medical
condition that their doctor
feels would benefit from medical
cannabis and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we should be um
encouraging those folks and and
hanging on to those folks when
they do.
work, um, in these positions
that are critical on the front
line. #2, this bill updates the
way that we are recognizing
whether someone is impaired. So
we are not relying only on the
metabolites we are adopting the
best evidence-based practices to
identify if someone is impaired.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
would say those two ways are,
uh, the ways that we are
actually increasing public
safety through this legislation.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee, and I think when we
talked about that, we said not
only the metabolites, but other
evidence-based approaches. Can
you tell me what other kinds of
evidence-based approaches we're,
we're trying to put in that
framework.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
going to depend on the employer,
so, um, that is, uh, left up to
the employer to define cannabis
impairment. So there are
options, for example, um, in
Bernalillo County, uh, they are
employing a cheek swab and a
blood test, um, and, uh, another
option would be a drug
recognition expert, um, another
option would be just pairing
evidence of you could do if you
had a suspicion that
someone is impaired, the
urinalysis plus, you know, one
of the symptoms mentioned by the
gentle lady from Bernalillo such
as, uh, you know that in, uh,
walking, uh, difficulties or
bloodshot eyes, uh, other
evidence that someone might be
impaired.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. And so I,
I do ask these questions because
I'm thinking of, and I was
talking to my friend here from
Lincoln and Otero about
Someone who's an EMT who has to
Administer certain kinds of
drugs like 50 drugs or something
that they're, they have to
oversee. And so, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it comes to
these.
Very important drugs for.
Resuscitating somebody, for
example, one example that I
heard was a drug, and I can't
even pronounce it, I'm not gonna
try, but it's a drug that you
have to.
Really slowly inject it for the
heart to slow down and then you
have another way is really fast
inject it for the heart to speed
up for multiple reasons. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering when it comes to
someone who may be impaired with
cannabis. I'm just wondering if
something went wrong in that
scenario where they did it
incorrectly because they didn't
have those cognitive skills at
the time to, to adequately
administer it, Mr. Speaker,
General.
I'm wondering what kind of
liabilities would lay on the
employer and then what would be
on the employee since there is
no random uh medical cannabis
testing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, uh,
it would probably depend on
whether a crime was committed or
not in terms of what
consequences might befall the
employee, um, but Mr. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's one
of the reasons why we adopted
the House Judiciary Committee
amendment, uh, to address that
employer liability.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then that
amendment actually, that was in
some of my questions in the
bottom here, but could you go
over a little bit what that
amendment does when it comes to
covering that employee and the
employer from any kind of having
to answer in a courtroom, for
example, with hundreds of
thousands of dollars in legal
fees and, and fines, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
what we felt was because we are
not penalizing the employee just
based on the metabolites that we
should not also, you know, allow
the employer to be penalized
just based on the metabolites,
so, um, it's just kind of
evening the playing field there
so that it's not an uneven, uh,
standard there and um so
basically if an employer, if an
employee had made a mistake, um,
had.
an accident or something in this
scenario you're describing and
the employer could then do uh uh
drug testing because there's
been an accident.
And they could also pair that
with, say, you know, checking
out their psychomotor skills and
saying, you know, they, they
seem like they're walking
unevenly, uh, they seem like
they're slurring their words.
That's all would be standardly
documented after any type of
accident or incident anyway, um,
so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that,
that doesn't change and we put
in the uh protection for the
employer as a result of the
changes in this bill. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady, and then I guess
one of my questions was based
upon the House Judiciary
Committee amendment, and it was
how can an employer defend
themselves in court if an
impaired employee causes it as
an accident.
But from the way I read HB.
2:30, it prohibits using a
positive test as evidence of.
Impairment. So how, how does
that work?
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
There are it's very difficult to
uh know without knowing the
case, but certainly many
employers will want to adopt
alcohol and drug-free workplace,
uh, policies and so that is
something that is important, uh,
providing evidence that they
provided that to the employees
and that the expectation to the
employees was that they
maintained the alcohol and drug
free workplace is important, um,
and in fact, if, if there
wasn't.
incident again there could be a
random drug test, uh, done at
that moment or uh as a result of
any concern, um, so if they had
any hint that someone was
impaired, uh, they certainly
could do that test.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady from Santa Fe. So,
That, that helped me a little
bit. So, and then I'm wondering
when it comes to the actual
employer having their own
definition of what impairment
is. I'm wondering, Mister
Speaker, gentle lady, what
happens if their definition
conflicts with state guidelines,
are they vulnerable to lawsuits
in that regard.
Mr. Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, so they would need to
uh stay within the parameters of
this legislation, so ensuring
that it wasn't solely
metabolites that could result in
an adverse employment action,
um, but outside of that, uh, um,
they, they would have the
guidance from Workforce
Solutions, but we are
specifically giving them the
authority to define, uh,
cannabis impairment for the
purposes of their workplace.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then is there a
certain time frame for when and
A workplace needs to have such a
policy written.
Um
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, not
specified in this legislation.
OK, Mr. Madam Speaker, pardon
me, Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
So what if the the individual
employer did not have a policy
relating to cannabis. How would
that be handled when it comes to
something like liability,
there's an accident, someone
dies or something, how would
that be?
Factored in regarding this
legislation.
For impairment, that is.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, it's
hard to say without knowing if
it's a criminal matter or a
civil matter, um, and, uh, as
well as knowing whether, you
know, the circumstances occurred
as a result of the workplace
duties, so.
Um, I'm not sure I can give you
a fair answer that encapsulates
all those variations.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and I understand
that. So I guess maybe the
previous.
scenario that we had with the
EMT and administering drugs and
they, they maybe just did the
incorrect thing when it came to
that patient, that patient died.
While in the care of that EMT
who was
On cannabis at the time, medical
cannabis, and the EMT company
did not have a policy written.
In that case, what would happen?
Well, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, this bill does not
allow someone to be impaired on
medical cannabis at work.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, and then how do we,
I guess it's kind of like a
circular thing cause we say they
can't be impaired at work, but
how do you prove that they're
not impaired at work and I'm
just wondering how that happens
because I know that we talk
about metabolites and things,
but I don't know if there's a
specific standardized approach
to
Finding somebody.
who has a certain amount of
cannabis in their system to be
impaired. So, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm just wondering
how that's determined if you
didn't have a policy in place.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, so
for example in Bernalillo
County, they have a cheek swab
and blood tests, um, that are
part of their protocol for
dealing with um.
The uh impairment issue.
And
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, you could also enter, have a
policy that uh you are informing
your employees of what behavior
is permitted and supervisors can
assess, you know, using just
their plain vision that someone
is impaired, um, maybe it
doesn't seem like they're
behaving the way they usually do
and they could be recommended
for a reasonable suspicion drug
test at that time that's fully
allowed in this bill.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I guess
when it comes to that, we talked
about the cheek swab, uh, so
with that cheek swab, could it
potentially
How, how does that work when it
comes to what's in the
bloodstream versus a blood test
because in my, my understanding
from what I've read from the
NIH.
It says that THC can cause
impairment for up to 21 days.
Can you tell me a little bit
more about how this.
Say you're positive and negative
when it comes to impairment
versus just being in the
bloodstream.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that's one of the reasons why we
have Department of Workforce
Solutions, identifying evidence
based and research-based
practices, um, and we're also
allowing the employer to
determine, uh, cannabis
impairment and how that's
measured. So the examples that
were given were about how
Bernalillo County is doing it,
um, but there's certainly, um
will be other options laid out,
uh, in terms of the best
practices from workforce
solutions.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I'm also
wondering when it comes to one
of these scenarios, let's just
say they were terminated because
of
The impairment that was
perceived by the employer. What
happens if a small business is
sued for wrongful termination
after firing an employee. He did
test positive for THC.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
you know, I think it's, uh,
always a good idea to have a lot
of documentation.
When you, uh,
are engaging in any adverse
employment action, uh, I myself
have been through that and uh
really important anytime you
have uh those uh.
Uh, those types of employment
situations that you have that,
um, you know, this, this
legislation doesn't change.
Uh, any of the potential
liability to employers, um, and
in fact we put in that
additional projection with the
House Judiciary Committee
amendment so I think we're
actually have improved the law
over, uh, where we were.
Um, uh, where we are today.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I guess.
Since, since it's not very
prescriptive, I guess the word
would be from the bill on what a
test needs to look like.
I'm just wondering.
How that would limit liability
for the employer because it
doesn't say which test, for
example. So I guess it's just an
issue that I see in the bill in
my opinion, but I, I think
that's just something people
need to consider because we
definitely want to make sure
that these employers are not
just getting sued later because
they did the incorrect kind of
test or, or something that can
be kicked out of court on a
technicality. So,
I guess that's just 11 problem I
did have with this, but Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
Does HB 230 allow an employee to
challenge a termination based
upon impairment if no reliable
scientific standard exists to
measure cannabis impairment.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
this does not change.
Uh, the an employee's grounds
for challenging a termination,
um, it none of that's not
addressed in this bill.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Good to know. So I guess if it's
not addressed, then it means if
I did, if I did fire somebody,
and I thought that they were
impaired and they wanted to
challenge that. I guess it would
just be the, the regular legal
recourse that they would have.
Is that correct, Madam Speaker,
General lady? Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady.
And then I also see here.
That, of course, federal law
still classifies cannabis as
illegal and it doesn't recognize
it's.
Legitimate medical use, that's
according to the personnel board
analysis. I'm just wondering how
do we reconcile that when it
comes to
Federal law and how, how do we
work with like if you go into a
federal building or something or
a contractor, for example, how
does that work?
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I'd say this is one of the
places where the federal
government should follow the
state of New Mexico's ideas, um,
but Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, that's been the central, uh,
uh, tension of the medical
cannabis law since its enactment
in 2007.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I only ask that
because I know that there's
federal laws relating to
workplace safety, OSHA laws,
etc. I don't even know what they
say regarding cannabis. So Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering how would a private
employer
Need to be now comply with HB
230, but what if it directly
contradicted federal guideline
standards, OSHA regs, things
like that, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady.
So, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, what was already an
existing law is that an employer
cannot take adverse, uh,
employment action against an
employee if they were a member
of the uh excuse me, qualified
patient under the Linnear and
Compassionate Youth Act, um,
except for the safety sensitive
exclusion and so we do have uh
this language in here that says
if there's a monetary benefit,
federal law, federal regulation
that the.
um employer does not have to
follow this legislation.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady that helped me on
that, and then Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
This, so this, this law would
ban random cannabis testing. Is
that correct, Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
do we know if random alcohol
testing.
Can be administered.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, gentleman, like a
breathalyzer, sure.
OK, Madam Speaker, generally,
I'm just wondering why is it
that cannabis cannot be random
tested, but alcohol can, if both
have been proven in this debate
to both be able to impair an
individual in certain
circumstances.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
it's because the um amount of
metabolites, uh, in the you're
in a urinalysis test cannot be
tied to impairment definitively.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I guess that's,
that's kind of why I feel like
maybe we're
Going too far too quickly when
it comes to this, but because
it's not very equal when it
comes to what's regulated,
what's legal in the state of New
Mexico and then what is allowed
when it comes to.
Alcohol random testing and then
cannabis random testing. I feel
like, like I said before, if we
were more prescriptive and had a
certain amount of kinds of kinds
of tests, like we said the cheek
swab, we said the blood test. If
we could maybe have those kinds
as well and make it.
Equal to alcohol where you can
do random or you can't. I feel
like that could be a little more
equitable when it comes to the,
the results on that, but I guess
since we're here on the floor,
we can't really change that now,
but Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
So
I asked about the THC remaining
in the body and, and, and that,
I felt like that was super
important to, to bring up, but I
also wonder, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
I did have one concern, and it
wasn't even a concern about the
actual bill. It was just like a
little.
little error that I saw in the
bill. And so, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, I do have an
amendment. It's just a cleanup
amendment, and I hope it's
friendly, and I will just
deliver that to the clerk now.
And I guess I would, I'd request
a roll call.
Um, um, gentlemen, could you
identify the 202 number, please?
I'd be happy to, Madam Speaker.
It's just 0.231913.1.
Hello
You have your roll call and the
amendment is being passed out.
Um, gentleman from Otero to move
and explain the amendment.
Yes, Madam Speaker, I guess.
Did I already move it? I guess I
move, I move house floor
amendment number 2 to House Bill
230 as twice amended.
And I'd be happy to explain the
amendment.
So it's, it's literally a
cleanup amendment. It changes
one letter, literally. And so.
On B under section 1 on page 2,
it says a employer may require a
drug test, and I believe since
that.
Is
Not proper English. It just
needs to say and.
So it literally is one letter
and it's just to clean up, make
the bill a little better.
And we're having a roll call on
this, OK, um, unless it's
friendly, Madam Speaker
Madam Speaker, uh, and gentleman
from Otero, uh, may I ask you a
question?
Yes, Madam Speaker, and I'm
guessing maybe is it about a
certificate of correction?
Uh, no, actually, Madam Speaker
and gentlemen, I was wondering
if this might be, if I did deem
it friendly, would it be your
first friendly amendment.
Yes, ma'am.
And, and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, does that mean that
the gentleman would need to
sing.
I don't believe those are the
rules, but
I might be inclined if, if it
went through.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
nonetheless, uh, I am happy to
say this is a friendly
amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment?
Seeing none, you haven't amended
bill.
Gentlemen, you still have the
floor. Thank you, Madam Speaker,
and I hate to make your bill now
thrice amended, but I just had
to. So, Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I just saw that and I
was like, what? And I, I don't
know. My, my bills, I've had
typos in my bills as well. So,
my bad. So Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, just a few more questions
when it comes to your bill.
And so, I guess I'm just
wondering.
Did we contemplate when drafting
the bill, making some exceptions
for
Critically important.
Fields such as EMS.
And people that were purporting
to help, like, like nurses,
frontline workers.
Because Madam Speaker, gentle
lady, I know maybe like off the
job, that's different, but if
it's something that can
Seep onto the job. I'm
wondering.
Did we consider maybe exempting
them in any way.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
um, I'm gonna say this is our
bill now because you have
amended this bill and Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
our bill, um,
we have really, really tried to
To, to address this, uh, in a
way with the least unintended
consequences and really tried to
make it targeted. There's been a
bunch of versions, uh, uh, of
the language over the years, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen and
so, um, I, I think that that
certainly has been the
intention, um, and I will say,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
we are working with the
utilities and the rural Electric
Co op.
To ensure that concerns about
linemen are addressed going
forward. We couldn't quite the
concern came up today. We
couldn't quite get the language
together for that, but we will
be working on that um if this
legislation passes in the Senate
on our bill.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, and
I'm glad that your bill
will be working on that.
So Madam, I guess I own an
entire letter of your bill. So I
will own that letter proudly.
So, Madam Speaker, generally,
so.
I'm wondering, does this apply
to employees working from home
or can they be impaired while
performing duties remotely.
I believe that was something
that came up on the EDD
analysis.
Um,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that would depend on the
policies of the employer. So if
the employer, uh, regardless of
whether the employee worked at
home or in a specific setting,
um, if the employer had a
policy uh for no um.
Use substance use, um.
Then that would still apply.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, but I guess from my
understanding of the bill
itself, if you're a cannabis
user,
Are you protected from
termination under HB 230 just
for being a cannabis user in any
way.
No, uh, Madam Speaker and uh
gentle.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um.
The, it's, it's not for any
cannabis use. This is only for
qualified patients under the
Linen A and Compassionate Use
Act.
Got it. OK. Thank you, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then, uh, I feel like I had a
question about that.
But it slips my mind. So, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I guess
I'll continue on the last
questions I have.
So
When it comes to someone.
Having a medical card.
Being somebody who does indeed
use cannabis for medical use.
I'm wondering how does an
employer determine whether they
are medical, medically using
cannabis versus just using it
recreationally if from my
understanding from previous
debate, it would violate HIPPA
to ask that in an interview, for
example. How do we get around
that?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that was a lot of questions, so,
um, however, I would just say
that uh we have examples of
other states where this policy
has been adopted where um
specific for say a uh uh uh
firefighter division, um, the
employer requires that they
provide medical cannabis
documentation, um, to the
employer after they're employed,
um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
there are a lot of.
protections about what you can
and can't ask during an
interview, so that I think
that's a separate set of issues.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. I guess maybe
outside of an interview, let's
just say they they see somebody
who maybe had like they smelled
like cannabis. They were not.
Actually high or something, but
they smelled like it. How would
they determine if that person
was using it medically
previously or
Recreationally, and I'm just
wondering how do they delineate
between the two, maybe in other
states you have examples for me
of, of how they do that.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that's exactly why we would like
for the impairment testing to
occur, so that there are other
ways outside of the smell or
some kind of metabolites in the
blood to document that someone
is impaired, so if they uh had
other um indications that they
were impaired or if they, uh,
were then were submitted for a
uh tested under a reasonable
suspicion, then that would be
determined.
OK. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. I do
think that that impairment
testing is important, and I'd
love to see more definitive,
like scientific, oh, this works,
this doesn't work, or, or some
people are using this, some
people are using that, and I'd
love to see maybe a, a
centralized approach, because,
you know, we can do a
breathalyzer, see if someone's
drunk. It's hard to do it with
cannabis. So, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, thank you so much
for the, the fruitful debate,
and I appreciate your answers,
and I will listen to the rest of
the debate. I'm sure, I don't
know if
someone else is on the board,
but I really appreciate it,
Madam Speaker. Thank you so
much, gentle lady. Appreciate
it.
The gentleman from Chavez, Eddie
and Lee Counties, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair, with the
gentleman yield?
Or
lady I should say.
Madam Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Lee.
Hm.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Uh, granted most of the
questions.
I hope we've been asked by now,
but there I still have a, a
couple that I'm.
Did I have a problem with,
gentle lady, uh.
One of them, uh, John just kind
of hit on just a minute ago on
on page 3 section C.
Gentle lady,
Nothing in this section shall
restrict an employer's ability
to prohibit or to take an
adverse.
Employment action against the.
And employed for the use of or
being impaired.
My question is.
Why did we
Exclude
Impaired by medical cannabis, is
there a difference between being
impaired with recreational or if
somebody overtakes their
medication is, is impaired with
medical.
Cannabis, gentle lady.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
that's just simply to ensure
that we're covering uh any kind
of cannabis use, so it's not
limiting it just to medical
cannabis it's, it's including
any type of cannabis use, uh,
Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
because the, the folks that were
trying to support with this
legislation are those frontline
workers, um, but this bill
doesn't open the door to, um,
allowing cannabis use during
the.
During work hours or in the
workplace.
Thank you gentle lady, uh, uh,
Madam Speaker, uh, I'm looking
at
The bill with amendments in
context on line 3, it does have
a line drawn through.
After being impaired.
It says buy cannabis, the
medical part was is excluded.
My question was, is what is the
difference between being
impaired if you're impaired.
Medically or recreationally.
Or what is to keep an employee
from using medical and
recreational at the same time.
And why would we exclude
The impaired on uh in that
section of the bill.
Madam Speaker and gentlemen um
from Chavez and Lee and
Ed, um.
The line through the medical
makes this broader, so.
Previously, the law said that
um.
You could prohibit someone from
uh the use of being or being
impaired by medi medical
cannabis. Now this is just
saying cannabis, so thank you. I
was trying to read something in
there that wasn't there, uh,
gentle lady, Madam Speaker, uh,
one other question that's
bothered me, it's on the first
page of the bill.
And on the last page of the bill
both.
It says
I'll go to the, the on page 3.
defining cannabis impairment is
the responsibility of the
employer. Is that
Is that true, gentle lady?
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, yes.
How it it am I as an employer.
Go to determine
Impairment when if you read the
rest of that statement.
It says the Department of Health
shall assist.
In developing cannabis
impairment guidelines that are
based on reliable research and
so on and so forth.
When will these guidelines be
available to the employers?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, the
effective date of this
legislation would be June 20th
of 2025, so I would imagine
shortly after, um, and Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, I would
just add that we added this so
that the employers could
evaluate their own work
conditions and ensure that they
have uh a good definition that
works for them of cannabis
impairment, so it could include
whatever testing methodology
that they typically use it could
include
physical symptoms of impairment,
you know, bloodshot eyes or etc.
uh, in combination with a drug
test, so, so this gives
employers options.
Thank you gentle, uh, Madam
Speaker, but uh,
I, I, I as an employer can make
my own guidelines as to what.
To determine what level of
cannabis is, is.
Uh, what uh.
Determining the impairment.
Without any guidelines from
anybody else?
Uh, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
so these guidelines will be
provided and it'll be up to the
employer to determine what works
best for them in their
workplace.
Thank you gentle, but at this
time, uh, as employers, we, we
do, we don't have any.
When we're passing this
legislation, madam, Madam Chair,
young lady, we have no idea what
Those regulations are gonna look
like. Is that true, gentle lady?
Madam Speaker and gentlemen, um,
there, there are no draft, uh,
guidelines and Madam Speaker,
gentlemen, I do want to stress
that they are not regulations,
um, they will be guidelines, so
they will be informative for
employers and Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, it could look like
what Bernalillo County has done
in terms of the types of testing
that they are using.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, uh.
Madam Speaker, uh, I guess my
problem is, is if I determine my
guidelines and I
Take adverse
What is and I'm, I have a little
struggle with that. What is
adverse employment, but I take
action against an employee and
then it's up to a court to
decide whether my guidelines
were legal or illegal or what
recourse have I got is an
employer to protect myself.
In those regulations, Madam
Chair, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, um, it's similar to,
you know, employees that are
going through medical conditions
and have many prescriptions
prescribed to them in terms of
understanding how that might
impair their job performance, so
medical cannabis is, is no
different than that, um, and I
know employers make these
difficult decisions every day,
and I, I don't envy that, uh,
and I understand that, uh, how
that, how that.
uh, feel, um, and, uh, Madam
Speaker and gentlemen, we, we're
not asking for anything
different on this other than the
consideration that's given to
individuals who are dealing with
other really serious medical
conditions and and may have very
serious prescription medication
as well.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. The only
difference that I see is that
you're not allowing me to test.
For the cannabis, but I can test
for oxycodone, all the
prescription drugs.
And if a person takes those off
of prescription level, which
they do, uh,
I know it with the test.
I don't, uh
Have to wait for an incident
occur where I think they are
impaired. Is that true, gentle
lady?
Oh, I'm I'm sorry, madam, madam
Speaker, gentlemen.
Could you repeat your question?
I was just asking, you know, I
can still test for all the
prescription drugs and all the
other drugs in determining.
On a random test, so I know
whether an employee is
overdosing on those drugs, even
though they are medically.
Prescribed, but I have no way of
knowing on the cannabis, whether
a person is taking only medical
or combining medical or doubling
his medical or any, any
indication of his, of his usage
of the cannabis, but I do have
any other drug. Is that true,
gentle lady?
Well, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, if there was any
evidence of impairment or that
the person was not performing
their job duties, that's when
the testing could occur.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh, I'm
still a little
Questionable whether what the
consequences will be to me if I
test somebody from what I think
is impairment without any rules
or regulations for me to look at
and what impairment means.
One last question.
Um,
it said in here, see if I can
find it again.
About accidents if uh
In the
Going off of my analysis, uh, an
example of a employee has a
small accident.
In a vehicle, say in the parking
lot.
And uh no damage done, then I
won't, can I have him in?
tested for that accident.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentlemen,
I think it would depend on if
anyone had seen that accident,
um, because if anyone had seen
that accident that would
constitute reasonable suspicion
of impairment, and so then you
could do testing in that
scenario, um, Madam Speaker and
gentlemen, I suppose, um, that
that this legislation doesn't
change that because if you had a
parking lot accident and no one
noticed and you didn't do any
damage, um.
I'm not sure the employer would
take any action in that scenario
either today under existing law.
Thank you, gentle lady. You
know, if nobody had seen it, I
wouldn't know about it. I don't
think, but uh anyway, that
answers one question because I
didn't want to be unable to
attest them attesting for a
small one and wait until they
got into a serious accident
where
Maybe personal injury or
Significant first uh
Damage was caused to to
somebody's.
Either person or to their
vehicle or to anything, but uh
thank you gentle lady. I think
that's all I have for today.
Thank you.
gentle lady to clothes.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and
thank you members for the debate
and uh special members very
First Amendment and with that, I
move that House Bill 230 is
thrice amended, do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 230 as thrice amended, the
vote is now open.
Approaching closure.
I
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 38.
Yes to 24 nays.
House Bill 2:30 thrice amended
does now pass.
Gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan, are you ready on item
number 23.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
the action necessary for placing
Senate Bill 163 as amended with
an emergency clause on final
passage has been taken.
And it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution
generally explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
members of the House, Senate
Bill 163. This bill will allow
federally recognized Indian
nation, tribal and pueblo
students who are enrolled or
eligible for enrollment in
public schools to where their
tribal regalia and cultural
objects at their graduation,
promotional ceremonies or public
school events.
This bill will recognize the
cultural and spiritual
significance of traditional
attire, ensuring that students
can celebrate their academic
achievements.
While the graduation cap and
gown graduation dress also
symbolizes recognition of
academic achievement.
This bill will complement the
graduation dress code along with
tribal regalia.
I stand
for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move that Senate Bill 163
amended do now pass. We are on
final passage of Senate Bill 163
as amended with an emergency
clause.
The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The borders are closed by vote
63 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. Senate Bill 163 as
amended with an emergency clause
has really passed his house.
Gentle lady from Donana Socorro
representative Dow. Are you
ready? And item number 7. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will you get
me to that point that action has
served for place in House Bill
208 on final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. House Bill 208
allows those who apply for
hunting and fishing license to
register to vote at the
Department of Game and Fish, and
with that I stand for questions.
There is a debate, gentlemen
from Lee Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady ill?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
begrudgingly yield to the
representative from Lee County.
Mr. Speaker, I couldn't let this
go without some discussion.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady, do
you recall a bill that may have
been, that was passed last year.
Uh, for anybody getting a
driver's license.
That would be automatically, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady
registered to vote whether they
wanted to be on this bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
getting there.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I do
not.
Well, I'm curious as to the
impetus of this and if we could
relate this back to any key
learnings, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that we may have
learned from, from registering
our voters through the DMV.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
know that New Mexico has, we're
ranked in the top bottom for
voter participation, and this
adds another opportunity, uh,
they can register online. It,
it's, it's to access, to give
more access to voter
registration for our rural folks
in remote areas that, that get
their permits online for hunting
and fishing.
All right, well, I appreciate
that, um.
Thank you. That's all. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. no further debate,
gentle lady to close.
Mr. Speaker, I do now move house
Bill 208 at Dumas.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 208, the vote is not open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 208.
Azuli Paz's house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Speaker, we go to that order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business. It is so
ordered.
Announcements.
No, we're not canceling lady
from Los Alamo Santa Fe Sandoval
Chandler. Mr. Speaker, the
moment that everyone has been
waiting for.
Your house judiciary Committee
meeting will be meeting tonight
at about 7:25 and it would be
super great if people could show
up on time so we can get out as
quickly as is appropriate, Mr.
Speaker. Why did you stare at me
when you said if people show up
on time.
We have an experience together,
Mr. Speaker.
Members do not take note.
Gentle lady from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, um, house
commerce will be having Jersey
ikes for dinner. Please show up
and uh we can be in and out as
quickly as possible, 15 minutes
after the floor.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
your, uh, rural development,
land grants, Cultural Affairs
Committee will not meet tomorrow
morning, get some rest, some
pretty sleep, everyone. Thank
you.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Taos, Mr. Speaker, your
house agricultural se and water
resources Committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at 9
a.m. and we do have burritos for
those members who come but only
the members of that committee.
There is booing. I don't know
why, but members taking note,
gentlemen from Donana thank you
Mr. Speaker. Appropriations and
Finance Committee will meet at
7:25, uh, in room 307.
With
Jersey Mikes.
If you go to House commerce
beforehand, Mr. Speaker.
Members take notes.
Remember Cenel 112, which was
referred to the House Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee.
We will be adding the house
taxation revenue Committee as a
referral to send a bill 112
Senate Bill 112, which is in the
House of Commerce and Economic
Development Committee. We'll, we
will be adding how taxation
revenue Committee as a referral
to that bill.
FYI
Seeing no objection, it is so
ordered.
Any other announcements?
Members, thank you for a great,
uh, day, good day of work, hard
work, appreciate all of the
thoughtful debate.
General from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker,
What do you get when you cross a
vampire in a convertible?
He did not clear this one by me
earlier today, sir. This is a
different joke.
What do you get? A blood drive.
That's a good dad joke. I'm
writing that one down.
No more Red Bull.
Any other announcements?
gentle lady from Santa Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House do in recess until 10:30
tomorrow morning.
The house was set in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
