threat. Representative Garrett.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
committee. uh, we're here today
to talk about uh House 31, the
4th degree felony for shooting
threat, my expert witnesses are
chief deputy of the New Mexico
Department of Justice, James
Grayson and Detective McRae of
Albuquerque Police Department.
I want to start out by saying
last October, uh, when I was
meeting constituents, a 4th
grader, a 10-year-old, ran out
of her house in northwest
Albuquerque.
And she said, Miss Joy.
Please do something.
About school shootings and guns
at school. I'm afraid to go to
school.
We're afraid of getting shot.
That a 10 year old
would say something like that to
me.
Hurt my heart as a teacher, I
had to start training students
around uh 2019 in the Alice
procedure. The Alice procedure
is alert, locked down in form,
counter evacuate. We would have
to talk about whether the canned
foods in the closet should be
used to potentially throw at
someone.
This isn't this is.
Can is that working well?
OK.
It's a, it's a different
situation. No child of any age
should fear going to school
because they might get shot.
House Bill 31 elevates school
shooting threats from a
misdemeanor to a 4th degree
felony. The amendment aligns the
penalties for making a bomb
threats with shooting uh threats
and I'll add, um, it'll assist
law enforcement and protecting
schools and schoolchildren, but
it also applies.
To the workplace and the, the
public places in our community
to interrupt you, but you just
said an amendment. Did you mean
act?
You don't have an amendment to
this, no,
no amends the law. Yes, sorry.
Thank you for clarifying that.
Um, it's amazing that changing
one word misdemeanor to three
words for degree felony can have
an incredible impact on the
ability of law enforcement, uh,
to get to the root of a shooting
threat, uh, not just a bomb
threat, but shooting threats and
situations that involve our
residents, our people, and our
youth in a quick and effective
manner, not wasting any time.
This amendment isn't just
something to enhance penalties.
to allow the support and
involvement and intervention
that can quickly be developed,
uh, to help those making these
threats, uh, particularly when
they're youth. Our kids need to
feel safe at school, and I'll
mention that in 2024 alone,
several schools in our state
received shooting threats,
including schools in
Albuquerque, my own high school
Volcano Vista High School,
Clovis, Santa Fe, Raton, Pooque,
Real Rancho, and eagle nest and
APD.
alone investigated 28 incidents
in just September, so it strains
law enforcement resources, but
it undermines our students'
sense of safety, well-being, and
security, which allows you to
learn. You can't learn if you
have these kind of worries in
your head, even when there's no
actual violence, school shooting
threats that kids hear about or
happen in their own lives,
disrupt their learning. They
cause psychological.
Stressed and trauma and fear,
and this affects the students,
the staff, and the families. It
negatively impacts our school
climate. Our school, our kids
deserve to be kids. They deserve
to walk the halls of their
schools to play on the
playground safely without
worrying about these kind of
issues, and that is why I think
it's really vital to to amend
the bill the statutes in this
way, and with that some brief
re.
mark s will be given by Chief
Deputy Grayson, some brief
remarks by detective Rye, and
then we'll stand for questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing me to speak to you
today. I'm James Grayson. I'm
the chief deputy at the New
Mexico Department of Justice and
the New Mexico Department of
Justice stands in strong support
of this bill. This bill is not
It's the target is really not
punishment. This tool is this
bill is about giving law
enforcement the tools.
To react to a school shooting
threat in a manner that prevents
the the threat from being
carried out and protects
particularly school children
we're talking about, of course,
the bill applies beyond schools,
but that, that's really the
focus here is is school
shootings and
Unfortunately, in the United
States school shootings are on
the rise in 2022, there was,
according to one data set, there
was a school shooting every 52
days in the United States.
2023
That dropped to every 45 days.
So this is a very serious
problem and as Representative
Garrett said this is, this is an
issue that affects how safe
students feel at school and it's
an issue about.
It it affects how law
enforcement can respond to these
threats and, and the goal of law
enforcement and the goal of the
New Mexico Department of Justice
is to prevent these threats from
being carried out. We want to
protect kids and this bill can
help protect kids. Um, I would
like to highlight a couple of
things, um, in terms of changing
the punishment from a
misdemeanor to a 4th degree
felony.
In the juvenile system, there is
not punishment.
There is a disposition.
And then there was supervision
care and rehabilitation.
So if a juvenile is charged
under this statute, it is not a
youthful offender offense that
would subject to juvenile to
adult sanctions.
The juvenile sanctions would
remain the same with this change
in the bill.
So what changes is the ability
of law enforcement to
investigate and or for purposes
of of explaining that to the
committee. I'll turn it over to
Detective Mick Ryle.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
thanks for having me here. Um,
this is something that's very
near and dear to my heart, and I
believe I have a unique
perspective on this topic based
on what I've done throughout my
career.
I've been with the Albuquerque
Police Department for
approximately 35 years.
And during that time, I've
served as a patrol officer.
Where I responded to threats and
began basic investigations of
threats.
I served as a detective where I
investigated these threats
further.
I served as a school resource
officer.
Where I was able to um not only
investigate these threats, but
see and have an opportunity to
experience along with the
students, faculty and staff, um,
kind of the the trauma that they
were that they were receiving or
experiencing it as part of these
threats in that function as a
school resource officer, I also
had the ability to teach
lockdown trainings, um, to, uh,
assist with evacuation drills
and to be part.
Of the educational process and
how it kind of marries or ties
into the safety as a school
resource officer, I always said
that my job is not just for the
physical.
Security of the children, but
their mental security as well.
And as time goes on, I'm sure
that those topicals will come up
and how I can better explain
that.
As a SWAT officer.
I responded to threats, active
threats, current threats, and I
was able to see.
How responding quickly is
necessary.
also how it has a
Traumatic effect on students,
faculty, staff, and parents.
It's not something that's um.
Supposed to be seen at a school.
A school is there for education
and law enforcement. It is a
separate piece and when we
introduce not just law
enforcement officers to a school
and a school resource capacity.
But when we introduced tactical
officers.
They're viewed not as
That community, but outsiders
coming in and it has a, an
effect on the students faculty
and staff that
is beyond our control because we
don't have uh time to kind of
explain what our purpose is
there or, or what exactly
brought us there or what we're
doing there. So it gave me some
perspection as far as that goes,
as far as being assigned as a
homeland security detective for
the Albuquerque Police
Department, um, my function is
not only teaching officers how
to respond to active shooter
threats, teaching cadets how to
respond through reality-based
training.
But I also have the opportunity
to teach, um,
The community on how to lock
down schools, how to lock down
and evacuate. I assist in
building emergency action plans
for churches, schools, private
entities, um, and even
government entities.
As part of my job and function
with the Homeland Security unit
is I am also uh one of the
people on the threat group, so I
am notified um by our control
supervisor through our radio
dispatch for every mass casualty
threat in the metro area, day or
night.
And as part of that, uh, my
function is to provide support
and guidance to the officers and
detectives and um and other
entities or agencies that are
assisting in um
Identifying the level of threat.
If it's an actual threat.
And what our response needs to
be and is going to be.
So
I know that was kind of long
winded, but I want you to know
what my perspective is, and, and
why I'm.
about um this topic.
And Madam chair with that will
stand for questions. Thank you.
We'll go to the audience. Thank
you.
Yeah
Um, those in um opposition, um,
can you raise your hands?
And how many would like to
speak?
OK. Um, they'll hand you our,
um, security.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is Ben
Bauer. I'm the chief public
defender. Uh, I am.
I'm concerned about school
shooting threats. I'm concerned
about the children or adults
that make them, and the harm
that there could be. I'm also
concerned about criminalizing
conduct uh for people and over
penalizing.
Folks, 11 question and, and this
is part of a real conversation
is, it's unclear to me, uh, how
law enforcement is prevented
from fully investigating
misdemeanors and how increasing
the penalty from a misdemeanor
to a 4th degree felony somehow
affects how law enforcement uh
can react to that. Uh, but also
in Mrs. Chavez Cook will address
some of the technical issues. I
believe this is fairly broad,
school shooting threats can be
punished both for juveniles.
results, there is, although we,
we don't call it punishment for
children. There are real
consequences under the juvenile
code and the people to whom we
want to send a message by
increasing penalties are
generally not the people that
are committing those crimes.
Kids don't listen to the press
releases from here. So I believe
we often create more harm by
increasing penalties and uh with
that, I think the representative
and the committee.
Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, my name is
David Sanchez. I'm a rancher
from northern New Mexico, we uh.
We traveled 3 hours in a
snowstorm to get down to this
committee and hear the various
bills before you today and I'm
opposed to this legislation
simply due to the fact that it
appears that all of this gun
bills that come before your
committee want to make everybody
a felon.
And uh I, I have a problem with
that, uh, on our ranch, uh, we
use uh tools, guns to protect
our our kids or grandkids and
and others, and I find that this
bill as an example, elevating it
to a felonies. All it does is
take
The
Constitutional rights away from
somebody from owning a gun, and
we're opposed to that across the
board and all these bills that
are uh before you today. Thank
you.
Thank you.
And then there were a few people
on this side.
Good afternoon, chair and
Committee Diane McCash, Citizen.
Um, I totally support the intent
of this, um, to lessen the
incidence of shooting threats,
but I can't support the bill,
not just because I don't believe
that changing the penalty will
have the desired effect, but
because I believe that raising
it from a misdemeanor, which can
carry up to 364 days of
incarceration would have
unattended long-term
consequences of increasing
felony convictions, especially
on young people who I believe
are more likely to fall.
here under this, uh, with
lifelong collateral damage.
Young people who receive the
support service they need along
with being held accountable in a
way that doesn't subject them to
possible prison time are so much
more likely to be able to leave
behind their problematic
behaviors and transition into
full adulthood without becoming
entrenched in possibly decades
or a lifetime of criminal
behavior. I believe that making
a shooting through a felony
might end up making things
worse.
Thank you. Next person.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is Kim
Chavez Cook. I'm with the law
offices of the Public Defender.
I do think it's important to
clarify that the crime of
shooting threat does not mean
threatening with a firearm. It
is a verbal threat, however,
insincere it might be to commit
a shooting in the future. It
does not require any imminence
or um that anyone react in fear
or that there be an emergency
response.
So I do think it's important
that we distinguish between what
the expert witness talked about
as active threats, where there
is a shooter in a school from a
threat of a shooting, which are
extremely different behaviors.
Uh, this existing misdemeanor
crime applies really broadly and
is almost always pursued against
children, teenagers. The
collateral consequences, as we
mentioned, of felonies cannot be
understated, and we do believe
that it is a rational choice to
punish this particular offense
as a
misdemeanor and not as a felony
and would encourage this
committee to keep it at the
current penalty level. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else in
opposition?
Like to speak
OK, we'll go to um the Zoom and
I think we have one.
Zoom.
Johnson. I'm the district
director for Sports Association.
I do think this bill has some
merit, but I'm very concerned
about how it's being addressed
most of your conversations today
have to do with school shooting
the same.
I'm not sure this bill really
addresses that help in that
regard whatsoever.
Um
Growing a can of Representative
Garrett is absolutely ridiculous
because we are really concerned
about our schools.
And making the situation like
that must harden our schools
like other states have done.
We need every precautions.
When you locked doors, we need
armed guards, this will all
prevent it from happening, not
try to deal with charges
afterward.
The down the Duice department
and said this happens different
times, 51 times a day. I'm sorry
it's not accurate. If you look
at the statistics.
That includes shooting in
parking lot after school hours
are closed. Shooting within 100
yards of the school statistics
were not accurate.
Again, we can.
We got, we got deal with being
introduced in the past to really
work on crime and would really
solve some of these problems
that we seem to focus on the law
abiding citizen and make the
most kill them.
We really want to do some good,
but harden our tools,
but look on the bill, the bill
energy year after year after
year and you all vote them down,
build that would really be
solutions to crime.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
OK, great. All right. Now those
in support, will you raise your
hand so I can see how many
people want to speak.
OK, so we just have a few
people. OK, we'll hand the
microphone to you in 2 minutes,
please. Thank you. Whoa, uh,
good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Terry Cole, president CEO for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. House Bill 31
increases the penalty for making
a shooting threat to the same
level as making a bomb threat.
That's very sensible.
While HB 31 applies across the
board, I want to focus on the
effects are children, when an
act of violence is threatened.
Nothing is more terrifying to a
student, especially our youngest
and most vulnerable. Making a
threat is a very real form of
violence and intimidation that
can leave lasting emotional
scars for those that commit such
crimes, a slap on the wrist,
misdemeanor is not nearly enough
of a consequence for
perpetrating violence. In 2020.
47 schools in New Mexico
received shooting threats as
Representative Garrett
mentioned. Every fake thread
diverts resources away from
genuine emergencies putting
entire communities at risk.
According to an analysis by TDR
Technology Solutions, the impact
of fake threats nationwide is
tremendous, costing upwards of
$500 million including lost
instructional time and mental
health impacts.
We urge you to support the bill
today and we commend
Representative Garrett for
carrying it. Thank you.
OK. Is there anyone else in
support?
like to see.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sam Bregman. I'm the
district attorney in Burlingo
County, arises to support this
bill.
I want you to know it is 100%
consistent with our zero
tolerance for guns on schools,
so I urge you to support it.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Oso Chavez. I'm here in
support of this bill because I
have many uh nephews who um are
very young and are really
worried about being safe in
school. And I think this is a
good measure to help make them
feel a little safer and to have
some consequences for the folks
who might want to um threaten
our students. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jeremy Store. I'm the
chief of police for the Las
Cruces Police Department, the
Las Cruces schools were not on
that list. Last year we had at
least 3 separate instances where
there were shooting threats, um.
Primarily through social media
that disrupted our schools. And
one thing that's important to
remember is that when this
happens, it's not just the
threat itself and the impact
that that has. But up to 20 to
25% of our students do not show
up to school that day. And so
you have the disruption that
extends beyond the threat
itself. Um, it was already
pointed out that the, the same
statute has a bomb threat,
already has a 4th degree felony.
And so although I feel that a
bomb threat is obviously very
significant and should be
treated as such, but not to have
the shooting threat at the same
level.
It's not a logical thing in my
opinion. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Anyone else in support like to
speak. OK, is there anyone on
Zoom? 2 people, OK.
Um, you have 2 minutes, please.
Go ahead, the person on Zoom.
Um, you need to unmute yourself.
OK, we'll go to the next person.
Please unmute yourself and go
ahead.
Hello, this is, uh, Kathleen
Moley. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Go ahead. 2
minutes. Yes.
Thank you. Um, I, I was, um, a
student in uh university that
had one of the first mass school
shootings in our country. Now
there are books written about
them, but the thing that I'm
most impressed with is that
schools now have um at least an
Albuquerque. I understand how a
30% chronic absenteeism rate,
and I know that um firearm.
of fears
have a direct relationship to
absenteeism. So I want just to
support this bill and see if
that's something we can
decrease. Thank you. Thank you.
it
Thank you. All right. Do you
have any closing remarks before
we go to the committee,
detective.
Excuse me.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I would just
highlight some of the remarks
that were made by the public,
and that is
in terms of, in terms of the
level of punishment, this
statute applies to both bomb
scares and shooting threats.
Those are equally dangerous to
our schools, our workplaces.
And they cause serious law
enforcement difficulties and
should be the same punishment.
Thank you Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you. OK, we'll go to the
committee unless, did you want
to say something? OK. um
Representative Lord.
Hey
Thank you. Do you have water?
I don't have a lozenge.
You with that?
want a lozenge, she wants me to
get you a lozenge.
OK.
Thank you man. I want to address
that first with
Hold on.
Don't choke on the laws.
OK.
So, Madam Chair, experts,
representative, I do have some
questions and it's because we're
going from.
Misdemeanor to a felony.
But I do have quite a few
questions on this bill, so bear
with me.
So
With this bill, it does then
apply to minors, anyone under
18, is that what I'm
understanding, or they have a
completely different code for
what happens if they call in a.
You know my expert witnesses to
respond.
Man, I'm sure you could just
point to them if you want.
OK.
Madam Chair represented Lord,
uh, so.
The way the juvenile code works
is that if there is a crime in
the criminal code.
At a juvenile violates that
becomes a delinquent act.
Unless it's a specified number
of crimes that are described as
youthful offenses.
Delinquent acts are um treated
through the juvenile system as
non-criminal acts. There is not
criminal punishment associated
with that. There's instead
rehabilitation associated with
that.
Um, if it, if it's a youthful
offense, then a delinquent is
subject to a potential adult
penalty of certain conditions
are met.
Um, this offense would not be a
useful offense. Um, this would
be considered to be a delinquent
act if it were committed by a
juvenile.
OK, so Madam Chair and
represents so.
When, if they were to call in,
cuz they're.
Really, so they call in.
They go through the delinquent
act.
There's no criminal charges, but
instead there's other wraparound
things that happen. What, what
is it that happens with the
child when they do, it's like
I'm just gonna get straight to
it if somebody is calling
something in they either have
homework for the bomb threat,
which is historical women kid,
or they have mental issues. So I
want to find out what is
happening before I move forward
with what is happening here.
It's just gonna be some overlay.
Madam Chair Representative
Lords, so just as with any crime
that is uh or any uh delinquent
act committed by a juvenile if
it's a crime under the criminal
code.
Um, that becomes a delinquent
act, then they would be, um, it
is not a criminal charge that
they would face. Um, they would
instead go through the juvenile
system.
Um, they, they have the right to
an attorney, they have the right
to um process under the juvenile
code, and if they are found by
the judge to have committed the
delinquent act, they're subject
to juvenile dispositions.
Not criminal punishment.
And so they would not have a
felony on the record.
They would be subject to the
types of rehabilitation and
supervision that are provided
for under the Children's code.
This is me thinking.
Meters I'm just thinking about
how that applies to the bill
that's coming later that we're
going to do background checks
and the children.
To get a firearm, so I guess
that wouldn't count because
there is none.
There is no felony charge,
correct?
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
that is correct. It does not go
on their criminal record.
And under the under the
delinquency code.
Um, after a juvenile has
successfully completed the
juvenile disposition imposed by
the judge. There are provisions
for that to come uh for that
information to be sealed.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
We'reservative. Thank you for
answering that because it
actually is going to answer a
question I have later about
another bill that before you can
purchase a firearm, you have to
do a background check to you as
a juvenile, which this would not
show. So that kind of beats the
whole.
So unless I guess mans and
experts, there was a mental
adjudication.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
no, there are, as I, as I
mentioned, there are youthful
offenses.
In the juvenile code, those are
typically 2nd and 3rd degree
felonies.
They're not the type of 4th
degree felony that that we're
addressing here and for those
youthful offenses, the juvenile
is subject to either a juvenile
disposition or an adult sentence
and some there are occasions
when um a useful offender.
Um, sentence would remain on a
juvenile's record.
That does not happen for
delinquent acts like this. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So thank you for
addressing that's a few more
minutes off.
that's coming later to ask on.
Last question on that specific
thing. Is there mental health,
are they getting mental health
evaluations. This is pretty
serious if they're saying, I
mean, you have legit evidence
that they're going to do that is
their mental health training or
are they provided with mental
health?
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
so it would be the Children's
Court judge who would decide on
on how much supervision and what
type of supervision would be
needed if the individual is
found to have committed a
delinquent act. I can say though
that if it's a misdemeanor
offense.
Um, under the Children's code,
the juvenile probation office
has the authority to deal with
misdemeanor offenses in an
informal way up to 3 times for a
juvenile within 2 years.
So those misdemeanor offenses
never make it to the Children's
Court attorney. They never make
it to the children's court.
And um they never receive
whatever supervision of a
children's court judge might
impose.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
Representative experts for
founding on that question.
Um, so what we have with this
bill.
So in the past, historically,
it's been the bomb scare
consists of falsely and
maliciously stating another
person.
That a bomb or explosives has
been placed in such a position
of property that could be
injured uh cause injury or
Or it says to be destroyed, I
think it means destruction.
In 2022.
Uh, we amended that to stay in a
shooting threat is unlawful and
provided a penalty of
misdemeanor. So the question
that I have is making a shooting
threat.
Consists with intentionally
communicating to another person
an intent to bring a firearm to
a property or use an intent
intent to in that lists various
things, but my first question
is, can you explain to me in
some detail what is
intentionally communicating.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
I can answer that question from
a First Amendment perspective
and then I'll turn it over to
Detective Royal to answer in
terms of what he sees on a day
to day basis.
So the First Amendment protects
speech, freedom of speech. It
does not protect what is called
true threats.
And true threats include those
intentional.
Knowing or reckless
communications that cause
another to to be in fear.
Um, and so the language in this
statute.
Picks up basically some of the
First Amendment law.
And requires that there be an
intent on the part of the
individual.
And I'll turn it over to to
Detective y for, for what he
sees day to day.
So
With the introduction or um
With more internet
accessibility.
And um.
With social media and things
like that, what we're seeing is
a different method of
communication, so, um, as part
of my investigations in the
past, I've seen um.
Threats
Uh
That were sent on a Valentine's
Day card.
All the way to threats that were
placed on social media, um,
stating that they would live
stream an incident.
On a school campus, and then
we're asking people to log on to
it.
There's also threats to where
people are posting images, so
they'll, and we get a lot of
these to where people are taking
pictures of them holding
firearms, they'll cover portions
of their face or they'll just
show their hands, and they will
display um everything from
pistols to semiautomatic rifles,
and then they will caption some
type of threat, and then they
will send that to someone in the
community or they'll post it,
um, on, on different social
media platforms.
s
Once those are observed by one
person, then it becomes more um
prolific as far as the
distribution. So some people are
passing it on um.
To further the, if you, if you
will, chaos and others are
passing it on as possibly a
warning to others not to go to
school because this is going to
happen.
The, the additional thing that
we have or follow on threats.
From the social media platforms
as you will have that initial
threat that comes out and the
person who receives it believes
that it is going to happen at
their school or their church or
their um.
Or their institution.
And then when it's forwarded
somewhere else, they attach that
meaning to them, so we have what
we have to kind of discern of is
this a follow on threat?
Unrelated to this initial
threat? Is this a warning, um,
so it becomes a little bit um
kind of.
Um
I don't want to say convoluted,
but it, it creates a situation
where we have to conduct a more
thoughtful investigation to make
sure that we are right, and
that's, and that's kind of the
ugly side to this is someone who
wants to do harm or or commit
this type of, of, of.
Assault or or threat.
They only have to get lucky
once.
But we in law enforcement.
Have to be right every single
time.
To prevent these acts from
happening. So, um, those are
different ways that these are
communicated. Some were
communicated by telephone,
they'll call the school, we had
several of those in the past
couple of months where schools
and businesses are getting
direct phone calls where the
threats are made, um.
The we're getting them again
through social media and we're
getting them through word of
mouth. So 11 person will
overhear another person talking
about this, or there'll be a
group of of individuals that are
involved in something and then
one.
Breaks away from that group and
reports that behavior. So these
threats come about from.
Um
Someone overhearing, someone
participating and changing their
mind or having direct knowledge
of it, um, through written
statements, through telephone
calls and through social media.
Sorry, thank you, Madam Chair
and expert. So that leads to
another question and represent,
sorry.
Um
How does it work?
If somebody says,
And I'm gonna take it out of
school cause this isn't just a
school. They say to us in here.
I'm gonna go in and kill
everybody at the roundhouse.
They don't have a firearm. They
don't say a firearm.
Is this still applicable to
them?
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
so the, the language in the
statute.
As presently written.
Is making a shooting threat
consists of intentionally
communicating to another person
and intent to bring a firearm to
a property or use the firearm
with the intent to place a
person in fear.
Prevent or interrupt the
occupation or use of a public
building or cause a response to
the threat by law enforcement.
So if the individual in that
situation, that hypothetical
that you mentioned, the
individual threatens to come to
the roundhouse and shoot people.
to use a firearm and does so
with the intent to place someone
in fear.
Or to disrupt the operation of
the legislature in the
roundhouse.
Or to cause law enforcement to
respond, then it would be a
violation of the statute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Reason I ask that is because.
I mean he's represent a block,
uh, cause we've been.
How long has he been threatening
to kill us? Years. We've had
somebody's threatened to shoot
us for years.
Nothing ever happens.
I can't even imagine if this is
passed. I have to say that he
would care because he wants to
kill both of us in a very
graphic detail.
Um, the reason I was asking.
It's because he doesn't always
say he's going to use a firearm.
He says, I'm gonna kill Stefie
Lord and drag her out in a body
bag.
So then this is not applicable,
and that's what I was.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative,
so.
When hearsay happens, if
somebody says.
I heard somebody.
was going to do a shooting here.
Is it then, does that then
trigger then for you guys to go
investigate and talk to the
person directly.
That happens. Is that what
happens?
Yes, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord, um, that's
exactly what happens when a
threat comes through what we
will do is we will go and try to
intervene. um, so if there is a
plan in place, we want to make
sure that we talk to somebody
and, and kind of get a feel for
what's going on.
If there is a.
If it's just hearsay and we
don't have any facts to support
it.
Um, then we, we can't go forward
with criminal charges and we
don't further the investigation,
but we do do a thoughtful
investigation on every one of
these, um.
But we have to have evidence.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
appreciate your answers because
it's hard to vote on a bill. We
try to do our best to do our due
diligence to understand.
Um
Still is also very frustrating
that.
In this case, somebody like in
our case with the gentleman that
wants to kill both of us, um, it
can continually say he's gonna
kill us, but unless even if this
was passed, he said firearm, but
that has no bearing on him, he
would find a way to kill us
anyways because that has been
his goal for.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, um,
And experts.
OK.
So I, I, I read through the bill
and so there is nothing in here,
madam.
Representative experts that.
And make it because I, I, I see
what you want to do, you want to
say, well, this is a felony, we
want to make this a felony.
But there's nothing really at
the end of the day from somebody
plea bargaining to misdemeanor,
correct? There's nothing to stop
it happening Bill. I mean, if
they get picked up felony.
It takes a very long time for
these people.
So it could be.
There's no mandate to, there's
no way we can mandate that it
stays a felony. Madam Chair
Representative Lord, that's
correct, um, one of the
Um, one of the reasons behind
this particular change.
Is less about what happens after
someone is prosecuted. It's more
about the investigative
investigatory process. I know
that was raised in the public
comments as well, but judges are
reluctant to issue warrants when
it when the crime at issue, the
crime being investigated is a
misdemeanor.
Um, and so police officers have
difficulty responding to these
threats because they can't get
warrants. They can't search
someone's phone, for example, if
they made a threat on social
media, they can't search.
Oh
For example, a locker to find
out whether there's a gun in
that individual's locker.
They, they, you know, there are
many difficulties in an
investigation.
From the fact that this is a
misdemeanor and that's beyond
the fact that that as I
mentioned juvenile probation can
treat these as
Um, an informal.
matter that is not referred to
the Children's court attorney.
Madam Chair and representative
experts does law enforcement
take into consideration that
they have the ability to make
decisions on their own.
Do they have the decision, um,
cause I know with 43-110, the
emergency medical health
evaluation.
With the officer be allowed to
use their discretion.
Say this person is having a
mental.
Illness episode. I'm not going
to charge them, but I'm gonna
take them to a mental health
facility, or is it all or
nothing?
Madam Chair represented Lord,
there is always prosecutorial
discretion, and there's always
officer discretion that is
exercised, um, in terms of
mental health issues if someone
presents themselves if they're a
danger to themselves or a danger
to others. There are other.
Parts of New Mexico statutes
that apply in those situations
and police officers can respond
to medical professionals can
respond to that type of
situation.
Thank you, ma'am, because I
would hate to make this, cause I
know with the with the red flag
bills your hands I have to do it
or you have to report to the
sheriff why you or you have to
report why you didn't do it.
So I, I want to make sure that
our officers have discretion,
Madam chair and expert, did you
just say that?
You can't go in and search a
child's locker.
Unless you have to have a
warrant or you just can't do
that if you're looking for a
firearm.
Representative Lord, um, so.
It
In schools, in particular, it's,
it's a, it's a combination of
Um, school administration and
school purposes for searches or
for talking to kids about
disciplinary measures and police
officers investigating crimes
and so the Fourth Amendment
still applies.
And Article 2 Section 10 of the
New Mexico Constitution still
applies in schools.
Um, and so officers are subject
to restrictions.
And what they can do in schools
in terms of searching backpacks
in terms of other things. And so
there are situations where
Um, for example, a school
employee investigating a
disciplinary matter might have
the opportunity to search.
Um, something that a police
officer would not.
OK, thank you for answering that
question, expert because.
It just seems like they had.
Enough if there's a threat, I
guess that's not enough probable
cause to be able to get in the
locker, but the administration
could.
Did you, sorry, did you want to
say?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Lord, I just
wanted to kind of circle back to
the mental health side of this.
So as part of our process with
the Albuquerque Police
Department and certainly other
law enforcement agencies is when
we're investigating these
crimes, we do utilize as part of
our tools the crisis
intervention teams, which are
officers that are certified to
kind of go the extra step with
um identifying and working with
uh people that might be in
crisis, um, also as part of.
Uh, my function, um, where we
also notify the supervisor of
the crisis intervention unit,
and they also provide us with
crisis intervention, detectives
um to make contact in some cases
to identify if um we need to
have a clinician um who are part
of these teams and we also use
the uh Metro crisis teams um to
also
system that so our overriding
goal at the onset of one of
these investigations is to
intervene if there's a plan in
place and then to identify if
this person, if this is truly
criminal behavior or if there's
some sort of mental component to
this. And so we are thoughtful
in that process, and we do use
crisis intervention officers, we
use clinicians, licensed
clinicians, and we use metro um
crisis teams on some of these
calls.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative experts I'm
learning a lot about how this
works.
Um
Another question I had.
So
No matter what age group that
we.
Just had a bunch of teens.
13 years old, and Sharon and
they just did a shooting last
night.
Seems like everybody has access
to firearms in the state.
You know on Telegram early on
that app, you can go buy
firearms, you can buy cocaine, I
learned all kinds of things
about this stuff.
So let's just say.
We pick somebody up.
And they get arrested for the
felony.
The goal is to make everybody
feel safe, so I'm gonna do here
instead of schools.
So somebody says I'm gonna show
up and shoot everybody there,
which then triggers this if you
can figure out who it is. We're
all evacuated, law enforcements
come, right? I get the
resources.
That person gets arrested.
But how does that help us?
If they're released on.
Fail and they can still get get
another firearm, but at the end
of the day.
The problem is security, even
when you look at the schools.
You could arrest every single
person that says they're gonna
do a thing some kids said
they're gonna do some,
somebody's gonna do something.
We, we arrest him.
You know, we have a tendency to
let people back out. We don't
hold them on bail until trial
and even then they get out.
There's really no way to assure
that our kids are safe still.
Right? Because
Until we do it like other
schools have done like have a
marshal there, people who are
trained.
Retired law enforcement.
Or more lockdowns.
Technically that person can get
out and this is a sad reality of
the pill.
That person could technically
get out the next day and go do
that.
There's no stopping them, so I.
The components that are always
missing for me, Madam Chair,
representative experts is the
mental health that was needed
when there was warning signs in
school.
When there was warning signs
before and getting that person
the care that they need and it
breaks my heart because it's so
frustra so I've been saying that
since I got elected, the lack of
the mental health.
Air.
Mount chair and represent
experts.
I have mixed feelings about it
because it doesn't give you a
sense of safety.
I mean, it gives you more tools,
but at the end of the day, that
person could technically go out,
even if they're red flagged,
they can still go out and get
another firearm. They could find
other ways. They could run.
There's lots of ways that you
can.
harm another person, sadly, as
you know, being long course, but
people can have different ways.
I get the tool, but I don't get
that it's going to.
Have the effect.
Unless there is a huge mental
health component.
Because especially for the
children that do do these
crimes, because I've done a lot
of research and they have mental
health issues.
And the people that do these
kinds of saying I'm sorry, I'm
just saying it are are sick.
There's something wrong with you
if you want to go in and harm
other people.
My other concern is.
Intent
Going to a felony.
Also have trouble with that too,
because I don't want to start
felonizing a bunch of people,
but at the same time also want
people that are who make those
kinds of threats to be punished.
But I also don't want to get
them into.
System where now I have somebody
who's perpetually gonna be
labeled as a felon and has more
of a tendency.
To continue that lifestyle when
they get out.
So my district has been somewhat
split, some for, some against
it, so I have a lot to think
about with this.
But my final word on this is
until we get down to how do we
stop that person.
Not the, I'm, I'm gonna take the
intent person out because they
may or may not do it. I got, we
got bomb threats all the time
when I was in school, we never
did it. Shooting is a different
story, right? They do do it.
But is that 100% of the time the
intent of the person?
And if it is, how in the hell do
we make sure that they don't go
actually do it.
The next day.
And that's what breaks my heart
about all this.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
experts. That's all the
questions.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Block.
Pardon me, madam Chair. Good
afternoon, everybody. Thank you.
I'm gonna put that a little
further.
Oh, let me put the water on the
other side.
I know, how dare I drink
Madam Chair representative, uh,
detective Mr. Bauer, uh, so,
A few questions to begin.
Madam Chair Representative.
I guess I'm just wondering, I
know we mentioned there were a
few cases, I forget the number,
I think 27 threats that we that
we logged, I believe, Madam
Chair Representative, and I'm
just wondering what statistical
data do we have to support this
increase in penalties and where
did we
How did we arrive at this felony
level.
Infraction, Madam Chairman.
Madame Cheron, Representative
Block.
Um, the attorney general's
office requested this change,
and it was supported by many of
the law enforcement who have to
deal with this uh daily, weekly,
monthly and the fact that it
increased.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK.
So the AG's office or
of Justice
Requested this
Yes, my expert witnesses from
the Department of Justice.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative End.
Mr. Bower, uh, so, OK, that,
that makes sense that that's the
impetus for that. So, Madam
Chair Representative,
Um
Have we looked at other studies
or case law from maybe other
states that justifies
Similar penalties.
And uh
And different situations that
may arise when it comes to
specifically.
Shooting threats as opposed to
bomb threats, etc. Madam Chair,
Representative, experts.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, uh, we have looked at
what other states do, many
states have what they call a
mass threats law.
Um, and that applies to both
firearms and bombs.
And those are felonies and other
jurisdictions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and I'm sure Mr.
Bauer knows this. Any, anywhere
in the western.
Southwestern area of the
country, such as ours.
That has similar laws like
Colorado or
Arizona, etc. Adam.
Yes, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, the um, when I was
talking about the First
Amendment, um, that case is
counterman versus Colorado and
so Colorado does have a mass
threat spill.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that you
had.
Madam Chairs representative,
this is actually Chief Deputy
Grayson.
Forgive me. I'm so sorry. I had
Bauer written down cause I
heard, heard the testimony,
Grayson.
I apologize.
Goodness me, Madam Chairman, I
apologize. So, continuing on
here in my questioning, um.
So
I see that there, so Colorado is
the main main one is there's
also a felony, Madam Chair, or
is it um
Misdemeanor in that state.
Mr. Grayson, Madam Chair,
Representative Locke, I'm, I'm
not sure with respect to
Colorado specifically. I've
looked at many of these statutes
in many states, and they are
typically felonies.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and uh
experts. So continuing here.
I'm just gonna go through some
of real quickly, hopefully the
physical impact reports and the
agency analyses.
So, starting off here, Madam
Chair.
Department of Corrections.
I, I guess I didn't look at
their.
Agency analysis number. Do we
know how many new
Incarcerations they are
expecting with the
implementation of this and
what's the physical impact of
that?
Madam Chair.
Uh, representative experts.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, they can't predict.
There would probably be more,
but uh not necessarily
significant fiscal impact.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, uh, that is
helpful.
OK, so continuing here, so,
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
sure that if we did implement
this, it could have an impact on
on counties. I'm sure the larger
counties that have more
population would
Potentially since they have more
schools, right, statistically
they'd have more uh impact on
this. Are we continuing to look
at maybe funding allocations for
specific counties that may have
higher proclivities to have
these threats, and how is that
working, Madam Chair.
Madame Chen representative, uh,
this may.
cost fewer situations and again
it's not necessary that people
would be incarcerated.
Because as Mr. Grayson
explained.
Uh, there's a lot of different
uh solutions.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and uh
yes, I think, I hope, like
whenever we pass legislation, I
hope.
It's a deterrent for people in
the future. So that's definitely
what I'm looking for here, uh,
Madam Chair Representative.
So, next would be just caseloads
of DAs and public defenders. I
know at least in my judicial
district, it's.
Very hard for district attorneys
to be able to
Do everything all the time, and
there's a need for attorneys.
There's a need for
Or more law enforcement and
people to testify, etc. Madam
Chair, Representative.
I guess this is, I, I assume,
and I don't want to assume, but
this probably is part of a
larger crime package in general
to just try to help fix our
crime problem, but
With the district attorneys.
Have we spoken to them about how
this could help.
Give them more tools maybe to
plead cases, etc. Is that
something that we've spoken to
them with and, and do they see
this as a net. So I, I don't
want you to have to speak for
the DA's cause they're not DAs,
but the ones that you have
spoken to, do they see this as
another tool in the tool box, I
assume, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block as District attorney
Brigman said.
Um, do you across the state.
are highly focused on.
Guns in schools, school
shootings, and other threats to
children in schools.
Um
This would be another tool for
those district district
attorneys.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, and I guess
going to the schools here.
Hey, I know that the bill is
being
I've heard from the testimony,
it's been
I don't want to say the word
marketed, but
Introduced as to protect.
Children at schools.
But it really changes three
words.
Doesn't say anything about
schools, and I think earlier,
Madam Chair Representative, we
heard about the criminal code or
the children's code rather.
And I'm wondering if this goes
into effect on the and I know
Representative Lord asked a
similar question, but I just
want to make crystal clear.
If this goes into effect with
the criminal code.
Would this help change the
Children's code.
When it comes to the penalties,
because
If it's a credible threat.
From a child who's underage, who
makes this threat.
Since we're trying to target
schools and a majority of
to
are from
Younger individuals who may not
be adult.
AIDS
How do we
How do we reference that
regarding this bill, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Madam chair, Representative
Bloch, so this change to the
statute would not affect
possible juvenile dispositions.
But as I mentioned with respect
to juvenile probation and the
fact that juvenile probation can
informally dispose of up to 3
misdemeanors. This would ensure.
That a shooting threat is
treated the same as a bomb
scare.
In the sense that it is referred
to the children's court
attorney.
For further action and
Could potentially if the
children's court attorney
believes it appropriate to
proceed in the juvenile system
could also be a children's court
judge to decide on disposition.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Mr.
and so
OK, that, that makes a little
sense. That makes a lot of sense
actually, Madam Chair,
Representative. So I, I guess.
My next question is regarding
the law offices of the Public
Defender. I did read their FIR.
And I did read there, um, I did
hear them today and they were,
they had concerns about
How this statue
Could affect verbal threats
without imminence.
Would you be able to address
that concern and with this
increased penalty, how that
would
square with their concerns in
their FIR and today in
testimony.
Madam Chair.
Representative and
Mr. Grayson.
Excuse me, I, I apologize. Madam
Chair, Representative Block. So,
um, I have not reviewed that.
Um, LOPD bill analysis.
Um, so I, I, I can't speak to
that directly, um.
What I can say is that.
Uh bomb scares.
Or a 4th degree felony.
Um
School shooting threats right
now would be a misdemeanor, but
those crimes create a similar
type of danger.
In in our society.
And um from the New Mexico
Department of Justice's
perspective, those crimes should
be treated the same.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative. And so I guess
that gets to my next question
regarding the actual threat. So
we, we have to prove some kind
of
Intent to commit the crime other
than just saying on social
media.
Hi
Like, let's just say somebody
says I, I cannot stand this
school, and I'm gonna
bring a gun to the school.
How, how would that affect
somebody from
Making the threat versus
actually.
Following through on it, Madam
Chair, and then what?
What is in place to help find
that kind of threat and stop it
preemptively because I guess
that's kind of the point of this
bill. We want to preemptively
stop these kinds of threats. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
just would like to know, and
maybe, maybe the detective has
something to add about that with
his experience in these
instances, how does that work
and will that indeed be a good
tool to to assist.
On the ground, Madam Chair.
Madame Chair Representative
Block, uh, before it turned to
detective Royal, um, I, I will
say that this language is
already
in the statute, the definition
of a threat is already in the
statute.
And what it, what it requires is
placing people in fear or
disrupting um a public building
or causing the response by law
enforcement.
Um, and so those, those are the
requirements in the bill. If
someone just says I'm taking a
gun to school, that is not a
shooting threat. I'll turn it
over to Detective Ryle.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, uh.
Absolutely. And when we look at
these things, what we have to do
is look at what the intent is,
and so, um, I say it over and
over whenever I talk about this
is that we have to conduct a
thoughtful investigation because
this is very serious, and
there's a lot of resources
involved and there's a lot of um
secondary victims that are
involved and that's all of the
the people that would be in
fear, whether it's at a school
or a church or a synagogue or a
business, so we do conduct a
thoughtful investigation, all of
these, and we do look for.
what is the criminal intent?
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you, uh,
Representative and detective and
Mr. Grayson, and I appreciate
that.
That
I'm glad that there's the
thorough investigation, right?
But
I do want to make sure that we
are indeed helping with those
immediate threats.
Because if it's the morning of,
they say, today I'm gonna go to
X Elementary and shoot the
school.
I want to make sure that we have
those tools in place. And I'm
sure that that's probably a
larger discussion, Madam Chair,
representative, for just law
enforcement funding, and I, I
won't get into that rabbit hole,
but continuing here, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Just, I, I did read some of the,
the agency analysis from the
Believe it was the
The AOC
District attorneys.
Madam Chair Representative, and
they said that there may be some
First Amendment concerns
regarding this, Madam Chair
Representative, they mentioned
uh the Supreme Court has a
reasoned the threats of violence
are outside the First Amendment.
Which is good and thankfully.
But it also says HB 31, Madam
Chair, is broad enough to
include threats against schools,
being felony offenses that would
require CYFD to forward these
cases for juveniles.
They also say that continuing
here, um,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
there needs to be a definition
of.
Actual damages.
And I guess, Madam Chair, I'm
just kind of wondering what's
your interpretation? First
Amendment wise, and then could
you just address quickly the
actual damages.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um, this bill it.
As I believe you mentioned, was
passed in 2022.
First Amendment concerns were
raised at that time and
addressed at that time the First
Amendment law has not changed
since that time. The United
States Supreme Court issued the
opinion, as I mentioned, in
counter counterman versus
Colorado and reiterated the fact
that the true threats are not
protected by the First
Amendment.
What is required in order to
prove a true threat under
counterman is a mental state of
at least recklessness. New
Mexico has a higher mental state
requirement in requiring an
intent.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative and expert.
So,
What about hyperbolic speech?
How was that?
Fall into that, Madam Chair.
P
Yes, Madam Chair Representative
block, again, that's, that is
dealt with in the in the phrase
truth, true threat, and so that
is part of First Amendment law.
OK, and I, I apologize, Madam
Chair Representative Block. I
didn't answer the question about
actual damages, um, that refers
to um the the
Subsection F in the statute
which is reimbursement for
economic harm and that is not um
there are no changes to that
section.
Um, proposed in this bill.
so much. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair and Representative.
And then one other thing on that
DA's.
FIR or the analysis from them.
It said it had possible conflict
with NMSA 31-17-1.
And Madam Chair Representative,
I have not been able to look at
that statute, and I don't expect
you to be a law book in your
mind, but I know you're very
intelligent, so I don't know if
you have any insight on what
that conflict could have been.
13-17-1.
Beam Chair Representative block,
if you'll bear with me, I'll
look that up.
Madam Chair Representative Lock
this again goes to the economic
harm part of the statute, um,
that is not.
Changed by this proposed bill,
um, I think the suggestion is
that
Might be uh
I, I haven't, again, I haven't
read that analysis, but if
there's a suggestion that it's
inconsistent with 3117-1. That's
victim restitution.
So this is not part of the
definition of the offense or the
penalty.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative and uh.
that does help me a lot
regarding that question. I just
wanted to make sure we weren't
putting
something that was contradictory
instead because.
We wouldn't want any of the
The legal fees associated with
that, right? So, Madam Chair
Representative.
I'm sorry, I'm just reading my,
my note here that I made. I, I'm
kind of trying to figure out my
own handwriting. I apologize,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
so continuing here.
I'm, I'm wondering what about
federal laws?
That have similar
Language as this proposal for
shooting threats. What is the
federal law say versus New
Mexico's law, and then does this
proposal is this equivalent to
that federal law, or is it more
stringent or
More lenient, etc. Madam Chair
and Representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Block.
Um
So in terms of federal law, I,
I'll turn this over.
To Detective Royal because this
was addressed it when the bill
was enacted in 2022.
Um, in terms of enforcing
federal laws with juveniles.
There is a law enforcement um
difficulty in that respect and
that was one reason um I think
behind some of the thinking of
the legislature in passing this
bill to begin with.
Um, I'll let Detective I'll
answer that.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, um, yes, there is
difficulty in that that the
federal system is not geared
towards the prosecution of
juveniles.
And um that's left to the, the
states and local municipalities.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
guess
Going on my, my previous
question really long time ago,
uh, regarding the actual statute
that we're trying to amend.
Is there a way that instead of
doing something like this with
this legislation in the criminal
code. Could we, do we, could we
make changes in the
Children's code, to be more
specific regarding shooting
threats so that we give better
protocols for all those things
that we spoke about earlier.
Was that, is that even something
we could do, or is this the only
way? Cause I know that
legislative council usually
writes these, these bills very
correctly, and they know where
the statute needs to be changed.
I'm just wondering, is, is that
a potential avenue to also
this
Or plugged this hole that we
have that's happening in New
Mexico, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, the way, the way the
Children's code works and
particularly the delinquency
Act, is it incorporates the
children's, I mean, the, the
criminal code into it.
Um, and so there aren't specific
crimes.
In the delinquency code.
The the crimes that are
committed in the children's
excuse me, under the criminal
code are then
Uh, determined to be delinquent
acts when committed by a
juvenile.
So there are specific things
that apply only to juveniles and
not to adults like underage
drinking or, or things like
that, um, but for a crime that
applies to the entire
population. Those are addressed
in the criminal code.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative.
And so, I guess this is this is
criminal code, right? But
What
I'm wondering, what about if I
was to
Let's just say I saw something.
That I thought was a threat.
I reported it to law
enforcement. I, I.
It may have been a shooting
threat as your bill has.
Is there a protection for folks
who give threats.
Or
If uh
Law enforcement tips on threats,
but those threats end up not to
be credible.
Is, is that something that is
protected for that individual
who may just be a good Samaritan
who wants to give some
information to law enforcement,
Madam Chair, Representative
experts.
Madam Chair Representative Block
in this scenario you posed that
individual would not have
violated the statute. It
wouldn't meet the elements in
the statute.
The, the
The threats that the police
investigate and then charge our
true threats under the First
Amendment.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Knight. I just wanted to make
sure that that was crystal clear
because we all just wanna to
protect everybody and
legislative intent, we want to
make sure that this is applied
exactly as we're looking to
apply. So, thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That, that's all
I had on this one, and I
appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have um Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
question.
Go to Representative Romero. I,
thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thanks to everyone for uh
helping clarify um a number of
things, I guess.
My, my first concern is, um,
When we're, when we're actually
gonna felonize this. How does,
how do juvenile records work?
When you have a felony record.
Um, as a juvenile.
Like what happens when you turn
18?
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero. So again, it depends on
the the type of offense that's
committed by the juvenile. If
it's a youthful offender
offense, those are treated
differently because they're
subject to a sanctions.
If it's a delinquent act and the
individual has satisfied the
disposition that is that is um.
Decided upon by the Children's
Court judge, and that
information is sealed.
A man, um, and, uh, Deputy
Grayson, is there
Since we're not putting that
discretion into this bill, how
does the court determine which
path it will go down.
And with a 4th degree felony, is
it always a delinquent act or is
it always something else, or can
they choose which path?
It goes.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, no, there's one path,
and it would be a delinquent
act. Um, it has to be specified
as a youthful offender offense
in the Children's code in the
Delinquency Act.
Under the definition of a
youthful offense in order to
carry any adult sanction at all.
And because this would not be
listed as a youthful offender
offense. um, it would only carry
juvenile.
So when it carries to.
Age 18, you have a delinquent
act on your record, your 4th
degree felon, and so now you're
that record stays with you for
the rest of your life, is that?
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, uh, that information
would stay on our record unless
it is expunged or unless there
is a pardon.
OK.
Um, so with the idea that we're,
you know, thinking about this in
a, in a felony context. I think
there's um,
Some sort of
Uh, definitional.
I think problems with how we
are looking at
What a shooting threat is when
it was a misdemeanor, um,
You know, we were able to sort
of think through that. I would
love a bill that just tells the
judge to investigate shooting
threats, um, when, even though
it is a misdemeanor, um, if
that's really the problem.
Um
So I think the, the issue that I
have right now with the the way
in which we're we're talking
about bomb scares versus
shooting threats.
We talk about bomb scares
consisting of falsely and
maliciously stating.
Um, whereas in this making a
shooting threat, it consists of
intentionally communicating.
Is there a reason why these
aren't sort of parallel language
as to what we're talking about
with the threat.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Romero, I'm, I'm not familiar
with the the reasons why there's
not a.
Not
um.
Yeah
As I mentioned, it was
Considered by the legislature in
2022, I heard some of those uh
committee hearings and the floor
debates on that. I don't
remember that being discussed
specifically.
Typically when it comes to true
threats, most mass threats
statutes.
Nationwide track.
The language from the United
States Supreme Court on what a
true threat is.
And that's
Falsely and maliciously is is
language that I've not seen in
other statutes and so it may be
that this language was derived
from
A sample in another state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think.
I, I guess just when we're
looking at
Felonizing a bomb threat
currently.
Um, in the investigation of
something like that.
If, can you just describe how
that investigation has worked
and when the felony charge is
applied to a bomb scare.
I can give you my personal
opinion.
So over the years, I believe
that bomb threats were something
that
Uh, were occurring
30 plus years ago, um, the
shooting threats are.
In my opinion, relatively newer
and and becoming more and more
um prevalent.
So I think that when we look at
these things we have to look at
them as where they came in time
and then what their effect is on
the community.
So when we investigate the bomb
threat if it's in a mass
casualty investigation. It's the
same type of investigation that
takes place, but if we have that
bomb threat.
Or a shooting threat that's out
of place that's actively open,
whether it's a school or a
church service or something like
that, it does change the
response and how we and how we
approach that and um the.
The
The way that the bond thread is
handled because of the nature of
the threats, um, from my
understanding is.
It's going to be um.
It's going to be looked at as
what is going to be the most
efficient path to identify.
If there is an actual device at
a location.
Um, but when we talk about
actual devices, those in my
experience are stationary when
we talk about a shooting threat,
it has to be handled differently
because the shooters are mobile.
They could be in a vehicle, they
could be on foot, they could be
in a classroom, they could be
walking through a hallway or a
corridor, so the law enforcement
response to those is, is
different and I would say for a
lack of better um word for it
would have to be more
aggressive.
in that
because you have to locate this
threat if it is in a in a
position that's being mobile.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks
for clarifying that, and I
think.
That
Sort of affirms the the risk of
being overly broad in this
definition, um, when we're
Looking at
You know, felonizing, making the
shooting threat, I think the
reservation is, they were just
joking, now they're child felon,
right, um, or they weren't doing
anything when we're talking
about intentional communication
versus falsely and maliciously
stating, and I'd love to figure
out what language sort of
tightens that up.
Um, you know, how we're able to
sort of figure this out. I want.
In many ways to um agree with,
with how we're investigating
these threats. So 2 points. One
is why aren't judges, you know,
issuing warrants for
misdemeanors that are important,
credible threats. Um, and 2 is
if there is a pathway that we're
looking to, to be able to use
this bill that we have a better
Handle on very specifically the
type of threat that we're um
Going to be felonizing.
Um, so I'm, we'll see this in
another committee. I'm
interested in trying to figure
out how it operates, but I, you
know, really want to encourage
figuring out this definition.
Um, see no further discussion,
uh, do we have a motion?
Sending chair, I moved that um.
I do pass without
recommendation, there have been.
issues
And I feel like judiciary is
better suited.
come up then
OK
Thank you. Is there any
objection?
Or do pass without
recommendation.
Sure.
Thank you all, so sorry, um, I,
I just wanted to just take a
moment, um.
And I've talked to
representative um Garrett about
it. I've had a number of
conversations with folks from um
the Department of Justice. Thank
you for taking the time. So
folks from Public defenders and,
and I appreciate everybody's
insight. I think everyone's
trying to figure out what the
right thing is, um.
If you follow me closely and and
the work that I do around this
type of work. I mean, to me,
prosecuting kids, um.
To me is is not the way to go.
And so to me this is just, this
is even though we're trying to
figure out the right language
for this, um, I think these are
the sort of, uh.
Uh
Pieces of policy that we really
need to take.
Um, into consideration, um, like
I respect all of the the the
details that you've been able to
share. I know that your work is
really, really hard, especially.
When we're dealing with school
shootings and things like that.
And so, um, I just, I just want
to be clear that that it's just
really important that as we move
forward that we.
That we really take a look at
how we're expanding these crimes
and, and ensuring that we're not
making young people.
Criminals in the long run and
so, um, I just, I just wanted
to, to say that. Thank you.
Thank you, and I jumped the gun.
Do we have a second on the
motion.
Thank you.
All right, we take role.
Representative Block.
Representative Lord.
Representative Ramiro, yes, no
recommendation.
I beg your pardon.
Representative Thompson. Yes.
Madam vice chair.
I'll vote no.
Uh, Madam Chair. Yes.
Um
With a vote of um 3 to 1 for
they do pass without
recommendation for house filled.
2031, I'm sorry, um, you have a
do pass without recommendation.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee for the
thoughtful conversation. I think
I'm ready to go to law school
now.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, next.
