Will be this Thursday at dinner
for two at five thirty speaker
knows about it so we're gonna
have the real quick out people
need to take their food to go no
problem at all we just want to
celebrate the committee so
Thursday night thirty.
Working as.
It'll come to me very little bit
trying to do but
That.
Yeah.
We.
Being passed on hospital for
recurring.
And then one other announcement
house bill one fifty eight will
result.
Are you.
Representative.
Representative Cadena.
Representative Chris.
Representative Harper your
Representative Jones here
Representative.
Both sides Representative
Lundstrom.
Representative budget.
Representative editors.
Percent of Americans.
Representative Garcia.
Madam chair house health care.
Teamwork
is.
House Bill twenty four
Representative Garcia.
The committee.
Sure.
That is that Senator thank you.
Chair of the have
Because the twenty four and then
would agree with you for
Medicare if we could act as a
self after our presentation
okay.
Thank you madam.
Madam
we connected last month for the
through the mind of the need to
move that for discussions I'm
going to do that I have to move
to make a motion to discuss.
Okay everybody knows.
We are discussions.
So we'll just go twenty four
percent presentation on both
into
after the presentation.
Thank you madam chair
Twenty four basically
calls for the repair of
sidewalks he their
responsibility of the local
government the at the city or
county and I want to share with
the group what the law is.
Repair sidewalks Madam.
And the manager the the existing
state statutes regarding the
repair sidewalks is really
Regis.
The funeral in nature and then
you kind of explain why that is
chair
saying that we have a local
sidewalk in the neighborhood of
residential area.
And state law basically states
that local government can issue
a notice to the property owner.
In terms of doing the repair
within the
a fifteen day
notice.
And
Madam keep in mind that
sidewalks are public property
they're not the property of the
property will.
So
the the the the notice given by
the local government to the
property owner for the there.
The buckled sidewalk.
and they have a certain amount
of time in which to do it.
If the property owner manager is
not do the repair work within
the given time.
The local government then goes
about doing a repair.
And and then after the local
government does the repair madam
chair she said of the deal.
To the property owner.
For compensation of the the
sidewalk repair.
And there's a cost in the
statute that allows for people.
On the part of the property
owner but if there is no appeal
and the property owner just flat
out doesn't want to pay the
bill.
The local government sent an
issue resolution within their
local government.
And pursued four action in terms
of opposing the lien on the
property owner for non payment.
Of the repair.
And that's that's what exists
currently in state statute.
And our field kind of.
The aids the system
where the local government is
responsible for the repair the
sidewalk.
And
And now to the to the to the
cell we complete our our our
presentation madam chair
You know this issue with putting
the burden on the local
government to do the repair and
pay for the repair is not only
a and and and administrative
change in the way that we do
repair with us bill twenty four
but it's also an issue having to
deal with public safety and
public health and then explain
briefly madam chair.
we have a local sidewalk.
And we know that in a day a
mother taking paid.
In the stroller on an evening
walk in ninety two she ate that
level sign off.
So they have to go around the
bottle sidewalk.
The street.
To to to get over the the total
sidewalk and proceed on the
sidewalk the same thing madam
chair with a handicapped person
that is taking a stroll through
the neighborhood.
On a Walker.
And we know that a lot of our
elderly and mobility issues they
don't have that strength to lift
their names.
And so one of the single person
because of all the sidewalk they
do the same thing.
It go around it so on the
street.
Creating possible as are their
and then go back on the sidewalk
and the same thing with the
generated sidewalks manager.
Some of the teachers sidewalks
is here especially with a
stroller or without a Walker you
cannot negotiate that
deteriorated sidewalks that's
almost Mexico.
And
Also manager we have the issue
of health
Issues with.
The generated sidewalks buckled
sidewalks.
In that they're sponsoring
injury.
There's possible faults.
And we know that elderly and
disabled.
are more prone to injury
then a normal individual in
Southbury name or middle aged
manager.
So we can do about the sidewalk
you know and the the person
trips
The responsibility chair for
that injury if there's no
action.
Is not the city or the county
but the property is liable for
that engine.
And
and that's that's.
The which is part of the the
situation with the buckle
sidewalks also managed care.
The issue with the current
policy is real discriminatory
towards marketing from
neighborhoods.
Because.
Lower income neighborhoods a lot
of our our property owners are
low income is stable in lower
blue collar families that are
just.
You know page at the bank in
terms of putting food on the
table and then to get hit with
the three to seven thousand
dollar bill for us what we fear
is extraordinary
The sea wall in my opinion chair
for them to give you an example
of a some individuals that have
wrote to me regarding this this
contradiction
Thank you for taking issue with
the sidewalk ordinance we were
recently forced to make repairs
on foursquare be in front of our
downtown home to the tune of
three thousand dollars we were
able to get on a plane and land
to ease the pain but is not
something we feel we should be
on the floor.
I always voted for bonds that's
support I passed museums
libraries since Senators and sat
on my Weston is widely used by
money to pay for sidewalk
repairs.
Not every one uses I pass of
senior centers but most use
sidewalks I don't yet I hope you
make promises this issue this
really not fair.
Excellent Representative since
you've already had a chance to
to present on this bill once
before can we can I stop you and
and we can move on for committee
substitute so that we can kind
of keep rolling on gentleman
Jack I really appreciate that
you is that this is the first
time Representative schools many
I I I.
This is when I take up acting
all the time you want I.
Right comment right thank you
the government committee that's
right that's right thank you
the manager of the second Moses
I sure hope you your bills about
the sidewalk passes these are
almost the only sign of this
morning and said persistent gaps
and flexibility seven thousand
dollars I have no idea I was
responsible for this I just
brought in twenty twenty.
I am very upset and worried over
the name they'll impose on.
And madam chair of like to a.
Yield to my experts
and reflect on her personal
experience in dealing with this
issue.
Morning madam chair
representative my name is Thelma
going thank you for allowing me
to speak here today I'm a
lifelong resident of the south
valley in Albuquerque on July
eighth twenty twenty one I
became aware of an ordinance
that makes homeowners
responsible for the maintenance
repair and liability for the
sidewalk in front of their
property.
The sidewalks on sunset gardens
road where I live we're putting
approximately eight years ago
the residents were extremely
happy for many months.
You can safely enjoy activities
such as walking job so I can get
into my car on sunset road
across from Barnes to children
walk to and fro by from the
nearby school I mean Madam are
safer.
Three when the monsoon rains
come you don't have to worry
about huge mud puddles and
flooding because our storm
drains for.
Please leave the area is no
longer existed muscle mass and
the assessors office this allows
her to drop their flood
insurance seeing them that
expense a new subdivision of
tribal this bill dried off and
safe gardens just down the road
from my house with the new
subdivision foot traffic
increased greatly when I want to
get both we and many places on
the street with three next to my
house I called earlier county
services request sidewalk repair
for the safety of all those.
We use the sidewalk this county
manager informed me that the
home was responsible for the
repair for.
She went on to inform that the
board of the counties
implemented with the same
ordinance that is in place for
the City of Albuquerque I was
shocked how could this be that
homeowners would be responsible
for this so I presented
different scenarios.
One I asked what if someone is
walking jogging or riding a bike
on the sidewalk in front of my
house is located cracked and
they have a mishap and injure
themselves who is responsible
for that her answer was you are.
To what my husband is trying to
repair the sidewalk any stains
and injury was responsible for
that grants allow us you are.
Three.
Four to page someone to repair
requests was you're still
responsible.
I would express to the county
manager the ordinance was very
unfair and holders of the whole
position and open the lawsuits I
told her that since the sidewalk
is public property and is not
included on legal documents in
the county assessors office as
part of the homeowner's property
there was no way for a homeowner
to be included on their
homeowner's insurance I also
told her that I'm sure that most
homeowners we're not aware of
this ordinance and the liability
that comes with the sidewalk.
After my conversation and it I
knew that I had to work with
this issue and try to put some
kind of resolution and that's
when I called Representative
Garcia the champion and
advocating for his constituents
I share my concerns and he
immediately went to work on it.
I need phone calls to four major
insurance companies one of which
is my home insurance company
they are trickling Mexico
Allstate State Farm and farmers.
I asked the agent at each
company if I would be able to
place the sidewalk in front of
my home under my homeowner's
policy and not surprisingly each
one the same response no it is
not part of your full or
structure and that city or
county property.
As a whole I had no problem
accepting the responsibility for
keeping the sidewalk free and
clear of any debris that
instructs the pact what what I
can not agree with is that a
homeowner is required to assume
the responsibility for repairing
broken tracks are.
And the liability that may come
with that sidewalk my hope is
that this ordinance can be
revised so that homeowners no
longer have fiscal
responsibility for the sidewalk.
Likelihoods are not in jeopardy
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Thelma chair of this up.
And the substitute bill kind
consideration
discussion that we had.
there line item which it also
has
some concerns and issues.
by this for the.
And also concerns that the
chairman had regarding the some
of the issues that were not
clear so in the saw what we do
is we need to hear that this
legislation is all about
residential properties.
We're not talking about
commercial that's why we we
insert.
The section of the reinstate
section
three that's forty nine that for
which is what we we feel.
Bill so we're bringing back that
old section for that it applies
only to commercial properties.
All of the bill Representative
can you just really quickly read
out the tool to number of your
twenty substitutes
two five two zero five one.
Okay.
One more for the two to.
We have to yesterday yeah that's
that's the one years okay.
Okay manager so again this
Basically makes reference to
of the ages one through four are
you basically bring back the all
wheel.
is entirely.
Which is a scenario ID
Bernalillo in terms of what was
on.
basically agreed to this but we
have I sold to commercial.
And and and then the bill
basically because of the
legislation that adverse
exclusivity to residential
properties and also madam chair
raised in the fire committee and
of which you also race and
gender
on page three started online
line is that we.
At.
State.
That loss repairs falls on the
local government.
And that's what was the.
And also issue that that came up
in terms of our.
The privative was that that
there is no appeal action
regarding our legislation and
lines
of nineteen to twenty two but we
have this we have in the field
process madam chair that once.
The local government you know as
food a property owner that they
will commence repairing
sidewalks in thirty days that
property owner has the right to
appeal that decision.
And basically state the reason
why.
Mr government we're having a
family reunion.
We have our our driveway on the
public property
And in any way
In in anyway under construction
because we're gonna be coming in
and out you know and they have a
family for two weeks or
Also madam chair the issue with
and say the property owner is
doing some type of construction
on the.
And needs the kind of extent
that thirty days beyond that and
so there is an appeal process
that that that that that is in
play if the property owner needs
more than thirty days to kind of
deal with.
Senior account going in there
and doing the repair what.
The language that we have in
this in this and also.
What's the responsibility and
liability on the property owner
for that duration of time that
the extension it exists and and
it doesn't fall on the city or
the county in terms of that
liability I just and that's an
area manager and that's
essentially what the what the
subjects it kind of clarifies
some of the issues that were
lingering in the prior bills in
the prior committee and it kind
of really emphasizes that this
legislation is just about
residential properties.
And with that the Center
questions thank you very much
Representative I'm gonna go to
the audience first is anybody
here in opposition to the.
Important thank you madam
chairman of that committee there
around with this for the New
Mexico miss I also represent
cities Los crucis.
We appreciate what Sanchez
trying to this piece of
legislation but this is a
fundamental shift on how we deal
with issues related to sidewalks
one of the things that generally
happens sometimes they are owned
by the public but typically
residential area sidewalk is a
decent of property that is owned
by the property owner so when
they purchase their property and
I wanted to be spent so it's
actually private property and so
when we think about C. Rio
Rancho or the C. Los crucis city
of Albuquerque thank all
sidewalks there are and now
follows certain cities can be
responsible for in the financial
burden all of those repairs
that's not something we
anticipated it's a final ship
something we've been doing for
decades.
Paying for these I also don't
really have a chance to budget
for that so Phelps.
Millions of dollars in repairs
this is in the case of
cigarettes on an annual basis
that's going to come from
general fund we have to look at
those other services that are
provided for citizens public
safety fire traffic of these all
of that so this is a significant
burden on municipalities as we
ask you propose legislation for
happy to work on a way to
improve your process property
are surprised if that's not the
situation.
Thank you Madam.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the Jeez
Louise register of this feature
on the accounting echo some of
the comments made by Mr Moran
and I can get in from the LFC in
the I just hope that the
committee know that if
Bernalillo county is now the
soonest possible for taking care
of the sidewalks there is
deferred maintenance I think is
to the tune of about twenty
twenty five million dollars and
then on annual basis to keep up
with those repairs insanity
roughly one two million dollars
and that's county wide right so
the the reality is we do have an
existing situations this.
These are the students that
we're relying apartment owners
use in terms of installing
sidewalks can walk on the.
Very much appreciate with
Sanchez trying to do as Mister
man also indicated we really
like to look at alternatives to
make this process potentially
more prepared for that simply
shifting the burden entirely
really Academy and in all
counties and cities create
significant fiscal impact for
local governments that we're
just not thank you.
Morning madam chair repudiates
and director of the department
transportation madam chair
members off the end of you to
use this service to this bill we
do have a question
is you may as well there's a lot
of examples out there that we
can pull from.
To support our innovative but
really most of the cities and
counties from New Mexico adopted
a five foot sidewalk questions
correct and if you are.
Serving greater sections where
the four foot sidewalk comes in
is that figure out of the
acquisition
tears down the wall jurors on
the fence was responsible for
cutting the trees the shrubs
take out the flower beds and
things like that does it affect
with lighting signalized
intersection is impacting
structures providers off and
then once things like that those
types of projects are very large
in size which is set of teachers
are drawings of the goes on to
be to contract so it could be
expensive we do own a lot of
main street for all small towns
throughout New Mexico and we see
some maybe some liability there
but also to small towns madam
chair you know other businesses
and other structures a write up
on the sidewalk of how do we
handle the relocating of
Business signs things like that
we haven't had a chance to read
this of of madam chair we to
have questions of the artificial
of builders want to bring that
up maybe sports movies some
conversation thank you very much
but just enough of the.
When we do that maybe the road
needs to be upgraded maybe
current governor needs to be
added you different utilities
needed we need to be added those
occurrence I will call rate in
districts who were districts
whatever.
Those costs are assessed on
preventive foot.
Of the ownership.
And they're paid for property
taxes were periods of the year.
Once again once that's done this
accepted in the city or to
accept it as a as a County
Subdivision.
Once again that municipalities
that agent now owns that.
This is special to me.
actually is engineer forcing
the.
the sidewalk outside of
Representative Romero chance
could copy somebody gets hurt
that he would be liable for that
now that's the stuff that thing
over Furman's those as
The landscape that I get that.
But for any other because this
throws me away this madam chair
I I see so many issues with with
us when we start doing small
sidewalks we started dealing I
can tell you the number of
councillors driven through madam
chair representative where
people are actually parking on
the sidewalk.
You know I can see where the
risk and fall when certain
things like that happen but
Madam chair we deal with cities
that require.
Central members to do the
cleaning clearing debris and
snow I mean Santa Fe is one of
those madam chair the the
commercial properties are the
ones that are actually
responsible for some officers.
residents trying to the same
thing
At the end of the day madam
chair we've heard from.
From Los crucis we've heard from
Bernalillo refer from Santa Fe
this is not a statewide issue
madam chair this is a.
This is a local ordinance issue.
We don't need to be involved in
that as the local ordinances
that the if the population base
of the local of of of of
whatever municipality this
doesn't like the ordinance and
they should be working with our
city county commissioners
councilman whoever is to resolve
this issue.
This bill doesn't belong here
thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
through thank you madam chair
that was my first question
having been a county
commissioner the first thing I I
the state most are writing local
jurisdiction I I really have a
problem think it's white white
have county commissioners last
city council I think we have to
really think about that issue I
just until we do that of
secondly Representative do you
know if the local governments C.
counties around the state have
any way of helping residents
Fund.
Records are there if you're low
income is you know if there's
any.
chair.
no there's no there's nothing
like that madam chair the the
issue madam chair
regarding that this is a local
issue is that if a city or a
county wishes to adopt and of
the sidewalk ordinance they have
to go through the state statute.
So they they they start the
state statute implementing.
Their local ordinance.
And and and that's how it's
connected to.
This being a statewide issue.
Because the the city ordinance
that unless it's one of the best
teams allergies that can kind of
a doctor of the importance that
is is not lower than existing
state statutes but is it after
by state statute but it always
comes back to the state statute
that we haven't played in terms
of the foundation for the
creation of a city ordinance or
a county.
On the sidewalk.
And
madam chair.
Representative.
The.
Really County is home will come.
The
states it's important says.
Based on the needs of the person
for the county thank you they do
not come to the state for for a.
Some of subsequent with doing
Alan Act law.
And I live gentleman should
concern that it it can open up a
Pandora's box of issues for not
only this but for the state of
New Mexico Rhonda variety of
things are in the right of way
that are kind of shared
ownership with with the with
residents are simple weeds
trees Porsches all the things
that can.
Become problem if if now states
the state cities and counties
are all our responsible for
everything immediately out of.
The what would be defined as the
owners
property so I just I should we
open doors box issues Madam
thank you.
That have anyone else.
View comments the representative
thank you very much for coming
in and talking to me about this
bill my apologies for not
remembering that we haven't
actually heard this bill here
with their community committee
substitute I see a few things
that I'm very glad to see the I
see a couple of things that.
Still concerns me one of the
things that we had talked about
was I believe limiting this just
to residential property and as
far as I can see your entire
section one is referencing and
including commercial property
which I think might not only
and.
Constitute constitutional
problems but I think it
undermines the entire purpose of
your bill that you know we're
here to talk about those folks
that have that can't afford
these large repair bills as they
begin and I think exempting
commercial property
from this bill makes sense and
that way because the commercial
businesses and Charlie is the
story about so I'm that concerns
me really really happy that you
are put back the reference to
three sixty five I thank you
very much I think that that
process is really really
important to preserving the bill
so that there was the process of
that people knew how or what to
do if they were ever put in the
situation so I think that was a
good movie but the the third and
final.
Issue I have with this
Representative is
I think we're talking not only a
massive shift in policy but
we're talking a massive costs.
Right now we've based upon the
information that I've received
from some of the larger
municipalities Bernalillo county
Santa Fe Santa Fe County
especially if we include
commercial properties in this
work we're talking millions and
millions of dollars.
At the end of the day and that
makes me feel that this needs of
our agency.
Because of the amount of money
that were we're talking about
here so
I I I'm afraid I can't support
your bill at this time so
Representative I absolutely
understand what you're trying to
do I think that we're closer
I I don't think that we should
give up but at this point I
still don't see a way that I I
can support a committee
substitute so
have a motion.
I just absolutely response
imposing the rate of.
And actions sure madam chair the
current law that we have that.
Applies to commercial property.
So
so that isn't an issue because
currently.
That there is a lot of the data
sign off.
All sides are.
All.
Property commercial area.
The city the county.
Notice in all that they have to
prepare for and they don't
Sierra County with the repair
so.
If they don't pay the bill cedar
county the resolution it's a
judgment from of course books in
the nonprofit that exists right
now.
What we're dealing with this is
we're bringing back that.
To the any that are built solely
for residential.
And the
and that what existed before we
on the new hire bill what
existed when we reveal the whole
section.
That that section commercial
property.
So there is no.
At a cost in terms of the
million because seeing County
already closed the.
That that that law regarding
several repairs in commercial
areas and madam
our bill does focus in on
residential areas and the thing
is that.
That in the residential areas
madam chair.
For over four years money is a
reversal of the anti donation
box.
That's why this this statute in
relationship to the to the
residential areas is so Regis
because we're turning anti
donation it's just returning it
upside down so what we're
actually imposing a selective
tax on the property selected.
That is unconstitutional.
We know madam chair and and so
now we're saying well.
You're gonna overdose because
now we have to pay millions of
dollars to repair sidewalks and
residential areas.
Chair of the work that will have
to be very those have to come
from the bank accounts of the
banks of residential property
owners Madam chair.
So that that is the the the
region as part of currently is.
Residential property
Madam but
yes the last in managed care is
the issue of these.
You know I'm the first
legislator madam chair noted
remains in the southbound is.
With sidewalks.
With affirmative there's a
reason for that storm drains.
We take those properties off of
the flood plain.
It's not just anywhere from five
hundred twenty five hundred
dollars a year.
And madam chair
These men on the sidewalks.
On this one the only sidewalks
in residential areas in the
south
is peaceful area where I've
been.
Building she's kind of of.
The storm drain systems with
curving the sidewalks there is
no other sidewalks in
residential areas.
All the way for the in the two
thirds of the of the southbound.
So madam chair
you know
By by decision of the committee.
But
you know I still receive this
email
because the decision basically
really asking for these changes
and not only in mind but
throughout the state and the
emails and I just referred to
you know to of.
You know the over AT the emails
and letters are C. throughout
the state I just need references
too much thank you for letting
us on this matter thank you very
much the first one back to
Representative Cruz that to vice
chair CNN to venture thank you
madam chair representative
Garcia I appreciate what you're
trying to.
You are I think I I would be
more apt to be supportive of a
fund that could be possibly
created that season counties
could apply for to help indigent
residents that are in need of
some support so.
While increasing I do.
Is the only thing this
particular bill this is current
for thank you much thank you
very much Mr Garcia Madam chair
a just a disclosure of my part.
Of we this bill will be up and
then to a level sixty pieces of
property include grant you know
and I feel of just for me to
take a whole.
I see with the problem will be
during the bush weeds on the
sidewalk the this the that and
that's a big issue the
motivation but since landowners
grants but the vehicle the
meeting.
for against it and I want to get
in that situation because it
would be because all of you know
I've had broken sidewalks are
free from that growth will occur
but yes but in that case the
drug.
We will do even more.
Thank you for letting us down
Representative the Sanchez thank
you madam chair I've just a
couple comments about eighteen
or nineteen years ago I remember
one one of the biggest debates
in the legislature was this New
Mexico subdivision Act and I
know they're in others in the
Representative profit.
Because cities and counties are
instrumentality state never
forget that at the end of the
day there there because the
state allows them to be there.
So what my suggestion would be
madam chair for the
representative is that.
Gosh I hate open up that baby
Act because that one brings out
everybody and their brother.
I think
Representative is this correct I
don't agree with have you have
residents particularly pay for a
public benefit and that's what
side products are I know the
sidewalk in front of my home the
kids are riding bikes on it you
know if the mailman or using
everybody so it's a public
benefit that is my
responsibility to maintain that
goes back into this into the New
Mexico subdivision at.
So
the previous committee would be
and during the rules would be
the appropriate group the start
peeling that and and skin away
and making those changes because
to my knowledge I've been here a
long time we haven't talked
about this for these nineteen
years and I think it's time that
that the evaluated.
anytime you're looking at Dr
driveways sector sidewalks
clear English is so people can
say when the contest up sign
that all files on the property
owner.
Every member that's a public
benefit at the end of the day.
So that would be my suggestion
Representative is start looking
again and opening up that
subdivision Act that is the
controlling authorization for
what these ordinances are based
on.
with and and Gallup this is like
Bernalillo county were home rule
city.
And they can do some things are
little different from some of
the other cities but at the end
of the day these governments are
instrumentality of the state at
the end of the day so thank you
madam chair I think this this
bill without those changes
inside the majority off really
authorizing
Act.
The LFC.
Representative.
Chair thank you Representative I
I heard there was a committee
substitute come late last night
I still haven't seen it so I I'm
talking back and forth between
the original due to Madam chair
representative I've.
I I think it's a bit of a week
floor that the bill title
doesn't include the the
commercial property in it
because it looks like it's only
residential but if there is any
fund which now and I think
that's a material change in the
bill and and should be reflected
in the bill title with I venture
and and Representative right I
think there's an issue here but
I don't think this bill
necessarily gives us a solution
to the needed and I am concerned
about the high cost of
Basically everybody has to pay
for something here and I I think
madam chair that Ralph we have a
good sidewalk in front of our
home we're probably very happy
to claim it but if it's in need
of great repair than we want
somebody else to do it and so I
just think this is a bill
probably madam chair the should
have gone to the Judiciary
Committee as well because it
does property ownership real
property and there are some
legal things here that need to
be sorted out so it it did
receive madam chair two
referrals for state government
and then to this committee and I
just think there's a lot more
thought that needs to go into
getting this maybe we're going
to financially so thank you
madam chair thank you very much.
Chairman motion to take second.
Representative Brown.
Able Representative David
Millard table Representative
dela Cruz yes to table
Representative Parker yes
Representative Johnson yes
Representative.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Representative MM.
Representative Garcia.
Of these.
Alright fans Representative yes.
You very much thank you for
signing comments and all that.
Consider that in the next rock.
Come back to us and look forward
to seeing.
Okay we're gonna have to.
You might even want to look at
that.
Subdivision.
Sen.
Chair.
One of two years
Is to remain in the.
Right.
All four.
Distills passed the house and
Senate.
Three times.
I.
But.
The difference between I in this
bill the districts and.
I.
So my job is to call.
Okay there anybody at this favor
of the three one of.
Madam chair there's.
Of steel T. services all members
on there is concern that there
could be some talking provide
Department we work with them in
the past with the state
funded job about trust building
on the right and the if it were
to pass we would look at a
campaign to educate the driver's
education the other.
St and and also in person
correct.
The farm.
For anybody else.
But I have them.
Is there anybody in opposition
to this.
But at the same.
Can you hear me.
Okay good morning madam chair
Members of the committee this is
Johnny Johnson managing director
for the New Mexico trucking
association.
And we propose SB one oh two in
its current form as amended.
When the bill was first drafted
madam chair we wonder what he
was trying to accomplish and
then he amended and the one of
the committees to be only semi
trucks and a raise the fine five
times the original number.
We understand the stretch of
highway between Arizona
Albuquerque by far in my opinion
as far.
But knowing even the Senator
knows three lanes and more truck
lines is twenty years away at
best.
But they're both sorely needed.
With all due respect we
understand the numbers of the
semi trucks involved in excess
but that doesn't mean the semi
truck because the accident.
We don't believe this bill is
the answer to the congestion and
accidents on any highway much
less I forty.
Our point not to belabor the
moment is that laws exist
already on the books sixty six
dash seven three oh wait state
right except to pass was put in
the books in nineteen ninety six
sixty six dash seven three oh
five drive in this slow speed
that impedes traffic was also
put in their nineteen ninety
six.
We believe the good senators not
unlike the rest of Business
frustrated with what I consider
the slow motion drag race that
slows traffic to a crawl and I
think that's what he's trying to
to avoid here.
We fully understand that would
be willing to work with the
members of this committee to
enhance sixty six seven three oh
five or different bill to
address any vehicle that
entirely takes too much time
pass in another vehicle and
seriously impedes the flow of
traffic.
Respectfully ask that this be
one of to be tabled and the real
issue of semi trucks that impede
traffic one pass into slow the
main topic of discussion thank
you for your time I'll be here
for any questions thank you very
much secretary for anybody else.
Okay let's go to the committee
members.
Representative Garcia of thank
you madam chair.
Thank
you know are out there.
And.
Giving.
The only reason we have axes the
chair of the regional.
Additional rare.
That part of the computer you
can go off there you'll see
seventy three Jos would buy my
album our.
Tell me if this is the bigger
have your doing that with the
future could you know move up
with that but he said the I
would love the years what
computer need to some of the we
do need a graphic the news
probably have the same issues I.
Representative will you know and
to be.
You need to step up and fill to
we can build it faster or will
be the loss thank you thank you
very much for that anybody else.
Representative are.
Madam chair of the issue this
morning
So question for you
so I understand.
The two drive way.
Conundrum where you don't want
to have someone in the Four left
lanes two lanes right to the
left lane Leicester Act we
passed.
there's more than.
Two years later story.
you're also if I understand this
bill right Madam chairman
not allowing them to the center
lane last last the only way for
the direction they're going or
they're actually passing.
Why do we just not say in the
far left lane less record past
chair so if you're talking about
in the fall to the area
Albuquerque what you get to that
area would trust you whatever
leading to the exit by exit left
in the north of million.
So what she did and metropolitan
that area for a call coming from
the.
That goes away.
Yeah so Madam chairman I
understand that but I see that
here they they can if they're
making.
But it's not making trying to.
You know just use the center
lane and not walking the the
last thing that looks like
that's not permissible this is
my understand that.
Holding area I think it's it's
takes out which is Albuquerque
you can move in a lane the need
to move in to to.
Get to traffic.
Okay so.
Madam chair.
Chairman someone looking at age
two this is one eleven.
So this
story is about when the public
divided into three lanes.
So it says the vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane
except.
Hey when overtaking and passing
vehicle.
Be in preparation for time for
C..
In the center at that time
allocated exclusively to travel
moving in the direction the
eagles receiving.
And a sign posted.
To give notice of that
allocation so I understand it is
B. R. U. saying see.
Yes and so outside Gallup right
when I.
In those to three.
So on coming traffic traffic
sides of the hill stay in the
right hand lane right and then
if they are over to determine
next left early in the third.
Picture on my phone from this
weekend we're all three trucks
all three lanes as you're going
the.
Thank you madam chair chairman I
think that was all.
Yes.
Graham thank you chairman
Senator good to see you this
morning so
So if the state the simple you
just gave of you have a photo
showing three seven hours side
by side who would get ticketed
madam chair Senator
I think the one in the far right
left hand because if first right
hand lane is trying to go the
second was trying to overtake
you in the third string take
notice as that's an excessive
lane for that he'll then up so
the one in the far left.
Are very we also.
Position on that.
Thank you for the answer madam
chair etcetera so what I'm very
familiar with this I would be
able to do heading back home to
Carlsbad.
Of I just your Moriarty and
heading out and I see semi
trucks jockey for position and
sometimes the one of the right
hand lane is very slow and so
another someone's to the next
slide to try to get ahead of
that person and
I I understand what they're
they're trying to maintain speed
as best they can but sometimes
the someone just can't can't do
it but
I think what what's hard for me
Mr chair and representative
senators at this to me this is
just a little bit confusing
there's a lot of mental fault it
has to go into.
Why the words here to how we
have some of the drive behind
the deal so in that respect it's
maybe a little bit too
complicated for
Especially drivers to driving a
long time interviews to how
things are done now but I
understand madam chair Senator
YG or wanting some kind of
resolution here until such time
as we get out of lanes in some
of the highways so
I I just I just think people
whatever our time following this
if it were to pass and I'm
concerned about that so.
Senator civil Madam those are
local CDL rules right so we need
to see a license that we
instructional format but truck
drivers leave California with
the same.
By truck to the right.
In Arizona for students from
flagstaff to Phoenix trucks on
the right hand lane is sixty
five the end to Oklahoma and
instruction the right hand.
seventy five fifteen other
states are enacting this law or
proposing this this year.
And so everybody's in the same
situation a third lane from
as of the two Albuquerque is one
million dollars
and so that probably happened
just like you said for a very
long time will that really
resolve the issue because we
know what happens is truck
drivers well happens everyday
there's a truck driver rear
ended a person from now thank
you please stop.
They went to court.
But they got to educate the
structure.
Restoration of Max.
That nobody knows what tenure
here down for what kind all you
can plan on leaving L. six and
if you have an opportunity under
normal traffic conditions of the
there anything happens I forty.
You're done.
It
affects a lot of people from
Gallup to.
Just to get all so my high
school.
You know those
are the laws that.
We.
She's seven.
Right the truck is in
Representative is very is in his
mouth truck accidents are just
outrageous and is I left in the
session one morning at five in
the morning in the truck that
was parked in the and they
offer.
Okay I was paying attention New
Mexico state police the caller
said you know we're looking at
everybody was sort.
Madam chair and etcetera so just
I
If New Mexico Doss it would
conform us get states like
Arizona and other states are
already doing sectors of health
please have a long time.
California is a truck with a
trailer so I have my kids if
they have that restrict their
right hand lane.
All the time in California the
mobile home of the it simply.
Chairman were question if I may
so funded records now
do you see any aspect of this
bill on.
It might drive time for example
for some CEO of drivers who
think they're going to get some
point I.
So we would have to stop over
potentially is that correct.
Changes.
Okay okay.
Okay thank you madam chair the
very off.
Madam chair Senator thank you
management asked Johnnie Johnson
a question about this conformity
to these other states.
Can you hear me Mr Johnson.
Representative Lundstrom yes
ma'am I can hear you can you
Concern about.
Whether or not this
Legislation will help us conform
to what's happening in
California and Arizona reason I
asked that serve states that
deal with the interstate system
that we have I forty nine ten
I would be curious as to know
whether or not this is already
in place in these two states.
When I want to believe the
Senators correct about
California and they also have
four five lanes now in Arizona I
don't know that that's a that is
in fact the right hand lane and
our Oklahoma.
Okay all right thank you.
Thank you.
I'm sorry but Representative
Parker thank you madam chair.
thank you Representative Center
for for this.
I want to service saying this is
a very large bill read.
And I think I said in our.
Early meeting this morning you
know there's out there madam
chair called as a man thank the
take an hour to read one
paragraph so thick and full of
information
this winter if for ever the
right because this doesn't flow
well together for me.
that said.
I'm curious with respect to
madam chair with respect to what
I believe I heard the senator
say that we have fourteen states
looking at legislation across
the country right now and my
question feeds off a little bit
of what Representative Brown
Lundstrom has to say.
so specifically.
In the legislation that we're
seeing across the country is it
the same intent or the same
flight which the same verbiage.
The chairman Senator
only ten active accordingly.
Look at every bill that's in
every single state.
The Maryland Indiana.
New Jersey at homeless.
I appreciate that I'm not sure
some of the side of the a vote
on this but
And if it makes it to the house
floor.
Have that debate there and
information does make it to the
house floor I am thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
from committee Representative
Bradford just for the second
thank you madam chair and
senator so we have a else's that
associate sampling which is a
bit unclear and for example I
page one of the committee set up
down at the very bottom of
subsection two is a vehicle
shall not be moved from the rain
and more directly or saying that
might be it's a passive language
and should not.
Switched to the more common
which we're freezing but it
there are a few other things
here and I I just point out
madam chair that would be
helpful perhaps before this bill
gets to the next stop some
little language tweaks might
actually make it a little more
clear.
And I just want to ask Senator
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you for using operate.
Right.
Transaction.
Total.
Representative.
Yes Representative Kannada.
Representative Cruz yes
Representative Parker yes
Representative Jones.
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative.
No.
Representative Romero yes
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
I have seven one.
Rebound but by.
Thank you thank you.
This is the.
Okay.
I go to the other end of the
table to presented by bill or
can I just say.
The stars.
Same here thank you outside.
Your.
Okay have a fit I.
Eight
Topic through it appropriates
five million dollars to the of
the.
To create protected by.
throughout those units apologies
that fit the size
hospitalizations standards and
it would be for any road
improvements moving forward so
in a row that schedule for
improvement or schedule to be
constructed that that fits the
population is.
So we ask you to look at terms
of safety FY I writers traffic
in the process any any time that
that standard is triggered.
Are you drove us instruction
protected bike lane will be
wired.
To be incorporated into that
design
this idea was brought to you
Dr actually he's in the audience
right now hi.
and it's really part of the
shift in the zeitgeist is called
complete streets which asks all
of our transportation
agencies involved to start
considering all modalities of
travel when they're creating
their their friends so not just
cars but by the three.
Education not only not only for
decision purposes but for
kind of services and we know
that we need for the.
Reviews
More emissions that is hoping
our climate temperature target
so this is this is our attempts
to start that shift in the
bank and the bank just at the
state level I do want to thank
our committee analyst Lee is
shin over didn't excellent job
and outlined some of the issues
that we have with this bill and
I just have a very robust and
interesting
conversation on this is just the
beginning of of something like
this so it's my pleasure to
bring it to the committee.
At this point we would go to the
audience is there anybody in
support of this bill.
The fact.
News of the transmission service
your call last fall grade point
four questions the State Farm
this is.
Here in a small close hours
friends are this.
Argentine both cities have
embraced protected by claims
region where critically during
the COVID when people are not
taking of us
to get around bicycle very
safely when we put up the
protected bike lanes and
strategic styles streets
throughout the whole series.
Downtown was there is a nine
time but right we saw someone
riding on halting Spanish answer
to my questions.
That would be here without.
Really makes a difference to
handle first rated five stars.
Is this to to but safe with
friends like to support the bill
thank you for.
Your next.
How many more issued on house
members by Santa Fe consolation
to get more people.
In the city and the try to get
one membership recently in a
very big thing is that people
are free to buy off the streets
here and so I also lived in here
for a little while it really
does make a really big
difference having rejected
bike lanes persistence all I
need to the pavement.
I don't know any better.
Rios is that.
Sure these finalists so it was a
big difference for you know a
the only city but they often go
out because
there.
do so it was a make a huge
difference and encouraging that
and and transform the city in a
really great stable and thank
you.
Chair members the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
speak my name is Alex Applegate
the gentleman transportation
working group of the
environmental justice caucus are
covers fully supports not only
this bill but house bill three
twenty eight Representative
builders vision zero bill I did
not come here today to speak
about how the transportation
sector is the largest and
fastest growing contributor to
climate change everybody on the
road reduce rebels and tons of
greenhouse gases every year I
did not come to talk about how
just really study from wanted
similar legislative efforts
increased new and existing
ridership by twenty five percent
it's first year by twenty
percent of each of the four
years
that I did not come to talk
about how anybody could
restructure increases spending
and businesses and restaurants
along the paths that are built I
did not come to extol the help
and virtue that by the grace of
the money the state will say as
the long run as a result today I
came to talk to the I can hear
with over a hundred thousand
miles on the streets of Dallas
in Albuquerque and the manager
said to many close calls in this
account within hit twice by car
I was fortunate to be able to
walk away from each incident.
From our farmers were not so
lucky actions resulted in years
after you're there for that.
Talked about how the joke about
the writing or by people who do
not know what's being we talked
about our old age but we
probably will be soon or not but
I'll review the second most Daly
city in the nation for
vulnerable road users.
Madam chair and thank you to do
this it will change that my
friends I don't have to go to
the war memorials or see what
those facts on the ropes thank.
Thank you madam chair especially
for this bill my name is Susan
herring and I am a resident of
central Albuquerque I am a
bicyclist and a member of but
ABQ.
It's been over three years now
since my kids lost their father
who was hit by an SUV while
bicycling in the curb lane of a
multi lane road.
It didn't have to happen.
It's pretty easy to protect our
bike lanes it's not rocket
science it's traffic's science.
This bill is not yet perfect.
It's a start though since bill
was killed I've devoted much of
my working life to researching
multi modal traffic issues this
bill recognizing in an important
essential way including funding.
US short recognizing a statewide
need to protect vulnerable road
users is extremely important.
It gets New Mexico a start and
the call and to begin to protect
our bicyclists in a measured
economically efficient way.
Please protect us paint isn't
enough.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you Susan.
Yes.
Is there anybody in opposition
to this bill.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Once the first.
Representative thank you madam
chair I applaud this effort it's
it's long overdue.
Just when you consider some
money.
Injuries and fatalities for
bicycles thank you doctor.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
I love biking.
When but I'm not so much with
kids at home I hope to get back
to that hobby
and mostly I just love the the
exercise and and and being out
of the the.
The air go through your what's
left of my hair.
Couple questions about this bill
I think I agree this is a great
starting discussion piece by.
I'm a little concerned about
some things I just want to get
your thoughts so.
madam chair what
What cities would this apply to
there's like a threshold of this
is that right to the actual
it it needs and yet has to be it
if.
Should be further defined in
that is some of the work that
needs to go into this bill but
we were thinking of possibly
Iglesias counties and about.
which I think would have a
population size of what do I.
All of them for me on that but
we're going to go they can't I.
Okay so thank you for helping me
understand that Madam study a
lot of small smaller rural
cities that this would not apply
to which.
Makes sense to.
They don't quite have as much
traffic as like.
You know central you know
whatever Albuquerque we're
definitely avoiding putting
protected bike lanes and Johnny
Mexico
Representative office I think
that that makes sense thinking
about my neck of the woods
though in Rio Rancho our cities
are great job of putting.
Biplanes and many of the streets
Throughout the city
But you know just think about
that threshold you know Rio
Rancho then be.
captured in in this at all.
And.
I'm just.
Just wondering if this is going
to talk earlier this committee
about a bill that was in front
of us that was really kind of.
Local issue but doing it at a
state level or maybe that was
not appropriate and that's kind
of where my my brain's going
here you know there's not a lot
of bicycle commuters in Rio
Rancho because it would take you
an hour to get your job in
Albuquerque
but where I work at Sandia labs
I have lots of co workers who I
live nearby and they talk about
how dangerous it is dangerous it
is
And so I just wonder if this is
you know kind of a.
City level.
Conversation I'm not sure if you
want to mandate this at the
state level at this point it's
kind of weird for my brain's
going
what were your thoughts on that
yes thank thank you
Representative Harper and that
is some of the analysis and see
from our own.
Which is how much of this is
appropriate to crossfire the
state level I think we could go
back to again the complete
streets ideology which is
changing the design expectation
for for most tribal
transportation moving forward
so changing that ideology at the
state level so that we're always
keeping multi modal
transportation and money for
what state state roads and so as
this bill continues to evolve I
will work with the O. T. same
salmon also say also receive
from DOT working with the LFC to
narrowly scope this bill such a
way so that it captures the.
To our.
In a way that it's not overly
burdensome for them and also
doesn't take away.
Local municipality municipal
discretion to be able to put
these to implement this in their
own way as well as you heard
from some of the at members of
the audience there are many
different groups of folks that
are working on this issue of the
county and city level and those
those folks actually have were
initially consulted when we
started talking about this bill
and I think the crux of it
Representative when we get to a
more final place with this is
figuring out the interplay
between that which which needs
to be
put forth by DOT.
and managed by DMC and
everything else that needs to
stay at the city county level
especially the complete street.
Again ideology but that's
exactly that is exactly the crux
of the issue with this bill so
very a student.
Thank you madam chair.
Share your thoughts on that I
guess my last order income and.
I appreciate seeing in here that
there's a five million dollars
appropriation right your your
knowledge of this is going to
cost me.
I'm assuming that's not baked
into the budget as we sent it
over.
So what we've actually been
trying to do well just for the
sake additional time is there is
father a father of federal money
available through state feel
that better exactly for for this
four Viking protected bike lanes
and so I've been working with a
former overview mayor Marty
Chavez in making a request for
some of those infrastructure
funds turned out process a long
and arduous and and made the
request kind of late in the game
so I am working with I plan to
actually replace that
appropriation possibly with
federal funding for this exact
purpose but right now I have a
place holder of the five million
dollars which is not in the
budget as that but madam chair
thank you for that and and I
actually like the idea of the
federal funds bettors just.
You know I rarely do we use
state funds for municipal.
projects and so that was and
other guys gonna you know
wondering about that so I like
the idea towards federal funds
one million Representative off
at the state level this is is
the change and the site is the
change in the focus and always
keeping in mind multi modal
modal transportation as we
designed
It is wouldn't be interested in
this I think is incorrect.
so if I may and.
Yes
we have many rural communities
that participate.
You have many of those center
and so I don't understand why
there's a population issue in
here at all.
When you're talking about road
right roadway improvements
within minutes of holidays or
state roadways it would seem to
me that it needs to be
consistent
If you're biking let's just take
Santa Fe ons Rio CM a protective
roadway but then it takes you up
to the ski area why would that
change you're still going to
have heavy traffic patterns and
to some of these areas the other
thing I'd like to ask about is
that this is an eleven month
effective date.
So with those projects that have
already been let for
construction purposes are they
just going to be grandfathered
in as they are or what we have
to go back and re scope those
projects just a question because
that's going to cost a lot of
money to do that so just just
wondering about that if those
existing projects whether
municipal.
Our state or county would then
just be grandfathered in so we
don't have to go back and risk
of.
but I am a little concerned
about there being a population
issue here I don't think it's I
don't think it's appropriate to
assume and I come from a rural
community that inside of rural
communities inside of downtown
Gallup as an example on Front
Street which is a state road
that we wouldn't want that kind
of protection for those folks on
all sixty six that we don't need
this now.
Same way with requests every
community along forty has got a
peaceable sixty six and.
So I I guess that's my concern
is that why would we be
eliminated as anybody now or
what was the rationale behind
that.
Madam chair that's precisely the
reason why I wanted to bring
this here today because it was
at the moment.
Be limiting factor that we can
best come up with to avoid the
type of situation where we are
forcing protected bike lanes on
communities that simply don't
want to and or need that.
but we are a hundred percent
open to better more nuanced way
of building that requirement and
that exclusionary
portion of it so that we can
ensure we can communities to do
one at the the added protection
of bike lanes
and want to take part is just
but we we don't force you know
folks to putting protected bike
lanes in the middle of the
county on five marker you know
six sixty two so we are I am a
hundred percent open madam chair
to additional input on that if
you would be willing to listen
of your time after the it help
figure it out because truthfully
madam chair that is of the
number one weakness I feel this
bill has right now is we don't
have the limiting factors
forecast.
Really need to figure that out.
The chair then we look at
definitions like roadway
improvements.
and roadway you know just a
definitions in general I know
those are pretty standard.
But we already have in some in
some areas this they're not
protected by claims that they're
designed for bike lanes and
roadways we have a very
extensive trail system in Gallup
in McKinley county now.
And that's for mountain biking
but now they've brought that all
into urban trails.
that could easily be
reconfigured as a protected area
also so I guess I just want to
make sure that Madam chair of
the rural areas are just
unilaterally dismissed that and
I would even suggest that to
move this along or we can iron
out wrinkles is it might even be
looked at as a pilot urban and
that a real pilot didn't
actually see how this would be
on the ground particularly
because you have so many
projects that are being left now
for construction this summer and
we don't have the money to go
back in and put more money into
it to do this I'm I'm suggesting
you might wanna.
But Albuquerque possibly in
Albuquerque pilot and then a
rural.
Yes that would be my suggestion
to you thank Madam great
suggestions.
Thank you madam chair
We have an I did Representative
had everyone's on the less first
I just didn't really matter I
will always.
Thank you so much madam chair
I think bike riding is a great
great thing and
I think there's a sense here of
if we build it they will come.
And Montoya I don't know if
that's true in my area of the
state we could build bike lanes
everywhere and we've all seen
appreciable increase in the
number of writers it's because
of the type of community we have
and we do a lot of
it's just long distance even
within the city limits and so
just I think a lot of
communities and minds are
exception we do have bike lanes
where local officials think
there most going to be needed or
used for example we have to pick
a server running through
Carlsbad and we have a wrote a
sort of sort of like a scenic
drive and its use by everybody
wants to pay their bike lanes
there and we do want people
biking around the river so.
But to to impose a cost and.
There's a provision in here that
there could be some exceptions
depending on circumstances but I
working at the estimate here the
average cost of adding a bike in
corporate monthly would be one
to two million dollars a mile.
And I'm concerned that if we
impose that we're not going to
help projects done because the
cost gets to be even more than
what we want you know can handle
right now and I have one
estimate here this is from The
Seattle Times from just a few
years ago saying that there was
one development project there
that was talking to him dollars
per mile and I guess it was
golden crusted or whatever I.
How they got to twelve million
miles it
I think what makes more sense is
a carrot approach and just
saying there's money out there
as I forward if you want to do
some Barclays area and again it
doesn't make sense for
for water areas it would make
sense perhaps for housing
developments where students are.
School.
And if we can find ways to
encourage that we have we tried
as it is but to make it
protected for them as well.
So
Hi I have a cell chair who works
and lives in Europe and he's a
site that's how to get rid of
that city and he said that.
To see it for myself someday but
there are parking garages just
for bicycles and there may be
hundreds or thousands of bikes
and he said they really enforce
the traffic laws there and
regarding bike so we're not that
kind of the place though and so
again it may make sense in some
areas but not others so a little
hesitant to vote in favor of the
bill but I do I do think it has
in the future we're going to see
more of this will be a good
thing thank you Representative.
Who thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair for in the
bill
Your bill's always study more.
Yeah so thank god for our
analysts they can just.
Figure out of cool stuff.
Full information down and I put
something good will get
something completely different
but they're able to pull
information.
Madam chair my first question
would be.
Very specific to.
Three communities Albuquerque
Santa Fe Los crucis.
Ordinances similar to this piece
of legislation been tried in
each of those communities on
that so madam chair what was the
outcome.
Representative so I go through
my cell.
You should.
Mr chair.
Percent
I know that there happens
ordinances and the larger cities
in New Mexico I'm actually in
the call time one of the experts
in the audience you may know
this information Alex do you
know if you give the instructor
knows ordinances and Albuquerque
there is a vision zero plan
there they are going to try to
get funding for a I going on
along Martin Luther.
Right now but there are no
words were protected by.
Madam chair of our.
Chairman will survive vice chair
and
Representative chair
I've seen probably fifteen bills
now this year.
That I feel are specific to
communities.
And help communities will look
at stuff in the sidewalk bill
was one of those examples where
I think we need to be don't
have.
I think there's some it I
understand very much so where
representative Garcia wants to
go and I'm wondering within.
The house how this legislation
out there I'm not very much with
and the same thing from hi I
struggle with whether or not we
actually need to tell the do you
need to do so.
By the.
And for the piece of legislation
and they're the the dunces there
was nothing and the money that's
been appropriated the federal
level that would keep the
community from going to the DOT
and partnering with DOT and
going after those funds on their
own there was absolutely no
reason for this legislation
makes.
And
And so.
Chair and.
Madam chair.
Looking at some different
analyses differ Reports.
Based on the language in the
bill right now we would have
about twenty three
municipalities across the state
that would fall within the
requirements of this bill.
There's another report after
called most less traveled this
report that highlights inside
this report ten major cities
With the highest rated bicycling
to work and and
Those population bases.
The determining factor behind
the ones that this really works
in the cost benefit is there is
about eight thousand people per
square mile.
So madam chair chairman madam
chair with respect to that of
those twenty three communities
how many of those communities
within our state actually have a
population density.
The fall within the scope.
That.
Mr chair representative hi.
After that I can get it.
Well curious about that because
if I take the percentages.
Chair and madam chair with
respect to this.
The report continues to go that
services one percent of those
people actually use.
I find it so if we put that in
there and we take up the
dynamics of let's just say less
than fifteen years ago.
Older than sixty five years old
people what are what are
nonworking population as in the
state of New Mexico that would
act for perform well that would
be statistically the number one
thirty two PM.
For one point five million
dollars per mile we built the
track on.
I'm not sure the cost benefits
there with respect to that staff
to me there's a price you can
put on life so I get the the
the.
Chair and madam chair I think
get the testimony that we get
because there is no value on you
can't put a dollar value more
insurance companies to but at
the end of the day you can't put
a dollar value on so how do you
make that that benefit work and
my struggle with this is is
specifically that when we look
at.
You go in and you look at census
data reports and I've got one
report to basically says that
Governments at all levels local
state and federal should be
about meeting the infrastructure
needs of the population not
driving population to changes
behavior.
By putting preferences of
government about the choices of
the individual.
At and if I may um.
One that I Representative
respectfully I feel like that's
actually one of the the points
where Phil off philosophically
you and I.
And and in many ways.
And not
As Representative route already
said if you build it it is our
perception that they will use it
they will come we know the
protected bike lanes are there
that people feel safer on their
bicycles to use them that they
will be more willing to get on
the bike and take a ride rather
than get in the car and use the
gas and again you know we.
Philosophical differences I feel
like we do have a as we have a
responsibility to ourselves and
to the planets to start reducing
our carbon footprint and I feel
like this is actually a
fantastic way to do that if we
can make people start to feel
safe enough to do it I was
telling you know constituents
that hatches to bring this bill
I don't feel safe getting on a
bicycle in Albuquerque I I don't
but I would love to be able to.
Sunday and so I think that this
bill if if spoke correctly and
put together in a way that makes
sense for the communities upon
which the this will be our
parted I feel like we can slowly
start to secede changes in
behavior if people have to thank
you it's not the place of
government to change the
behavior of the people it's it's
a place people that change of
behavior all but if we make it
that much easier then we're
gonna start to see those
changes.
And and that was that was the
impetus for the so I appreciate
that thank you chairman or vice
chairman thank you chairman for
your response I think it's
actually the responsibility
people to change behavior
government.
Not the other way around and so.
With with respect to that as we
go and we look at just the the
sheer numbers.
My thing is for every ten miles
of road to that we built if we
have this.
This costs and here that's
fifteen million just three miles
that's three five miles road we
don't get to math and chair and
vice chair one of the think big
frustrations for this whole
committee.
Was the lack of funding that was
an House Bill three section nine
House Bill to for our roads
right now
with the surplus of half.
And and thus the the reason for
the rogue rogue Fund and so many
other things and we're looking
I'm not saying this is a bad
idea I don't want to wait.
The chairman and.
The the I don't want to weigh
the provisions written in the
bill I think.
If this is important to the
communities each of those
communities spoken up and talk
today.
Have the same opportunity to
work with the DOT and go after
those federal funds without this
legislation.
In any other community in the
state have that same opportunity
to do that.
And so I contend right now that
yes we started a grassroots
level knobs not legislate from
up here down started to
grassroots levels are working it
out that way and and for the for
the year is that this is
critical and important to I want
to support that would be behind
that one of you for that I'm the
same way I'd love to be actually
I don't want to.
For for.
For for for for us but that's me
and and coming from a from a guy
that uses the participating
travel to many trials.
You know I I get it.
Is it would be okay if we met
during the summer I would
probably be biking here no
matter what the traffic was
light on the Senator on the ice
and so you know something about
many floods and so.
The.
So I can send.
J. vice chair and chairman the
gate where you're at with us
what I don't like it is US
legislating here down instead of
working at the grassroots citing
that everybody's name of those.
Federal funds I'd like to see
legislation worked a little bit
differently I'd like to see this
come.
From the cities and counties the
the the morning done this shown
proof and then turned around and
and make that so with that
leases current form I can send
thank you Representative.
Okay at this point in time I
really appreciative to the
committee for the conversation
knowing that this money is not
in the budget I'm actually going
to just roll the bill and that
is our job I don't want to.
It is my intention for those of
you who who are going to
participate in the
transportation interim committee
I really want to work on this
issue for those of you that want
to work on it with me because I
think that we could get
something really cool out of
this we put the work into it and
so we're just getting we're just
getting started sell thank you
so much at that point in time
we're going to call our last
bill house bill fifty.
There is.
Six percent.
The.
Okay.
welcome back to the committee.
We want to reassure your bill to
us many substitutes so we'll
move after discussion for the
motion.
Thank okay.
Insurance
claim that.
That's the last.
On Thursday we submitted the
order for on Friday and then.
You are and we'll see those
really service technical areas
today and the doctor so the
reason for the point I.
The two.
Really is that what.
Your question right there we
only have a point four.
Version reviewed.
He said what we don't have a
point I will have a point four.
Of the when we talk this.
I would be happy.
Yesterday after the.
I understand.
Yeah
this is what the is that.
It was for one.
Okay.
I have is.
Okay well we're getting
properties figured out
Representative remind you just
described the changes and
the madam chair and members see
is on page two.
We work and really change the
format of the vehicles that are
excluded made it more clear once
yes you'll be able to see that
one of the things that we were
asked last time was to get some
of that.
And you need to have on the
health front license plates
would help in reducing crime and
commander Torres what does that
so I'd like for him to explain
right now we're just the
committees of the students.
Okay so on page two you'll
you'll see.
This is so language that we had
before but in a format that sees
here read in the state.
And there are any other to think
there is one other changes the
substitute with regards to
have here to debate but for yeah
the madam chair and members what
we did is we made the thirty
year us just why we have the
older vehicles that were exempt
as well as fortune.
In the in the
questions of you know the older
vehicle so they only have to
have one flight so Oklahoma over
thirty years.
Just needs one point okay the
other two.
Yesterday was a singular plural
yes the change yesterday was
singular and plural they had we
had floral work should have been
senior for and that's what the
animals caught and so that was
the change there that's why we
I think it was like the word for
clarity instead of using the
Seahawks are staff.
So Representative as we've
already accepted public comment
on this we've already gone
through the committee on that
we're bringing back for members
to vote on the current committee
substitute I want to check with
my members to see if they feel
comfortable thinking about after
the changes of the next
question.
Yes yes okay I'm gonna go to
representative I.
Madam chair I move that we
respectfully and gently table
