Good morning, everyone.
Uh, welcome to House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee.
Um
A little bit of housekeeping
before we start, I guess for.
Representative Abeda here.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry here.
Represented Montoya.
Represent
Here
Representative Senator Cortez.
Here.
Representative Small.
Vice Chair saidana.
Sherry McQueen.
Yes.
So we have a quorum.
Uh, we're being told we don't
have sand on the web. OK, we're
good.
Um, some housekeeping, uh, first
off, we have our committee
dinner on Monday.
Uh, so after this meeting, we
won't see each other, uh, until
dinner each other around, but
whatever. Um, so don't, don't
forget, uh, 10 o'clock, it's at
uh Carrody Cafe. We have a bunch
of sponsors, uh, who will
announce at the dinner.
Um
There are a bunch of other
committees, uh, going on right
now. Uh, well, maybe not right
now, but this morning, um, uh,
thank you all, by the way for.
Great to be here at 8. I think
that's helpful.
Um, there, I think a lot of our
members will be in and out, uh,
through the course of the day,
including myself.
So, uh, when it's time to vote,
If people aren't in the room, we
will try to round them up, and
we will hold the vote open.
Uh, and give people a chance to
come back.
Uh, so, and on both sides. So,
um, you know, keep your
Uh, chair, vice chair or ranking
member.
comprised of where you may be,
so we can find you when, if we
need you.
Um
We have 6 bills on the agenda
today.
Um, they're all substantive
bills. Uh, I don't think any of
them are particularly
controversial.
Uh, you can do the math, right?
If we spend an hour on each
bill.
And we're here for 6 hours.
We spend 90 minutes on each
bill. This day gets pretty long.
If any of the bills blow up, you
know, 3 hours or so, they gets
pretty long.
Um, so I would encourage you to
be
Uh, succinct and to the point,
um.
I, I personally think if you're
You're shuffling the papers in
front of you thinking, oh, do I
have any more questions?
You probably should be done at
that point. Um, if you're, you
know, I think, um.
You know, personal stories,
background, different
perspectives can be useful to,
to illustrate a point.
Uh, but please keep them short.
And you know, you know, if
You find yourself going off into
your political philosophy or
your philosophy of life.
Um, maybe try to resist that
urge.
Uh, so we can get through the
agenda.
Uh, any, uh, questions,
comments, an announcements from
the committee.
OK.
So our first bill is House Bill
140 hazardous waste constituent
definition, and we have
Representative Chandler and
A variety of
Yeah
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh, we do
have a committee sub.
And we shall I give you the 202
number, Mr. Chair. Yes, please.
It's um.
0.23230433.2, that should be
available online for the public.
Um, does everyone have a copy of
that? OK,
yes.
OK. So we moved the committees
up for discussion. So why don't
you present the committee set
over them. Many of you, I'm sure
are aware of us PFOS in our
various communities, notably
Clovis is an area that has
really suffered significantly.
from it's um close proximity to
that significant viral impacts
on that community forms and we
think the genesis may be the
airport or um activities that
the National Guard have had at
the airport. So this is a
problem. Um, the environment
department has been very, um,
responsible, attempting to get
these issues rearia, but they've
hit a brick wall and that brick
wall is called the Department of
Defense. The Defense Department.
Does not ity to um regulate and
seek.
And as a result,
they for those individuals in
our state.
This amend other states have and
provided legislation that
departments and as a result, has
come to the table and worked
with sis. So, um, with that, I
will hand this over to Secretary
Kenny, and he can give you the
details of the committee.
Thank you, um
Sponsor and uh thank you, uh
Chairman, Vice Chair, um,
members of the committee, for
those of you that I've not met
personally. I'm Jim Kenney. I'm
the Environment secretary been
in this role since 2019, uh, and
look forward to getting to know
those that I don't know very
well and continuing to develop
the relationship with those that
I've been working with, um, as
the chair as a representative
just explained, um, and maybe
more relevant to any of the
talking points that I prepared
for today is I just got back
late last night.
from the multi-district
litigation in South Carolina. I
took a little reprieve from the
session to go and be in uh South
Carolina federal court, um, on
behalf of uh our case that is
there, our case being against
the Department of Defense. Um,
we are one of the four
bellwether cases out of close to
500 cases seeking both damages
as well as um restoration of
Clovis area and other areas in
the state that are all part of
this litigation.
Now, um, most important from
that meeting yesterday, um, I
don't like to, uh, share this,
but I think it's really
important because of this bill
that's in front of you, uh, the
federal court judge said, um,
hey, New Mexico.
You need to exercise all your
authorities in the state before
you, uh, before we consider this
to be a federal matter, meaning
that if you have not exhausted
all your remedies in state court
under state law, under state
rule in state enforcement, um,
questioning why you're here. And
this is after 6 years of, of us
trying to get uh better outcomes
for our own state. So I want you
to know that background because
that just happened yesterday and
um I think that's
Relevant though itself is
actually rather short. It's 20
pages total in paper, but the
language added to the bill is
actually quite short.
And what we're doing, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, without trying to get into
the weeds of being wonky in
terms of how federal law, which
is what New Mexico has authority
to implement under the hazardous
waste Act, we put our
regulations together and EPA
says you're good to go.
So, um, what we're doing now is
clarifying.
hazardous waste include
those wastes that the EPA has
identified nationally.
As well as giving New Mexico as
the um as Representative
Chandler explained, giving New
Mexico equivalency to what other
states have done through their
legislatures, saying that you
can identify hazardous waste and
hazardous waste constituents as
well. Those terms have very
specific meaning. Um, we can get
into that if you like, but
basically we're saying the state
can identify these hazardous
waste, in addition to waiting
for the feds to identify them.
That is exceptionally relevan.
because the feds have not
identified PFOS as a hazardous
waste yet, despite the fact it
will give you cancer, despite
the fact it will raise your
cholesterol despite the fact
that it will pass from a mother
to a child
There are known health effects,
not.
I'm not speculating, there are
known scientific peer-reviewed
health effects, um, and we need
to catch our laws up to those
other states that are resulting
in very uh positive outcomes for
their residents. We're the only
state in the country that is
being sued by the federal
government. We're the only state
that I know of that doesn't have
this ability. So effectively,
that's what, oh, sorry.
Um, effectively, that's what the
Excuse me, that's what the bill
is doing, um.
We're adding a definition of
hazardous waste constituent, and
then we are also um further in
the, that's on page of 5 of the
committee sub, I believe. Yes,
page 5 of the committee sub
lines 21 through
25.
And then it spills on to page 6,
lines 1 and 2.
Um, and then we're also on page
10 lines 4 and 5, in lines 15
through 21, both adding and
striking language so that we can
accomplish what I set out to do.
Most importantly, I don't have
the authority to list something
as a hazardous waste
unilaterally. Uh, that is not
within the department's purview.
In other words, if we were to do
something above and beyond with
the uh feds were doing, it would
have to go through rulemaking,
which is a stakeholder engaged
process that considers cost, it
considers.
But, um, it considers a whole
bunch of factors because it's
within the environmental
Improvement Act that the EIB has
to consider those pieces. So
there's no railroading anything
through. Um, it is, uh, you
know, more work on our end, but
it's the right way to do roles
in the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, thank you very much. We're
going to go to the public.
Um, just a show of hands, uh,
who's here in support of this
bill?
Uh, who's here in opposition?
OK, um, so we're gonna do, uh,
free in support and 3 in the
opposition that will take um a
couple online.
Uh, we're gonna do opposition
first.
So if you would like to speak in
opposition, please come forward.
Um, you have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 member
companies.
We support the intent of this
bill, but we're concerned about
the potential unintended
consequences to the possible
powers granted to EIB.
If passed, we will continue
working with the sponsor and
secretary. Thank you.
Others in opposition who would
like to speak, you don't have
to. Oh, Mr. Chair members of the
committee, Jim Winchester,
Independent Petroleum Asization
of New Mexico. Um, just want to
second the comments from our
friends at Nmoga. We do have a
concern about a potential
loopholes that would carry over
to oil and gas. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman Mike Miller,
Permian Basin Petroleum
Association, uh, we just echo
the same concerns from our
industry. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online. Is,
is there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
I really singer.
Are you in the opposition?
Yes, sir. Thank you. Beverly
Itzinga, dairy producers of New
Mexico while we understand the
intent of the bill, we're also
concerned about unintended
consequences. I appreciate all
the work Secretary Kenny has
done with the PFOS situation in
the Clovis area that's affected
our dairy producers, but I'm
just worried that somehow those
producers will be left liable
for something that wasn't their
fault. I know we can probably
take care of that in the
rulemaking, but um we are
worried about the unintended
consequences, but we do
appreciate
Secretary Kenney. Thank you.
OK.
Thank you. We're gonna come back
to the room, uh, would anyone
like to speak in support of the
bill. Please stand up.
We'll take 3, you have 2
minutes.
Good morning, um, chair and
committee members. My name is
Mariel Lanai with New Energy
Economy and our 5000 members. I
want to thank the sponsor and um
the environment department for
bringing this bill. This is
critical for two reasons. One,
it expands the definition of
hazardous waste, and 2, if you
go to outdoor life duck gram,
Pfa, Google that, you will find
that 1 g 1 g of the duck meat,
um.
ducks who, who are exposed to
PFES contains more Pest than
anyone should have in their
entire life. 1 g. Thank you.
Please support.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Melissa Bernard and I'm here on
behalf of the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter, very briefly
here in support of HB 140, the
state took a similar action when
it passed SB 8 in 2021, allowing
us at the state level to set air
quality standards and rules more
stringent than the federal
standards and rules. This bill
would give the EIB hazardous
constituent that is not PFAS and
PCBs are not regulated under the
hazardous waste Act, and with
this legislation,
could be regulated locally,
given the huge cost of these
pollutants to our state, our
water and our health. We
strongly support this
legislation.
You have one more in the room?
Morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Sharon Archambright. I'm a nurse
and a teacher, retired Air Force
officer. Thank you very much for
bringing this bill forward,
sponsors, I support HB 140 and
your vision and your um
awareness of the safety for the
people, and especially now.
Especially now.
Thank you. Uh, is there anyone
online who would like to speak
in support. Please raise your
hand.
Tina Kristadula.
Chair members of the committee,
my name's Athena Christodoulou.
I'm a, I'm an energy and
environmental engineer, and for
that reason, I am very, very
happy that you are bringing
forward this bill. I moved to
this state over two decades ago
and always wondered why we were
considered a um a sacrifice
zone, and that is because we did
not have laws in place that
protected our people. So I'm so
glad to see this come forward so
that we are again having
the government of, by and for
the people. Thank you.
OK, thank you very much, uh,
Representative Chandler, would
you like to add anything before
we go to the committee?
Mr. Chair, unless um Secretary
Kenning would Mr. Chair, I'll
just be very brief. Um, I look
forward for the day when I can
get Beverly, uh, Jim Winchester,
and Ashley, uh, all supporting
one of my bills, I'll work hard
to get there. Um, I appreciate
the, the opposition comments and
the sport comments. One thing I
do want to clarify though, uh,
that maybe many of us are not
realizing is that to the extent
that um the federal Superfund
law CERCLA is, is active in the
state of New Mexico.
go, um.
That, that has a detrimental
effect, um, it, it's, it's not
intuitive but just trust when I
say that these changes will give
New Mexico better authority to
regulate PIAS and not be held at
arm's length saying, Hey, New
Mexico in 5 to 6 years we'll
finish our clean up under circle
and then we'll let you know how
we did, cause that's what's
happening.
Uh, members of the committee.
De Matoya
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, representative.
Um
I, I know we've taken uh action
in the past, as was mentioned to
expand.
Beyond what uh air quality.
Uh, in the state versus the
federal standard.
But labeling something.
Essentially, we really have the
right.
Within the state to do that.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes.
OK, and I'm, I'm just
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Representative, it's really
important, um, I'm the, the
words here matter, so I'm and
I'm not trying to correct you or
anyone else, but I just want to
use the precise words. So we're
not looking at anything that is
not a waste already. It has to
be a waste. It has to be
discarded. It cannot be a
product. So labeling something
as a hazardous material, I'm
just going to put aside for a
moment, but if it's discarded
and it's a solid waste, then it,
the question is, does it become
a hazardous waste. That's the
exact place we're looking at.
Not products, it has to be a
waste.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that. Um once again,
I'm wandering way outside of my
sphere of any sort of expertise.
But uh I am wondering.
If the if we
As a state
Create that new definition.
And that is not a definition
recognized by the federal
government.
Does this really increase our
chances of being able to go to
court and I'm just trying to
figure out has this been done
anywhere else? Has anyone else?
Uh, made something, uh,
designation that doesn't exist
within the federal government.
Under EPA or or something like
that that
That, that's what I'm looking
for. Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Representative, great question
and case in point is uh January
2019, the federal government
sued us, uh, then 18 months
later, they agreed to clean up
uh PAS at an Air Force base in
Texas because Texas has passed
this. So it it it's, it's not
only material, but it would have
saved the state uh $12 million
in litigate uh more money and,
and most importantly, health
outcomes and his dairy farm.
Um, it, it's costing us real
money every single day, and I'm,
I'm sick and tired just as you
are sick and tired of me coming
to HAFC and and and Senate
Finance asking for money to
fight the Department of Defense.
So thank you Mr. Chair and and
Representative and Mr.
Secretary, um.
What is the reluctance? I mean,
if we're finding that this is a
Truly a hazardous material.
What's reluctance on the EPA's
part.
From designating it as such.
Mr. Chair and, and
representative, there's not
reluctance. In fact, uh, this
day a year ago, um,
2 years ago, they proposed uh to
list PAS as a hazardous, uh, as
hazardous, and that rulemaking
did not conclude before the end
of the administration. I am
optimistic that the new
administration will continue
that rulemaking and we're going
to champion that, but they have
to consider, um,
That they are not nimble like
states are, and they uh received
over, I think 11,000 comments on
that proposal, um.
So states are really the ones
who are who are best suited to
protect and make these
decisions.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Mr. Secretary.
Um, my, I guess.
Where I'm going at this is it it
POS.
Seems to be purposely.
Put in several products that we
all use.
I mean, it's in
For God's sake, it's in the
solar panels. I mean, it's in
makeup.
It's in, so I'm, I'm just
wondering.
If there's some reluctance
because this doesn't just seem
to be a waste product, it seems
to be a product, a purposeful
product that is created.
And so I'm, I'm just
Wondering as we go down this
road, is that
Is that where there could be
concerns of a potential of, I
mean, will things come off the
shelves, products that people
use will.
Will it make it harder? Will,
will, will this product be made
somewhere else.
And will we lose a product? I,
I'm
Represent Montoya, that would be
helpful if I could if I could
understand that Montoya. So as,
as I think you know, our next
bill is the Kiosin Products
Bill.
Which I think that discussion we
will have that discussion. I
think this bill is limited to
PFOS and waste products. I
understand, Mr. Chair, I'm just,
um, my connection to this is
Are they having a hard time
defining it as a waste product
because it's a product and you.
You understand that that's
that's the connection.
I don't know if you have any,
any expertise in that as well. I
mean, I'm just
I'm concerned with that, that
we, we define it as a waste
product.
Does that harm it being a
product?
Um
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative know and, and in
the next
Bill, we will talk about that
PAS in products, but um it, it,
in order for it to be subject to
regulation, it has to be a
waste.
So
Calling discarded PAS a
hazardous waste or hazardous
constituent.
Um, has no bearing on its
product.
So, again, and we'll talk about
that in just a moment, I hope.
OK, so, so, Mr. Chair.
This is where I'm going with the
question.
It, it appears as this as if.
In one instance, we may be
looking at PFOS as a waste
product.
Another as a product.
What then makes it a waste
product? Is it the amount
because
Frankly, I see my wife wash her
face.
Every evening
At the house whenever she's
getting ready for bed and
washing off whatever makeup she
has on her face that goes then
into our
The sewer system, which then
ends up back at our water
treatment plant. Is that now a
hazardous waste, or is there
some level of, or is it only
determine that if we choose to
then
Sue Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Um,
Again, anything that's generated
our house at a household level
is not by good, bad or ugly.
That's the way it is. Um.
That being said, we will, if we
wanted to designate, which I
under an EIB rulemaking because
the whole point of HB 212 is to
get those POs out of.
Something like a bio solid as a
hazardous waste. Again, this
bill gives the EIB that ability
to go through arrangement and to
have that discussion. So thank
you Mr. Chair and Representative
Mr. Secretary, I guess what I'm
looking for is
The unintended consequences that
I'd like to avoid could
potentially be addressed in
levels of concentration.
Because I'm looking at
Potential of
You know, uh
45,000 residents in Farmington
on the water system that are on
the sewer system.
That then we have, let's say 60%
of those folks washing their
face every evening going into
our direct water supply.
I mean, the, the, the things
that we heard from
Uh, some of the testimony.
Earlier or public comment
earlier was
That it's getting into people's
water wells and
This is going directly back into
our water systems.
So that for me.
Regardless, I, I, this is, this
is for me, this has nothing to
do with oil and gas or anybody
else. This has to do with
eventually will our own city
utilities potentially be
Open to civil suit.
Under this very thing because
of.
Used every day and and on top of
that, uh, Mr. Chair,
And representative Mr.
Secretary, those products are
being applied purposefully.
Every morning, so I, so that is
my concern, the concern is we
designate as a waste product.
Once a purposeful product or
byproduct is used.
Are, are then now we potentially
labeling.
Maybelline, cause they make
products that are applied
directly to, I don't know.
That's, that's my concern, and I
don't know that.
That can be addressed today, but
that is a concern I have, and
I'm I'm looking for some way to
Obviously this is an issue, and
this has been an ongoing issue.
Uh, and
That is what I'm hoping to
address. So, I don't know if you
have an answer.
That'd be great. If you don't, I
would like to have further
discussion on this with you.
Yeah, just real quickly, I
think, um, I hope this is your
yes vote in the making on 212.
0, let's not be that optimistic.
Um, Mr. Chair and, uh,
Representative Mr. Secretary,
just one last thing, and that is
Um, I, I would hope that during
the discussion with uh our
local.
Commanders at our bases.
This is not their decision.
They, they have no, they have no
discretion to make.
A
come into an agreement with the
state of New Mexico. So I would
hope um
Mr. Secretary, uh, that
Our discussions with the with
the base commanders is is very
respectful.
Um, they may end up being the
sitting as a plaintiff on the
other side just because of their
role, but one thing that we
don't want to do is
In some way, uh, make them feel
not wanted in New Mexico.
So that's just kind of a side
note. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
representative Coolla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you.
was an eye opening for me to see
that this has to be regulated
before, um, one question, Mr.
Chair, I have is, um, do you,
what, what would be the hell
outcomes that you would foresee.
If this is implemented. So, um,
and Representative, that's a
great question. Uh, you know,
more, most acutely, if, if we
see, um, if we are to pass this
and are able to enter in
limiting the amount of PFOS in
groundwater or um what we will
see is overation of New
Mexicans, them having uh to both
use their health insurance to
medicines and maybe for no
purpose, right? If your doctor
exercise more
your diet,
is, you know,
Everything from high cholesterol
to early childhood uh issues in
terms of low birth weight, I
mean.
The ramifications are not just
for this generation, but so
we'll see those improvements.
New Mexico received $18 million
as you'll hear in the next
presentation at the next bill,
you know, 1100 watered by PAS,
let alone the New Mexicans who
are on private well water. So,
um, you know, what we've also
seen in Clovis is a is a
valuation of their own property,
their real estate coming in
lower. I would expect we'll see
that in
Haenga,
um, because once you're wealth
value drops. When your property
value drops, your ability to
decide about how you're going to
live your life, um, and how
you're gonna have, uh, you know,
the other is evaporating. So I
could go on, but I know we're,
you know, fairly sure on time
with the heavy schedule seeing.
How this bill could be.
Uh, disruptive to all those
negative. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Cha. So there is a
possibility to undo.
Um
If Mr. Chair, uh, New Mexico,
you think that um
And could be used as a funding
to, to, to, to support with this
representative, uh, yes, we are
asking for damages, the other um
impacted communities throughout
the state of New Mexico, uh, in
this session, I'm asking for $8
million.
And then we have to figure out
long term how we're going to
keep implementing it. So yes.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Further questions from the
committee.
Representative
Good morning, everyone, Mr.
Chair Representative and
Secretary Kenny. I do have some
clarifying questions. Um, the
first one is, why is the strike
through included in your view
again?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, say that one
more time. Why is the strike
through? is it included in your
view?
Oh, why is the strike through
included in our interview? Um.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
is strike through is included so
that we can bring rules to the
EIB that would allow us to PFOS
or hazardous.
Mr. Chair Representative
Secretary Kenny, do you believe
that this could be interpreted
as now allowing EIB to list the
waste that maybe were not
otherwise listed due to the
federal exemption is hazardous
way,
there are, you know, the federal
hazardous waste laws written to
say everything's a hazardous
waste and then there's a
enumerated exclusions from it,
both by Congress.
Uh, we can be,
uh,
More stringent than the federal
government. So I can't take
something, let's say like mining
waste.
Which is congressionally
examined. I, I can't undo this
law.
Thank you so much for
clarifying, Mr. Chair
Representative and Secretary
Kenny, um, while I am extremely
concerned about the makeup,
that's not my next question. Um,
you know, they say old barns
need new paint, and I am an
aging barn, and so that is
particularly important to me.
However, um, I am concerned, Mr.
Chair Representative and
Secretary Kenny about the
ramification of such a
designation to the boiling gas
sector should that occur.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
hear you. Um, I understand
that's why, um, there's an EMP
exemption for any from uh law
and rules that from hazardous
wastes,
Uh, I don't think I could pierce
that.
Uh, through this change, um, so
things like produced water, uh,
I know it's been a concern. Um,
I also think there's a little
bit of push here, uh, if that's
really a concern, then, you
know, get to investing in
produced water treatment and
get, if it's not a waste, it can
never be a hazardous waste. So
one, I don't think I have the
authority, and 2, let's get
investing and treating produced
water so that we can call it a
commodity, not a waste product.
Thank you so much for
clarifying, Mr. Chair,
Representative and Secretary
Kinney, and I don't believe this
is a philosophical question, um,
but what would the oil and gas
industry do with said waste?
Should we lose our exemption,
and then it becomes designated
as a hazardous waste.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
that is.
Under the federal
administration.
Highly improbable, um.
Uh, for, for a while, uh, but if
that were to happen at the
I'm not trying to dodge your
question, but in any way, um,
but I think it would be more
nuanced than the oil and gas
industry losing their uh
exclusion or exemption under
federal.
Under federal rules. I think it
would probably be
Associated with certain wastes
like.
Drilling muds or
you know, spent frack fluids,
but again, it has to be a waste.
And it's I, I'm not
sure.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
The chairman, uh, thank you,
Representative, and
Mr. Secretary, for your
presentation legislation.
Um
Can you, uh, Mr. Secretary, can
you take us?
Through the steps.
Um
From the very beginning.
Who present
In terms of um
The text example.
Starting from ground zero.
In terms of where the
contaminant.
Was
Being located
You know, through the process of
What we have in this
legislation.
To the actions in terms of the
courts.
Uh, and to the actions in terms
of the implementation.
Of the cleanup in terms of
current status.
Do you have that information
available,
Mr. Chair, I'm, I am happy to
provide more of a sort of
written chronology to so if I
understand your question, uh,
Mr. Chair Representative.
Um, you're picking up on what I
said about Texas, uh, having
more stringent regulation with
Air Force Base.
Uh, compared to, um,
What's happening here in that
questions teed up correctly.
Yes, that's correct, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, and Mr. Chair,
representative, in short, um,
The Air Force looked at all
their bases, 2019, we were met
with the federal lawsuit when we
asked them to clean up P5 bouts,
uh, TCEQ asked the Air Force to
clean up.
PAs at Air Force Base under
RICRA, under their um.
We spend $12 million in
litigation with no outcome.
Cannon is cleaning up and then
uh Reese is mostly Right. Thank
you for that, uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, this legislation just
doesn't apply to PFOS.
It includes PCBs.
Um
Do you know if, uh, Mr. Chair,
do you know if PCBs have been.
prohibited
Um
And so when, when were they
prohibited in terms of?
Using
That toxin in uh.
Products.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, my knowledge of
PCB contamination or PCB
regulation, I should say, uh,
is, is more from my days of
working at EPA but under uh
Tosca, there are restrictions
that the toxic, I believe those
came about in the late, um, but
I would, I would want to
validate sort of my, my
recollection there. I think
important there are other
regulate like PCBs that.
don't have federal exclusions or
exemptions that um and that
would be to the benefit of
Uh, protecting New Mexicans from
neighborhoods and
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
Mr. Secretary.
Any further questions from the
committee, Representative Henry,
no, Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
keep this brief. I think my
colleagues covered most of the
areas representative Secretary
Kenny, it's nice to meet you,
um.
I own a, as you may know, a
small, um, Mexico-based.
Family owned oil and gas
production company. I've been in
the business my entire life.
And I have seen the booms and
the busts and many of the issues
that have affected this
industry. Um, so my comments are
gonna parallel some of my
colleagues a little bit, but not
repeat them. Um, I, I understand
that under RICRA, oil and gas uh
byproducts are exempt.
Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, representative,
correct. And I understand the
logic for that being that while
they may be of some volume, they
have low toxicity. Would you
agree with?
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I, I think.
EPA's rationale for exempt
exempting them tracks with what
you're saying and the Mr.
Chairman and Secretary Kenny and
in the United States Congress,
uh, would support that, I would
presume, right.
Um, so,
Going, um, Mr. Chairman,
Secretary Kenny, um, going to
your assurances that regarding
an unintended consequences. I'm
still sort of drawn to page 53
through 9 of your of the bill
and
10
Uh, 15 through 21, that strike.
And if I understand your
testimony, Secretary Kenny, is
that uh you, that cannot be
used.
To declare oil field byproducts
as as hazardous waste under this
because it's exempted by federal
law. Is that correct?
Represent Murphy, are you
referencing the bill or the
committee said? Uh, I think.
Each 5 page.
Page 50,
yes, page 53 through 9 in the uh
hazardous waste does not include
any of the following down
through.
Geothermal energy at the end of
page 9.
Yeah, lines 3 through 9.
I'm
just note that you're referring
to existing law.
Yes.
OK. Then I'm connecting it to
the other. OK, thank you.
So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um,
So, uh, effectively, yeah, I
agree with you.
Uh, the way the hazardous waste
Act and the Federal Resource
Conservation Recovery Act, their
version of work is that what
we're talking about in, in the
changes to the bill are
requiring cleanup for the
hazardous constituent. Think of
it as the ingredient that's the
actual toxic molecule in this
quagmire of junk, right? I say
junk because it's discarded. It
doesn't have value. So, um, so
the hazardous constituent is the
actual causal uh mutagen
carcinogen, etc. Um, that's what
we're talking about here is into
the requirement for cleanup.
Once we establish that you have
to clean up on a schedule.
Thank you Mr. Chair Secretary
Kenney. I, I, so in in layman's
terms, it's not the gallon of
water, it's the molecules that
are in that gallon of water that
constitutes.
Hazardous material.
Mr. Cherry, Representative
correct. Um, I'll finish with
One last statement, um, uh, Mr.
Chair, Secretary Kennedy, you
made reference to, um, oil field
treatment and clean up.
And I think this industry
together.
Fairly closely with your offices
is working in a variety of areas
in that regard. Is that not
correct?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, represented
correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, one
last question, um,
The
It seems to me, and once again,
I'm new to this area, but it
seems to me that you're
concentrating on a mainly
specific sites, DOD sites,
mainly specific chemicals.
Um
To Mr. uh, Representative
Montori's points, maybe even to
certain levels of certain
chemicals.
Could the bill not be Mr.
Chairman, uh Secretary Kenny,
Representative, could the bill
not be more tightly
Constrained and focused just on
those locales, chemicals.
I think you see where I'm
heading with my question. Mr.
and Representative, yeah, it, it
could. I mean, in all honesty,
we could write a bill like that.
Um, I get once a year, Mr.
Chair, and, and representative
to bring forward.
Um, and, and what we typically
see now are 19,000 POS chemicals
in which the chemical companies
are producing, uh, so many,
they're they're moving out the
more toxic ones and bringing
less toxic ones in, which is a
great move, but if we're not, if
we, if we can't be as nimble as
they are to produce the
chemical, then we can't be as
nimble to protect public health
either. So while I respect your
question and understand it.
And I do agree that we could
write a bill like that. It would
be detrimental in my opinion, to
protecting communities because
those 19,000 chemicals were born
overnight, and I, I bet I'm
wrong that there's probably 50
POS and PAS substitutes that I
don't know what they're uh.
What their toxicity is.
Uh, and they will be in our
environment.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman, uh
secretary, um, thank you for
that explanation. I'm not
completely satisfied with it,
but uh I hope you and I hope you
can understand why. Um, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative I
secretary, I think you're.
Or definitely trying to, I, I
appreciate the spirit of the
bill.
Um, I can't support the bill
because I believe I'd love to
work more closely with you
because of unintended
consequences, the tightly
tailoring, and lastly I just
continue even though I've only
been in this job a short period,
it seems like there is some
authority in the legislature and
more and more of that gets
transferred to to unelected
bureaus and as a general
comment, I'm concerned about
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Secretary Kenny.
Thank you. Any further questions
from the committee or Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Secretary, thank
you.
chairman might not love the way
I present this question because
I do understand there's another
bill right behind this. Um, I
can't really help that, but it's
gonna go along the, the same
lines of what representative
Montoya talked. I'm still a
little confused.
That becomes a waste.
But then if it gets picked up
again, it becomes a product that
does that make sense? So if it's
a product and it gets.
Becomes waste, then it gets into
the water. So then somebody
picks up that water, now it's a
product again that could then
become waste again.
So
Help me understand who.
The consequences could be
somebody that picks it up later
that didn't add it, but it was
picked up in.
form. Now they're dealing with
it. I, I don't understand. Does
that make sense what I'm saying?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative, um, it, it's a
good question and, and if
there's one thing that uh I can
say conclusively about hazardous
wage rules federal confusing,
um.
So, uh
In, in general, the owner or
operator.
Decides what not the state, not
a bureau. Um, so if, if, if, for
example, and I'm moving away
from
PA said bases and talking about
PAS that enters the, the
drinking water system from all
of our households, and if
you're, if you're not, if you're
saying in my household doesn't
do that, um, we all put Pfas
into the water system that moves
uh down to the wastewater
treatment plant, uh.
That it's, it's, um, maybe not
legally a waste under the law,
but it is, I mean, it's
wastewater, and then it moves
through for treatment. Once that
PAS is moved out of the water.
Um, into something like a
biosolid, then there is
decisions made at that point. Is
it a product and, and products
can have POs in them. I mean, to
your point about the makeup,
that product is a waste. Um, so,
so there's
It, it, it's.
It
You're right where you should be
in the sense that it's confusing
and Mr. Chair and and
um, that's, that's why it's
important for us to be limiting
the amount of PIAs, um.
That's getting into the
environment, the, the, the
kangaroo rat that was found at
Holloman Lake, uh, if it were
here on this table today, died
and decomposed, the table would
be 900 times the cleanup level.
So, I mean, that's the
concentration, I mean, to your
point about concentration, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Montoya, you know, that, that,
that will be something the EIB
will have to consider.
Um
But I think
Putting that into legislation,
Mr. Chair, and Representative
would have unintended
consequences that
It's not partisan that none of
us would like, cause we would be
Causing communities to be
burdened with POS because of
that unintended consequence,
you.
be afforded greater protections,
and I think that's where there
will be the place to talk about
biosols, talk about filter
cakes, talk about those those
items. So we, we can be more.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary, the only other
question I would have or or
comment is, is there language
that can be added to this bill
before, I mean, obviously not
today, but uh.
But
It's much like Representative
Murphy, I do love the spirit of
the bill. I like to say I
understand is incorrect. You
just heard. I don't I'm.
So that's not a fair statement,
but to help me be a little less
unconfused. Is there language we
can add to the bill to make sure
that some of these industries
aren't affected. Is there
something we could add before it
got much further.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, if any of those
who spoke in opposition want to
propose in-kind struck out
language uh with a
consensus-based position, the
environment department would be
happy to consider it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
secretary, um, I, I would love
to see that. I would love to
accomplished as it sits,
unfortunately, it's a little
tough for me, but.
Um, I do appreciate what you've
done. Thank you so much. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Any further questions from the
committee?
Um
Represent Chandler final
thoughts before we go to a
motion.
No, other than to say this is an
important bill to protect our
citizens, my constituents in La
Cienega and probably many other
people in the state have that we
have not.
you.
I substitute.
I um.
Thank you, I think
motion. We have a 2nd.
Um
And you know, could you take the
vote?
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Murphy.
No.
Representative Senator Cortez.
No.
Representative small.
Representative Abeda.
Vice Chairana
Chair McQueen.
Yes
you, but you pass 74 represent
Montoya to explain his vote
briefly.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Representative, um,
I cannot support the, the bill
as is, but if you want to help,
uh,
Secretary get his wish of having
me support one of one of his
bills. This is probably as close
as it's been, and so if there's
a maybe a little bit of language
that could be added to this
before we have to vote for it on
the floor. Um, we may be able to
make the secretary happy.
Thank you very much,
Representative.
were you staying for the
nextville?
No. I excused, Mr. Chair. It was
that a polite way to ask you or
maybe an impolite way to ask me
to leave.
But I do think Secretary Kenny
is staying for the next bill is
House Bill 212, her and Polly.
EFAST Protection Act represent
Ferrari, uh, whenever you're.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, and the
committee members. Um, thank you
for the opportunity to present
um the committee substitute for
House Bill 212. Do we need to
have a motion to the committee
for consideration.
But if you could go ahead and
present the committees.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
this bill er um creates
certainty for New Mexico
consumers by phasing out and
prohibiting toxic POS chemicals
from showing up at their dinner
tables and to their and into
their homes while limiting state
and municipal liability for
long-term cleanup.
And before you use a bill that
represents a joint effort
between legislators and the
environment department with
input from various stakeholders
over many months in recent days,
and that is why we have um.
The committee substitute and we
discussed toxic POs
contamination in the radioactive
and hazardous materials
Committee, and while the
environment department has um
invested
significant time in listening to
the communities most impacted by
record setting PFOS, um,
pollution in our state.
And in addition, we built um on
the lessons learned from the 13
states that have enacted laws
like HB 212 and our.
Various phases of implementation
around the United States.
Um, in addition, we built on the
lessons learned. I'm sorry, in
HB 12 aligns with the efforts of
major retailers who have
committed to removing PFOS from
their products.
Um, fast food restaurants like
Chipotle, Wendy's Chick fil A,
Nathan's Famous Burger King, uh,
McDonald's and Taco Bell have
all committed to removing POs
from their packaging by the end
of 2025.
And grocery chains like
Albertson's Trader Joe's and
Whole Foods Market have taken
action to reduce to eliminate
PFOS in food packaging.
And other retailers like King
Foo Footwear.
Um, Patagonia clothing, Home
Depot, Lowe's, and Ikea own
goods, um, I have committed to
carrying only PFOS-free versions
of certain products.
So why do we need this bill and
This is a bottle of fabric
protectant.
And um
Mm
You can buy this or another
brand of it in New Mexico.
And um I was shocked to learn
that this bottle contains Phos
chemicals that were phased out
of production about 25 years
ago.
Yet there are still distributed
in the United States to
consumers like us.
And the concentration of POs in
this container.
Um, is almost 50 times higher
than the EPA's drinking water
standards.
And while this all costs $10 to
buy, it can cost 2.7 million to
18 million to remove a pound of
POs from water treatment plants.
And we need to protect families
from products like these and um
our municipal governments from
these costs.
And I'd like to um.
Reintroduce Secretary Kenny to
continue.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair and, and uh
representatives,
um, thank you for allowing us to
be before you or me again, um, I
forgot to introduce JD, uh.
Nance, I always pause because
I'm thinking I'm about to
introduce the vice president,
but uh JD Nance is our hazardous
waste bureau chief that was
sitting up here with me at the
last, uh, bill and sitting to my
right, uh, is, is uh Zachoga our
general counsel at the
Environment department.
Um
So real quickly, Mr. Chair, on
HB 212, uh,
HB 212, that the anatomy of this
bill is, is as follows. Uh,
there are phase outs and
prohibitions or phase out to a
prohibition, uh, with 3 key
dates, um, January 1st, 2027, we
phase out and then prohibit
after that, uh, cookware, food
packaging, dental floss,
juvenile products, and
firefighting foam that contains
intentionally added PAS. Think
about the thing and you, you can
say that's an interesting group
of things, but the way they are
grouped.
Those are the things that you
are likely to ingest or get into
your mouth and have an exposure
that way. Um.
It takes me a minute to think
about that sometimes as well.
Uh, but we'll talk more about
that. The next date is January
1st, 2028. This is a second
phase of uh uh eliminating and
then prohibiting certain
categories of products that
contain POS, um, carpets and
rugs, cleaning supplies and
fabric treatments, cosmetics,
feminine hygiene products,
textiles, upholstered furniture,
and ski wax. Um, and then third
is a is a
catch-all that says here by
January 1st, 2029, if there's
anything that has intentionally
added PAS, those would also be
phased out and prohibited. So
while those dates sound
exceptionally comprehensive for
the amount of things that are in
our economy, let me now explain
to you a couple, uh, or
highlight for you what is, has
an off-ramp from these dates,
because we don't need to
regulate everything. So while
again that sounded
Comprehensive. Now I'm gonna go
over what's excluded from this
bill or from those dates. Um.
And the and the way we came up
with what's excluded is, as you
heard from Representative
Ferrari, there's about 13 other
states that have passed a bill
like this, so we're, we're
letting them go first and
watching how they're
implementing their laws and
rules, and now we're learning
from them and and we've included
what's excluded here. So, um,
everything that contains
intentionally added PFOS that
falls into medical pharma,
agriculture and including their
packaging, semiconductors.
the microchips, including their
packaging, electronics, lab
equipment, certain refrigerants
and automobiles are all
excluded. Um, everything that
you would find at Goodwill and
think about this, whether it's a
secondhand product of any kind,
uh, would that has PAS added to
it would be excluded from the
bill. Um.
Uh, I'm, I'm not.
By any means gonna go out,
there's more that's excluded,
and I think you're questions
will help discern what else is
excluded, but they're in section
3 of the bill. Um, if you wanted
to take a look at that. In
addition, one of the things that
you, that's very unique and I'm
really proud of us for uh
putting forward a bill like
this, uh, and appreciate
Representative Ferrari, uh,
starting this process, and then
um letting us come in at the
environment department, but we
also added what's known
as a producer responsibility
organization. So think about
your white goods, your betting,
you know, mattresses, uh,
furniture. We basically are
telling manufacturers that if
you come into New Mexico and
keep that out of our landfills,
and you set up a program, we
will also exempt you from,
because again, we don't want
this in our landfills. We don't
want this leaching into our
soils and groundwater. So we
said, you also have a pathway to
a
basically a product storageship
program or recycling.
program in the state. I think
that should be something that
our waste haulers and
municipalities would also
appreciate is limiting their
liability for long term PFOS
exposures and clean up.
Um
And that's unique to New Mexico.
So that's in New Mexico true
moment. Um.
Finally, uh, we gave the
environmental improvement board,
the option to pass rules
understanding some objections
that I heard earlier about
giving um appointed and
unelected individuals, such
authority, but we thought it was
important that we have a pathway
to carve out more exemptions,
uh, to the extent that they make
sense, they're science based,
they're protective of our, our
community and they facilitate
our economy. So, um, there's a
pathway for the EIB to
additional exemptions through
rulemaking, um, again, as, as
that is prescribed in in both
this bill and the authorizing
statute of the Environmental
Improvement Board.
Um
And finally, there's consistent
with other federal, sorry,
consistent with other state
laws, um.
There are concentrations set for
intentionally added POS that are
done by rulemaking, uh, we allow
reciprocity with other states,
so that if if Maybelline and I
I don't know if that's if a
cosmetic company makes a certain
product that has an exclusion in
Maine or any of those other
states, they can submit that
information to us or we can rely
on what they submitted, so we
don't burden uh ourselves and
them so, you know, those
industries with with having to
justify something separate here
when they already have approval
in another state.
Um, and then the last parts of
the bill set up requirements for
testing that if we're in dispute
that the manufacturer would have
to test and show us the results
and uh an ability for us to
collect civil penalties, um, as
you can see with this bottle
that they came in and we can
pass that around. I ask that you
not open it. Um, but, uh, we can
pass that bottle around and what
you'll see on there is that it's
non-hazardous. And when I
purchased that from a big box
store in Albuquerque. I don't
blame the salesperson, but they
said it's
for your kids, pets, family, and
it's completely biodegradable,
non-hazardous. It is completely
not safe for your kid's pet
family, biodegradable or
non-hazardous. Um, so I think,
you know, enforcement will be
part of this, and we, we carved
that out in the, in the bill.
So, Mr. Chair, I know that's a
big high level overview for a a
bill of this, um, both
magnitude, but
Uh, with that, we should
probably pause here. OK, thank
you very much, um, we will go to
the audience first show of hands
who's here and support.
Who's here in opposition?
OK, um, we will do, uh, we'll do
opposition first, uh, no more
than 3 people uh speak in
opposition to minutes each. Uh,
please step forward if you'd
like to speak.
Morning, Mr, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is TJ Truillo, and I'm a
registered lobbyist for croplife
America.
Crop Life America uh ensures
that farmers and consumers have
the technologies which include
pesticides.
Uh, that they need to protect
their crops.
The issue with this bill for us
is, is uh rather
straightforward, and that is the
fluorinated pesticides are
caught up in the overly broad
definition of PAS.
So instead of debating about
what's a more appropriate or
maybe a more narrow definition
in the bill. My client instead
is requesting that they be given
an exemption for for fluorinated
pesticides that are regulated by
the federal insecticide
fungicide and hoy act.
Otherwise known as FIFA.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committees, I would ask you to
quickly turn to page 7, in the
bill and uh take a look at lines
11 through 24.
Um,
This is uh one exemption for
veterinary products and if you
look down to uh line 23 and 24
veterinary products are given an
equipment or given an exemption,
a direct exemption, uh, under
FIFRA.
Uh, we would essentially be
requesting for the uh products,
a technologies that we do as
crop life to be given the same
exemption we are robustly
regulated, uh, under FIFRA and
uh this bill already has
examples of such exemptions and
how they would be operated.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, uh
I appreciate the opportunity to
comment on this, and again, uh,
our client's request for this
bill, this bill be rolled over
until we can do some more
technical fixes. There's some
exemptions, uh, ours are one of
them, and, uh, simply put this
bill is not ready for prime time
yet. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else would
like, uh, would anyone else like
to speak in opposition?
OK, Xing Nun, we'll go online if
you would like to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand. I see a bunch of hands up,
uh, we're doing opposition.
So we're just going to take the
first hand up. It's Alison.
Alison, are you there? Yes, I'm
here.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley with the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, and we're
here today to express our deep
concerns about House Bill 212.
The bill would impose sweeping
restrictions on PAS without
considering their essential role
in manufacturing, clean energy
and aerospace. We appreciate the
exemption, the exemptions that
have been made.
But thousands of businesses
still rely on PAST-based
components for their products. A
ban like this could force
manufacturers out of New Mexico
and jeopardize jobs and
investments in our state. We've
seen similar similar policies
fail in other states, leading to
enforcement delays, skyrocketing
compliance costs and business
uncertainty. New Mexico cannot
afford to follow that path. We
need targeted science-based
regulations that protect health
and the environment without
crippling our industries. I urge
the committee to consider.
The economic consequences of HB
212 and pursue a more balanced
approach. Thank you. OK. Now
we're gonna do uh support. We'll
take 3, in the room for support.
If you would like to speak in
sport, please step forward.
You'll have 2 minutes.
Thank you for bringing HB 212
forward, Melissa Bernardin with
the Sierra Club Rio Grande Cha.
This bill targets the products
we use every day, banning the
use of forever chemicals, as 13
other states are doing with
traces of PAS in our blood,
breast milk, wildlife, dairy
cows and waterways, we have to
take action.
Not just to regulate the
industry, but to ban the use of
PAS, especially in products
targeted at Morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Arjunray. I'm a
nurse and it was a good 15 years
ago, I heard about the POS in
the carpeting as I was heating
with wood stove. I was very
concerned when the sparks shot
into the carpet.
I shudder when I see large fires
being put out at flight lines or
structures knowing that's POS
and
No more plastic water bottles
forever.
Thank
Good morning again, Marilyn Nasi
on behalf of New Energy Economy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
sponsor and the environment
department. This is important to
ban nonessential um use of PAS
in products. Let's lead the
nation, um, instead of
Being the last. There are 13
states that have already done
this for good reason. This is
very important science-based
policy. Thank you for your
support.
OK, and we'll, we'll take one
online, um.
First name is
Tim's Chestick, are you in
support of this bill, Tim?
Mr. Chair, actually, no, I'm
meant in opposition to the film.
lower your hand then.
Uh, Chris Correy.
Oh, he disappeared.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in sport, please
raise your hand.
OK, so seeing them, uh.
Go back to the committee, um,
Represented Ferrari, before we
take questions, uh, would your
secretary Kenny, like to make
any final comments? Yes, Mr.
Chair. Just a few points that
were brought up.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, and um,
Representatives, uh, regarding
the opposition, um, what, uh, TJ
mentioned, TJ Trujillo
mentioned, um, seems reasonable.
Uh, in terms of an exemption
for, for pesticides and happy to
uh receive uh uh.
Strike out red line version um
from him on, on what that
exemption would look like, uh,
and then secondly, regarding the
chambers comment, if I direct
your, I didn't mention this, I
should have, but directing your
attention to uh
Page 8, line 25 of the bill.
Uh, the very last line of page
8.
Uh
We agree with the chamber that
we don't want to disincentivize
manufacturing in New Mexico and
uh line 25, which starts with
number 11 equipment directly
used in the manufacturer
development of the products
described in paragraphs 1
through 10 of this subsection,
essentially are exempt. So if
you're making solar panels in
New Mexico, where you're using
intentionally added PAS or
you're making consumer electric,
uh, consumer products, electric
goods, uh, Intel chips and
things like that.
We, you know, when you, when you
look at it again, we agree with
the chamber that
If you're prohibiting the, the
bringing of these uh products
into New Mexico.
Uh
Or grant, I, I should say
granting an exemption for these
products to come into New
Mexico. We certainly don't want
to disincentivize their
manufacture in New Mexico
either. So I feel like we did
address that, and it may not be
widely known cause we just
introduced the committee so this
morning.
OK, members of the committee
represent Montoya. Yes, Mr.
Chair, I'm just getting a note
that there were several in
opposition, but I don't know
that it was showing, but there
were a number so just I
apologize for that. I, I, I
think we're done with public
comment and we're gonna move on.
That's fine. I just wanted to
make you aware that.
Oh, Monterre, did you have any
questions for the, on the bill?
OK
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Something that uh I, I'm not
sure to what degree.
Um, and I don't know that it was
that has been discussed or I
missed it.
But um
plastic water bottles
themselves. Is there Phos in or
were they or have they been used
previously in plastic water
bottles.
The reason I'm asking this is we
have currently recycling
programs.
I don't know that we would ever
eliminate POs out of plastic
water bottles.
experts.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, some
categories of plastics will
contain PIAs, others will not.
So, uh,
Whether
So yeah, uh, you know, if
there's like a, I'm thinking of
the category 6 with the with
Polyvinyl chloride and things
like that. They may contain uh
intentionally added PFAS. Others
will not. I apologize if I'm
missing.
More of your question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, so,
Representative Mr. uh Mr.
Secretary.
Yes, I'm, I'm just wondering.
Without concentration, once
again, this goes back to
previous discussion without
determining constant
concentration levels, which that
appears uh uh Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary, that appears to be
the crux, in my mind of why
we've not already reached.
Just a ban on PFOS is
That
There doesn't seem to be any
consensus, which I also find
written into the um FIR.
That that there's not a
consensus on what's safe.
Um, and it seems like we're
jumping the gun just a little
bit.
If we're gonna do a a a a ban
without considering.
That and I, and I don't know if
if it's not been reached at a
national level.
I'm not sure how we.
Determine that here, it just
seems to me like we're just
doing an outright ban on certain
products.
Without consideration of that
could, could you elaborate just
a bit?
Yeah, Mr. Chair and thank and
thank you. I knew we would get
into sort of the anatomy of the
bill better through the
question. So that, that's where
we're at now and, um, Mr. Chair
and representative, if you turn
the page, it's section 4,
page.
12
Line
12. So I think I said page 12
line.
Um
And it, it should read the board
shall adopt rules to and in that
uh.
parenthetical one,
the board shall adopt rules.
Um, to create a series of ranges
for the amount of PAS in a
product that contains
essentially PFA, so that is
directly getting
To not putting it in statute,
but putting it in raw and by.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Um, Mr. Secretary,
I get, but I guess the point is,
If there's not
A consensus
From people who have been
studying this.
How do we then even determine
I,
I, I'm just, what expertise do
we have?
Especially at
The cost of what we're talking
about here is just 1.8 million.
Per year, I would imagine that
staff. Mhm.
Um
And, and that staff, I would
imagine would be towards
monitoring.
What products are coming in or
coming or not coming in.
I, I don't see any.
Uh, anything that would be
considered peer reviewed.
That could then be that we could
then determine what is a safe
level. I, I'm just not sure we
have that expertise and it
doesn't, doesn't appear as if
this legislation
Gets to
The underlying question is how
do we determine that? I, I
understand that.
That we want to adopt ranges,
but based on what? Yeah, um, Mr.
Chair and Representative again,
good question. I, I see that,
um, so as I, as mentioned in on
page 12 line 12, that's where we
direct the board shell, adopt
rules to set those ranges, and
the board will look at the
25 to 50,000 peer reviewed
scientific studies that
establish what's in
juvenile products in makeup, in,
uh, so those studies are out
there, they're not incorporated
by reference into the to the
law, but those peer reviewed
scientific studies exist for
food packaging for for all the
categories we're talking about.
And based on the root of
exposure, whether that's
ingestion, something else that
the standards are different,
right? Um,
So while I, I, you know, while
I, I hope none of us are using
plastic bottles because of
microplastics, that's not the
common, that's not the most
threatening, um, but food
packaging would be, right? Or
microwave popcorn bags would be,
and those, those studies exist.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Mr. Secretary. I
understand they exist.
But I'm not seeing that there's
consensus.
I don't know that
How, how do we get to, to
determine
Which study we believe which
study we don't believe.
That's what I'm trying to get at
without.
Established consensus.
Or the preponderance, let's say,
what whatever that would be, how
would we determine that? I just
don't know that.
That we have that ability to do
that.
And, and Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, I agree that we
shouldn't be doing that. We, we
should be relying on the peer
reviewed scientific studies that
are out there that are telling
us what's safe and then, you
know, I view our our duty
collectively and not putting you
and I at odds, I believe our
duty is to, is to put that into
state law, state rules, state
policy that um accepts the
science and protects, you know,
our, our families and and are.
environment in in that way. So
I, I think that's the the
scientific studies are there.
There is consensus. It may not
be for every product today, by
the way, it may not be for um
A product that's, you know, new
to the market.
But
those studies and Representative
and the Secretary I'm, I'm not
going to belabor the point, but
that is my, that's my largest.
That's my greatest, uh, uh.
Hang up on this bill is
If we're going to then
Let's just say say impede.
Products from being able to make
it to market that are, you know.
I would imagine uh we don't want
to interfere with interstate
commerce, uh, on a general, as a
general role within the, within
the states.
As a general rule.
Um
Obviously I believe there are
exceptions and
This seems to be very broad,
very sweeping.
And I don't know in some of
these products whether or not
there's an alternative.
I don't know.
And until
And until there is some
standard,
It's a lot easier when I,
whenever I can hear that this is
the EPA standard, even though I
don't always agree with the EPA
standard, but the, the reality,
Mr. Chair, and I'll end with
this.
And it's just a some, I'm very
old.
So I, I remember a little rhyme
from school, and that was that
the solution to pollution is
dilution.
So at some point,
It's been, been determined by
the EPA that a certain amount of
rat feces in our food is
acceptable.
A certain amount of uh dead
cockroaches and flies in our
food is acceptable. Somehow they
tested that and they got to that
point. I just don't know.
If there's not that specific of
consensus, I believe once there
is a consensus on that, there'll
be a a nationwide mandate. I, I
just think that this is way
outside.
Of our ability, where we don't
have the equivalent of EPA
testing going on in New Mexico,
minus us doing the testing like
that. I just.
Absolutely have to stand and
Not like the last bill where you
might be able to get me to come
over with a couple of changes.
I think we're way out of our
league on this. I think this is
way above our head.
Until those standards are set
and until to believe the
science, Mr. Secretary, I have
to feel, uh, Mr. Chairman, as
if.
That we have science to rely on
and and what I'm finding is no
consensus on concentration.
And, and I think that's what I'm
waiting for. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative Representative
Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair
Representative, Mr. Secretary,
uh, my concern is the economic
and fiscal impact. So, just some
clarifying questions.
Does this give the NMEID more
rulemaking authority.
Representative yes.
And this also gives them more
responsibility to monitor.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, more
responsibility to monitor, um,
products or yes, those, those
products, yes.
Resentative, um, Mr. Secretary,
and this may be a question for
your general counsel. We know
that there's 4 different
elements to negligence and it's
duty, breach, causation, and
damages. So Mr. Chair
Representative Mr. Secretary, do
you think that the NMID will
have more
litigation, will they open them
up to more litigation.
As a result of all of this
rulemaking and monitoring.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representatives, my name is
Zachogaz. I'm the general
counsel of the New Mexico
Environment Department. Uh,
thank you for the question,
representative. Uh, although
it's possible that, you know,
any kind of new regulation could
lead to litigation, you know,
I'm an attorney for the
Environment department,
everything we propose ends up in
litigation. It seems like, uh,
but uh I, I only get the fights,
so there's, you know, plenty of
things that go on without the
litigation, uh, but to your
concern of, you know, more
litigation.
In in our original draft or uh
proposal of this bill, there was
a citizen supervision that has
been struck from this provision,
uh, we want from this bill
because we wanted to, to make
sure to, you know, obey any
concerns of, uh, you know,
massive increase in litigation,
uh, which is why we removed
that.
Mr. Chair representative Mr.
Secretary, and going back to
general counsel, could you agree
that maybe more duty is a more
likely to breach the duty.
And could you repeat that
question or is there a language
that you're referring to?
to the elements of, of
negligence, which we know that
lawsuits can be built on, so I,
my question was, he has
Do you think that there's more
likely to breach the.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representatives
representatives, uh, although
there may be increased duties
for the board to to make sure
that this program is being
implemented, uh, you know,
certainly that creates an
opportunity for someone to make
a claim, um, yeah, it is gonna
be our responsibility to make
sure these rules get passed and,
um, you know, approved and
regulated and force, so um
although we don't anticipate
that as a real possibility, uh,
again, if the EIB were to ignore
the instructions.
given by the legislature and in
the the statutory language, uh,
yeah,
then certainly.
Um, again, my constment, the
likelihood is more successful
representative secretary and
general counsel.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative and
Mr. Secretary. um, I've got a
couple of quick questions.
Basically, the bulk of the
products used.
Contained some sort of POS. I
correct in that. I mean, there's
a, there's a.
slew of products that actually
contain pefos.
Agree, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
So Mr. Chair and Representative
and or representative Mr.
Secretary.
What, what is the intent of the
bill? What are we trying, uh,
Mr. Chair, and Representatives,
so, um,
The goal of the bill is to
eliminate.
The
Public health
Medical issues, environmental
issues, litigation that are
Um, rape.
In the state right now because
there's, you know, bottles of
POs coming into our households,
our businesses.
Um, into our environment.
So it's, it's going after or,
you know, trying to eliminate
that exposure both in public
health environmentally and.
Uh, legally, which, you know,
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative back to um the,
the question we just heard, I
think while I, I understand the
theoretical aspect of more laws,
more rules can create more
lawsuits, I think the absence of
certainty around PFOS exposures
in people's households in their
water, in their land, also
creates um not only more
exposure for
lawsuits, but higher tort claim
actions higher.
You know, it, it creates
additional lawsuits. So I think,
you know.
Striking the balance is what
we're trying to do here. That's
the goal is to, is to stop the
exposure, break the uh exposure
pathways, um, that are plaguing
us right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary. So with that, let's
take Maine, for example. That's
when I looked, I think they've
enacted this and, and since then
they've they've had over 2400
exemptions.
You've already mentioned Mr.
Chair.
Representative.
All the
States that have already passed
it and all the exemptions that
are already built into the bill.
So with that many exemptions.
What are we accomplish?
Fair point. Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, Maine is one of
the states that we've
incorporated. There are lessons
learned, so appreciate you, you
acknowledging, uh, your, your
work there, you know, your
research there. Um, so what are
we accomplishing? So, you know,
maybe an easy way to point to
this is that, you know, when,
when you have a product that's
coming into your house, that's
labeled, you know, nontoxic or
whatever it is, that's 50 times
the drinking water standard,
maybe the EIB's approach is to
say that any cleaning product
that's 50 times over.
what we should be consuming that
could cost us $18 million to
remediate is the threshold. Um,
maybe, you know, microwave
popcorn.
Isn't the threshold. And, and,
and microwave popcorn with PAs
is your choice. If you want that
convenience and that exposure,
that's up to you. I, I think
there's a balance that will
strike through the rulemaking
based on peer reviewed science
based on what's right for me or
or Colorado or another state may
not be the right levels for us
either, right? Because our who
we are as New Mexico is not
necessarily
not drag and drop.
Per se, but give ourselves the
ability to say, how do we live
our lives in New Mexico. Maybe
our, our well water like La
Cienega went to you, but that's
not your day
was sitting next to me, um,
maybe, you know, cleaning
products that are getting into
their reseptic systems that
could be contaminating their
drinking water, maybe our real
issue as opposed to you again
going back to microwave popcorn
or Teflon pans or something like
that. So I'm, I'm in agreement
with you that there's a
I think that there's a place we
need to land, and that's where
the EIB will right size what
we're doing in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary, I guess, uh, and so I
guess that's exactly kind of
what I want to hear, but to
representative of Montoya's
point, I'd like that before we
pressed it through because Mr.
Chairman, and I know you don't
want stories, but, but there's a
little story. I've never, I've
never heard much about people.
Right?
But I do know at Christmas when
my daughter came home, I had to
throw all my pans away.
Um
And Mr. Chairman, I was not
happy because they were
expensive.
But she went out and bought
better pants. So I do think the
public has some education
towards PFOSS. And I'm very
grateful for that.
Is there a way maybe, OK, you
passed the bottle around. I
looked at the bottle and there's
nothing that says there's POS in
there.
If we were to educate the public
and then maybe label it to your
point earlier that you made.
Could they make the decision at
that point and say, I've heard
of PFOS.
We would like to, which might
then change the way
manufacturers do business
because if we're moving away,
Uh
Does that make sense, Mr.
Chairman,
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
it does make sense and in our,
um, the duties of the
environmental improvement Board,
we gave them the opportunity to
just pack the products in
English and Spanish, um, in a
way that, that, uh, you or I, I,
it, it's funny, Mr. Chair and
representative to hear you say
it doesn't say it because I've
had the same debate in my
household about bringing things
in where I say we're not buying
that because it contains POS.
And the answer is it doesn't say
it contains POs, and I said it
says it right here, C6 flora
polymera uh polymer, sorry, C6
flora polymer. And, and so, you
know, there's levels of, of, you
know, your daughter, I commend
her. She's educated and
understands exactly, uh, Mr.
Chair and Representative, how
these pans are, are, are not
great for your family's health,
but nobody's saying that. And in
fact, when you go to the store
to pick up a pan from any of the
big box stores that says.
Contains no POA PFOA. Great, you
have eliminated one of 18,999
other chemicals that are in that
pan, that got phased out 25
years ago, but are still showing
up in New Mexico today. So, Mr.
Chairs represented and
passionate about this because I
do feel it's the, it's the one
thing that we as New Mexico, um,
as the environment secretary,
it's a plague. It's our silent
Spring here, um, and if, if
We, so labeling is part of it,
and I agree.
Labels should be required.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Secretary, thank you for that. I
appreciate it. I guess I'm just
gonna keep going back and trying
to understand. OK, solar panels,
phones, and everything, the
chips excuse. So when those go
to the landfill, how does that
break down? And when it does
break down, does it then enter
into the groundwater. Is, is
that, is that something I'm, I
really am trying to understand
when it breaks down out of of a
plastic type substance. What
happens?
Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Representative, good question,
um.
You know, you either have an
acute concentration of something
like a firefighting foam, or you
have a chronic sort of
widespread issue as you're
describing, like e-waste and
things like that. Um, so what
Those chemicals, uh, or I'm
sorry, those products when
discarded and go to a municipal
landfill, uh, break down and
release PFAS, um, it may be
immobile depending on the
product or it may be mobile, but
over time, you know, 25 years
for some, you will get that
concentration of Pfiles showing
up in the landfill leachate,
that landfill leaks, it'll go to
groundwater, but that leachate,
I am not worried, Mr. Chair and
Representative, as much about
what's going into our
handfills to, um, I'm not
unworried, but I'm not as
worried about what's going into
our landfills. I'm worried about
this,
this, I mean, Mr. Chair and
Representative, quite candidly,
um,
represents
a, a chemical weapon for our
wastewater treatment plants.
I mean, that's how I see this.
And until the time we can sort
of right size the, the
rulemaking to address
The riskiest issues first.
But I hope in time with New
Mexico joining those 13 other
states that will get some
manufacturers and federal
national consistency that we
never have to exercise a rule.
Right? Because we're joining
that mass movement that will
cause manufacturers to change
willingly or the federal
government to change nationally.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr.
Secretary, and I'm glad you
mentioned the wastewater again
because I'm, I'm a local
official as well, and so I I am
familiar with the wastewater
treatment plant and kind of the,
the changes that might.
Or have been discussed is a fair
point. Um, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary, so I'm gonna go back
to, I'm just gonna keep
reiterating this product, makeup
that might get an exemption
because, I hope, you know,
otherwise what's going to
happen? People are gonna be
really upset if you take their
makeup away. um, but a lot of
those types of products that are
still going to go down the sink,
still, what have we changed?
I think Mr. Chair and
Representative to your point
using your example with your,
with your, with your family, um,
You know, when, when somebody
comes home to your household and
says, I chose this product over
that product cause I saw a label
on it. I chose this product over
that product, even though the
product contains POs, the
packaging does it. I chose this
product over that product
because I'm more educated and I
understand that we're on a
septic system, and I'm not gonna
buy a a product that's going to
cause or contribute to um the
decrease of our property value,
right? That'd be a big win if we
got people thinking.
that way. Um.
I think that's where we're
going, and I, I think this
bills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Secretary, and and I guess
that reiterates kind of the way
I'm thinking about this, uh,
again, very.
To your point, I'm proud of what
my daughter has figured out. And
that is, you know, her group,
she has a pretty big group of
friends friends at college, and,
and they're all thinking along
these lines.
But their push is, we would like
to know what it is we're buying
and, and she's very conscious
of, of weird stuff that I don't
think about, um.
She's very conscious of that.
But I do think it would help
them if we were able to label
that to make that choice easier
so she doesn't have to do the
amount of research she wants to
do, to pick and choose products.
But if we're going to approve.
Randomly approved products.
Randomly is the wrong word. If
we're going to give, give a uh
exemption to a product.
And still not make it labeled.
Now we still have to do that
research. So I guess where I
would land on this is, is I
would love to see more
information on how are we really
going to affect change, and how
do we help our, our
New Mexicans, um, and everybody
really make those choices, and I
don't see that.
Happening here because I see
exemptions happening, um.
And, and we're still gonna end
up in the same spot, maybe a
little less, but it's still in
the same spot. So if you could
help me get there, I would love
to support something like this
because you have no idea how
excited my daughter would be at
least, and that would make me
proud. And so I do want to get
there. I'm just having a hard
time, Mr. andresentative, I
appreciate your, your point. We
want to help you get there just
as much as maybe your daughter
wants to help you, I'm happy to
talk to her. Um.
But Mr.
Cha representative in all
seriousness, uh, that if you
look at section 4 of the bill 12
again, um, there's two sections,
A, the board, the board shall
adopt and when you go down to B,
it said the board may, um, and
these are the basically the
things the board shall and may
do, uh, or shall do and may do,
and um, you know, we, we left
under uh
Be the board may adopt other
rules as it deems necessary to
carry out the provisions here,
um, and, and those may, you
know, there's labeling elsewhere
mentioned, but
But there's options, um,
In there for us to work with
stakeholders and figure out
exactly what is most useful. I
will tell you the label on this
product is misleading, in my
opinion, because it says
non-hazardous, but then I read
the ingredients and it is
hazardous. So, uh, you know, we
as a state should be at least,
at least telling people to label
their products accurately,
right? There's a start.
And we can do that with this.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Representative Secretary IT
support the, the purpose of the
bill. I just have a couple of
brief questions. The first kind
of fall under what I call the
cart before the horse.
And that relates the first
question relates Mr. Chair and
secretary to the stakeholder
process.
Um, I'm a little concerned about
that and that it may not be
adequate, and I want you to tell
me why I'm wrong, um, and the
reason I bring that up is for
two reasons.
We had in public comment here a
gentleman, Mr. Trujillo, a few
minutes ago proposed an
exemption to um something
related to agriculture. You
thought that uh don't let me
mischaracterize, but I believe
you thought that was probably a
pretty good idea.
Um, and then we also had um one
of the public comments about the
impact on manufacturing and
business from a chamber of
commerce person.
Do you feel like that there's
really been an adequate
stakeholder uh process and, and
can we improve upon that in any
way or do you think it's
adequate?
Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I appreciate
that question. Um, you know,
stakeholder engagement is never
a destination, it's a process.
And, and I do believe there's
always room for improvement. I
mean, I look at the good
representative here, you know,
I, I reached out to all the
interim committees and said I'd
like to talk about this, uh,
radioactive and hazardous um
materials took us up on that. We
had conversation there. I've
done um speaking engagements.
I've talked
To the chambers, um,
I, um, again, I agree with you,
there's always room for
improvement. Uh, you know, with
no
We, we just hired a dedicated
PFOS attorney who is sitting.
Back here, um.
Greg Smith gear and and uh.
So
Uh, I think we've done a great
job.
We've not done a perfect job.
And I just like to add, Mr.
Chair and uh.
Representative that, um, I was
contacted by Mr. Andrew Beammi,
who's with the, um, his
managers, um, he's with the
sustainable PFOS Action Network,
and we took into consideration,
um, their suggestions and
changes and um we had someone
else that we, um, but that's why
you have a.
Uh committee substitute because
we did consider um other
stakeholders.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
and secretary, thank you for
that explanation. A second part
of my cart before the horse
question and that is, um,
If I understand what's going on
right now is we have the
national EPA, uh, going through
a process.
Process that training Kitty, I
believe you said um you expect
to this administration to
Continue
I don't mean to mischaracterize
your testimony, but I believe
that's what I heard. And what
I'm wondering is, and this goes
to sort of the duplication,
litigation, even the standards,
toxicity, all of those things.
Wouldn't it make more sense to
actually let EPA sort of
You know, continue with that
process.
See if there's deficiencies
there that need to be addressed
on the state level.
Um, and then proceed with
something as opposed to
proceeding and maybe I'm
misunderstanding the law or the
process, but proceeding with
something at the state level.
Then seeing something come out
the federal level level which
would actually take precedent
and therefore then we would
immediately be with two sets of
rags at odds with each other,
which would go back to some of
my colleagues' questions
regarding litigation. I
apologize if that's a long
question, but I think you know
where I'm headed. Yeah, Mr. Ja
and Representative, no, I don't
think that'd be efficient. I
think what we're
Uh, how spell 140 is about
waste.
House Bill T12 is about more
products, right, right, so just
Commodity, no commodity, maybe
to think of it that way,
commodity value, no commodity
value, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, we've been,
uh, you know, New Mexico is the
one that caused EPA. We, we
tried to get EPA to place
related to hazardous waste in
PAS, the non-commodity side.
Uh, back in 20, since that time.
How many bottles of this have
been sold in New Mexico? How
many pans have been sold? How
many people are drinking water
on well cause their own septic
is polluting it, um.
So I, I don't think we have.
I, I'm not saying this in any
kind of subjective way,
objectively, the longer we wait,
the greater the cost of the
state is to fix the problem,
because we are going to pay for
this in municipal governments
we're going to pay for this in
uh individuals health.
We're going to continue to be in
litigation with all sorts of
entities, um.
The my department is being asked
to do things that we don't have
the ability to do your private
well water issues.
Um, so
We're not in front of this in
any way.
And
HB 140 and HB 212s.
is, I think, more protective of
the taxpayers, more protective
of their health.
Whether you look at it from a
physical or health standpoint or
BT12 is, is the way.
We get there and
There's no duplicative.
If EPA was to take up the
hazardous waste rules.
Uh, and finalize those HB 212
would still be needed. It's,
it's the tap side, not.
The trash can side.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary, I've got
Couple more questions, but I
think I'll just roll them all
together and
So it goes something like this,
um,
You you previously, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Secretary, a
moment ago, you said solving the
problem, and I think the problem
that some of me, me and my
colleagues are having is
There's no standard for defining
the problem.
And I think, and I'll try this
question this way. When I look
at what are the standards for
removing liability.
Where, what is the disposal
method? What is the location?
You would probably direct me to
section 4 and so we'll figure
that out. Is that correct?
section forum.
Uh, in terms of rules being
promulgated.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
just the easier side, you're
correct. The rules promulgation
is section 4, but, but Mr. Chair
and Representative,
I think the solution side.
Is
Uh, I, I'll just, I'll say yes,
but I, it's an explanation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll wrap
it up so we can move on.
Representative secretary,
general counsel, thank you.
Thank you.
Is that it's it? OK, sir. Why
don't you turn your mic off? Oh.
Thank you.
Um, representative Montoya for a
2nd time briefly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
indulging me.
Um
I am, as I've been listening, a
couple of other concerns came up
and maybe a better solution.
But the concerns are
The idea that there's an
exemption that all of this stuff
can still go to.
Uh, secondhand stores and end
up.
Really getting the people who
would not be looking at labels
anyway because there'd be no
label on the product that that
that's a pretty big loophole. I,
I don't know how to fill it. I'm
not suggesting there's a way to
do it. I mean, you, there's no
way I would imagine your
daughter's products and going to
some other family, just not
yours.
Um
That and the fact that there
was, there's no way.
to stop
My wife's
For for efficiency for the
effect. If one of these products
disappears on the shelf.
And with my wife, she's gonna go
and see if it's still available.
They got company go out of
business. Oh no, great, they're
online, or yes, I can order
this and uh and Amazon.
I, I just think the loopholes
are way too big. I just don't
think we can really do enough
here to make, to put a dent.
However
I would suggest that there is
you have an advocate of all
places in the
Trump administration.
I think our efforts should be
directed to Robert F. Kennedy.
Junior
Because this is exactly the type
of thing that he.
I champion
And if it were done at that
level.
These products would either
change or disappear nationally.
And my wife would not be able to
go and
Instead of going to a local
Business in New Mexico that is
selling these products on the
shelves.
And then just bypass that and
going and ordering it from the
source.
I think that would be a better
solution. I, I just, there's
this, as many exemptions as
there are, as many as loopholes
and being able to get the
product as there are, I just
OK, that's not really the
direction I was expecting, but,
uh, any further questions, um,
from the committee. OK, I, so I
just had a couple of comments,
um.
Representative Ferrari,
Secretary Kenny, um,
You you mentioned um
Silent Spring earlier on, um, I
mean, I, I think PAS is our DDT,
um, so we used to use DDT in
lots of products because it was
really useful. And we found it
was.
persisting in the environment.
And had really negative
consequences. I think POS.
Same way, really useful stuff.
That's why it's in so many
products. And I can remember as
a kid.
personal story, if you will.
um,
Scotchguard.
Right, to spray that stuff on
everything because we're being
smart because it was protecting
our furniture and protecting our
shoes and.
I mean, that was all just POs,
you know, and that's why it shed
water.
that's what POS does.
Um
You know,
I, I know other states have
required labeling of hazardous
materials.
Um
And, you know, as a result, uh,
companies have reformulated
their projects.
Products because they don't want
They have to tell people that
the materials are hazardous.
And I think, you know, Mr.
Secretary King made this point,
which I think is really good.
The pressure is gonna grow
nationally.
To
Start reformulating things.
And this bill, in my mind is
part of that. So I think that's
a good thing.
Um
Uh, Representative Ferrari and
Secretary King, any final
thoughts before we take the
motion?
Um, uh, Mr. Chair, I'd just like
to thank our other co-sponsors
for most of the presentation.
OK, what's the pleasure of the
committee?
Mr. Chairman, I move a do not
pass on House Bill 212 in a due
pass on house energy environment
and natural resources.
We, we have a, a proper motion
and a second, uh, I believe
representative Abeta is right
outside, uh, um, and in the
meantime, we'll, we'll start the
vote.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia,
Representative Carrola. Yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Represented Montoya.
Represented Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez,
Representative Small.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Abeda.
Vice chair.
Chair
6 to 4, you have a do pass on
the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee.
Thank you very much.
OK, moving right along. Our next
bill.
Is House Bill 211.
Solar market tax credit changes.
Also with Representative
Ferrari.
Resent Ferrari whenever you're
ready. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And committee members.
Um
um 211, uh, would encourage the
installation of photovoltaic
systems with the
Les 15 kilowatt hours of solar
storage capacity and create a
new corporate solar market
development tax credit.
And the reason this is so
important is that it will allow
taxpayers to roll over their
eligibility when the maximum
amount has been certified. Um,
I, uh, there's been.
A decline in solar installations
in our state and um I think this
would help uh remedy that,
making it so that taxpayers
don't have to take on so many of
the different um
ins and outs of getting the tax
credits and things like that,
and I'd like to introduce my um.
Uh
Expert witness, uh, Mr. Rocky
Bacchus, and he has, um.
I think it's been passed out to
you, yes, the, um
Presentation.
So, um,
Presentation appears to be in
the form of a PowerPoint. Um, I
would ask you to be uh
Brief and to the point and, and
not necessarily do a whole
PowerPoint type presentation.
Yes.
I'll be very
it can be very brief, sir.
So, um, I'll just hold up the
page I'm gonna talk to uh.
The amendment, the reason it's
needed is there was a
significant drop in solar
residential companies doing
business in the state, over 100
businesses closed during 23 and
24, according to solar insurer's
report.
And this was mainly due to high
solar prices, which were due to
high interest rates and to the
COVID effects on the supply
chain issues. Interest is
actually the largest cost in.
And um the next.
graph is from yesterday's report
from the innerd website which
shows that
Of the 30 million allowed.
For tax credits, uh, only 6.1
million, so only about 20%.
was done in 24 and 24 out of the
last 5 years is the only year
there's been a significant drop.
In the amount of solar done.
So it is definitely a
significant drop and change that
has occurred.
And
Uh, this affects jobs. It
affects
Electric prices for everyone,
and that's why we believe this
amendment is heavily needed and
there's also some other benefits
to this amendment.
Uh, the next page.
It's right here. So if you see
this page for a moment and um
This amendment has no budget
change. There's no budget
impact.
It's changing some of the
processes and clarifying some
things and allowing some
different things, but no change
in the budget.
It allows power purchase
agreements.
Uh, to get the credit. That's
the one of the main factors of
this.
And it does change the limit
somewhat, so 10% of PV only or
20% of batteries are included of
at least 15 KWH.
Previously it was based on per
taxpayer instead of per
property.
So it's essentially the same
limits because two taxpayers.
Partners, whatever, married,
whatever, 6000 was 12,000.
So it's 6000 per property for
solar only or 12,000 if they're
solar and battery.
And uh PPA projects.
Have to be certified.
By someone that's certifying the
federal tax credit as well.
There have been issues in the
past about what the value should
be and when you have someone
installing and then owning the
same system with the federal tax
credit systems the way they've
resolved it. So using the same
guidelines that's used for IRS
would be used for appraisal.
The next, um,
Slide is this one.
And so
This is pointing out the
advantages to customers,
homeowners, and so forth.
So in the case of them just
purchasing the power.
If the powers not provided to
them, they don't pay anything.
It's on a meter similar to what
you have for your house meter.
It's done mainly by electric
companies.
There's 0 out of pocket costs
for the homeowner.
They don't have to deal with any
tax credits or other tax
matters.
The state is refundable, but the
federal is not.
Um, they're generally just going
to buy power at 30 to 70% less
than they've been buying from
their utility.
They would still have the
utilities of backup.
And the PPA provider pays all
the insurance, maintenance,
installation costs, so they
don't have to have it go on
their credit or have those kinds
of effects.
The PPA providers want to have
this long term. So if the
property is sold, they'll be
able to transfer it to the new
owner of the property. It's not
like a financing where the
financing is stuck on the
individual as opposed to being
able to be transferred.
And there are multiple.
EPA providers competing within
the state now.
I've listed and pointed out one
provider which is uh next area
Energy.
You may not be aware of Nexair
Energy, but they are the largest
utility in operation in New
Mexico. There are about 40 times
the perspective. They have over
100 megawatts of wind, 120
megawatts of solar and 150
megawatts of battery in New
Mexico. So they're here for the
long term.
And there are multiple providers
competing, but this is
relatively large players that
provide this kind of a
System and that want to own it
and have it long term.
When you have a 30-year
agreement with someone at the
house or business or
agricultural, you want that to
go well. You want them to save
money because you wouldn't have
good customer relations.
The next slide is, is a picture
about the effect on jobs.
While we lost.
Almost every major residential,
not commercial, but residential
solar company in the last couple
of years.
Those people are still here.
The people that did those
installations are still here.
They can form new companies.
They can do the installations,
and they can be trained and
formed companies so that that
economic development can be
brought back because it's a
great value for the homeowners
and businesses.
70% reduction in your electric
costs is a big factor for.
I've mentioned one trainer.
There are multiple trainers and.
In meetings with the Najo Nation
I had this week. They said, yes,
we need someone to train our
training facilities. And so
they'd be able to have training
at their local facilities or
with.
Whether the, the local training
of whatever type, whether it's
through a union or through a
school.
And then, uh,
The last
PPAs will supercharge New Mexico
solar for a few reasons. Number
one, because customers will see
a real 30 to 70%.
Lower cost and what they're
paying the utility. And it's a
lot simpler to understand if I'm
paying.
15 cents to P&M and I'm gonna
pay 7 cents or 3 cents to a PPA
provider depending on the
competition. That's an easy
understanding where it's trying
to understand what are my tax
credits can be fairly complex.
Again, it's a no hassle
situation because they don't
have to deal with the credits.
And clear
Uh, pricing.
Um, you may or may not be aware
that PNM
filed for an increase of 32.47%
in June of last year.
And that's a big increase.
That's a big impact that's gonna
happen.
Now the actual stipulation
that's pending is for 19.8% to
be done in two phases.
Half this June and then another
half in April of 26.
Another reason that solar is
because solar panel prices have
dropped dramatically. That's why
these much more competitive
prices are happening.
Prices of solar panels.
Or contractors.
A year and a half ago where as
much as 80 cents a watt.
Right now they're down as low as
20 cents a wa.
That's a humongous drop in the
cost of the solar itself.
Interest rates are dropping a
little bit.
Um
And then training makes a good
arch and entry situation.
This amendment again does not
change the budget at all.
But it does allow power purchase
agreements.
To be enacted that will be much
more favorable consumers.
And there were problems with
power purchase agreements many
years ago, 10 years plus years
ago where there were some very
unfavorable people doing some
negative things.
But large companies that are
doing this now that have deep
pockets.
are making sure things are done
right. They're having it done on
their own software so they can
make sure what the savings are
that can control things that
Salesmen can say almost anything
when they're in someone's house,
and we may never be able to
totally control what people say,
but when the
Technology they're having to use
is forcing them to use the
actual electric bills and the
actual information and you take
the tax incentives out of it,
it's a much better improvement.
OK is that it? Yes, sir. OK. We,
our audience is greatly
diminished uh by a show of hands
who's here in support of this
bill.
The
Is there any opposition?
OK, um, I didn't see any
opposition. If anyone would like
to speak in opposition to this
bill?
support
anyone online who would like to
speak in opposition.
Raise, please raise your hand.
None, OK. If you would like to
speak in support, please
support.
No one anyone online like to
speak in sport.
OK, easy enough.
Uh, going to the uh
representative Ferry, uh, would
you like to add anything before
we go to the committee?
Um
Just I think that the reason I'm
supporting this so
wholeheartedly is I have solar
and I think there are others who
haven't been able to take
advantage of having solar um and
lower uh electric bills, um,
like my, um,
Stepdaughter, um, and
It's something that if we can
make it more accessible, we can
bring back the industry, we can
bring back.
Jobs and it will make a
difference. Thank you very much
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh
Representative, and I'm sorry,
um, expert, I did not catch your
name. Rocky Bacchus.
OK, Mr. Bacchus. Um,
So, uh, did I, am I
I'm gonna just to kind of
backtrack on your presentation.
Uh
Currently
Of the 30 million
Uh
That was there available.
For solar last year.
Just over $6 million was spent.
So,
There's still money out there
for people who want to do this.
They're just not doing it.
And I'm gonna go name a whole
bunch of things that way we can
move process along. Um, also,
That, uh, there were
I have no idea how many
residential solar companies were
are in existence now in New
Mexico, but
Of however many there are.
Uh, 100/100 of them have.
Shut down so.
Generally
When you don't see demand, you
don't see an ask for an
increase.
To the budget.
So, if I can pivot to try and
see if I can understand.
But what we're looking to do.
is to help move the process
along is to allow a third party
provider.
To purchase the equipment.
Install it on a home.
Whether that home is owned by an
individual, and then this is
where I may be wrong.
Or if that is a series of homes
owned by
An investor
That
It would be considered a single
taxpayer.
And however much would be put in
there by, let's say a
Let's say a guy who, somebody
who owns a a
Multi-family complex or they
have multiple homes that they
are renting, but if they were to
install this, that the third
party provider would then become
the utility of record.
For the solar, uh,
For the solar tax credit. Is
that essentially correct?
um.
There was a number of questions
I'm gonna try and remember all
of them, um, so.
First off, it is not changing
the budget at all. The budget is
$30 million a year for multiple
years, the budget does not carry
over. So if you only spend 6
million and 24 and your budget
for 25 was 30 million. It does
not get increased by the amount
carried forward. It's they're
independently the way the bill
is currently set up and that
would remain as it is.
Uh, another question you have is
who would the owner be? If, if
the owner of a solar system
installed on a property is what
the limit is. So if the property
is a residential house or if
it's a um business or if it's a
nonprofit of some sort or in the
case of the tribes which got a
change last year so they could
be renting it from the tribe and
yet each one would still be
allowed even though they're
leasing it, each member would be
able to have a
Something on their property,
that would be the property. If
you have a
Multi-complex apartment complex,
I think is one of the things you
mentioned, then.
If they're separately metered
for each individual unit in each
individual unit could be done,
but those would be pretty small
systems because again, the rules
are limiting it to be within
accordance of M nerd's guidance.
So that may be a
$5000 system instead of a.
$10,000 system.
I think I answered all your
questions, but if I didn't,
please, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, yes, Mr. Chair,
um, and, uh, represent Mr.
Bacchus, um.
So
But what this would allow a
third party.
Installer or the not the
installer, but the company that
pays for the
For the solar system we put on a
On a, on a structure.
That that
would be the person who could
collect the tax.
Incentive
And would also then be who would
receive.
They would have to put some sort
of monitoring on there to see,
and then they would be able to
then collect.
A utility rate
Is that correct? Is that, is
that my understanding? Is that,
uh, that's pretty close, yes,
sir, uh, if, uh,
Almost never did the companies
that own this do the actual
installations, which I think you
corrected that also. Uh they
would strictly own it and then
they would dispatch local
contractors to do all the
service installation and so
forth, which is why it builds
jobs locally.
In terms of the rate they
charge, it's typically a 30-year
program, so you don't have the
surprise effects of uh 30%
increase all at one time or
things of that nature. You have
a long term commitment to the
pricing of the systems and then,
so it's not done through the PRC
through the regulatory process.
It's a contract that's done.
When the system is agreed to be
installed.
So thank you Mr. Chair and uh
Mr. uh Representative Mr.
Baucus.
Um, my understanding was that
these uh PPAs in the past ran
into some trouble because.
There was nothing in place, and
I don't know that it's in place
here either that would.
Keep the PPA.
From being able to pass on the
cost.
Of the
System itself, so they could
collect the tax.
Incentive
But then they could pass a level
of cost.
Unto the the the person renting
the building or renting the.
The the home.
I, I believe in the past that's
where we ran into trouble and I
don't see that there's anything
in here to to protect that.
from happening again.
Um, because I, I, I believe the,
the reason that this would work
out well for the
Person receiving the incentive
is like you said, it's paid out
over a period of time, but I, I
don't believe that there's
anything that limits them from
Adding an additional cost.
To the renter.
If this were to be in a rental
unit.
So, am I missing that or is
there a protection from that?
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Within the requirements of the
Uh, certification for M nerd,
there is the requirement to copy
of the PPA has to be provided to
M-nerd.
And when you have a 30-year
agreement that has prices for
every year of those 30 years.
Then that is a protection from
anything else being added later.
It can't be added later because
it's already in the contract and
it is having to be supplied to
M-nerd so that it is not only
the individual but the state has
that copy.
OK.
Thank you, um,
Mr. Chair and Representative Mr.
Baus that that is helping me
understand this better.
Um, as to your
Um
Other comments in the
presentation, you mentioned
that.
Uh, last year, P&M.
Got cost recovery for increasing
their infrastructure to the tune
of 30% increase last year and
there's a 19% request.
For uh increase this year.
Um
Mr. Bacchus.
Overall, that has been my
general concern with what we've
been doing with
With uh utilities uh since the
ETA.
However,
Not my only concern, only
concern with what we're doing as
well is, is grid reliability and
those type of things.
Um
And
As it's concerning
The cost to
the utility
Ratepayer
Uh, or let's just say the
consumer from public utility.
Is that
The more that we allow big
chunks of
Ratepayers to be pulled out.
Of that
And
Siloed off separately, the costs
for what they're having to do
are are still rising. They still
and that they, they're still
passing that cost on to the
ratepayer or the consumer.
But if we
In a dramatic fashion limit uh
uh start to eliminate.
Consumers
From them
Well, that cost is then going to
be borne by even fewer
ratepayers.
So the increase
Let's say we had a whole bunch
of folks that came out last
year, the request for 19% rate.
Increase might be 21%.
That, that's my concern. It,
it's
And by the way, just, you know,
at some point, I am going to be
one of these people who economic
status that I can, I'm going to
be able to take advantage of
this where many people will not
be able to.
And we're
You can help me pay for if I
wanted to buy a car and you want
to help me pay for my car, I'd
let you do that too. But uh,
The
The, the problem that I have
here is for our public
utilities.
The, the more that we do this at
the, at the micro level.
At the macro level, which
they're trying to, which they
have some
Uh
Requirements that we've put on
them.
And the more people that that
are pulled out of that, those
requirements remain the same.
And I, and I, and I'm very
concerned about the rising rates
on the people who cannot escape.
And I've even seen in and one of
the concerns I have is, is I, I,
I've seen that we're wanting to
put in place
Uh, protections for low income,
which there are many.
Who are customers of those
utilities that won't have an
opportunity to opt out.
And what, what we're looking at
doing is then capping.
What can then be passed on to
them, that would mean the middle
class.
who also cannot afford to, to do
this.
They left to bear the.
I, I'm, I'm so worried about
the, in my mind.
All of that then goes back to
these public utilities who have
to maintain grid reliability.
That
All together mixed into this big
pot of stew is very concerning
for me.
Um, are, are, are, are you at
all concerned?
About how if this were to be
taken advantage of that grid
grid reliability is
And, and by the way, Mr. Chair
and, and Representative grid
reliability is not just based on
when we don't have enough
electricity in the grid, but
At the same time, if we're
overproducing,
And it's taxing the grid that
also could harm the grid. So
that was a big long statement,
but those are my concerns and I
ask um representative if you
could address them.
Um, Mr. Chair and um
Representative Montoya, those
are, you know, all good
concerns, um, what this will do
is make it so that we can put
more
Um, energy onto the grid or just
make it so that there aren't
needed to, you know, the
households or the businesses
that take advantage of this
won't be, um, you know, um,
adding to the pressure that PNM
has or the other utilities, um,
to go to other very expensive
um.
You know, measures to get more
supplies. And as far, and that
would help keep it um lower cost
for people who might not be able
to have the solar, um, because
they're renting or other things
and still needing the um energy
supplied. So as we increase, um,
the number of homes or places
that have this agreement and can
take advantage and we have more
solar.
It makes it so that there is
less uh demand on the utilities
for them to invest in a lot of
money that could increase the
cost to other rate ratepayers.
And so in that way, and we can
expand to more businesses that
are going to, you know, um, have
big demands for energy. So this
will help meet the demands of um
economic growth, make it so that
um.
More expensive investments by
the utilities will not be as
necessary and that ratepayers
then who aren't taking, able to
take advantage, will not see
those huge increases.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you Representative. That's
a good answer, and that is, that
is helpful.
Um, I am.
And
Yes, yes, please.
Um
Mr. Chair Representative.
I'm on the pricing committee as
a volunteer for, for Prak for
P&M. I participate in the rape
case and in the additional
assets case. I just wanted to
correct a couple of things. What
I said was that P&M applied for
a 30% increase last year and
that the current stipulation is
to be 19.85%, not 30 + 19. So I
just correct that, please.
And that they've currently
applied for, uh, well, it was in
late November, they applied for
additional assets, most of which
is batteries out of a asset base
of perhaps $750 million of asset
increases, um, most of that is
batteries and based on their own
table, the annual revenue
increase required was $77.3
million now.
In the to make it, I think,
fairly simple.
If
The cost for
The utility to add assets.
is at
$77 million a year.
And if instead of that, you have
individuals, businesses, and so
forth, adding.
And they reduced the revenue
requirement.
And make it to only 50. Yes,
there's more revenue requirement
because they've lost revenue,
but if the loss of revenue is
significantly less than the
added revenue, you're making
everybody in the whole system
come out better. In the
particular files that have
actually been filed.
The prices for P&M to do the
batteries are up to over 4 times
more than what residential and
commercial people will be doing
it based on the prices I've seen
from contractors. So that's why
I said that you will actually
make it better for everyone for
this to pass and for the low
income people in particular, the
PPAs that I'm seeing based on
the incentives that they can get
are about 70% less than they're
paying now. So if someone was
paying 150 now, and they can
drop that to 70.
5 a month
That's a huge benefit to low
income folks.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
Representative Mr. Baucus, um,
As far as certain.
Infrastructure that's required
to be maintained though
specifically power lines, the,
the grid within as we pull
people out, that, that cost will
be passed on to fewer people.
Um
But I do, I'm, I'm glad for the
education on, on, on, because
that is something I've, that I
truly need to be able to make a
good decision.
Um
I am concerned.
About what I'm hearing of
Uh, insurance companies are
getting
With the with the with the
battery packs that are in the
homes that.
Insurance companies are talking
about maybe not insuring homes
because we can't put that fire
out.
I would almost rather have.
A mass
Um, battery storage, which,
which to the at that at that
rate where where the uh
Uh, where there is mass battery
storage. It doesn't have to be.
In our minds, what we see as
lithium batteries, they have
other options.
But with the inability to be
able to put out a fire from a
lithium battery, you can put
those things in water and they
can, you can immerse them in
water, they keep burning, and
that is the reason I understand
that the insurance companies are
talking about not insuring
homes. I don't, I don't want
many of our residents to be in
the same position of folks that
were in.
DC or in uh California.
With the fires that they had
just many of them just lost
their insurance.
So
I, I, I would almost prefer that
the.
In a in a larger scale and away
from residential areas.
Um, that, but that that's not
dealt with this, and I, I
appreciate the chairman for
allowing me to, to go to talk
about that a bit. Um.
Those are, those are my
questions. Thank you, Mr. So
we're gonna move on, uh, in the
interest of time. Thank you. uh,
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh.
Yeah
And thank you, Representative
and.
Uh, Rocky for your
presentations.
Uh
My line of question is more in
regards to uh.
Concerns that the.
Oh, perhaps
Uh, brought forth
Uh, um,
Right around that break period
of 2000.
23 2024.
And into 2024.
Um
So, um
I don't have solar. I'm
Waiting to kind of do a remodel
on my 90 year old house.
Before I do that installation.
Um
So I'm kind of novice in terms
of the process.
So, Mr. Chair, and Rocky, um.
Uh, what is the taxpayer.
Property owner
Homeowner
Specifically, homeowner.
Uh, what are the steps and they
And uh
Wanting to install a solar unit
on their homes. What's the first
step?
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, Representative, um.
The steps for a homeowner to, to
make that decision is to uh
evaluate what the benefit is to
themselves. I believe all quotes
that are done for so that I'm
aware of or done free.
And then if they decide it makes
sense for them, then they would.
Generally contract with someone
if it's a local contractor who
can use financing, they could
pay cash or they could under
this bill, they could use a PPA
provider and then.
Once that is agreed to, then
there would be permit
applications, interconnection
applications with utility, then
there would be installation
done, then there would be an
inspection by the
Local jurisdiction inspector,
and then there would be an
inspection by the utility before
it would be allowed to operate.
OK.
So, where does the
We're in that process, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, does the property owner,
homeowner.
Uh, pursue the credit.
qualifying for the tax credit.
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
If the homeowner is going to buy
it themselves either pay cash or
finance themselves, then after
the ins for New Mexico's tax
credit, which is refundable,
there has to be an inspection as
part of the submittal to M nerd
in order to get the
certification and then when they
file their tax return, they
would get the tax credit paid by
the state, but they do have to
file a tax return to get that.
In the federal case, they don't
have to have a lot of that other
documentation. They just include
from IRS with their tax return.
which can be done electronically
and then it would be processed.
OK, so we're looking, Mr. Chair,
at a property in a homeowner.
Um, who's purchasing the system.
Why
Bail out
From the sellings of
You're bureaucratic, uh.
Inaccuracies within the
departments that they've
approached.
In terms of
Processing the credit.
That's what happened to these 4
constituents, Mr.
They just said no on the
process, mainly because there
was this.
For some reason, their inability
to kind of.
Process that credit.
So they kept going, kind of got
the run around from.
The departments that they were
dealing with, and I'm not sure
who they were dealing with if it
was a nerd.
Jackson red or if it was this
other department that's involved
in the process with
With the processing that this is
right around.
Into 2024.
Mm
to allow just so many people and
um once they hit that cap.
Then they quit, um.
You know, approving people
where.
They had a 2nd step.
Where tax and rev would then say
well, but they couldn't go back.
To letting more people in,
approval process that we didn't
get more people that could so
um, I introduced a bill that
would change that.
And I
Don't remember when in effect.
Um, that now people don't have
to have a tax.
spread it to only qualify. So
now, if it's refundable, they
let everyone.
Does that make sense? So I think
they got caught up in that.
Yeah,
I think that
that was the constituents each
had their own story.
With their own conditions.
In their own assessments.
So it, it didn't flow in terms
of
You know, uh, I tried directing
them to the dinner.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Representative.
A couple of questions, um,
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
It was to clarify that there
wasn't an intention to exclude
nonprofits so the churches and
other facilities that could also
use solar.
Uh, would be able to and the
federal bill added a
refundability for nonprofits,
which was then lining up the
state with the federal
guidelines.
Mr. Chair, um, do we have any
issues with anti nonprofits pay,
I don't know how Mr. Chair
Representative, um,
The nonprofits are not.
Owning and getting the tax
credits from the state.
A third party that would put
solar on their property who does
pay taxes would be getting the
incentive. Thank you. Um,
OK, um, a couple of
Questions.
I want to copy of.
Great, um.
First, um, item, I noticed that
for there is expected to be a
fiscal impact, although small,
um, is that something that, uh,
I'm sorry, we don't have, Mr.
Chair and representative.
OK, we got it. Thank you.
Mr. Chair,
Madam representative, uh,
I've been in meetings with M
nerd.
Almost every day this week, this
past the last week.
This week and um they have not
mentioned this as being an
issue. It's a relatively small
amount that they would have to
make some modifications to the
website that displays it and so
forth. So $150,000 to their
budget is a relatively small.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. um,
and Representative, um, and Mr.
Bacchus.
Um, based on the, um,
Uh, the table at the top of the
FIR though, it does indicate the
total 3-year cost, uh, um.
But that would certainly be
something.
Potentially another committee.
Um
Um, my second question is on
page 3 of the FIR2, um,
Regarding the at least 15
kilowatt hour threshold, um,
and, uh, M nerd, um, in their
analysis notes that um
This system eligibility may
exclude many residential
applicants from this tax credit
because most residential
distributed solar plus storage
systems
include batteries,
um.
2 years ago.
Uh, almost all batteries for
residential, we're in that range
and because that's too small to
run your air conditioner or a
number of other things in a
home, they would have what they
call a critical loads panel. And
that critical loads panel would
mean if you lost power from the
utility and went on your
battery, that it would shut off
automa your air conditioner
typically and several other
items you did, but the battery
prices have come down so much.
And when you take the cost of a
critical loads panel being
installed versus adding more
batteries.
You're better off to go with
more batteries, and then you
don't have to shut everything
off.
And so it's 15.
KWH is about the minimum size
that you can still run an air
conditioner on.
Because if the battery is too
small, you can't start the air
conditioner because of the
initial load draw. So that's why
the 15 kWH was put in there to
say, we don't want to keep doing
critical load panels. We want to
do batteries that allows a lot
more resilience to the grid, and
it's a good minimum.
Level, that's about the same
cost as you were paying 2 years
ago for a smaller amount of
batter. Thank you. Um, the next
item, uh, is actually.
Following up on that, um, and
the FIR and I apologize, Mr.
Chair, because I am quoting the
FIR because I don't know that um
everyone has it in front of
them. Um, but the 15 kilowatt
hour threshold could also
negatively incentivize solar
installers to overbuild solar
systems for the stated needs of
the residential consumer, which
would not be in the best
interest of the homeowner.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Could you point me to where
you're reading, please?
Sure. Bacchus, my apologies.
Page 3, the last.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
um,
The
Costs of residential batteries.
are part of what's evaluated in
a total system that M-nerd has
guidelines on when they set
their rules for what you
typically you're not going to
put in more batteries than what
can be charged and what what I
expect them nerds additional
regulations that they will be
developing out of the funds that
they have there.
And um.
In in practical terms, I think
that most even low income folks
will go with 30 KWH which is
twice this amount, uh, because
that will give them the
capability of totally
disconnecting from the utility
and operating for multiple days
without the utility's power. So
if the utility charges are going
too high, they can literally
disconnect, which gives them a
competitive situation. Thank you
Mr. Bacus. Um, and
representative, did the, um
Uh, IOUs weigh in on this bill.
Have they been consulted at all
that uh.
It
concern about
Um
Customers from
The
Utilities onto other
customers. I'm just wondering if
the utilities have provided any
feedback.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
um, the utilities have not
specifically given feedback for
this bill in and of itself and
again this is a modification to
an existing program, utilities
are expressing a huge need for
additional resources in the case
of PNM. It's about
700 million is my calculation
and about 77 so when you remove
people from the system.
If the, if the amount they're
taking off from revenue from the
utility.
is less than PNM would add in
order to provide for that
customer, then you lower the
cost for everyone else.
And because the costs have
changed so dramatically.
This is a bonus for everyone
that pays the rate, not as it
was a few years ago where they
were saying this is going to
raise everybody else's rates or
cross-subsidizing non-solar
people for the solar people.
That's not the case anymore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
um, thank you for that. Um, I
wanna continue, Mr. Chair, um,
and Representative on the FIR,
um, top of page, um,
Uh, too bad we don't have line
numbers. Um, but
First paragraph, this
eligibility could also
incentivize the rooftop solar
industry to push power purchase
agreements contracts when such
contracts may not be
advantageous for that household,
um.
So I, I don't necessarily need
an answer to this, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, but I think what
I'm concerned about with these 3
items specifically, is what I am
interpreting as a concern from
MED that we may be
Uh, promoting something that is
not in the best interest of
customers.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, and
Representative, the next
paragraph, um,
The current language of HB 211
does not prioritize smaller
residential solar installations,
which could
Um, and, and so further on in
that paragraph, Mr. Chair,
Representative, they actually
suggest, um, that if
Um, that the legislation
considers separate funding
pools, uh, thereby allowing to
prioritize smaller projects, um,
or having an adjusted cap.
Um, if part of the Gal access.
Um, so I wanted to flag that as
well, because if
That's a similar concern that
tax and revenue brings up, um,
further down, uh, where they
note, um, combining the
aggregate credit cap, um,
At the for personal income tax
filers. So,
Mr. Chair Representative, is
that something
Have you
Thought about
how you feel about.
That concern. Um, like, are you
comfortable with potentially uh
smaller residential.
Consumers getting pushed out.
And if, if you are that.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
uh, 1st, 1st off, I would want
to point out that that's not
part of this amendment. That's a
concern that's been there for a
long time with the existing
bill. That's not part of this
amendment at all, but in terms
of your direct question, the way
that is addressed is by the
limit per property. So if you
only have $12,000 per property,
you can't have a million dollar
project taking up most of the
money. And so,
It's my opinion that that
$12,000 is a good amount to, to
regulate that without a bunch of
different buckets that would
make it much more difficult for
Mner to track and then have
multiple
Buckets that they're trying to
follow the limit on. So I
believe it, it is with a 6000
without batteries and 12,000
with batteries because frankly,
batteries need to be at least
50% of all projects because
that's where the cost is going
for the utilities.
Intermittent issues with
renewables.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I would definitely be interested
in getting a little bit more
feedback from tax and Rev, um,
since the, I think what they're.
Speaking to is part of the
changes, um, but that could just
be, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, last two items.
Thank you, not tax and rib. I'm
sorry, taxation revenue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. Um, and so potentially
the tax and revenue department,
uh, could further clarify that,
um.
Um
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
the last couple of questions
that I have relate to.
Um, conflict duplication,
companionship and relationship.
Um, so the relationship of this
bill, 211.
Um
To House Bill 213 and House Bill
51. Um, and one of the things
that um.
I suppose this isn't necessarily
a question so much as a, um, not
quite philosophical statement,
but I do get a little concerned
with
Sometimes I feel as though we.
Pass bills and policies and a
silo. Um, and so I think that
what my concern is highlights is
The innerplay of multiple bills
addressing.
Fractions of a larger issue.
Um, and
How they will all work together.
And I suppose, Mr. Chair,
representative, that some Thank
you Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've
just got, I think two quick
questions for you. Uh, first
question, I, I was asked, and I
don't see the need.
Can you tell me for sure that
this only applies to New Mexico
residents. Um, they didn't see
where it only applied to outside
of the state.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
I'd have to look at everything
in detail again, but it's only
for New Mexico residents for,
for New Mexico properties. It's
not for out of state.
And I'm pretty sure that's in
the writing, but I would have to
go through, uh, I think it
refers to New Mexico taxpayers.
And uh New Mexico properties,
but I, I would have to find that
within the bill to, to get that
to you, sir.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. I
think I'd, I'd like to know for
sure that I know New Mexico
taxpayers.
Which could be a taxpayer with a
resident somewhere else. So I
just want to make sure I'm clear
on that and the other thing I'll
I'll ask very quickly, Mr.
Chairman Representative and an
expert.
Um
Since solar energy is not, I
guess, considered a base load.
Um, it causes companies to have
to overbuild their transmission
lines to accommodate the solar,
and I think that's somewhat
represent a month if we're not.
If we're having to make
companies overbuild their lines.
What does that, what does that
do to the grid? It feels like it
makes the grid a little bit fun.
They're having to figure out how
to accommodate it.
They've already got some built
out to some extent, I would
assume I'm speaking very out of
my world here, um.
So your, your question about the
grid itself and transmission
lines in particular.
Transmission lines are currently
running about a million dollars
a mile, so they are very
expensive, but they also have a
typical depreciation life of 70
years.
When you have the utility
putting a battery station and
there's one plant in
Albuquerque, there's some
planned out in other areas.
Those are the ones that are
using the transmission lines in
round numbers when you're doing
renewable solar and wind, most
of the wind power generates at
night and solar only generates
during the day.
When, when this bill is allowing
more residential commercial
solar that's distributed, so
you're not using the
transmission lines at all. So
this bill and the extent it is
able to more serve more people
that reduces the congestion on
the utility lines reduces the
cost of them having to do more
service for transmission lines
in. OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. I, I
think that gets me.
Further questions from the
committee.
Represent Murphy.
Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Chairman Representative,
um, thank you very much.
No, that's OK. I just, I, I
didn't want, I want you to hear
my question. Yes, Mr. Chairman
Representative, thank you very
much. I'm gonna talk about this.
Sheet right here in my central
question is,
What I'm really trying to get
in my mind is why the decrease
in the utilization of this. And
let me
Make a statement here, and you
can tell me if I misunderstood
or I'm wrong.
So
When I look at this chart,
especially the, the bottom
right-hand side of this.
I see beginning in, it looks
like 2020. We had just over 2000
projects approved.
Over the next 4 years from 20 to
20 to 2023.
Um, essentially that doubled
from around 2000 to around 4000.
In one year from 2023 to 2024,
it had.
It was down
Um
Yeah, 50% or so from 4000 back
to 2000.
Now,
if I was to have my accountant
brought me one of a chart that
looked like this in my business.
And I looked at this revenue
stream activity or however we
want to call it in terms of
charts. I'd say why?
And Mr. Chairman,
Representative, one of the
things that I heard was, well,
it was because of COVID and
supply chain.
Well,
I have to just, I'd wonder about
that because that was largely
over by the end of 2021, and yet
we see projects increase in 23.
Or 22 and 23.
Um, I then say, OK, well,
The reason it fell from 2023 to
2024 by 50% is because of cost,
perhaps inflation.
But
I was, you told me, uh, told us
a little while ago, Mr. Chairman
Representative that actually
these costs have come down from
80 cents a watt inflation.
So my conclusion would be if
somebody brought me this.
And I was looking at it from a
business standpoint.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative, that one of 3
things has happened.
Either this is too expensive.
Which it can't be because it's
come down so much.
There's market saturation.
Um, everybody that's wanted to
do this is largely done it.
There's still a few, but the,
the, the curve is breaking over.
And I, my question is.
What am I missing?
Thank you. Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, the supply
chain issues that were caused by
COVID, we're not immediately
fixed and um the
If you want greater detail on
that, some of, especially a lot
of the tariff issues were a big
disruption. China had been by
far the major and.
Uh, punitive tariffs were put in
place for certain areas of
China, mainly having to do with
the Uighurs and
slave labor that was done in
that area, um.
And a lot of the production
moved to other Pacific Rim
areas, Vietnam, Malaysia, and so
forth, those movements took a
while to happen and then come
over.
The cost reductions that I
mentioned were not in 24,
they're in 25 right now within
the last two months. What has
happened is there's now
approximately 37 manufacturing
plants that have been built in
the United States that are state
of the art, and they are coming
online and so they're getting
closer to, you know, world
technology for sure, but world
prices also where world prices
were.
About 1/3 of what US prices
mainly due to a combination.
As far as the cost to the
consumer.
The cost of the consumer of
solar is dramatically less than
the cost of staying with the
utility and so that will create
a competitive situation in the
balance, they will better enable
the, the group as a whole
greatpaers to not have as big of
a benefit all ratepayers and um.
We haven't addressed everything
in the FIR yet because it didn't
come out till midnight or
something last night. I got it
early this morning. I read it.
But we'll have more conversation
with the nerd. I think we can
address every issue they had and
some of the information they
have is they haven't been
updated on the costs as well. I
did have a meeting with the
chief the assistant secret the
secretary's chief expert.
And he was
Amazing and appreciative of the
information. We want to work
together with the nerd, um, but
most of the questions we're
getting are not having to do
with the amendment to the bill.
It has to do with the bill
itself and its continuation. I
just want to point out that
difference.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative, um,
One last comment and I'll and
then I'll, I'll, um, I'll.
I'll see, um, the supply chain
type of, in my experience so
supply, we deal with supply
chains in my business a lot,
pipe and cement and all sorts of
things. And so generally what I
have found in my experiences
when you have supply chain
issues.
They generally manufacture
themselves early in the process.
So you could argue that I think
that your first two years were
growing but not growing as fast
because of that.
The next 2 years perhaps those
supply chains were being um
opened up more, but it doesn't
explain and once again the
dramatic drop in my problem with
flight chain. So I don't want to
belabor this point. I don't want
to take any more time in the
committee, but I'd love to sit
down with you at some point and
try to understand that issue
better. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy. Any other questions from
the committee.
So I will just add my two cents,
um.
I think we often have tax
incentives.
Uh, to encourage adoption of new
technology. Um, so I appreciate
that the storage is in here. We
have a um we bill coming up.
Uh, that's not new technology,
so that's gonna be interesting
uh conversation. Um, I, I
personally think
In terms of incentivizing rot
off rooftop solar.
I think we're getting to the end
of that adoption of new
technology, period.
It's been around for a while.
Um, so we've, uh, you know, I
carried one of these bills
before.
Uh, to extend the rooftop solar
tax credit.
Um, and, and they come back year
after year and at a certain
point, um, I think rooftop solar
will prove in itself and it's a
worthy investment and it will
end up standing on its own, so
just.
92 cents.
Um, represented.
commotion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would move a
you pass with no recommendation.
And
You know
You want to do, do it just
briefly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
think given the, um, you know,
the fact that the FIR didn't
come out until late. I have a
number of concerns that um I
would like.
To see a addressed, um,
potentially in the next
committee. It could be, uh, but
about consumer protections with
no recommendation. OK, just for
clarity, um, we, uh,
Uh, moved one of the vice chairs
on this bills for on the
recommendation, um, and I've
since learned like we call it
DuP pass with that
recommendation. It's actually
report without recommendation.
Um, cause the do passes that the
recommendation. Um, I, I think
we call it that because
Uh, you know, for us, we're
moving a bill forward.
Um
Uh, but in this case, just
without recommendation.
Um, so that is a proper motion
is, is there a second to that
motion?
OK, we have a second to that
motion.
And
just stirring the pot, jeez. Um,
OK, so we have a, uh,
Chairman Small, we're on House
Bill 211. We have no
recommendation motion and we're
about to take a vote.
you, uh, Nina, can you take the
vote, please?
Representative Abeda, yeah.
Representative Dixson of Garcia.
Representative Grola.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative Small.
Vice Chairana.
Yes.
Terry McQueen.
Yes.
So by 7 to 4 vote, you uh you're
advancing without
recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee, and we will work to
get.
Thank you very much, um, our
next bill.
I, uh, the usual suspects in
Ferrari and Mr. Baucus, um, our
next bill is
Hospi 213.
School solar tax credits, uh,
whenever you're ready.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee, um, we will.
Let you know about um
This is something that's really
important, um, for our um
education system in New Mexico
to um support the provision of
clean and renewable energy in
public schools and public
postsecondary educational
institutions in New Mexico and
this bill, um, would enact new
sections of the income tax Act
and the corporate income and
franchise Tax Act to create a
transferable, refundable tax
credit of
0 % of the costs for taxpayers
to purchase and install one.
Wait a minute. Yeah.
Anyway, I'm just gonna go off
the grid and um this is
something that is going to help
our school systems. They're
already seeing this, um, in a
couple, uh,
Uh, districts and um I think
this is, this will make it so
that
we can expand this to all
schools, have the schools save
funding that they can then
better use in other uh
situations. Um, so with that,
um, I'd like to again introduce
my expert, Mr. Rocky Bacchus.
Mr. Chair, committee members.
So I want to go to the first
slide which mentions the
benefits to schools, uh, savings
of 70% on electric, which it
frees up
Up to $130,000 per school per
year, so it's a very substantial
savings to the schools. It's
zero cost share, uh, nothing the
schools have to pay for.
Uh, it also provides a local
shelter situation with the
batteries that are on the
schools, they can go off grid if
there's an emergency, a fire
takes out lines, whatever, they
can become a much better shelter
for the local community and it
will add substantial new jobs.
Or bring back a lot of jobs that
have been lost.
The next page looks like this,
and it has a list of every
school district in New Mexico
both charter schools and um.
Regular schools, and I'll just
mention a few numbers from some
of the areas based on the
calculations which, which will
be made per school districts. So
Hobbs would save about $1.3
million per year, dimming
$711,000 per year.
Smaller school districts, Cobra
140,000 per year. Alamogordo
200, excuse me, 740,000 per
year. Clovis, a million per
year. Roswell 1.3 million per
year. Farmington 1.48 million
per year.
Uh, central, uh, consolidated
school, $664,000 per year, and
their board chairman yesterday,
Suzette Hasy Oberly, if I'm
pronouncing that right,
expressed how much she would
like to have this done and asked
me to come make a presentation
at their retreat at the end of
the month.
Every school in New Mexico is
being contacted in order to make
them aware of this and what is
in it for them and for each of
your districts.
The next slide looks like this.
Um
School financial benefit, again,
zero cost share.
And the schools only buy the
electricity from the solar
that's produced, generally it's
70% less than they're paying
now. The PPA provider has to
provide the installation, the
maintenance and all the
insurance.
There are multiple PPA providers
competing so that competition
gives you the best pricing
situation.
Sun wealth is one that's just
saying this is one company that
happens to be a um public
benefits company, they're not a
traditional for profit company
and they provide some
fantastically low rates in about
17 states including New Mexico,
and they've already contracted
with Kobry School District and
with.
Demming School District.
The next slide is this the
picture of the Capitol.
And uh
Historically,
What they call PSFA, the public
school Facilities Authority have
offered to pay 90% of the cost
for schools to go solar and the
schools only do 10%.
But with this bill, what we are
going to see is that the state
will only need to pay 40% of the
cost, Federal tax credits will
pay 30% of the cost and the PPA
provider will pay 30%, which
means that the state is paying
less than half of what they've
previously been offering to
school districts.
It's multiplying the effect of
the state's money.
Then the uh annual school
savings in electricity across
every school, and I think every
school necessarily do it, but if
they did, they would say 42
million per year.
For the next 30 years.
It's a substantial amount of of
savings to the schools.
And in round numbers, it's about
4 times what the tax credit
would be in terms of the
savings, if you don't count
interest in inflation, with just
2.9% inflation, it comes out to
more like 7 times what the state
invests in terms of return and
reduced electric costs.
The next slide looks like this.
It talks about jobs.
Uh, most of you were here for
the previous visitation it's the
same situation that we have
people for companies that have
gone out of business that are
still here, those employees are
still here. They're interested,
many of them in forming new
companies and it's an
opportunity for them to have
jobs and to
Achieve the opportunities of the
energy transition Act.
And these are permanent jobs
because once people are getting
the experience and the
opportunity to get back into the
industry, then they can go do
commercial jobs, residential
jobs, etc.
So the next slide is statewide
utility savings.
And
Um
As I mentioned earlier.
Uh, PNM filed for in June of
2024, a 32.47% increase on
residential rates.
The pending stipulation, which
is not finalized yet. Would
that, for that to only be 19.85%
right now, which would be
implemented in two phases.
They're saying it's his fault of
the ETA, but I think the ETA has
got a lot of benefits that are
just not fully being brought
out.
School solar pudding batteries
on schools and solar on souls is
at a much lower cost than what
P&M's current proposal is to
add, and the same will be true
of other areas.
Because if you've got to not
only build a giant system but
then transmit it all over as
opposed to it being distributed,
the distributed system is much
lower cost.
And P&M has announced that they
cannot use the tax incentives
right now because they've got
A maxed out situation. So
there's a lot more benefit to it
being done in a distributed
manner. We expect that all the
utilities will follow. You may
be aware of some of the
co-ops which have had.
Columbus Co op, for example, I
think had a 26% increase in
demand charges on rate 3 last
year.
But it almost all the co-ops are
funded by tri-state. They get
their power through, not funded,
but they get their power through
them.
Um
Again, I'm mentioning next year,
they're the largest utility
that's operating in New Mexico.
They're 40 times the size of
P&M.
And they've already got 100
megawatts of wind, 120 megawatts
of solar and 150 megawatts of
battery, and they're one of the
groups along with Sun Wealth and
many others that would fund. I'm
just showing two different
companies that do it. It's not.
Exclusive to any one company.
And then the next page looks
like this.
And uh
What the bill is proposing is a
40% of project appraised values
and the appraisals have to be
done by the same appraisal as is
used for the federal tax credit.
A number of years ago there was
issues on, you know, what the
company is gonna own the same
system and they're valuing it
themselves and having third
party appraisals required is the
way that IRS and the federal tax
credit work through that and
just piggybacking on that, I
think makes the most sense for
the state.
There is no physical impact in
2025 because projects that are
done in 25 are not going to be
on tax returns till 26. And as
it ramps up, it'll be more an
additional years, but the bill
is limiting it to 100 million
per year for years 26 through
28.
The total limit is 300 million.
But again, that's going to be
paid back between 4 and 7 times.
So the urgency is the last page
which looks like this with a
clock on it.
And
Last year we brought this same
essentially same bill.
And it didn't make it all the
way through.
We lost 20% of incentives that
were available in New Mexico
that are now gone. So they were
higher federal incentives last
year than they are this year.
The new administration may cut
the solar incentives altogether.
There's certainly been rhetoric
to that effect.
And then if I, if New Mexico,
they may be back to paying 90%
of the costs and
IRS safe harbors, the federal
incentives if it's contracted in
25 and at least 5% is invested,
that's IRS.
Regulation, it's safe harbors
it, so you lock in those
incentives.
So if
Many of these schools will
commit and get 5% of the work
done within 2025, even if it
takes another two years to
finish.
They'll lock in the federal
incentives. And so that's why we
consider it urgent.
To lock in that
Co-payment, so to speak, to make
the cost much more effective.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'll
for.
Thank you. Next, we'll go to the
audience. If you are opposed to
this bill, please raise your
hand.
Anyone online opposed in the
audience, please raise your
hand.
Good morning again, committee.
Madam Chair, thank you for the
opportunity to rise in support
of this bill. My name is Melissa
Bernardin. I'm with Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter. This bill is
a creative way to expand solar
installation on schools, saving
them money on their electric
bills, especially if the panels
are owned by the installer and
the energy.
We do wonder, is there a way to
stipulate that half of the tax
credit anyone else in support?
OK, we'll go online.
We
Good morning, chair, uh,
committee members. My name is
Athena Christodoulou. It's
always a good uh idea to look
ahead and look at your costs,
and this is what this bill does
for our schools and that makes
us less reliant on other revenue
sources. I'm in support of this
bill.
Thank you, Tina. Next, uh, we'll
go back to the sponsor for any
additional comments?
So I would, I would address the
Sierra Club's comment and, um,
I appreciate this here Cubs
support very much, um, splitting
the incentive between the school
district and the contractor, I
think is better done in the way
the bill is written because it
winds up with a lower price for
the PPA if they, if the provider
of the PPA doesn't get the full
incentive that they won't give
as low a price, so it, it winds
up being a better situation for
the school district plus there's
no kind of, of things. So I
think the way it's written is
is better and that's why it
wasn't split. There is a case,
well, on virtually all of the
proposals that P&M has for
additional assets.
They're charging a price that
they're gonna request as a
revenue requirement, which on
the requested amount is 77.3
million per year of additional
revenue, but they're also
requesting that the contractors
rebate back to the utility half
of the incentives, and there,
that's in the contracts that are
in that 5000 pages of filings,
uh, but I think that that kind
of hides where the value is.
It's better for everyone for it
to be very much out front and
part of the PPA price. And if
the, if the
School's paying an effective 15
cents a kilowatt hour and on
this basis, they would pay 4
cents a kilowatt.
For your comments, um, we are
gonna go to the committee.
I believe Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
And uh presenters.
Uh, so this is essentially
the same
mechanism as the last bill, so I
don't wanna.
So these are gonna be more
specific to
Uh
The
The schools themselves in
particular is what I'm wanting
to address here.
Are they not
Are are the schools not
currently allowed to be able to
do this and enter into agreement
with the
A PPA.
Madam Chair, Representative, um.
The school districts are not
legally prohibited from doing
PPAs with anyone, and that's
been available for a long time.
Most of this, and I've been to
many school boards and, and
school districts, uh.
Schools in general do not want
to be responsible for solar or
for maintenance or insurance.
It's not their area of
expertise. It's not something
they want to do. They in
particular,
All virtually every I think
every school district I've
talked to hates the idea of
anything on their roof. So
everything that I've seen
proposed is all on carports.
So that gives them additional
shaded parking. It's a better
situation for the school
district, um.
Schools are not
In a good position to get all
the incentives and deal with all
those things. I mean, that's
fairly complex. They much prefer
Having a PPA and in fact, on
large projects, most of them are
done on PPAs, um, most of the
projects that P&M is even doing,
they're doing on PPAs or battery
PPA's equivalent of a storage
PPA if you will, they have a
different set of initials, but
they're not prohibited from
doing it and never have been to
my knowledge. So, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, uh, representative
and, and Mr. Bacchus. So I, I
guess the question I have is,
wouldn't they be able to
negotiate?
Some of the same parameters that
are in this bill.
Individually, could they not
with the PPA, uh,
Negotiate that the PPA since
they're putting it in, would be
responsible for the insurance
and
And all of that.
Madam Chair Representative.
The schools do negotiate what
they get and what they want, and
some of the schools, for
example, have said, well, we
want it over a playground
because we have hot playgrounds
that we want our kids to be able
to use in the summer. So they're
able to negotiate what this bill
is doing is giving them a way
for
The multiplication of the
federal incentives to make it
happen right now, so to speak,
and to lock in those federal
incentives with enough of an
incentive to where the schools
find it extremely attractive to
do, but they absolutely
negotiate all the points that
what they want, where they want
it, and how they want it to. So,
um, Madam Chair.
Represented Mr. Bacchus, so.
Why is this not happening?
Now or to, I mean, it does seem
like it is happening to some
degree. Why is this not
happening to a greater degree
currently.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I think that there have been a
number of schools that we've
looked at their data, whether
it's Rio Rancho or Las Cruces
School District and others, uh,
Hatch School District.
Excuse me, that
Have tried solar in small
amounts.
And they have not.
They are not solar people and so
uh in the Las Cruces School
District, for example, they put
in a fairly big size system at
Centennial High School.
And then they saw almost no
savings. Well, if the
If
Under the new rate for P&M as
much as 70% of the bill is a
demand charge, and you haven't
addressed.
The battery storage in order to
eliminate the demand charge. You
don't, you see almost no dollar
savings. Yes, it's
environmentally good. There's a
lot of positives there, but you
don't see the dollar savings,
and that's what I think is
changing is that having the
technology and the large players
coming in to say, we're gonna
analyze this and make sure you
save money, not just save the
earth, but also save money.
So
Madam Chair and and
Representative, I I don't think
I'm communicating. I think my,
my question.
It appears as if there's nothing
currently in the way of schools
being able to enter into an
agreement with the PPA.
The PPA could provide the solar.
The battery storage.
Potentially negotiate.
That the PPA cover the insurance
and cover the expense of
anything.
Is that just not
I mean, we're told over and over
that this is just a
There's a savings. You go this
route, there's a savings.
Is there not enough savings?
For, uh, a, a
School district to that they
wouldn't realize a better rate.
Anyway, or is the rate gonna be
higher without the incentive.
Madam Chair Representative.
Yeah
The incentive absolutely reduces
the rate.
So for the average school in New
Mexico, if you're in PNM
territory.
And you would save 30% without
the incentive, but you save 70%
with the incentive.
And that's a significant driver
to have the school board or
their staff decide this is
something we want to do in in
other rate areas, um, such as, I
don't remember the exact name,
but the Navajo
the utility that's a er and her
exact name I'm sorry,
uh NTUA Navo uh.
NTUA is the name of it. I, I,
I'm sorry I didn't remember that
name, but anyway, the
In in areas like El Paso
Electric, which I'm very
familiar with.
Because they have a 15 minute
demand charge.
If you
Uh, don't have an adequate
amount of batteries and some
other things, then
You may have no savings and
In fact,
You, you put the solar in in
some of the schools, they didn't
see no savings at all. And so
it's like, why did we do this?
It's for the good of the world,
but it wasn't good for our
financial.
With what's being done now, yes,
virtually everywhere they could
save as much as 30%.
But there's a whole lot of
issues with school boards and
school.
Superintendents and so forth.
And if we want to get them to
cooperate and say, OK, we're
gonna make this a priority,
we're gonna get this done in 25
because the state would rather
pay 40% of the cost and 90% of
the cost and have that long-term
savings, then yes, the incentive
is needed to, to get all of the
school or a large number, they
would never get all large number
of the schools to do this now
and
OK, so I, I think I've got the
answer that I'm looking for,
which is
Maybe, Madam Chair.
And in some instances,
currently, there is savings,
maybe up to as much as 30%.
In other instances,
May not receive savings because
of charges that would be from
the utility that they're part of
that.
If there's, OK, so some
instances, there's some savings,
but it's not great. In other
instances, there might be no
savings or even a cost.
This would
So, so the incentive is needed.
To guarantee savings.
Madam Chair, yes, yes,
Representative, it's needed.
Especially on the nava nation
apparently.
OK, so that's, OK, so I'm gonna
go to the next line of
questioning, which is um
Um
Battery storage at a school.
No
That's still not a large enough
project, I I believe uh that you
could use alternative battery
storage.
Likely this is just going to be
a larger array of lithium
batteries, is that correct? Or,
or is that incorrect? Is there,
is there, uh, in, in this size
of a project at a school.
Um, would they be able to use
some alternative other than
lithium batteries for battery
storage.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
Lithium ion batteries are pretty
much being phased out and going
to lithium phosphate, which is a
different chemical composition.
I think that addresses a lot of
your fire concerns and so forth.
And
So none of the projects that are
ongoing or using anything but
lithium phosphate.
As far as could they use things
like um suspended weights or
water suspended and a lot of
different storage methods that
are flywheels, a lot of things
that are being developed.
There are no other storage
methods that are as cost
effective and proven in actual
practice as the lithium.
Phosphate batteries and the
battery storages are
Very substantial. I mean, you
can be talking.
1.2 megawatts at a high school
of battery storage, which
run that high school for several
days or if you limited air
conditioning to some extent it
could.
Be an off-grid situation for
shelter for a week or more, or
actually continuously you just
have to limit air conditioning
on a given day.
So thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, uh, the
lithium phosphate, is there not
a concern for fire with those?
Is there, is it just lessened?
Is it just maybe a little less
intensity. What is the
difference?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, um,
There's always a concern for
fire. I mean, even if you have a
wood building, there's a concern
for fires. I would never say
there's no concern. It's
certainly dramatically less and
all of the commercial systems
that I've seen being proposed
have fire suppression as part of
the system because there have
been a very few, but some very
publicized fires that have
occurred in Tesla cars or so
forth.
And the safety record is
actually overall been extremely
high.
But uh the batteries are
generally being enclosed in a
steel structure that contains it
within that structure. If there
is a problem they have internal
fire suppression systems. I
mean, this is all commercial
fire code stuff that has to be
met regardless.
And that's, that's where most of
the safety guidelines come from.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
uh representative, uh, so
The storage facility.
Uh, that as well would be the,
the there are batteries in a in
a an enclosed area that would
also be all the
Um,
Put on the uh PPA.
To to build that there would be
any.
Additional cost to the school.
Or having to build a structure
like that.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative.
The PPAs include everything. So
it's a complete turnkey system
when the when the large player
like Next era.
Who's got
$100 billion deep pockets does
it. They want to make sure
everything is there. They want
to make sure there's a long term
savings to the school district
or any other customer because
that's their long term customer
satisfaction that they need to
stay in business, uh, but
Uh, when I talk about cabinets
and so forth, those are
pre-manufactured, they come that
way, so if you have a high
school, you may have.
Uh, 60 times you may have 10
casings that are
About half the size of that file
cabinet. Uh, it's about that
tall, that deep, but not about
half that wide, um, so they can
be outdoors or indoors depending
on what's preferable.
Um, most of the applications of
dimming and Cory School
District, everything's outdoors
just because that's the way
their setup is it I know there's
other school districts where you
can have equipment rooms where
they prefer to put it indoors.
It depends on the preference of
the individual district.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
don't think I have any further
questions. That's just, uh, once
again, concerned that we add
something that then becomes a
safety issue with the schools as
well.
Hopefully the fire suppression
systems had no POS in them.
Thank you.
Other questions from the
committee.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
she's the.
Um
Board chair for
The, uh
Consolidated school district,
Madam Chair Representative.
From everything I know that
whether they're on Indian land
or not on Indian land, if
they're a school district
receiving state funding now of
some sort, and they would be
Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative.
The the list came from the state
site of of schools that they
fund. There's nothing in the
bill that says they have to be
state funded in order to
receive uh the funds. So this
program would pay to the, excuse
me.
Uh, so
Um
This tax credit would go to the
PPA provider, it is putting
solar on the property of a
school.
And uh they're the ones that are
getting the incentive, but then
providing the school a much
lower rate. There's, there's
nothing in that process that I
would be a problem with what you
All right, do we have any other
questions from the committee?
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, for
indulging me, just a brief
question. Does it have to be a
New Mexico?
Business, does it have to be
because we're not because the
schools are not paying the taxes
on this.
Um, so
Does it have to be in New
Mexico?
Taxpayer in the system right now
to receive that, uh, or could
the PFOS or could the POS, the
PPA, sorry.
We've all got PFOS on our mind,
uh, could the PPA be located in
another state and received.
Madam Chair Representative, the
uh
Mm
The transaction has to be in New
Mexico. It has to be on a New
Mexico property.
A out of state company with such
as the one I mentioned, it's out
of Boston area, certainly do
that, but they then have to file
New Mexico taxes on their
income, which the income that
they're receiving from the
school is income to them, so
they have to file that, the
actual contractors that do the
work and do the service.
Just because of the nature of
distance, it's, it's more
effective to use local people
than to fly them in and so it
would typically be local service
work.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. That
is, that is a concern that we're
talking about.
Someone receiving an a New
Mexico tax break that is not a
New Mexico.
Taxpayer
Thank you, Madam Chair.
But Madam Chair and
Representative, it is the
savings and the.
Costs are being passed on to the
schools and to the, you know.
Making sure that they get.
The benefit.
All right. Thank you.
Make a comment on um
In, in, in some of the paperwork
it says school districts with
comparable savings from this
bill could conceivably hire 3
new teachers per year at base
level one salary for New Mexico
in.
Um, 202031. That's anytime you
can get new teachers, um, to any
school, they would be
appreciative.
And as a math teacher, high
school math teacher, um, this,
once they have it on their
school, this would be a great
math real life math project to
keep and the, and the saving and
um this is what our kids need,
real life stuff. So this is, I
love this bill, but, but um I am
co-sponsor. Thank. All right.
All right, um, can I meet Madam
chair, I move a motion on House
Bill 2130.
Representative Aveda.
Representative Dixon,
Representative Garcia.
Represented Representative
Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Represented Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Representative Small.
Vice Chairana? Yes.
J McQueen.
to 5 to 4, um, you have a due
pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee for your
time.
Break or we want to just keep
going? Because we do have.
sandwiches just got here. Oh,
the sandwiches.
So I guess if we don't want to
take a 5 minute break with the
sandwiches are on their way up
and we could take uh in and out
to get one and come back, right,
once they're here, they're not
here yet. All right.
Oh
House Bill 176, backup power
generation tax credits.
Whenever you are ready,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
I had some good news for
Chairman McQueen. Y'all wanna
hear it?
I haven't signed on to one.
License plate bill, this whole.
Time.
I want you to make sure you
share that with.
This bill.
Essentially does just a couple
of things.
So
As everyone knows.
We've experienced quite a few
fires in Lincoln County.
One of them was the, the, uh,
gavelin fire.
And
What had happened is, you know,
it, it damages a lot.
power goes.
And then we had.
The salt fork in the south fire,
and it destroyed a whole lot of
infrastructure as well.
And what this bill.
Essentially does is it gives a
tax credit.
Two individuals.
This tax credit's gonna run for
10 years.
It will
Every year,
If it meets its threshold of $5
million.
Then nobody else is eligible for
it.
Energy, minerals and resources
will be
They'll be running the program.
So you have to get a voucher.
In order to get the, the
emergency power generation.
Now in my area.
And I'm sure this goes for
everyone in New Mexico.
I have quite a few people that
are on durable medical
equipment.
Home dialysis, um oxygen
generators, and it really
stresses out our fire and EMS
departments.
So that was really the
brainchild for this, this, uh,
and with that.
I'll take any questions.
Sorry.
All right, first we will go to
the audience. Is anybody opposed
to this bill? Please, um, stand
up.
All right, we'll go online. Is
there any opposition to the
audience? Anyone in support of
this bill?
Is it still morning? Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Carlos Lucero
with the public service company
in New Mexico.
You know, PNM always strives and
takes pride in delivering the
most reliable, clean power to
our customers.
You know, we understand during
extreme weather and
unfortunately enduring wildfires
as the representative mentioned,
especially in the past fires in
the Rioidoso area.
There will be power outages.
HB 76 will help our most
vulnerable customers, especially
those with medical conditions
and the elderly.
PNM continues to work with our
communities, especially first
responders and emergency
management teams to ensure when
power outers do happen to ensure
residents are taken care of and
power can be restored safely and
quickly as possible.
For these reasons, we support
House Bill 176. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee carry Robin Bruunder,
I'm the registered lobbyist with
Lincoln County. Uh, we had many
of our residents that really did
need this kind of backup power.
We think this bill makes sense.
It's very targeted, so it's not
going to blow up the budget, but
our most vulnerable citizens
across the state could really
benefit from this, especially if
they live in high-risk areas. So
we urge its passage and we look
forward to the conversation in
the tax committee.
Madam Chair, members of
committee. My name is Kim Lagan.
I'm the registered lobbyist for
Mescalero Apache Tribe. Um, I
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward. Many of
our members live in both Otero
and Lincoln County. This is
especially important for our
elders, um, and would provide a,
a definite service for them.
Um, we're gonna go online. We
have support?
Um, Mr. D'Antonio.
Mr. D'Antonio, did you want to
speak on support for the bill?
All right.
Our comments, um,
representative.
My dude.
Madam Chair.
I didn't know that uh PNM was
gonna be here, but they're
another one that sparked this,
so during the, I, I said I'm
talking about the McBride fire.
The McBride fire in my past
history, you know, I was a fire
chief 25 years and I've seen
this need in my community for a
very, very long time.
And
P&M, they're trying to get ahead
of our mismanaged forest.
Everything's overgrown.
We ought to have somewhere
around 50 trees per acre and we
have over 1000.
And Madam Chair,
PNM during the McBride fire had
a class action my community.
And what I would like for
everybody to think is if I'm
providing you a service.
And Mother Nature starts
blowing.
60, 80 miles an hour.
In our arid forest.
And I know that you're gonna sue
me for my product that I'm they
are, they are looking at a
public safety power shut off.
So if everything aligns with all
the fire indices, the wind and
everything when the wind does
blow and you know they're gonna
trip the, the power.
And um because of our, our
people on durable medical
equipment, uh, that, that was,
that was mainly.
Right, Representative. Um, thank
you, Madam Chair,
Representative, are there any,
um,
Uh, this would go to basically
any taxpayer in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So we're
specifically talking about
Just back up, the backup
generation versus.
Like with uh so on your on your
home, a backup generating system
be much
Less the the amount of money
that you're putting in here
could really go.
I mean how many homes?
Uh, potentially if this uh tax
credit works.
Thank you for the question,
Representative Madam Chair. So
if you figure, um
A generator is gonna cost
$10,000.
So what this would do
essentially is give you 50% of
that 10,000 back. Now, before
you do it, you have to contact
energy, minerals and resources.
Make sure and make sure that
there is still room because
there's a $5 million cap.
So once that cap gets to $5
million you're no longer el
nobody's eligible.
And uh what, what it would do
is, um, we made it fixed.
Generation
That will run off of propane or
natural gas.
And
In the event.
You still are able, I'm not
saying it's gonna run your whole
entire house unless you really
want to spend a lot of money.
But if we can have some form of
generation of power for durable
medical equipment and maybe your
food, you know, freezers and
refrigerators.
You're looking at somewhere
around $10,000.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Representative, um.
I know there's folks who
Mm
They're, they're not really
wanting to increase their
expenses.
If, however,
There would be a time we've seen
where a couple of years ago
during the ice storm and that
we've had trouble getting
natural gas.
A solar powered.
Could be
Purchase.
Is there any limitations as to,
I mean, it's calling, it's
calling it backup generation.
Would there be
You could still use that if you
had uh
For vehicle I drive, I drive, I
drive a uh power stroke.
I'm sorry, a power boost.
It has a
Electric generator on it, and
part of the time I'm driving on
Um, but it runs around the
clock.
Just because it's designated as
a backup source that doesn't
preclude you from using it.
I mean, if you, if it were, if
my backup source were natural
gas or
Or propane or something like
that, there would be
efficient for me to use that
full time.
Would there be anything that
precluded me if I got a backup
so it might be much
more limited wouldn't.
Provide all of my needs.
That I would
have
Could, would there be anything
that would exclude me from being
able to use a partial.
Solar system to help.
Back up my cause this might be a
better option for me is the
reason I'm asking these
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the question, and
Madam Chair, this bill was
designed for and I, I don't know
why, why it would preclude that,
uh, in my mind, it was a so I
wouldn't want to overstep my
bounds and say, yes, it does
take care of solar, but it is
solar is backup generated power,
so.
I guess we'd have to ask. OK.
Well, that's all I have. I just,
uh, um, this is a unique.
Uh,
Circumstance, uh, but
There are, there is potential of
losing.
Electrical power to your home.
There's also
The possibility of losing
Uh, natural gas, if it's on a
lot ridiculously cold
temperatures, so.
I like it if it's the idea of
this being technology neutral.
Of course, that's what I would
prefer, so thank you, Madam
Chair. And Madam Chair, also.
As far as the public safety
power shut off.
If the power is shut off.
P&M has gone, so it might be, it
might be a day that you're
without power. It could be.
Again, what inspired oxygen
generators and a lot of people
lost over the the South Fork in
and um.
Salt fire. There was a lot of
people lost a lot of food.
And you know how much groceries
cost these days and you know,
when you have a complete full
freezer full of food, that's a
lot of money.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you
so much for this bill, because
this is actually something that
Uh
I can sort of understand for a
change, which is nice, so, uh,
got out of the solar panel
world, which is awesome, but
this is somewhere um so Madam
Chair, representative, uh, I, I
hear you mentioned fires. One
thing that I would also point
out as having been raised in
Cloudcroft, there was a number
of times we would be.
Call it a week or more out of
power, uh, with major
snowstorms, and when you live
down the canyon.
You know, your point, and I'm
glad you brought it up with the
mismanagement of forests as
those trees fall across the
power lines, some of those folks
can be out of power for
A week, sometimes more than a
week, uh, if they're on those
machines, this becomes crucial.
But then on the other side of
this, um, many of the folks down
that canyon are now running
pellet stoves.
And propane heat
So it becomes a life safety
issue when you can't heat your
house.
And there's feet of snow
outside.
Um, so that's something else I'd
like the, the.
Group to consider life safety
side of it as well beyond just
the machines that can be used,
uh, Madam. And I think that's a
crucial piece because I've seen
it my whole life.
Um, and how affected folks are
up and down those canyons, uh,
that don't get the sunlight for,
for some of these other things.
Um, when you're talking feet of
snow, um, my assumption is most
of the time solar panels aren't
going to be much use.
And I'll probably be covered at
that point, so um.
That, that's all I had was more
of a statement, but I did want
to make sure that I brought that
up, how crucial even beyond
fires and that that is something
that's important as well, but
there is other pieces we've got
to remember. Thank you.
Wait
Oh yeah, that's fine, no,
absolutely I defer for uh
bringing this bill like we hear
about people.
It is going out of power,
actually sparked my. You
mentioned uh technology neutral.
Madam Chair, it will be propane
or natural gas.
And the electric, the only time
this would come on is when there
is no electric to be had, you
know, out for one reason or the
other. It could be because of
wind and arid conditions on the
public safety power shutoff, and
it could be just, you know, on
or a tree falling over on a
power line, and you have no
power and what this does is it
gives people an option.
It's just an option. You don't
have to do it. You can um,
you're, you're actually opted
out anyways. You have to opt
into this program, and it might
not be for every, it was
something that I needed to do
for the elderly and the people
that are on durable medical
equipment.
And that's probably my follow-up
question. I don't know, it
seems.
It's not full.
And I don't know if I would be
able to afford this, so could
you devices?
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
It could be, if you know
anything about uh RVing or
anything like that. So for
example, let me give you this.
I've been in, I've been in an RV
person for 30 years. You get a
generator.
And you can turn on one air
conditioner.
For about $2500.
Then you can turn 2 air
conditioners on for about 5 if
you want to run your microwave
at the same time.
make you another 2500, so now
you're in the 7500. What this
piece of equipment will do if
you want to run your entire
house, it could be up to
$20,000.
And you're gonna get
If you want, just say you are on
durable medical equipment and
you only want it to run your
oxygen generator and your
refrigerator and maybe your
heater, you might only be in,
you know, $10,000 depending on
what brand you.
He
Send for me, for instance, for a
person like me, but I will
understand in health conditions.
Um, my last question, what about
uh sound of using this
equipment, Madam Chair, so a lot
of these are the extra quiet.
And um if you've seen some of
the and I I'm not endorsing any
brand, but if you see some of
the um the commercials on
Genact.
You know, it's, it's really
quiet, it's got Spark restors on
it so that it doesn't kick
sparks out and they are and
Madam Chair, I was just gonna
tell you I know you're a school
teacher. I'm a fireman, and it
might be a little bit outside of
our, our scope to to buy one,
but if I was, you know, having
to use oxygen, I might try to
Thank you
yeah, I think that's one of the
pieces that you, Madam Chair.
So,
uh, it's gonna be generated by
propane and or natural gas and
you know, it will have some
carbon there, but this thing of
an emergency, and it'll come on
and exercise itself once a week.
Once a month, however you want
to set it up and with, with uh
the generator itself, it has a
switch on it, so when that
switch.
Whenever, whenever, when it
feels that there is no power on
the grid, it automatically fires
itself and turns on.
And I don't use it for a whole
year.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives. So
what will happen when you put it
online, it has, it will exercise
itself. You can do it once a
week, you can do it once a
month. You can do it once a
quarter if you want, however you
set it up, and it needs to turn
on, it'll run for like 10
minutes and um you'll have to do
your, your monthly, um, you
know, general maintenance and go
out there and check the oil on
it and make sure that the oil to
keep it.
You know, exercise to where when
you depend on it, it's gonna
turn on. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam, and thank you. My
question is Representative
Murphy.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
our districts are very close to
each other. So, uh, I suspect
that that we're seeing the same
sorts of things and we certainly
had a lot of conversation and
we've seen in both of our
districts, um, the solar and
wind generation.
Um, and so this really goes on
to make sure that that um
propane and gas, natural gas can
be used to fire these uh uh
generators.
Um, however, there's other fuel
sources as well, and I don't see
any, and that is there are
gas-fired, there's propane
fired, there are dual dual fuel
fired if I recall where you
could use diesel.
Uh, and or gasoline.
Um, either singularly or
together.
And there's any combination of
those. So there's nothing in
here that would prevent that,
right? I mean, typically, if I
follow your statement, it was
that by and large these are
natural gas or propane fired
pieces of equipment. However, it
doesn't prohibit other types of,
of energy sources to be used. Is
that correct?
Good question. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So the, the main reason
that I had chose.
Propane and or natural gasses,
that's what mainly runs our, our
villages, towns, cities, and,
uh, you know, you can use
whatever you want as far as gas,
diesel, whatever, it doesn't
really matter. The thing about
propane and emergency generation
is, um, as a fire chief, I
always make sure that I had
emergency backup generation,
burning fuel and
With that cleaner burning fuel
when you have your
Um, when you have your
carburetors.
They don't get, you know, when
you're using gas or diesel, they
get dirty.
And when you're using propane,
they stay super clean. So there,
there's just less maintenance on
them.
Madam Chair.
Representative, thank you for
that answer. I conclude.
Representative Garcia.
Um, before we go, I just wanted
to make a comment. So can I do
that? OK, just making sure, new
to this, um, so, so you are
saying for sure that you get an
energy storage system would
qualify for this.
Is that
Repeat the question, Madam
Chair. So an energy storage
system would qualify for this as
a
You're talking about solar?
Battery battery.
I'm not saying that it would.
I'm not saying that it wouldn't.
This is, this is backup, uh
generation. It's a backup
generator, if that would, if
that works in there, I, I think
that's a great,
um, so, also, um, I'm, I'm still
a little concerned about um the
low-income New Mexicans, can
they afford it? But, but I do
believe you need this and
especially in your area, does
include energy storage systems.
I, I'm currently getting solar
on my roof in the, in the
gentleman.
medicine, you just needed to
refrigerator.
um, kept just the refrigerator.
That's all you needed. Then you
could, uh, do that. You can
isolate it to one,
So I think um for this bill.
Madam Chair.
Representative Abeta.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola,
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative Small.
Representative Beta,
Representative Dixon.
Vice Chairana,
chair McQueen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
Get our lunches and then we'll,
we'll go back.
I also like to thank Marco
Gonzalez for the lunch. Thank
you so much for
All right.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and get started.
I mean, um, all right, um, next
step is, uh, House Bill 175,
forest and watershed buffer
projects.
Whenever you're
Thank you, Madam Chair. So while
you guys are enjoying your
lunch, let me present for just
a, a little bit, so this bill is
the forest and watershed
Restoration Act amendment and uh
what it does is.
Some of the key benefits is the
buffer zones will significantly
slow the spread of wildfire by
creating wildfires by by
I'm sorry,
wildfires by creating strategic
barriers between natural
vegetation and residential
areas, providing critical time
for emergency responders.
And evacuation.
Firefighters will have safe,
more defensible operational
areas from which to combat
approaching wildfires, improving
their ability to protect
communities and minimize
potential damage.
The strategic placement of these
buffers will be dramatically
increased.
Uh, the likelihood of
suppressing fires before they
can reach residential
structures, particularly
preventing catastrophic
community wildfire events.
By creating international
separation.
I'm sorry, intentional
separation between natural fuel
source and human settlements.
The bill offers.
A scientifically informed
approach to wildfire wildlife,
wildland urban interface which
we'll call Wooee from now on.
Wooee is wild, wildland urban
interface, buffers, the
challenge reducing uh community
v vulnerability.
The death devastating South Fork
fire swept through the village
of Ridoso on June 18th, 2024
revealed extreme vulnerability
of communities that live near
natural landscapes.
Unmanaged vegetation and lack of
strategic buffer zones created
dangerous environment where
wildfires can rapidly spread
from natural areas into
residential neighborhoods.
Putting homes, lives.
An entire communities at
critical risk.
The solution.
Expanding the forest
Conservation Act.
HB 175 seeks to comprehensively
address wildfire.
Preventing prevention by making
strategic amendments to section
68-4-2 NMSA 1978 by introducing
precise legal definitions for
buffer zones.
And high risk areas providing
clear guidelines for
implementing protective measures
around communities vulnerable.
To wildfire threats.
Expanding the definition of
eligible projects and explicitly
include the creation and
maintenance of protective
buffers around wildland urban
interfaces, ensuring that the
preventative measures can be
legally.
And financially supported.
Enabling funds in the forest
land protection revolving fund
to be used for these critical
preventable, um, preventative
infrastructure projects,
transforming potential
vulnerability into proactive
community projects.
Fiscal overview.
HB 175 leverages the existing
reoccurring revenues of $2
million in the forest land
protection revolving fund,
ensuring no additional financial
burden on the state.
Minimal
minimal additional physical
investments.
Will be needed by redirecting
existing resources towards more
strategic and preventative
issues.
HB 175 utilizes the current
administrative infrastructure of
the forestry division.
Meaning, no substantial new
bureaucratic mechanisms need to
be created a proactive approach
to community safety.
By creating strategic buffers
between natural landscapes and
humans settlements.
HB 175 represents a forward
thinking scientifically grounded
approach to wildfire prevention.
The bill transforms reactive
emergency response and proactive
community protection.
Potentially saving lives.
Homs and entire communities from
growing threats of catastrophic
wildfires
of inaction.
Without HB 175, the forestry
division will be critically
limited in its ability to
proactively fund and implement
essential buffer zone projects.
In high risk areas.
Uh, communities will remain
exposed to increasingly
unpredictable and dangerous
wildfire risk with potentially
devastating economic and human
and Madam Chair.
Members of the committee and
ladies and gentlemen.
I knew
Some of the people in
Lincoln County that lost their
lives during the fire.
And if you watch that on TV.
It really didn't do it justice.
Until you were there. And
We had literally trained on that
particular scenario.
For the whole 25 years that I
was there.
And I was hoping and praying
that it would never happen and
it did, and it happened.
And unfortunately,
It's the kind of stuff that
personally keeps me awake at
night.
And my next one is the village
of Cloudcroft.
And it scares me.
And that's such a beautiful
area, but it's so overgrown and
a lot of the legislation that
I'm bringing forward this
session it fixes the compounding
problem of what's going on. And
One final thing that I wanted to
say, Madam Chair, is.
I'm very proud of Mescalero.
And Mescalero
They know how to get it done.
And I wish our Forest Service
would, would take note of what
they're doing over there.
And President Padilla, before
she was the um
RCMD
And I don't know if anybody
knows how to do it as good as
she does. And if you want to see
some spotted owls, and I'm, I'm
not saying you're gonna see 10
or 20, I'm saying you're gonna
see species, they like healthy
flours.
And with that, oh, madam chair
also.
Just if it does get brought up
this, we've been working on this
for quite a while, probably the
last 5 months.
And
With this particular buffer
zone, it could get to your
property and they thought that,
you know, is that an
anti-donation problem.
Well
Madam Chair, I've handed out to
the committee.
The AG's opinion on that.
And the AG and it's a public
benefit with that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and also
I'd like for my, my uh coast, my
coda in introduce himself.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, thank you, um,
Lindsay Ku, I'm the deputy. Um,
OK, we're gonna go ahead and go
to the audience. Do we have
anyone in opposition of this?
All right. Online, if you're in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
OK. All right, in the uh back to
the audience, anyone in support
and would like to speak on the
bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee carry Robin Bruunder,
registered lobbyist with Lincoln
County. We do not want to have
happen in another community,
what happened in Riidoso,
watching that fire come up over
the ridge, knowing that we can
have in place these buffer zones
for other high-risk areas is
something that Lincoln County is
very, very committed to seeing
happen in other parts of the
state, because we know that it
is a way to save lives, save
property, and save
I honestly, billions of dollars
of recovery efforts that then
have to happen from both the
state and the federal side. So
we think this is a very smart
investment for the state to make
and granting the state forester
this authority is something that
just makes sense.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kim
Lagant. I'm a registered
lobbyist for Mescalero Apache
Tribe. Mescaleropache tribe has
been a leader in proactive
forest and watershed management.
By establishing and maintaining
these buffers, we can
significantly reduce the risk of
wildfires.
Protect our water quality and
protect.
And promote biodiversity. The
importance of proactive water
forest and watershed management
cannot be overstated, especially
in the face of increasing
environmental challenges.
Implement implementing buffer
zones protects.
Protections will only safe.
Guard our natural resources and
also support the well-being of
our communities that depend on
these ecosystems. Mescalero
Apache tribe.
Wants to stand in support of
also their Sierra Blanca
partnership.
Um, partners, which includes uh
Rita so Downs, the village of
Ridoso, Lincoln County, and of
course, Mescalero. Thank you.
Good afternoon.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carlos Lucero with
the Public Service Company in
New Mexico.
And we believe um Senate bill,
um, 175 is a very important bill
for buffers.
And it really fits in PNM's
framework as as well as far as,
you know, trying to do what
we're, you know, doing from the
vegetation management
standpoint.
You know, we are in these
communities, we want to work
with our communities to make
sure that we're preventing any
of these, any devastating
wildfires from happening again,
um, you know, we're here in full
support for, for, you know, to
do what we can in our mitigation
efforts and but this bill like
this does um fit into our
framework.
And, but, you know, there is one
little piece that, you know, I
did talk to the sponsor about
briefly and we just want to talk
to more about to for simple
amendment to include utility
infrastructure in the structure
definition in Section 1G, but
overall this um HB 175 or yeah,
his policy that PNM can support.
Thank you.
Is it still morning?
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
I am Club Rio Grande chapter, we
support HB 175. This is common
sense legislation that helps
protect our community while also
preserving the essence of our
communities that live alongside
nature.
And efforts to preserve
Excuse me, efforts to protect
life and home.
Through forest management must
be paired with action to curb
climate change that leads to
these bone dry right, do we have
anyone online who would like to
speak in support of
Representative Montoya.
Just a brief question or
Uh, Mr. Madam Chair,
Representative, uh,
I, I know you held this up the
opinion from attorney from
former Attorney General, uh
Hector Balderas.
Um, just to more clearly.
Define what this says is,
That as long as
A forestry project like this.
Uh
If the purpose is protecting the
community rather than an
individual.
Uh
person, it doesn't run afoul of
our um
Anti-donation clause, is that
correct?
Madam Chair, representative,
that's correct. OK, so as long
as it's exactly what sounds like
is in the bill, which is this is
about protecting not
A structure, not a.
Uh, individual benefit, but the
but the benefit of a community
or people in general that that's
OK, that's all I wanted to, I
wanted to make clear. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
if I may.
The reason I love these bills so
much is because they are
bipartisan and I would love for
anyone that wants to sign on to
these bills because we, we don't
want our, we don't want to see
our insurances leaving our
community and, you know, talk
about
You know, with, with the
inflation and groceries and
everything going on, you were
used to paying $2200 a year. Now
you're paying almost 6 $7000 a
year, we can fix this. We're
smart enough to do it together.
Right, Representative, um, Senna
Cortez, Madam Chair
Representative, I'd like to
reserve my comments for.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola,
Representative Henry represented
Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative Small.
Vice chair said.
Cherry McQueen.
60 and just one last brief
thing, we're gonna run this
across the finish line together
because I'm gonna tell you some
good and some more good news.
Mescalero, I feel confident that
they're gonna stand up a
sawmill.
And we're gonna start taking all
this dangerous product. We're
gonna pull it out of the forest
and we're gonna start rebuilding
houses with it, and it's gonna
be a good thing and whenever it
happens, I'm inviting everybody
up there and you can all come.
Thank you.
