That was
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia,
Representative Garrola.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya.
Represent Murphy?
Representative Senna Cortez.
Here.
Represent a small.
Vice chairana.
Sherry McQueen.
He
have.
Dickson just walking, um, good
morning, everyone. Uh, first
off,
Um, houseville 273 certain
natural gas as renewable energy,
as rolled at the request of the
sponsor, um, so we will not hear
that bill today. Uh, we will try
to hear that bill on Saturday.
Um
But
I'm not really sure what's gonna
happen on Saturday.
Uh, right now we have sort of an
ambitious agenda and we will
probably have a floor session.
Uh, and the speakers' pattern
has been not to tell us what
time the floor session is until
Sometime Friday.
Um
So I, you know, I can only do
what I can to schedule.
And we'll have to see what
happens when Saturday rolls
around.
Uh, just so you know, uh, and
we'll get out an agenda for
Tuesday.
Um, after, after for Thursday
after today's hearing.
Uh, any questions, comments,
announcements from the
committee?
OK.
So our first bill this morning
is House Bill 452 clarify
renewable energy portfolio
standards.
furry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Each before 52 is about how the
state of New Mexico counts
renewable energy from a
distributed generation for the
purposes of the renewable
portfolio standard, and the
distributed generation is what
we often refer to as DG and most
often is rooftop solar, and the
bill's purpose is to clarify the
law to assure that renewable
energy from distributed
generation gets counted.
As part of the New Mexico's
transition from fossil fuel
generation of electricity to
clean renewable, carbon-free
generation of electricity and
its sole purpose.
And effect is to assure that
reasonable, I mean, I'm sorry,
renewable energy from
distributed generation is
counted towards the achievement
of the renewable energy
portfolio standards that already
exist in New Mexico law.
And with that we will um stand
for questions, but I'd like to
introduce um my experts, um,
Senator Souls and.
should be
Oh, I'm sorry, you're, you're
not one of our experts.
Yeah
reliability.
So
thank you, yeah.
I should be talking about.
So, so, sir, as a member of the
public will ask you to sit in
the audience, uh, it will
recognize members of the public
at some point. OK.
Um, Senator Souls, did you have
anything you want to add?
Mr. Chair, I, you know, I've
spent 12 years on the
conservation committee over in
the Senate. We dealt with many
of these things. I'm here
mostly uh supporting as a
technical expert in this area.
OK, are you, so you're ready for
question. OK, before we go to
the committee, we'll go um to
the audience. First off, just,
just with a show of hands, um,
who is here in support of this
bill?
Is there, who's here in the
opposition?
OK, so we do have some of each,
um,
So what we will do is uh we'll
go to the audience, we'll hear
from uh uh.
3 people from each side, then
we'll also go online, um, first
off, why we do support.
Uh, so if you'd like to speak in
support, please step forward,
step to the middle, uh, and
you'll have 2 minutes.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee.har
grown horse with a PNM.
Currently, only excess energy
produced by customers.
Behind the meter that is
purchased by the utility counts
toward the RPS.
HP 452 would allow all
production from a customer owned
net meter facility to count
towards the RPS for these
reasons, PNM supports HB 452.
Thank you.
Would anyone else like to speak
in sport?
OK, let's see, uh, opposition.
That would be great.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee and the sponsors.
We stand in respectful
opposition to this bill. I'm
Camilla Feibelman with the
Sierra Club's Rio Grande
chapter. Our members and
supporters purchase rooftop
solar at their own expense to
contribute to climate solutions.
Under net metering, the
associated utility pays the
customer in the form of a bill
credit.
For the energy that the customer
exports into the grid, not
including the amount that the
homeowner uses.
The utility can count those
renewable energy credits towards
RPS compliance.
If the utility wants to
continue, or sorry, if the, if
the utility wants to count the
full amount of solar capacity
from rooftops, including the
amount consumed by the customer
on site. They have the right to
pay the customer for the wrecks
associated with that on-site
consumption from the customer.
Utilities should not be granted
those wrecks without payment to
the customer. If utilities have
renewables deficiencies, they
should do the work the law
requires to bring on more,
especially given how affordable,
renewable, and battery storage
is. Please don't appropriate.
Homeowner.
rooftop solar. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online. If,
if you're online and would like
to speak in support of this
bill, please raise your hand.
Tom Solomon.
Uh, yes. Um, I'm not sure I'm
I'm gonna
speak in opposition to this
bill. We're doing right now.
OK, is there anyone in sport?
Raise your hand. OK, not seeing
any is, now, now we'll do
opposition.
I'm Solomon.
Uh, good morning, uh chair
committee
and uh audience was actually a
McKenzie,
um, I'm sorry for that, uh,
uh, I am a retired I I E W
tradition,
uh, I work for 40 years, uh, in
a commercial and industrial
electrical fields in New Mexico
and I'm familiar with many of
these issues. I was also on the
ground in Santa Fe in
2019 when the energy Transition
Act was enacted. So I, I want to
point out that this bill
We, we'll change the trajectory
of our motion as a state to 100%
renewable energy, the, the ETA.
Uh
was very careful in how it
constructed the allocation of
renewable energy credits or, or
RECs. And so this bill will
accelerate the move towards
renewable energy by giving
utilities.
Uh, Rex where they don't have to
build additional generating
facilities of their own. Thank
you.
Thank you. We'll do one more in
opposition, um.
Uh, Mike D'Antonio.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. The
members of this committee, Mike
D'Antonio with Xcel Energy. This
is a very confusing bill, and
I'll tell you that, uh, in all
due respect to the uh to the
bill sponsors, uh, the ETA was a
hard fought multi-stakeholder uh
effort back in 2019 and to
Come and, and try to modify a
bill, uh, just unilaterally
without input from so many
stakeholders. I don't think it's
good policy to begin with. This
is coming again, out of the blue
to, to change the ETA that was
negotiated by many stakeholders.
Now, the confusing part about
this is that PNM is supporting
it and we're we're, we're
opposing it, and then you've got
the renewable folks that are
opposing it, which
To me, this language just
More, uh, it just, it just
confuses the situation
altogether. So we would just
like to see it stay as it is.
And uh maybe the sponsor and,
and uh they can explain this to
to my satisfaction, but right
now it is very confusing bill,
very, very confusing. Thank you
so much. Bye.
OK, thank you for that. um.
Uh, with the sponsor, uh, Rose
and Ferrari, would you like to
add anything before we go to the
committee?
Mr. Chair, I would, I, I think,
uh,
The Sierra Club and others
mischaracterized what this bill
does. This bill is only about
counting how much renewable
energy is out there. We don't
know currently because we don't
know how much is being generated
through distributed generation.
This allows it to be counted.
That's all this bill is about is
about counting how much
renewable. It's not about
selling wrecks back to the
utilities or anything of that
sort, it's entirely about how
much is on the system.
And as we're working towards a
100% clean energy, it's hard to
get there and know where to go
if you don't know how much we
have currently and as it is uh
the rooftop solar, the
distributed generation doesn't
get counted by the utilities
that they are grid tied to, and
so it's not about selling wrecks
back to the utility or about
them buying them or about
punishing utilities. It's
totally about counting how much
is there. And so in the
bill where it says deemed to
have been purchased, that
doesn't mean they're purchasing
it. It's as if it was purchased
as part of their total
portfolio. It's totally about
counting. It's not about buying
wrecks or selling wrecks or
changing the ETA. It's about
clarification. Thank you.
members of the committee.
Represent Motoya
So, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, and senator.
I agree it was the the bills is
a little confusing. And so I
think a little further
explanation would be helpful and
if Mr. Chair, if you'd indulge
me, I'm, I'm gonna
I'm gonna express to you the way
I read it.
Um, so, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Senator, the way
that I read this bill is we uh
the utility.
Companies are able to count.
Any
Um
Wind, solar,
I'm, I'm, I would, I would
imagine battery power.
Uh, electricity that is
generated.
Um
As part of their ETA.
But when there's net metering
back or when there's anything
extra that comes back online
from a solar.
System that's on a house.
That's not currently counted.
Is that correct? Is that
incorrect?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, uh.
There are 2 different pieces
that come back from distributed
generation. The part that goes
back to the utility when uh can
somebody produces more than they
use, but the part that is used
by the person is not currently
counted as part of the renewable
energy that's out there, but
this bill does is that part gets
counted too as part of the
renewable portfolio that
utilities have. Again, not paid
for, just counted.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Senator. Um, so
I, I would imagine that's why
the Sierra stood up in
opposition. They don't want
that.
What's remaining at that
household that's being used.
But, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator. I, I would imagine the
The reasoning behind this bill
is because that home is still
attached to the grid.
By a utility.
Um, so when
Someone
Chooses to choose uh to purchase
uh solar system.
That home
Comes off potentially, at least
at most of the time, comes off
of the um
Utilities
Customer
Purchaser
At least 12 that.
Uh
Solar system is working.
In that home, but it is still
connected to the grid.
So I, I, I'm, am I understanding
that the reason that, that
you're
For this bill is just to count
what's part of the overall grid
of a utility.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I,
if I understand you, you got a
little convoluted in the middle,
but yes, I think that's the
understanding is it is part of
their grid tied to it and so the
part they're using at home is
part of the overall grid as well
as the part that gets that
metered back to the utility, all
of that should be counted as
part of the renewable energy
that is within that system.
Did I clarify what you were
saying?
Yes, yes, I believe so. And Mr.
Chair and Representative and
senator.
I, I tend to agree with that
from the standpoint of
Though the target kind of moves
on the utility every time
someone chooses to purchase a
Uh, a system and the expenses on
that utility to maintain the
grid remain the same.
Um, without
Really anything that we provided
back to the
Utility
Uh, for
For that expense and and that
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
Senator has been part of
What I believe has been a hole
in the ETA since since its
initiation is.
Uh, requirements going on.
A utility with an ever shrinking
customer base. So expenses going
up on the remaining customers
and
So, uh
I tend to agree. I think that
this, if we're talking about New
Mexico, the ETA was about New
Mexico getting to to net zero,
not.
Just a utility. So, thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I'm, I'm gonna
listen to further debate.
And Montoya represents small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you,
Representative. um, Mr. Chair, I
think we've gone through the,
the intent is to understand how
much rooftop or sort of
distributed generation is out
there. Is that right, Mr. Chair,
Senator, and Representative?
Mr. Chair and Senator, it's not
just how much rooftop, but how
much total is on the system of
renewable clean energy.
OK, thank you and um chair uh
senators representative, um,
you're doing that in order to,
why, why are you doing that?
Mr. Chair and, uh, senator or
senator, sorry, representative
and that old habits you get when
we move more over this way, I'll
get better at that, um.
The reason is the PRC needs to
be able to know whether we are
meeting targets or not and
working towards that and if you
don't count all of the renewable
energy, you don't know where you
are. And currently the way it's
currently defined the part that
stays on the customer side of
the meter is not getting counted
towards the.
The utilities, the investor
owned utilities, uh, total of
renewables.
OK. Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
thank you. That said, we heard
concerns that this sort of um
Can potentially be quite
confusing and sort of substitute
one, potentially lower the value
of systems that folks have
placed distributed energy
systems that they've placed on
their dwelling or other areas.
Also, Mister Chair, Senator
Representative.
Um
The split between IOUs is
interesting.
Um
Any sense, uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Representative YPNM
would support the bill, Mr.
Chapresentative, um.
I, I think the utilities
recommend or recognize that
their total system is what needs
to be looked at is whether
they're meeting the targets that
we set through the ETA and so I
think that you know this assist
them in what is total on their.
Their overall system, which
isn't counted currently, uh.
We should not be punishing the
utilities because they are
allowing lots of uh distributed
generation on their systems.
They ought to be rewarded for
that. Um, and so.
Yeah, when you say that the
systems are lower value. I don't
think that's accurate, that it
reduces the value of systems.
I've got one at my house, um,
and you know I'm, I'm happy that
El Paso Electric X is my big
battery and I want them to be
able to count the amount that I
generate as part of their
overall renewables, yeah,
Mr. Chair Senator
representative, thank you, um,
I, I guess the, the concern
though that I'm hearing and I
heard from some in opposition is
that this uh
gives that utility full credit
for something that a private
individual paid for, Mister
Chair, Senator Representative,
and one of the reasons, Mr.
Chairener Representative that
One might surmise.
With a split, right? There's one
utility that's supportive, one
that's opposed, one that didn't
speak here today.
It seems
Very fair to me and likely,
Mister Cha or Mr. Chair, Senator
Representative.
It's
Not out of the realm of
possibility that one of the
reasons for utility to like this
is simply to build fewer
renewables. Um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Representative, the goal
that you're uh putting before us
today sounds like it has real
merit, uh, but separate from
this bill, which could, uh, Mr.
Chair and our representative,
um, based on the testimony
today, sort of
So a lot of confusion at a time
where, to me, it seems like we
need strong clarity that we need
to be building as much capacity
in renewables as possible. Um,
so, very interested.
Unfortunately, I won't be able
to support Mr. Charison or
representative, but I think
The overall snapshot, if there
are different ways, including,
um,
through just direct funding to
PRC or others to do a census of
energy that's out there.
Seems like there are other ways
to pursue this very important
goal, Mr. Cha, Senators
representative.
The final apartments chair
center representative was just
sort of explaining my thoughts
right now. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, um.
Senator and representative for
the bill. um, I too am a little
um.
Trying to sort through.
But it sounds
Very simple, but
Um
Mr. Chair,
uh, and Representative in the um
FIR.
Um
The Attorney General, uh, notes
that the proposed language.
Actually, sorry.
Um
Yeah.
Alright, conflicts with the
current New Mexico
administrative code.
Is that
Correct, and then I see that in.
Uh, I see it both in the FIR and
then um in the uh New Mexico
Department of Justice
significant issues section. Can
you talk me through
What
They are flagging and.
But
Your understanding is?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, I'm not, can you point out
where on the fiscal impact, I
mean, I see where the attorney
general.
Might require an additional
attorney at 129,000, you know.
Agencies regularly want more
people. Thank you, Mr. Senator.
It's on the on the next page,
um, although it says, uh, it
notes the proposed language
within House Bill 42, although I
think that's a typo, um,
conflicts with the current New
Mexico administrative code, um.
And I think it's a typo because
then on in there, in the agency
analysis.
Under significant issues.
Um
They write this proposed
language conflicts with.
Uh, New Mexico administrative
code 17957210C, which provides
that in the case of qualifying
facilities that are net metered,
only the excess net energy
delivered from the qualifying
facility to the utility shall be
deemed to be purchased by the
utility for the purposes of this
rule.
And it goes on.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
you know, if I understand, I
think that's what this bill is
trying to clarify is that again,
the utility is not actually
purchasing this, but they're
able to count all of that as far
as their total renewables on the
system and so it's trying to
clarify that where that is not
clear for the PRC as to what's
happening with with that energy.
I'm not sure if I'm getting to
your.
Your question, representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, I think, um, let me
ask another question then. Um,
what happens, um, if the um
Generator is smaller than the
customer's load.
And so we're calling to count,
um, everything that's generated
that the customer is actually is
not.
Utilizing as much of the energy.
How does that work with the RPS.
Mr. Chair and Representative and
I think that's part of the point
is if they're not sending
anything back to the utility,
the utility should still count
the amount that's being
generated as part of the
renewable energy for that.
Invest your own utility.
So it, it counts on the amount
generated counts on both sides
of the meter.
That it's going back as well as
that that never crosses the
meter back to the utility.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
So if they, if they have sort
of.
If
If they're generating.
Excess
And what they're using.
It's sort of a negative.
Right? And that negative.
Or the utility
Cha representative, if they're
generating more than they're
using, they are sending some
back through net metering, and
then there's a whole bunch that
is over on their side that the
utility currently is not able to
count towards their renewable
energy portfolio side what this
bill does is it counts both
pieces for the utility for their
totals.
And so it gives us a more
accurate count about how much is
actually being generated, not
just how much is being sent back
to the utility, which is all
they're currently allowed to
count.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Senator. Um,
I apologize that I still find
this very confusing. I, I feel
like I could use a whiteboard
and um some, you know, math or
diagrams. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
you representative
representative Corolla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you panel for uh bringing this
bill, um, let me see if I
Understanding this.
It's complicated. It is true,
Mr. Chair. We are trying to
understand how much renewable
energy we are producing. So,
When is that?
Do the roof
When is the amount counted when
his mounted.
When is delivery, what is, could
you explain a little bit more on
that?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
let me try and explain what's
currently happening. Each of the
investor owned utilities has a
target at different years for
how much they need to produce a
renewable energy.
Currently, all that they're able
to count towards that is the
amount of renewables that they
actually generate.
And you are distributing out and
the amount that comes back to
the grid where uh an individual
overproduces what they're using
at their home, uh, for instance,
on my house, typically I get a
check for about $15 to $20 a
month because I generate more
than I use.
What this bill does is it deems
the amount that I use at my
house, also counting for the
investor-owned utilities total
towards meeting those renewable
energy goals.
Currently, that is not counted
for the utility.
And so we are forcing the
utilities to put in extra
renewable, and that is all paid
by the other customers that are
on the utility.
And so it increases the cost for
others that are not generating
their own. What this does is it
allows the utilities to count
all of the renewable energy that
is on their grid system, the
stuff that's generated like on
my home as well as what they
generate through their large
utility scale renewables.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator, so.
Does every owner is connected to
the utilities?
I'm sorry, say again please do
that solar owners, are they
connected to utilities, Mr.
Chair, at all of them. Mr. Chair
and Representative, everyone who
has a distributed generation
like a rooftop solar that is
connected to the grid.
Um, there's some here around
Santa Fe that are totally off
the grid. This doesn't touch
them. OK.
Sure, so they are not connected
it doesn't count. It's not gonna
be counted.
OK, um, so, Mr. Chair, do they
have to have a separate meter.
For the solar.
Mr. Chair and representative,
uh, I think all of them have
these separate meters and most
of them I believe are all smart
meters, they're able to total
how much it is.
Currently law doesn't allow them
to count the stuff that stays on
the homeowner's side of the
meter.
And I'm talking about the
investor owned utilities aren't
able to count. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator. So is
that information be
Sent through Wi Fi through how
it's gonna be communicated the
information.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't know directly how.
Utilities collect all of that. I
know, um, mine doesn't have it,
but a number of people have on
their phone where they can, you
know, almost any moment see how
much their system is and some
people really enjoy watching
that through the day. So there
are multitude of systems, I
don't know. Thank you. I'm just
trying to picture and I don't
have one, so I guess that's why
it makes it a little bit hard
for me to understand, Mr. Chair,
uh, do the utilities usually pay
for this um um renewable.
Energy, I am usually pay for
this?
Mr. Charon and Representative,
there is a market for what are
called the wrecks, which are the
extra energy out there.
Some people think that the
utilities should be paying to be
able to count it on their
system. This is only about
counting it. It's not about
buying the wrecks. People who
have the wrecks could still sell
them if the utility wants it. I
don't believe in New Mexico that
most small scale people sell
their wrecks or that the
utilities are interested in
buying them. This really isn't
about transaction or selling
wrecks. It's really just about
counting how much renewable is
on the system.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sir.
Um, I have a couple of
questions. Anyone else on the
committee?
Hey, um, Representative Senator,
um, first off in your bill, um,
page 2 lines 1011.
Uh, talks about the generator
being a qualifying facility.
What's the definition of a
qualifying facility?
Mr. Chair, um,
I don't know if that indicates
further up on the definitions.
It says as defined in the public
utility regulatory policies Act
in 1978, which sounds federal.
Um, but I don't have it in front
of me and so I read the bill, as
I read that it says.
It applies to qualifying
facilities and I, I don't know
whether qualifying facility is.
Mr. Chair, I don't know directly
as I read through this. I think
it's everybody who has a rooftop
solar as I'm trying to read
through, but I don't, I couldn't
answer that specifically.
OK, so I, um, I, I, I asked our
analyst to pull that up and, and
they sent me and and a
definition.
Um, which still sort of left me
in the dark because I was
curious about um,
Uh rooftop solar, but the
definition they sent me was up
to 80 megawatts.
Which seems like a really big
facility.
Much bigger than the rooftop is
you don't know one way or the
other.
Mr. Chair, I don't know, but up
to 80 could be, you know, it
just can't be a bigger one than
that, it could be down to small
individual size I suspect. I
don't know.
OK, but well, so in our our next
bill, we're going to be talking
about size of a renewable
facilities and uh the community
solar facilities which are
fairly big, go up to 5
megawatts, so an 80 megawatt
facility is a.
It's a big location.
And that's included in this
definition of qualifying
facility, and I guess it's
anything from 80 all the way
down to rooftop.
Is my best guess.
Um
Center, um,
On the wrecks.
Isn't
Ownership of the wreck.
An asset
And
You know, my understanding is
people sell the wrecks to the
utility.
So the utility can count.
That renewable energy towards
their portfolio standards.
And if we adopt this,
Then the utility gets a count
that renewable energy without
paying for the wreck.
Am I wrong about that?
Mr. Chair
You're not wrong, but there
needs to be some clarification
because when we talk about the
utility paying for that, the
utility, all of that is just
passed on to the other
customers. So the utility isn't
paying for it. It goes into the
rate base that they get fully
refunded out of the cost from
other people and so.
By making the utility pay for
wrecks, it doesn't really hurt
the utility at all, that just
gets put over to the ratepayers
of others.
OK, I, I was sort of thinking
about the transaction of the
direction.
That the owner of the wreck
would be disadvantaged because
they would no longer have the
ability to sell their wreck.
Because the utility would have
no incentive to buy it.
Mr. Chair, the, the owner of the
wreck to sell it, they really
are selling it to the overall
base.
Of the, the other ratepayers
that do not have that. And so
when we talk about the utility
buying it, it's all a pass
through cost to the other people
on the system.
the utility isn't.
Is it really paying for
anything, all of their profit
comes from undepreciated assets.
Everything else is a pass
through cost.
And so it really is putting it
onto the other ratepayers.
Does that make sense?
So, so here's my question. Say
I'm a investor developer, I
developed a 40 megawatt.
Uh, solar insulation and part of
my um return on that is selling
the wreck to the utility because
they, they need that wreck or
their portfolio standard.
Under your bill, like I can no
longer sell that wreck because
they don't need it, they don't
need to buy it in order to count
the energy that I've.
Invested in and produced.
I, I, and I could be wrong. I,
I'm trying to understand how
this works.
Thank you and
Some of this gets very technical
and, and, and difficult to
understand and I unders I get
that.
The this is not about buying and
selling the wrecks. Uh, I don't
know how many people in here
have rooftop solar, but the
amount I'm producing, you know,
I don't produce enough that it's
worth the while to try and sell
the wreck to anybody, and I've
never heard that El Paso
Electric is interested in buying
my res, um, I think that's
usually the case. Now, in a
larger situation that might be.
The idea is we want as much.
Distributed generation is much
renewable as we can on the
system, uh, and if we are
forcing, trying to force the
utility thinking we're punishing
them in some way to put more on
by not allowing them to count
the other that typically is not
worked. We want to give them
credit for encouraging more
rooftop and distributed
generation, uh, this allows them
to encourage more of that, you
know, if I'm understanding, you
know, it's, it really isn't a.
about buying and selling the
wrecks, but about making sure
and that's where it says deemed
to have been purchased, you
know, I think that's a legal
term or, you know, you're not
actually purchasing it, but it
looks as if you did and how you
count things.
And Mr. Chair, I think that's
what's really important. I have
rooftop solar also and are.
Uh, credits aren't really
acceptable, but, and this really
isn't about.
You know, selling the wrecks,
it's the, it's just um assumed.
And um that they are purchased,
but they really aren't
purchased, they're just being
able to count.
What is being produced.
OK, so let's let's talk about
counting. Um, doesn't a utility
know what's on the system?
You, you know, before they let
you hook up.
They evaluate the system to see
if it can take the additional
Solar load
Um, my my understanding is
there's a yellow zone, uh, in my
district that
Um
It's not quite a red zone. They
have a locked rooftop solar, but
they're charging a substantial
fee just to evaluate it.
And so I, my sense is that
The utility is well aware of
where energy is coming from on
their system.
Mr. Chair, yes, with all of the
metering and everything, the
amount is known. That's not what
we're talking about. The this is
not.
Currently, they are not allowed
to count.
The renewable energy that's on
the customer side of the meter
towards their renewable energy
portfolio. This allows them to
count that so that we then know
how close they are to the total
targets. Without that, all
that's known is the amount
that's on the utility side of
the meter that's being sent
back.
As we're trying to account for
how much.
Um, clean energy, we are
producing this will help us know
how well our investments, you
know, where tax credits and
things like that are, you know,
um.
Coming to fruition
So if we can know.
What that amount of clean energy
is being produced and compare
that to how much we're investing
in that production, it will give
us a better picture, plus we'll
be able to meet the target.
Um
In an ETA
Amount standards.
OK, so I, um,
It's, it it feels to me like
we're sinking deeper into
confusion.
Um
Let, let me, let me ask you one
more question. Um,
I, I have rooftop solar. Um,
You know, there's the
homeowner's side of the meter,
there's the utility side of the
meter.
I believe my rooftop solar feeds
into my house.
And I use that energy and excess
energy flows back across the
meter.
To the, to the uh system.
How would the utility know how
much.
Energy I'm using.
So if I have
Uh, maybe I, maybe I'm growing a
bunch of plants in my house. I
have a bunch of heat lamps.
Yeah, I'm generating power. I'm
using power, and only that
little bit of excess crosses the
meter.
So how would they know how much?
Renewable energy is being
consumed.
Mr. Chair, my understanding is
the smart meters, that's all
known, uh, how much you're using
and how much you're sending
back, you know, even though the
meter splits, how much goes
back, how much you're actually
using, um, on my house, you
know, we, when I get my bill
from the electric company, it
doesn't just show the amount
that I sent back with my refund
check, but it shows the total
amount of energy that I consumed
and how much I generated and how
much excess and so those smart
meters go back.
utility, it's all known how much
it unless you've got some sort
of a special meter.
Um, well, Senator, so, so I have
a combined system. It's uh for
the voltaic and thermal. Um, the
thermal heats water, connects to
my water heater.
Like, that's, that's not running
through the meter. It's just,
it's going into the back of the
house to the water heater.
You know, so if I'm, I'm
producing energy and consuming
energy and it never crosses a
meter, which is my best guess,
but it's just a guess.
I don't understand how that gets
quantified.
And Mr. Chair, you know, and I
don't anything that is not grid
tied would be separate and isn't
counted, but the electrical part
which is grid tight I believe is
counted or is uh known it's not
counted the stuff that's on the
consumer side.
OK. Um,
That exhausts my questions. I'm
not sure it answers them.
Um
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
Mr. Chair, I moved to the table.
Um, Nina, could you take that?
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola.
I
Representative Henry.
Yes.
Represent in Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez,
yes.
Represent a small.
Representative girl, yes.
First yearana.
Jerry McQueen.
Yes
Thank you, um, uh, I'm sorry,
your bill's been tabled. Uh, I
would suggest if you want to
keep working on this, we need to
clarify the
The situation, the goals and the
language.
Thank you. I appreciate no need
to apologize.
Thank you
River is do you know how much
longer you're gonna be here?
like
OK, so the reason I'm asking is
I'm presenting the next bill,
uh, Representative Tarana is not
here. I may need someone in the
chair.
Um, I usually, uh, a small, used
to be vice chair of this
committee. Uh, so I usually go
to him, um, one of my colleagues
like to share.
Represented, OK.
I, I guess we need to clarify
the definition of colleague.
I'm thinking the narrow
definition, not the the broad
definition.
Tara McQueen, would you like to
start?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, men members of the
committee, uh, House Bill 435 is
the renewable energy facility
sighting rules.
Um, in my opinion, how 435.
Fills a gap
Um, we don't have any.
Um, state public oversight.
Over renewable facilities above
a certain level.
And that level is 5 megawatts,
which is the maximum 4 a.m.
Uh, community solar insulation.
So above that
We really just don't have any
oversight.
Um,
this is an issue I've been
working on.
Uh, for a while, um, and.
I learned about this issue when
the Western spirit transmission
line was proposed to go through
my district.
And what I learned is that we
have.
You know, not all transmission
lines are created equal.
Um, there are transmission lines
that cross state lines like
Sunzia.
They are subject to federal
regulator regulatory oversight.
And there are transmission lines
like Western Spirit, which do
not cross state lines.
Which aren't subject to that
oversight.
Um, so we had a situation where
the developer of that power line
which um uh it it's now owned by
pattern Energy, but I think they
bought it while it was in
development.
Uh, so the, the developer that
power line.
was free to put it basically
wherever they want it.
Uh, there was no public process.
There was no oversight. There
was no uh formal process for the
public to weigh in on the
location of that power line.
Um
There was, I can remember
attending a a public meeting
down the mountain there.
Uh, where the developer
attended.
Um, but it was convened by the
state land office.
Which was interesting because
the land office, the, the
developer wants to cross state
land.
And the land office, of course,
you know, owns a state trust
land.
And was working with the
developer.
But because there was no formal
uh process, there wasn't a way
for the public to object.
Uh, there wasn't a way for the
public to speak up for uh
cultural resource values. Uh
there wasn't a way for the
public to speak up about health
and safety concerns.
And that project in particular
one the proposed routes was
going to cross through.
Uh, the immediate view shed of
the Grand Cavira National
Monument, which is part of the,
uh, Salinas Pueblo National
Monument salt, uh, mission
trails. It's one of 3 locations.
And it's a remarkable
archaeological site.
And it was built on the top of
the hill.
Because
The people who live there want
to see who was coming.
Um, and
You have a commanding view from
the site.
And the proposal was to put
Transmission towers.
Across this valley
Flashing lights at night, you
know.
And really have a significant
impact.
And the developer and
subsequently patterned energy to
their credit.
Listen to the public.
And moved uh the location
elsewhere.
So I'm, I'm grateful for that.
But the, the fact remains.
The, the process there is uh one
where, you know, the large
corporations are basically
saying trust us.
Uh, without a formal process.
And that's always concerned me.
So what this bill does is simply
ask the PRC.
To develop rules.
For the sighting of.
Uh, renewable energy facilities,
um, whether it's generation or
storage and intrastate.
Transmission lines.
Uh, and the bill would provide a
public process where people
could be heard.
Um, the, the PRC would likely uh
delegate this to a hearing
officer as they do in other
matters.
To take evidence and weigh the
evidence and make a recommended
decision to the 3 member.
Uh, Piercy
And that's, that's what we're
doing. We're, we're trying to
fill a gap.
Um, we're currently there is no
public oversight.
Uh, and with that I'd be happy
to answer any questions.
Thank you. Um, so we'll go to
public comment.
Um
Oh, great. OK. So, um,
Why don't we start with those
opposed.
Um
OK.
Mr. Chair, did you have a, a
Guideline on how many folks in
the room and online. Um, the,
the practice we've generally
been following is uh 3 on each
side, uh, in the room, 2 on each
side, online, 2 minutes each.
OK. Perfect. OK. So if we can go
ahead and do that, um,
We've got a couple of folks
getting them. OK, so we're gonna
start with those opposed.
OK, and if you can remember, uh,
when it's your turn to introduce
yourself, uh, and if you're, uh,
representing an organization or
an entity.
Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Rickie Lee Chavez, on behalf of
the Inner West Energy Alliance.
We are the trade association for
utility scale renewable energy
developers. We appreciate the
work of the chair and his work
on the committee, but
respectfully ask that this
committee vote no on House Bill
435. Permanent authority for
renewable energy projects exists
and is done at the county level.
Counties can induce set
standards that address community
needs.
Um, including those related to
human health, cultural
resources, and the environment.
Counties can regulate site, and
permit energy infrastructure in
ways that are responsive to
community needs, while
harnessing the benefits of
investment.
Unfortunately, an additional
layer of PRC review following
county review will increase
costs for industry, utilities,
and consumers by creating an
additional barrier to
development, to build projects
over 5 megawatts. We appreciate
your consideration of a no vote.
Thank you.
Oh
So if you're in favor, you might
just sit down for a couple of
minutes until cuz we'll go to
the folks online in between.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, Sheror
with P&M. We understand the
reasoning and having the PRC do
a rulemaking process. It is
unclear if the PRC will be the
primary marriage.
Primary jurisdiction in deciding
and permitting of renewable
facilities greater than 5
megawatts. This can lead to more
regulatory burden to utilities
and developers for these
reasons, PNM opposes HB 435.
Thank you.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Marco Gonzalez and I
represent Pattern Energy. Uh, we
appreciate the chairman's work
on energy issues here in New
Mexico and unfortunately,
unfortunately have to oppose
this bill. There's probably uh
many other reasons, but the five
top reasons to vote against this
bill is that the Attorney
General in your analysis says
that it takes away local
control.
Um, the Energy Department says
that it's outside the
jurisdiction of the PRC.
Um
Uh, the PRC itself says that
it's going to take half a
million dollars a year to be
able to uh accommodate uh what
the requirements are in the
bill, and there's no money in
the budget.
Um, it's also antithetical to
some of the other important
bills moving through the session
in terms of site readiness and
power up New Mexico, which are
designed to expedite the process
of getting badly needed
resources online so that New
Mexico can grow, and finally a
discriminates against renewable
energy projects because it
requires projects above 5
megawatts to undergo an
unnecessary process when other
similar or energy products are
not required to do the same.
Um, appreciate a vote against
this bill and thank you Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you. OK, so if you are
online,
And would like to speak in
opposition.
To this bill, please raise your
hand.
But
OK. I don't see any hands.
All right, wait.
Mm
All right. Georgine.
Go ahead, uh, if you're, are you
speaking in opposition,
Georgine?
Uh
Opposition to this bill. No, I
am for the bill. Sorry, I hit
the wrong button. OK. Thank you,
Georgine. Go ahead and keep your
hand up. We'll come back to you
when when we're there.
OK. Uh,
Kara Lynch, are you waiting to
speak in support or speaking in
opposition?
I was speaking in opposition.
OK, go ahead, please.
First of all, I believe that
there is a process for people to
get involved every uh
There is an opportunity before
the public regulations
commission.
For a discussion of different
facilities and
Um, decisions that are made
regarding their sighting, I
I would, uh, oppose this bill.
OK, uh,
Thank you, uh, Ms. Lynch. All
right, let's go ahead and take 3
people in support of the bill.
Wow. OK. Uh,
I'm also gonna ask that if you
are in support of the bill and
you're online.
Go ahead and raise your hand
now. Um, we have quite a few
people here that would like to
speak, um, in support. So,
Unless there's um.
Uh
Unless there's an objection,
what I'd really like to do is
just give you 30 seconds, uh,
for the folks that are already
standing.
OK.
You no.
I'd like to thank uh
Representative Queen for
bringing up this important bill,
um, we need this, um, I'm in a
preservation group and we're a
leader in preservation here in
New Mexico. We want to be a
leader in green energy, but we
need sighting rules, and I have
to oppose uh several of the
speakers that went before me.
I've been working with all the
commissioners and various
different counties and they're
begging for this kind of
regulation. They're saying they.
Don't have anything to actually
stop projects from inappropriate
location. Thank you. Thank you.
I would like to point out that
because there's no state
oversight,
it means that the counties can
do whatever they like, and for
instance, what happened in Santa
Fe County recently, there was a
uh uh biased uh uh planning
committee, uh, who was in favor
of the of of a big project and
uh the people who were posted
and that was the opposition was
mainly against the location.
They were just suffocated in
their in their right to speak
and the
uh
yourself, please? Your name,
your name. I also wrote you a
letter with uh what I wanted to
say.
Thank you. OK. Do you please
remember to introduce yourself.
Thank you, I'm Michael Daley.
I'm an electrical engineer, um,
and I am
Uh, highly trained in field
reliability of high power
electrical systems, I noticed
that the Santa Fe Planning
Commission has absolutely no
technical qualifications to make
these decisions, and that's
pretty concerning. The moss
landing experience shows us that
the implications of
One wise battery storage siding
do not respect county lines, and
if we burn the other half of the
pickles, we won't be able to fix
it. Thank you. Thank you. OK.
Hello, my name is Joe Pringle,
and while I support uh the
transition to renewable energy,
we need to do so in a proactive
and thoughtful manner, deciding
where, when and how to locate
these types of facilities right
now we're simply reacting when a
large utility corporation or a
wealthy landowner decides we're
going to put this here because
it's in our best interest, and
then there are no rules or
regulations in place to stop
them. We're all seeing the
example right now in Santa Fe.
County of uh uh uh the AES
facility going into a crowded
residential area because there's
no oversight.
My name is Dennis Kellogg, and I
want to thank you for the
opportunity to speak today. I
think uh Representative McQueen,
the key word here is a gap, and
what we've seen in these uh
facilities going across the
state, which they need to go
across the state is there's a
huge gap in knowledge and
ability and sighting from one
county, one city to another, and
we have a number of examples in
that area. I live in the East
Mountains, the comparison and
contrast between a proposal
there to AES is significant.
a vote for positive.
Thank you. OK, and then we have
one last person in person and
then we have, uh, we'll do 3
people online, um, and I
appreciate the, the committee
for indulging me in, um,
allowing additional people.
Given the rush to the
microphone.
Thank you.
I, um, chair, uh, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Anna Lindon Weller. I am senior
policy advisor for Western
Research advocates for clean
energy. Western research
advocates is neutral on this
bill. Um,
The responsible sighting of new
renewable energy projects is a
core tenet of our goals to
address climate change, and it
reduces greenhouse gas emissions
in line with our science-based
targets.
But we also very much understand
the concerns related to the
sighting of large projects in
areas of high biodiversity.
So we continued dialogue with
stakeholders during the interim.
Thank you so much.
Okey doke. Um, so we are gonna,
uh, hear from Kathleen Burke
online. We're gonna start there.
Good morning. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair and Mr. Chair, uh,
Kathleen Burke of Sandia Park,
New Mexico. Thank you for
bringing this important uh item
forward. I just want to say
that, um, current projects that
are being attempted, uh, are
impinging on culturally
sensitive areas, and federal
projects must adhere to um to
cultural sensitivity, whereas
the projects we're talking
about.
Uh, this morning, do not. I
would ask a do pass please on
this to protect communities.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Kathleen. OK, and then we're
gonna go to, we're gonna go back
to Georgine, who has been
patiently waiting and then for
the committee, I'll just let you
know that we have about um 6
other hands that we are not
going to hear because we've, you
know, um, just trying to keep it
balanced in terms of time.
Thank you, Georgine.
Good morning. Thank you for
allowing me to speak. When you
travel abroad and live abroad,
especially over the last 50
years, you see the last great
places being demolished by
unchecked industry, Bali, for
example, is a great case.
Northern Borneo where the
rainforests are cut down. I've
lived in these places. This
place for this bill is one of
the last great places left in
the world and it
Needs to be protected
on yours. I live in Sandia Park
and I moved here 3 years ago.
Thank you.
Thank you, Georgine. Thank you
so much. OK, wonderful. Um,
thank you, everyone, uh, for.
Participating, uh, Chairman
McQueen, did you want to add
anything before we do the
members. Thank you, ma'am. Um,
just a couple of things first
off, um, this bill won't take
any authority away from
counties, um, it would be a a
separate review process, um, and
I would just say, you know, the
County Review is spotty.
Uh, you know, Sanee County is a,
you know, larger county in terms
of population. I think they're
struggling with what's on their
plate, and I'm sure there are
lots of smaller counties that
really just don't have the
capacity to adequately vet these
projects, so that's a concern.
And the final point I want to
make is I, I think of this sort
of um as being analysis
analogous to our housing crisis.
Like I, I think we need to build
more houses. I think we need to
build them faster.
But that doesn't mean that we
should build.
Crappy houses or lousy
neighborhoods.
I mean, we still have to be
careful and deliberate in what
we're doing.
In for a state that relies on
outdoor recreation and its
scenic beauty and all these
other amenities to bring people
to our state, whether it's to
live here or or as tourists.
We need to protect those.
And because there's no oversight
of of any of these installations
were not adequately protecting
those other resources. So we, we
have.
Uh, insulations that have state
level impact with no state level
oversight.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you. OK, uh,
Representative, uh, ranking
member Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, Mr.
Chairman, um, so it appears
there's, there's two parts.
To this bill, one part being
that the
Uh, PRC.
Promulgate some rules all the
way for for site selection.
But
It it also appears that this
bill
Requires them to then be
involved in the site selection.
Is there any reason why?
Uh, we would not just have the
PRC.
Promulgate rules that then the
counties would have to adhere
to.
Um, uh, Meera Montoya, well,
first off, I wonder if we could
get the attendance to close the
blinds because I can't see you
because you're right behind the
sun.
And
probably a little bit of a
reflection
right back at you, um.
Uh, yeah, so, you know, there
would be PRC rules which would
be administered by the PRC,
which is typical for how they,
you know, operate with other
rules, um we're not trying to
impose an additional burden on
counties, um, you know, there
would.
It would be a PRC housed process
both in drafting the rules, uh,
and then the PRC wouldn't of
course be involved in selecting
sites, uh, developers that want
to do something in particular
site we'd go to the PRC, you
know, with that in mind and and
have that site reviewed.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
Um
Yeah it
Just by reading the
FIR
The PRC seems to have
significant
Issue
With
The bill. Um, I mean, I, I.
There there's several, there's
at least 7 points here.
Um, the, the big, the biggest, I
think being
Not that they don't already do
some of this, but they do it at
300 megawatt uh projects that
equal or exceed 300 megawatts.
This goes all the way down to 5
megawatts and they're
Their concern is just what
volume of of
Uh, new
Work, uh, that they would be
doing on these.
Much smaller projects, um.
Is there any reason you chose 5
megawatts as compared to maybe
150 megawatts.
Um, ma'am chairs, I'm gonna tell
you, yes, uh, 5 megawatts is the
upper limit of community solar.
And the PRC drafted the rules
for community solar. So, so they
have.
You know, involvement in
community and smaller and they
have involvement in very large
projects.
But nothing in between.
And so that's that gap.
I want to fill it and um Ma'am
chair and I told you,
you know, I've had some um
conversations with uh the PRC. I
was not able to discuss this
with them during the interim or
before the bill was introduced,
uh, they definitely have
concerns I I recognize that and
there's some of the things we
would be asking them to look at.
They, they don't currently have
in-house expertise on.
Um, so this would be an
expansion for them.
But they are also the
You know, the logical place for
this to be housed and we don't
have another state agency that
would fit nearly as well as the
PRC.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, also it looks like uh
Uh, besides
Uh, generation, uh, this.
Would
Also include
Um
storage facilities, so I would
imagine that's battery.
And and they currently do not
have any oversight over that.
This would be a new area of
oversight.
Um
I
Correct and correct. That's, I'm
just reading the.
The FIR.
Ma'am, to you, that's correct,
uh, and, and there have been
substantial public safety
concerns about a large scale uh
battery storage facilities.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and
then also, uh,
There seems to be a little bit
of confusion from the way your
bill is written to
How transmission is calculated.
Um, I imagine that's just an
oversight that could be.
Uh, maybe made a little bit more
clear.
Ma'am, a reso, yes, I agree, uh,
um, the drafter came up with uh
the, you know, we talked about
the size and the size of the
facility being 5 megawatts, um,
transmission lines aren't
measured in the same way
apparently they're kilovolts.
Um, so I, I, I've tossed around
in my mind whether we want a
kill volt standard.
Um, or possibly just a distance
standard.
a certain distance would be
subject to their.
Um, jurisdiction.
Thank you, Mr. Chair or Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, um,
The substantial cost.
That PRC.
would be looking at, um, I, I
would imagine this.
How, how
Looking at the number of this
bill, I, I would imagine that
this is not.
In the House bill too.
Manto yeah, that's correct.
So, um, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chairman. So, um,
Uh.
Once again, assuming this bill
doesn't make it all the way
through the process, uh, this.
Kind of a conversation starter
as well for the for this to be
Looked at, I'm, I, I understand,
Mr. Chairman or Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, I understand your,
your thinking here is
There's a gap.
On one end, the very low end,
community solar PRC has
Set rules above 300 megawatts,
they've set rules.
So I, I can see that there's no
rules.
Um, it does appear though as
there's quite a bit of
resistance from the PRC to want
to take on this load.
Um
Not that
Not that we don't direct
government agencies all the
time.
To expand their scope.
But uh it it does appear.
At the very least, at this point
they believe they are not
capable of doing this.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Chairman?
Um, men chairs and Montoya, so,
so this is sort of um.
Uh, uh, a, a good example of
something I I personally think
we struggle with uh in the.
la ture and that is we're
working on policy initiatives.
It costs money
And if they're not already in
the budget, which, as you know,
is largely.
You know, a lot of budget work
done before we ever get here.
Then we say, oh well I guess we
can't move forward with this
policy initiative.
And I, I think that's a real,
real problem.
Um, you know, because I, you
know, I, of course, I personally
believe this is a legitimate
policy initiative, I fully
recognize it's not in the
budget. I fully recognize that
that means it's a quote unquote
unfunded mandate for the PRC.
Um, you know, so it's a
challenge. Um, the only thing
that that's occurred to me that
we could do with this bill is
delay the effective date.
Uh, so like if, if the bill were
to pass and we delay the
effective date by a year to when
to take effect until uh instead
of July of this year, July of
the following year.
Then when we came back in our
next session, we could, you
know, as part of the budget
process, we could say.
We know the PRC needs to do
this, and it needs to be
factored into their budget
requests and their budget, uh,
allocation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
yeah, I just, once again.
We, we
Although we don't.
Uh, just, uh,
Passings on that agency's like,
um, usually when there's this
much resistance, there's
I, we usually talk about their
needing to be further
discussion. I, I do believe
there needs to be further
discussion on this.
Um
Once again, I, I, this is the
first time I've heard this as
well.
And this is an area of interest
for me. I, I.
If this does not go forward, I
would like to have some input.
Uh, if this goes forward in the
interim, but
At this point, I, I'm reluctant
to support it, uh, because once
again, what we're then doing is
we're encumbering a future.
Legislature
Or a future session.
Um, and without, once again,
this is a, I think a guess on
their part, maybe half a million
dollars to implement.
I don't know that that that LFC
has not weighed in on that. Um,
Governor's office is not waiting
on that. I, I would think that.
We'd want to see
Better numbers. So thank you,
um, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
we're next going to go to
Representative Murphy and then
Representative Gurola.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Chair.
Um
Most of my questions have been
covered, um, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, um,
Mr. Chair, you, uh, have stayed
you don't believe that this, um.
Uh, usurps or, or takes
precedent over any local control
there'd still be county process
or whatever may exist at the
local level. Do I understand
that correctly?
Maner and Murphy, yes.
Um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, um,
I don't, um, not completely
familiar with the various
Types of measurements, but.
As I understand it, this has
been
styled or at least the, the
units involved have been, have
been used more about
Pick sites as opposed to
transmission lines, and is that
the difference between megawatts
and kilovolts. I understand
that. Um, ma'am and Murphy,
that, that's my understanding
that um uh.
You know, obviously
Uh, production facilities
producing energy a transmission
line is uh energy is just simply
passing through, so it is uh a
different standard.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, Mr.
Chair, and so,
If
Not knowing a lot about these
systems, but just driving across
New Mexico, many times we'll see
a transmission line going into
maybe a transformer facility or
something like that, that would
be part of uh Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, uh, would be
considered part of that
transmission.
The lines
Plus
Anything associated with.
Um, ma'am chairs and Murphy, if
I'm understanding your, your
question correctly, um.
Uh, yes, um, you know, obviously
this wouldn't apply to existing
facilities only new facilities,
so you know one thing we've seen
with some of the proposals, the
recent proposals for large scale
facilities is there in my
opinion, they're deciding
decisions are being driven by
proximity to existing
transmission lines, which of
course, if you're going to
produce a lot of energy, it's
probably in your interest not to
have to also pay for a lot of
transmission.
get it to on the main lines, so
you know, they're looking for
sites that are close to existing
transmission lines and because
of that they're they're maybe
not considering these other
factors such as um
Environmental resources, visual
resources, archaeological
resources, things like that.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, Mr.
Chair, my, my last question, um,
I'm generally supportive of
this, um, I think there have
been some real concerns raised
with respect to um some of the
PRC.
Concerns and so forth, um, and
also would like to maybe
understand and flesh out the
language a little bit more. But
um I'm gonna take you back for
just a few days, um, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, on page 2.
Under
Uh, line 9.
It says addressed the scenic
cultural archaeological and
environmental impacts, and I
know that's something that you
just addressed, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chairman, and I'm always,
um, sort of interested on, on
how language is chosen and the
first word says address.
Um, which, um, to me implies
that, that it could be more
preventative if it can't be
addressed fully.
Um, I, I wondered, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chairman, if you can, if you
considered the word consider.
Um, because that sort of implies
to me um that perhaps.
Uh, mitigation measures, uh, and
alternatives could be
considered. Am I reading too
much into the wording here, uh.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Murphy, I, I.
You know, would politely say,
yeah, I think you're reading too
much,
um I set myself obviously um,
you know, you're building a
facility like this, you're gonna
have an impact. And so we're not
saying that these facilities
can't have any impact because
that would in fact prohibit
them.
Um, but even, you know, even
the, you know, smaller facility,
you obviously have a a ground
surface impact, you know, solar
panels, uh, the footprint of
transmission lines that the, I
mean, there's there's going to
be some impacts of the idea of a
dress was you would consider
them, you would address them,
you would uh factor them in, but
it wouldn't be an absolute bar.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, Mr.
Chairman, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative gorilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Chair, um.
I just have one question. What
is that?
Process for the county to
approve approve this projects.
Right now.
Um, Manches and gorilla, I, I
certainly believe different
counties have different
processes, um, you know, Santee
County has uh a big project
they've been considering and
there's been some questions
about whether or not
Uh, their process.
Uh, is adequate, um, you know,
they had definitions for.
Um, a community solar, uh,
installations, but their code
was lacking when it came to
utility scale solar
installations.
You know, so then the question
is, do they need to go back and
adopt the process, or did they
try to just sort of
You know, shoehorn, you know, a
large projects into the existing
process and again that's, you
know, Santa Fe County, so we
have some larger counties, um,
that.
Probably have more resources to
address projects like this, and
then we have a lot of, you know,
uh, rural counties that that
probably don't have that same,
uh, in-house expertise, so, um,
you know what I said at the
outset was the county oversight
was spotty, and I, I think
that's true, uh, different,
you're gonna get different
process in different counties.
Thank you Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, so let me just follow up
question. Will this process is
slow down the development of of
of uh of.
Get energy. I mean, we don't
have the funding or
Get to other communities.
I don't know. I'm sure.
Um, ma'am and golla, um, it's an
additional process.
So I, I would expect there to be
additional time and additional
money, and this kind of goes
back to my analogy before about
housing.
Um
You know, we, we need to find
ways to um.
Accelerate these things if we
want them to happen, but we
still need to do them carefully.
And you know I also talked about
the difference between Western
spirit and Sunzia.
The sun process has been.
Um
Horrendous.
Uh, I mean, they've been working
on that for like a decade.
And spent hundreds of millions
of dollars.
Um, it's really arduous process,
and then on the other hand, you
had Western Spirit, which didn't
have a process. So I, I mean, I
would like for both large
projects and other projects
there to be sort of middle path.
That it doesn't take a decade to
go through the process and then
you have some certainty and you
can expedite the, the
consideration of it.
But that doesn't also mean that
we shouldn't have.
Uh, that we shouldn't apply a
process to an area that's
currently unregulated.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. So right now my only
concern is the budget now.
you.
Thank you, Representative. uh
Representative Garcia, please.
Thank you, uh
Sharon, thank you.
Chairman McQueen for bringing
this legislation forward.
Um
E
analysis.
I think that uh
Bill has written
may not pass the state Supreme
Court's analysis of preemption.
What does that mean to maker and
terms, Mister Jack.
Um, madam chair and Garcia.
Federal government can preempt
the field if they want to the
state, uh, in the state can
bring the field if it wants to.
Uh, sometimes the state does
that explicitly.
Sometimes the state does that
simply by so thoroughly
regulating it.
That the courts feel that
He expressed an intent to
preempt it.
Um, this, it's certainly not my
intent and I don't think it's
present in the bill.
This would preempt local
control.
Uh
I did get that question from
from a county um yesterday.
Whether it was uh
I intend to take away, you know,
local authority oversight.
It's, it's certainly not.
And I don't think
I don't, you know, I certainly
don't say there's any
preemption, and I don't think
the, the scope of the review is
such that it would trigger
preemption.
OK, thank you for that.
um
The
question that I had, um.
Why the boy.
confinement a lot and 300
megawatt.
Was there any element of
Fast tracking economic
development.
Been these facilities.
range.
The reason why
and
consideration oversight.
facilities within that range.
The economic development factor.
Possibly one of those issues.
They looked at
Or what
Um, I'm sure, uh, Garcia, I
think.
At different levels, there's
actually different um different
sizes, there's different levels
of review. The, the PRC was
tasked with developing rules for
community solar, which we passed
a few years ago, so that was new
for them.
And prior to that time they
didn't
They were involved in projects
outside.
The larger size, I, I think the
only review the PRC does.
Larger scale facilities.
Is whether or not it's
appropriate for the grid.
So there's um there's something
called a certificate of
necessity and convenience, um,
and my understanding is what the
PRC is looking at is
You build this really large
facility and the grid handle it.
And that that size, even at that
size, a really big size, they're
not looking at any of these
other.
Cultural or environmental
considerations.
OK, thank you for that.
Um
My
adventure.
I uh
I think you're, you
The point is well taken.
It comes to cause a lot of you
know it's just kind of say,
well,
Kind of undermining local
control.
really the county's authority.
But your point is well taken
because
majority of the counties don't
have capacity.
gone
And
Developing an infrastructure.
with these types of initiatives.
So that's not well taken.
terms of what the analysis.
Um
I support this legislation, I
feel we should move forward.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Henry.
I,
I guess, I just wanna ask.
quick questions kind of along
what representative Montoya
asked.
How is this? How does the locals
still have control. You said
this doesn't take away so
control to the local.
communities counties.
Um
And
Henry, um.
You know, local, uh, you know,
counties have police power
within their county and by
police power I'm not talking law
enforcement.
acting regulation zoning.
A land use approvals.
Uh, subdivision things like
that, so it's like all all those
typical.
A county level authorities
remain.
You
Whether they exercise that
authority in.
How they exercise that authority
is left up to the county, and
that's why you get.
You know, very different.
Processes in different counties,
but that, that county is still
inherent in the county
government that county, that
authority is still inherent in
the county government.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh, I,
I
So the question I'm gonna, I'm
gonna ask is.
So
And Representative Montoya.
And I think your analogy of
building houses makes sense to
me as well. Why are we not just
as the PRC or as legislative
setting up the rules or
guidelines for these counties.
To understand how the process
works, because if I'm looking at
this as a house.
That the state has kind of set a
powerhouses to be built.
Right, we have building
inspectors that follow certain
guidelines.
Now counties and cities can
adopt.
More stringent rules we cannot.
Be less stringent.
So if we were to set up
guidelines at this level, those
counties to
Garcia, I think they all made
great points.
These counties don't have the
capacity, and I fully understand
that.
But if we had set up the
guidelines to help them
understand how the process
works, would that not be the way
to go, and that way we're not
waiting on Santa Fe to the site
selector. They've set up a
guidelines and then the counties
can kind of operate within
those.
Henry, uh.
You know, I, I, I'd certainly be
concerned that
It appears you would adopt a
process that would be good for
it would be right for them, that
would be difficult for
accounting to implement.
That it would require
Uh, level of review or staffing
that county um either didn't
have or wasn't interested in
having.
And I think of it, um, you know,
go back to the housing analogy,
like you, when you build a
house, um, you need a local
permit.
And
The construction industries
permit.
You know, that's a state level
uh review. It's separate. It's
overlapping in some sense, but
the, you know, construction
construction industries division
is looking at different aspects.
of that
Of that development
Um, and that's, I, I view this
as working in that way, that
it's, it's a parallel or
overlapping. It's not, it's not
a preemption issue. It's not
mandating the counties do and
one thing or another, it's just
that this would be the state
process that would be
applied with
4 facilities of this size.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chairman, uh.
I guess that's just where I'm
gonna.
issues with this to some extent.
I, I.
I get the intent, and I think
the intent is correct.
To a certain way. I just think
they implicate the
implementation.
Would be the way I would look at
it a little differently.
Even if there was an oversight
that the
Counties could say, hey, here's
the project we have.
help on this type of deal.
Look at that, but for me,
keeping things as close to local
as we can is very important, um,
because many times the counties
see that if the state is going
to override that we selection.
I'm gonna take it doesn't feel
like there's a lot of local
control when the state is in
fact doing the site selection
and overseeing the rules fully
understand what you're saying is
we would have our own ordinances
and zoning and all those types
of deals, but I would be very
interested in how do we help the
counties do this.
Uh, rather than the state tried
to implement. Just my thoughts,
sir. Thank you, ma.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Abeta. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
McQueen. Um, can you please just
help me, uh, clarify that.
Through this, as I understand
it, uh.
PRC will be assisting with the
rules.
Providing a uniform rule
structure with the input of
Smaller entities that we
discussed, but the permitting
with the permitting power would
still lie within local.
That correct?
Um,
ma'am she would be to, uh,
there's, there still would be
local land use control.
Um, you know, again, going back
to the housing example, I, you
know, when I built a home
office, I needed a permit from
Santa Fe County. Uh, I needed
approval from the construction
industries. I can't do it uh
with just one or the other. I
needed both.
And that's, that's what I'm
proposing is you would need, you
would have local control.
You would also have state
oversight.
So the
The rules, though.
We still have input from
Um, ma'am Cha representvita in
developing the rules, we want to
create a rulemaking process that
was inclusive, that included uh
the public they include the
developers that included local
government. So, you know, to the
extent local government was
concerned about preemption or
whatever other issue, you know,
they can weigh in on that as
part of the rule making process.
You know, so that, that was,
that was part of the goal of the
bill.
Uh, in developing rules was to
be, thank you, Chairman.
One last question.
As rules and as this needs to be
developed, how often do you see
them being able to come back to
Re-examine what's working and
what's not.
I will local entities be at the
table again when it's time to.
Um, ma'am chairs and beta, I
think once an agency has
rulemaking authority, um, they
have discretion to
Uh, revisit and revise those
rules as needed.
Uh, and certainly if we have a,
a statutory mandate to have an
inclusive process. I think that
would carry forward.
Uh, when they revised rules, I
know, you know, I work with some
rules at some state agencies and
you know, occasionally an issue
comes up that
Um, not addressing the rule and
there's some back and forth and
you know, it's a certain point
there's a decision that
Yeah, we, we need to do another
round of rulemaking to adopt an
amendment, a supplement or a
revision. It's just sort of part
of the process, part of the
evolution.
You, Madam Chair and Chairman.
It's my question.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Montoya, uh, for an additional
question, um, and then I'll ask
you a couple of questions and
see if anyone else wants to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so,
Mr. Chairman,
As, as I've been uh listening to
uh your, your answers.
Um, I, I agree that we do if
somebody wants to build a home.
Um
There is
The state has their
requirements, as does the local
community.
But the state doesn't weigh in
on on a site.
I, I think that's the
I think in the end that's the
the the the the real problem
here is
Um
Currently,
All counties
Have public works projects.
And they have a process to go
through all of those.
Um
I, I think if, if from the
standpoint of the PRC what we're
looking at is
Generally
From, from what, what they're
charged with is making sure that
when something comes online,
That it is
Um
A good project that it's
Fundamentally sound that it'll
do what it's supposed to do, but
what we're asking here is to ask
them to be involved with site
selection.
And so, um
Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman, I, I
I think that the real
The question is
The local community isn't the
local community better suited.
When it comes to site selection,
isn't the local community better
off making the determination as
to listening to the concerns of
the people in that community.
Who don't want it here, don't
want it there and having it, it
just appears like
Uh, people who want to stop a
project will now have 2 bites at
the apple apple.
And I think
Madam Chair.
And Mr. Chairman,
Mm
Why, why do we want to involve a
state agency in site selection.
Uh, menurs and Montoya, I guess
I would, I would quibble with
your terminology, uh, I don't
think the PRC would be involved
in site selection, I think, you
know, a developer site selection
is up to the developer and then
they would, you know, the PRC
would review the site.
Um
There are, there are certainly
assets in the state, which may
not be uh protected at the local
level.
Um, you know, there's, there's
one proposal right now in
Sandoval County, uh, that has
potentially significant visual
impact on Senior Kaiway.
Senior Kaiway isn't in Sandoval
County. It's across the the
county line.
You know, in Sante County.
Yeah, so you mean should Santa
Fe County get to weigh in on
that site selection?
Maybe, but that's not the way
our counties work.
Um, so, you know, it's, it is an
additional level of oversight.
It's an additional level of
review. Uh, it's a way for, um,
as I said at the outset.
Uh, the stage protect state
level interests.
Which I believe are not
currently, you know, being
protected, being reviewed, being
considered.
So Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
would you
Consider
altering this in any way where
only when there is a
State interest, because it
appears that what we're doing
here is because of
Every once in a while where
there's a state interest and
it's not within a certain
county.
That, that we're talking about.
That, what is the state
interest?
And I just believe what we're
doing here is we're, we're,
we're settling the PRC with
every
With every sight, not once
again, site selection is the
wrong term, but approval of site
selection.
Um
When the state doesn't have an
interest.
It doesn't make sense that if
the state does not have interest
to insert the state. So, thank
you, Madam Chair. I think that's
I think that's where I was
going.
I'm sure if I may respond, you
know, I.
I
I, I think one of our
fundamental um
tasks here the legislature.
And I know a lot of you agree
with this is economic
development.
And I believe one of our best
opportunities for economic
development.
Uh, is outdoor recreation.
Um, and to the extent we have
facilities that are um
impacting.
Uh, outdoor recreation sites,
uh, wildlife sites,
environmental sites,
archaeological sites, there's
lots of archaeological tourism,
um, I think the state does have
an interest.
Thank you.
Uh
Representative Garcia, did you
have another question, Madam
Chair, I was going to make a
motion. OK, uh, I've got a
couple questions, uh.
Representative Small, did you
have questions?
Uh, if you want to go ahead and
then um I can.
Thank you, ma'am. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
um,
One of the core questions is
sort of how we balance the one,
do we have a sense of what
Timelines are now for uh
development of this kind and
what the legislation could do to
those timelines.
Um, ma'am chairs a small, you
know, I think that's a good
question. Um, the, the, the
project in Santa Fe County uh
has already had a fairly
extensive timeline.
And they're really not close to
being done.
You know, so there was a a
planning commission approval,
um, uh, that gets appealed to
the BCC or the county
commissioners, uh, potentially
you could appeal that to
district court.
You know, so this, this goes
back to the issue of
Um
You know, I, I personally think
we need uh a process that's both
efficient and effective.
Um, and right now we kind of had
neither of those.
Um, you know that it's our
existing process isn't
efficient. It doesn't really add
efficiency because it's an
additional layer.
Um, but our existing process
isn't necessarily effective
either because they're
They're uh values they're not
being considered, there's.
Um, you know, oversight that's
not happening when when I think
it should be, so I, I think it's
incumbent upon us to work on.
On both those issues, uh,
effective and efficient.
Um, and this bill, um, mostly
focuses on effective, uh, and it
doesn't really, you know, since
it doesn't address county
authority.
Um, it doesn't make that process
more efficient.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, and
the
Going to the interests, Mr.
Chair or Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
we seemingly have a sort of
Overwhelming interest in a lot
of ways to build as much clean
energy, um,
And in the transmission for that
clean energy is possible, given
the consequences of continuing
to burn fossil fuels.
Would you agree, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair.
Um, ma'am, uh, represent a small
I would absolutely agree, but I,
I would add that we need to do
that in a way that we're not
sacrificing other values.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
I might think of it as sort of
balancing values, Mr. Chair or
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
Because there are
Um
Costs and benefits to any sort
of development and Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, um,
The idea of sort of setting
higher bars.
While also delineating more
clear roles.
And rules is appealing, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, but that would
mean moving into sort of
delineating, uh, different local
authorities.
Because right now, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, um,
The ability to sort of uh well,
not to sort of
The ability to delay.
Renewable or other sorts of
developments can stretch on.
Years
And Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I
think ultimately I applaud the
effort to uh engage a more
comprehensive process.
But
Unless we're setting.
A very high bar and then also
making it an easier route to get
to that bar.
Madam Chair, Mister Chair.
Um
The ability like adding
additional ways for um
Important energy development
projects across a wide range of
areas.
Delaying those.
While I can understand, yeah,
from many different
perspectives.
It delays getting clean energy
onto the grid.
Uh, it delays in other cases it
may delay funding coming to the
state for important priorities.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I guess,
as I sort of speak through it.
Uh
Doing both
Setting a more comprehensive
process while at the same time.
Defining and delineating
timelines.
And shrinking timelines in some
cases, so that um
The private sector has some
clarity about when things may or
may not be approved.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, that's
super appealing, uh, in maybe
this effort is moving us down
that road.
However, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
um, adding another layer onto
what is already can be sort of a
very burdensome process.
Wherein some parts of the state
Development is very difficult
across, across a wide range of
areas. And in other parts of the
state, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
development is
Um
Flows much more smoothly in an
orderly and a fashion. So I
don't know how we
How we and whether, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, if we
Just simply don't dictate to
local communities and, and just
choose not to go down that road,
which is a fair place.
But adding additional layers to
approvals.
Without dealing with that other
side, which is sort of the
clarity of development.
I struggle with that, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
Any thoughts on sort of how to
do that latter part.
Um
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, in a small.
Uh, I, I think that's, I think
that's a very good question.
Uh, and I've, I've.
Struggled with uh the
bureaucracy at the local level
of both personally and
professionally, um, and how to
um get them to process things
efficiently without um.
Um, cutting quality is a real
challenge. I I would say in
terms of if, if you want to
balance interests, um, you need
a forum in which to do that.
And I believe we currently have
this gap, we have this lack.
And that's why um.
I'm proposing this, this bill.
Um, but you raise a fair point
that we should be looking at not
only the effectiveness but also
the efficiency.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
level of questions, um.
Mr. Chair, um.
I think this is a hugely
important issue. Um, and, um,
I'm just wondering if you looked
at other state models, uh, for,
uh, for instance, Colorado and
New York, uh, with how they, um,
have set up, uh, sort of
permitting inciting, uh, with
the state and local levels.
Uh, ma'am, um.
Uh, I did not. This came up
fairly quickly and that's why
you see a bill that is um pretty
broad that, you know, we, you
know, I chose to leave this up
to uh the PRC in the rulemaking
process. I, I had suggested to
me various elements that like
should be included in the rules.
I didn't want to dictate this. I
want those to be part of the
process so that that kind of
thing could be part of that
process, but I, I have not had
the opportunity to look at other
states.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, there
are a couple of interesting
states that I've, um, followed,
um, and, um, I certainly made an
attempt last year to set up a
citing council, um, which had
some.
Positive and negative, uh,
responses, but, um, I think New
York and and Colorado have um.
Set up systems that uh.
We could probably look at, um,
and also potentially learn from.
Um
Mr. Chair, I was wondering, um.
I know you mentioned sort of the
the short time crunch uh for
bringing this forward, um, with
regard to the PRC. Were there
other uh stakeholders, um, or
entities that.
You coordinated with.
In preparing this.
Um, madam chair, um, largely no,
uh, I, I certainly have heard
from constituents.
Uh, and as I said, I've been
working on issues related to
this for
Um, quite a number of years here
in the legislature.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
also, uh, concur with, uh, some
of the challenges of working in
the interim, um, uh,
In terms of getting, uh, good
feedback, um, from different
stakeholders and other members
of the legislature cause not
everyone.
Um, is it all of the interim
committees, um, my personal um
thoughts, you know, as I said,
I, I do think this is hugely
important and something that New
Mexico needs to address and do a
whole lot better, um, I don't
know that, that I agree that
this is the way to do it, um.
Having looked at some of the
other um options, um, but I, I
do just wanna.
Sort of lend my support for um
the need to do this and do this
well and do it urgently.
So, um
Thank you. I don't have any
other questions.
Um, do we have, uh, yes,
Representative Garcia's
recommendation House Bill 4.
35.
Uh, there is a motion, um.
For a second.
Many can I second that.
Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah.
Yeah. OK.
All right.
Uh, so we will, um,
Go ahead and
All the role, Nina, is that?
Representative Abeda, pass.
Representative Dixon.
Adam, oh no, uh, no.
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative Gorola.
Ah
Representative Henry? No.
Represented Montoya.
Represident Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Represent a small.
Representative Abeda.
Representative Beta.
I'm going to vote yes.
Representative Gorola, yes.
First year.
Chair McQueen.
Um, so, uh, we have a vote 4 in
favor, uh, 6 opposed, um, so,
uh, the motion has failed.
Do we want another emotion or?
I believe it would be
appropriate to entertain the
tabling motion.
OK. Um, do I have a motion to.
OK. Uh, the motion has been
made, uh, by Representative
Abeta, um.
Oh
Can you oppose the tabling
motion?
Oh
00, is there any opposition to
tabling?
I, I'm a postman.
I'm a post as well.
All right. So shall we take the
role?
Thank you
Representative Abeda.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia? No.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative small
First year said Chair McLean.
No
Thank you, Nina. So, um, the
bill has been tabled, uh.
Thank you, Chair M.
Thank you, everyone who
attended, um, we do have one
more bill on the agenda.
Uh, I saw represented Vincent,
there he is.
Our last bill today is House
Bill.
Uh, 553 timber grating and Act.
Uh, represent Vincent whenever
you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
members of the committee.
I just want to make a statement
real quick, that's a this is a
tough committee.
And I've watched the last two
bills and I hope I can bring
some.
Some positivity this committee
today.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee will be presenting uh
HB 553 today.
And HB 553 is uh before I get
started, Mr. Chair, I'd like to
introduce, have my my expert
introduce himself, and then I
also have another expert online
which is our state forester
Laura McCarthy.
Chait. Good morning. My name is
Lindsay Ku. I'm the deputy state
forester.
While you're pulling that up, I
just wanted to brag on our state
forester, she had a bicycle
wreck.
And she broke her scapula, so
she broke her shoulder and um
she advised me that she is
mentally here, but she just
can't be physically here, so she
is in her right mind, Mr. Chair.
OK, so we have a uh attendee
labeled M nerd iPad something.
Uh
Forster McCarthy, is that you?
You're muted on your end.
OK. Good morning. I'm sorry, uh,
good morning, Mr. Chair. Yes,
this is me.
You're welcome and uh I hope
you're feeling better.
Um, uh, Representative Vincent,
would you care to present the
book? Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
the goal of uh HB 553 is to
allow residential construction,
the option of using locally
produced lumber, vegas, and
beams.
New Mexico has 18 sawmills and 3
and 3 facilities producing
beams, vegas, and latias.
They are all located across the
state such as Chama, Taos,
Ratton, Las Vegas, Amos, Pueblo,
Milan, Tularosa, and reserve.
Many of the facilities are
multi-generational.
Family run and some are tribally
owned and operated. They are
small independent operations
that operate on the edge of
profitability.
That's a lot of the reason that
we're bringing this legislation
forward.
So House Bill 533 provides New
Mexico.
With the opportunity to solve 3
problems at once.
By allowing residential and
commercial construction to use
locally produced lumber, gas and
beams, we will one.
Improve the markets for timber.
Remove, uh, removed in the tree
thinning and post fire hazard
removal.
Offset price increases as
tariffs on imports from Canada
to drive up the lumber prices.
And 3 generate a local timber
supply to rebuild after
wildfires and address the
statewide shortage of housing.
New Mexico building codes
require that all wood used for
load bearing applications be
stress graded by an approved
lumber grading and and or
inspection agency.
The US and Canada have 24
accredited grading agencies.
The cost of getting one of these
agencies to New Mexico depend on
the amount of lumber to be
inspected and the distance and
inspector must travel.
The cost is too high for New
Mexico sawmills, given the
relatively small volume.
Of timber they produce.
The result of this quality
timber products that could be
used for high value purposes
such as home construction are
sold at as lower value products
or buildings such as corrals and
or.
Like maybe chicken pins.
Chicken coops now I'm not saying
that that's a bad thing right
now due to the price of eggs you
might want to invest in some
chicken coops, but, uh, we, we
really would like to for that to
go to uh structures.
HB 553 will increase and will
create an in-state structural
timber grading system.
And certificate program within
the energy, minerals and natural
resources department, forestry
division.
Section 3 of the bill creates
the structural timber grading
certificate program to provide
training for sawmill owners and
their employees to grade and
label structured structural
timber.
Based on the system used by the
American lumber Standard
Committee.
The forestry division will
promulgate rules.
For the awarding of
certificates.
Training components of the
program, qualifications of
program instructors and grounds
for the processes or the
suspension and revocation of
certificates.
The training can be provided by
the forestry division or by a
community college and or
university.
The bill allows the forestry
division to charge a fee not to
exceed $250 for the issuance of
a certificate.
And then the certificate is good
for 5 years.
The sawmill who is certified as
a greater can then grade
thetructural uh timber produced
by their sawmill in the agency
they work at.
The label has to include the
name of the greater.
And this, this is, I really want
you to listen to this.
The label has to include the the
name of the greater.
The name of the location of the
sawmill where the timber was
processed, the name of the
timber species, the quantity and
the type of structural timber
that was graded and labeled.
The location where the timber is
to be used.
The date that the timber was
cut.
And processed the date on which
the timber was graded and the
moisture content of the timber.
At the time of grading.
So this is a very robust, uh, it
will be a very robust
certification and for that.
Mr. Chair, we would stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative, um,
did either of your experts want
to weigh in or are they just
here to answer questions?
I think we're good to go. We're
respecting your time,
our audience has thinned out a
show of hands who's here in
support.
Uh, who's here in opposition?
OK, so if you'd like to speak in
I didn't see any in the
opposition. If it's like to
speak in support, please step
forward. Uh, we'll take, uh, 32
minutes.
Mr. Chair members, the committee
carry Robin Bruder, I'm
representing Lincoln County, um,
after the fires and the floods
that hit our community
afterward, we have put together
a Sierra Blanca Regional Task
Force that is trying to
revitalize the economics of the
region.
Using uh our sawmill that
hopefully will be opened uh with
Mescalero tribe. We think that
this is a critical component to
our overall economic recovery,
we would be joining 4 other
states that already have the
certification, Alaska,
Wisconsin, New Hampshire, and
Tennessee. And we think that
it's just a really great way to
close the economic loop of our
trees are being created into our
timber, which can then build our
houses in New Mexico and we
think that's a really
Exciting, um, perspective thing
for us to look at.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Kim
Lagant. I am the lobbyist for
Mescalero Apache Tribe,
Mescalero Apache tribe currently
has 2 sawmills, which they plan
to reopen um this year. This
bill um will enhance market
transparency, improve product
quality and support sustainable
practices in the timber
industry. In addition, it is an
important step.
To strengthening New Mexico's
forestry economy, ensuring
responsible management of our
natural resources. Thank you so
much.
Forget how to address you. um, I
a little nervous. My name is
Rachel Wood. I'm um consulting
forester, and I started looking
at wood grading for New Mexico
back in 2017 when I did some
interviews with
Mill owners and several of them
wanted a way to to.
Um, grade
Lumber and wood affordably.
And several other mills are on
board. I talked to 12 who are in
support of this.
Project and I think it would
really, I mean we really need to
support our mills who do the
thinning of our forests, and
that protects them from
wildfires.
So this will expand markets,
increase value.
Um, the only change I see to the
bill is under moisture content
to specify whether the wood is
green or dry. Um, otherwise, I
think it's uh ideal bill.
And again, it's for other states
are here to assist and we have
their precedent of how these
work.
So, thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, is
there anyone online who would
like to speak in support?
Please raise your hand.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Uh, David
Hutchman
Hello, um,
Can you hear me, first of all.
Great, um, Chair McQueen, a
distinguished members of the
committee. I'm David Crutchman.
I'm the president of the
American Lumber Standards
Committee.
And ASC submits that this
legislation is unnecessary, um,
as New Mexico has already
adopted a comprehensive
provisions.
Addressing the safe and
effective use of structural
lumber in New Mexico has adopted
the building code that requires
the use of graded lumber for the
vast majority of the wind
structures in the state and
refers and relies on the
American lumber Standards
Committee.
Um, system implemented through
the US Department of Commerce,
voluntary product Standard 20.
Um, to accomplish this.
Uh
Further to counter the system
already in place in Mexico to
propose legislation suggests
that anyone can develop skills
to grade lumber by passing short
courses or having a pain the
reinforced to your wood products
and have an experience
equivalent to a degree program
at some point. This is not the
case. The grading is a skill
that requires many weeks of
training and continue to review
to maintain the required skill
to assess.
Structural lumber quality. The
national system overseen by the
ALLC includes stringent rules
for obtaining certification as a
lumber grader.
The other point I would like to
stress, and I submitted a
four-page letter that has all of
our comments on the bill, but is
equivalent, the legislation does
not address all the cools will
be established.
The law suggests that commercial
sawmill can sell the lumber
directly to individuals that
will inhabit the dwelling by
providing a written certificate,
uh, certifying to the producer
that the quality and sustaining
uh suitability of the lumber is
equivalent to structural wood
grated.
By an accredited lumber grading
agency.
Unless it's operated under the
PS20 system with all the quality
control and quality assurance.
That that entails certified
graders, monthly inspections,
random third-party checks.
One cannot claim that the same
equivalent to the ALRC
accredited great stamp material
is possible. And finally,
there's no liability link to the
producer of the lover that a
consumer can fall back on.
Basically, the bill would codify
buyer beware and does not
provide any tool or recourse for
further future owners to
understand who to hold
accountable if there is a
problem.
Thank you, Mr.
Oline.
Thank you. That, that's been 2
minutes.
OK, uh, I see one more hand or I
saw one more hand and then it
went away.
Is there anyone else who would
like to speak in opposition.
There's the handbag.
Line Philip.
Uh yes, thank you. Can you hear
me? Yes.
Uh yeah, my name is uh Phillip
Li. I'm with the uh
American Wood council.
And um
And we represent and wood
product manufacturers,
manufacturers from uh saw lumber
to, uh, you know, plywood and or
you know stream board uh panels.
And uh we too have submitted a
letter, um,
Opposing this legislation.
And um I just, I wanna emphasize
one point that was made just in
the.
Prior opposing testimony.
And um so there, there are
building requirements for uh
safe use of lumber and
structural applications.
And um
What we're seeing in this bill
does not
Kind of rise to that level
that's already already required
in the building code, uh,
primarily in the area of a
quality assurance and regular
inspection of the lumber and
the, the skills of the greater.
And uh we think that's a major
shortcoming, uh,
I think it is important, um, and
I, I hear all the uh support
testimony.
To use this lumber and for all
of the reasons they're saying to
use it. I think those are valid
reasons, but it, it shouldn't
be, uh, to compromise at the
expense of compromising safety
and um
Ensuring that the material is
properly graded.
With, uh, you know, regular be
check of the graders and even
surprise inspections. Uh, we do
not see any of that here.
Um, what we see is, um, a
certification that happens once
every, once every 5 years and um
we think that's a major
shortcoming, uh, in the bill.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK. Um, uh, uh, Vincent, would
you like to add anything before
we go to the committee?
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So.
I want the committee to be fully
aware of
some of the opposition that have
have called in and
What they're going after on the
bill is.
Grating and certification will
be adopted.
Quality control. We'll be in the
curriculum.
Standardization.
Regulation and enforcement.
International trade compliance.
What I want for the committee to
understand is.
The American lumber standard
Committee.
The first thing that I I
researched was how are they
funded.
They are funded by grading
agencies and mills pay for um.
The accreditation and oversight,
so they charge for
accreditation.
They get inspection fees.
They have program administration
fees.
You have to pay to be a part of
their organization and Mister
Chair and committee, I don't, I
don't blame them for opposing
this.
We're trying to make this
cheaper for New Mexicans.
Not lower the standard.
At all, we will adopt our state
forester.
Uh, in our, in our deputy will
adopt a accreditation or uh um.
They will adopt
The didactic and the um
accreditation.
And they will teach off of that.
And it will be.
Or
It'll be as good the standards
will be as good as what.
You're what the the um excuse
me, the American Lumber Standard
Committee.
is offering now and with that we
stand for questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative. I'll be brief
because I know you love that.
Um, my first question, Mr. Chair
Representative, is who can take
a training to be a certified
timber grader.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair and Representative Cortez.
So we're going to try to keep
it.
To where it's first sawmills and
sawmill employees so that we can
make sure we target the right
people because a lot of this, a
lot of the um idea behind this
is if you've been to Las Vegas,
New Mexico, where the Caf Canyon
Hermit's Peak is.
Where, uh, over in Lincoln
County where we had our salt and
South Fork fire.
There is still a lot of standing
timber.
They can be utilized for
different things, so while we
already have a lot of these
sawmills stood up.
And are ready to start accepting
this material we want to make
sure that their employees for
those sawmills have first option
at at these great courses right
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. I heard in
public comment about the
moisture content. So why is it
necessary to specify the
moisture content on the timber.
I guess the label.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative Cortez. I'm
not a I'm not an expert when it
comes to the timber, but, but I,
I know that a lot of people in
here that's used it if you have
green timber if you don't know
what the moisture content is and
you don't get it killed and
dried, it'll start to twist on
you just if anybody's built uh a
deck or anything it'll twist on
you so.
They will adopt standards that
will make sure the moisture
level is at least 16% or less.
And we won't have that problem.
19%, excuse me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, and what would
this new certification bring to
the sawmills?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Cortez, so
I just interrupt you and I would
observe that the representative
is representative Senator
Cortez, Senna Cortez, sorry
about that.
She's kind of like a little
sister to me, so I.
Are you, I'm surprised I didn't
call her little sis, uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Senator Cortez,
so would you repeat that
question?
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative,
and thank you for getting that
on the record, um, my question
was how would this news, what
would this new certification
bring to the sawmills?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senator Cortez,
so what it brings is it brings.
We're gonna do a hopefully we're
gonna start a robust logging
system throughout New Mexico.
And we're gonna maybe push
against the forest or just a
little bit to start cleaning up
some of the forest, bringing
some of that good forest
product.
Into our communities and our
local sawmills and then what the
sawmills are gonna do is they're
gonna start and and have a
standard of lumber that instead
of trucking it all over the
place instead of having to hire
graders to come from out of
town, which is very expensive,
especially if you don't have a
lot of the uh timber.
There they can only grade what
you cut.
We're going to be able to sell
this.
This, uh, timber that's coming
out of our forest it's causing
us a problem right now we're
gonna be able to turn that into
housing.
And hopefully our our our
building contractors and stuff
will be able to get this at a I
wouldn't say a discounted rate
but uh at least a fair rate.
To start rebuilding our houses.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair Representative, and
how could this initiative help
with economic development.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Senator Cortez, so it's going to
bring jobs.
To the community we're gonna
have a product to sell to the
community and that in itself
right there is gonna be an
economic driver. Hopefully we
have um logging people coming in
to do logging, so it's gonna
produce lots of jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. That concludes
my questions.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh
Representative, um,
I actually have a little bit of
experience with this. I work for
a company for a short period of
time that had a small
Um
Samuel
Um, and my son actually ran the
sawmill, um, after, after I
left, um,
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative.
Um
Currently sawmills have
White
Uh, a time delay.
Between when they
Cut, uh, a wood for a project.
And when an inspector can come.
And grade
That project as much as
A month and a half.
Um
Um, Mr. Chairman and, and
representative, it, it, it
appears that they, you have uh
you have inspectors that
Do a circuit
And
Um, if a
If whoever that
person is who is there to grade
the wood.
Um, get sick, has a family
emergency, takes vacation.
It, it
What happens in many instances
is that those visits get put off
till the next.
time in that circuit.
And uh and it it does prove uh
fairly costly.
a small business to have to wait
that extra time. Um, also, um,
Um, Mr. Chair and, and, uh,
Uh, representative of what I
found was.
It is
fairly specific to the person.
This is
Art almost to some degree, a
person who grades would either.
has it or doesn't have it. And
what I found was uh
Just a little bit of uh
Time spent with an inspector.
Um, my son quickly grew to have
a pretty good eye for it.
And apparently that does not
happen and in reality, Mr. Chair
and Representative, you, you get
maybe
3 hours with an inspector.
And they tell you what they're
looking for so that they can
Try and have
Uh, so they choose the right
logs.
For a job and then what they're
looking for.
In a finished product and Mr.
Chair and representative, what,
what happens.
In most instances is uh spoiled.
Product
Um, cause you're trying to gear
to a grade. So, um,
That once again, there's a
little bit of a feel to it,
choosing the right size wood for
a project, so that you can get
the maximize the lumber out of
the log.
Um, so I, I can appreciate the
need for something like this
because of how
Um
How long it takes to to have the
product which may need to go
out.
There, there's a delay for that
builder.
So, um
Mr. Chair Representative, in
this instance, uh, the only work
that was being done.
Out of this particular sawmill
was rough cut.
Wood
Vigas
Um, or
posts, um, things that were
Decorative
A structural
Um
However
What we're talking about here
today is it just
Rough cut lumber or are we
talking about all the way down
to finished lumber, such as
2x4s, something that you might
find in a in a Lowe's or Home
Depot.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Montoya we're talking about
finished lumber.
Kiln dried
That
Has all the tags on it that I
mentioned earlier.
That shows.
Who, what, when, where and how.
That product was left the mill
and where it's headed.
And the people that buy it will
get the certificate.
proving all that.
So thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and Representative. That's a
much larger operation.
Uh, for that. That's uh uh we're
not.
Talking about uh
Once again, rough cut lumber is
one thing, but getting it down
to specs and
That's that's something else,
so.
Um, I'm, I'm picturing bigger.
Sawmills to do that, how how
many uh Mr. Chair
Representative, do we even have
it that size.
In the state
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I don't know
exactly uh how big they are, cuz
I haven't personally visited
them, but we have Chama.
And we have Ratton Las Vegas.
It was Pueblo, Milan.
Tularosa and it's not a real big
one and then uh reserve and um
Mescalero the the community I
serve, they're they're fixing to
stand up their saw mill.
And
I'm so proud that they're gonna
be standing that up because.
When we start pulling that that.
Those force materials out of the
forest not only are we talking
about lumber our, our riddle and
Downs racetrack.
They missed Mescalero sawmill
because that's where they got
all the bedding for their
horses. There's so many
different products that come out
of this
that's such an economic driver.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative.
I, I appreciate that because
really you didn't, you, you
mentioned.
Less than a dozen, so we're not
really talking about
major program. We're not talking
about even shipping out of the
state, are we, is, is that we're
talking about.
New Mexico product to be sold
and used here in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. uh, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Montoya, so I
wouldn't want to limit anybody
if they did if they were
producing enough and they were
taking care of our locals and
they want to ship some out, you
know, I wouldn't want to say
that they can't ship it out, but
I would hope that it's gonna
take a little while, especially
in in uh my area.
You know, for houses and stuff
to be built because during so we
had the fire and we had the
flood well the flood took
completely took our lumberyard
out.
There's not one stick of lumber
in that lumberyard right now.
And I'm hoping that um and my my
hope is Mescalero is gonna be
able to.
ship directly to Foxworth
Galbraith and over towards our
Otero 84 lumber and they're
gonna be able to sell their
product right there.
So thank you Mr. Chair.
Representative, um, I guess the
point I'm getting at is if it's
gonna be sold out of state, it
would still have to comply with
the national.
Uh, organizations that are in
place, correct?
That is Mr. Chair, that's
correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I, I
do like this cause it, it will
offer, uh,
If you're dealing with a
particular directly with
developers.
Um, I, I could see how this
could be less expensive, uh,
quicker, um, and
I think there is a need once
again.
Mm
My son, while he worked for
that, uh, lumber yard for or
that sawmill for about
A year and 3 or 4 months.
Within that period of time,
maybe meeting with a an
inspector.
Maybe 7 times, maybe 8 times
during that.
period of time was at that point
at the end of that where he was.
Meeting the grade.
That was expected, so it can be
done. I, I don't.
Um, I mean, if I were sitting
back and I had no experience and
I was just listening into the
conversation.
You make it sound like it was a.
and the folks in opposition kind
of make it sound like it was
hard to
To
Get to that point, in reality
is.
Probably in 7 or 8.
may be a maximum of 9 times that
my
son interacted with the state
inspector.
By that last time was
Meeting grade, maybe 3 hours at
a time, 4 hours at a time.
I think this is doable.
Um, once again,
When you're then go out there
and you're
Uh, treating the wood when you
are killing the wood and making
it and drying it out to where
it'll meet.
And not twist, uh.
That'll that'll all prove out.
Fairly quickly.
And so, um, I, I don't have a
problem supporting this. I
think.
I think the reality is, this is
something bringing in closer to
home.
And I think it could help bring
our, our prices down for
construction across New Mexico.
So I, I fully support this
legislation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I didn't
touch anything.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I just
represented Montoya, I wanted to
make sure.
That um I clarify something so
not all of those mills have
kilns, but it's about the option
for meals to develop their own
markets, so if they do want.
If they do want to kill them,
they can have a kill and it'll
be just rough cut if they have a
kiln, then it'll be, you know,
the, the great ace lumber.
And
But so he didn't actually ask
you a question. It's running a
little late. I'd like to just
move on if that's OK.
Resent small
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you,
Deputy Forrester, really quick,
Mr. Chair, Deputy Forster,
uh represent, uh, on the
liability question.
Any perspective on that.
Who, how will we handle that
since the state.
And Mr. Chair, I've signed on to
this bill. I intend to support
it. It's an interesting point. I
do want to ask about it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative Small.
You know, I've got the same
problem with one of my other
bills, who is liable.
So let me just make an example,
Mr. Chair, and I'll, I'll try to
make this brief.
We are running a bill where they
harden homes and do buffer
systems now, uh, who's gonna be
liable, so if I hire a
contractor and he hardens my
home.
Am I stating to you that
That home's not going to burn.
Everything's going to burn.
There's always gonna be
liabilities and I would, I would
say that there's probably gonna
be a portion on the curriculum
that we're teaching that could
be a liability.
And also if I owned a sawmill.
And um my employees were
grading. I would feel like I, I
would probably have a little bit
of liability as well.
Mr. Chair
Right
OK, uh thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Deputy Forrester. Um,
second, uh,
There, there is funding in the
budget related to this both
around uh some of the sawmill
startup costs.
As well as potential support for
forestry to do the program. Is
that right?
Mr. Chair representative Small,
that's correct.
Great.
Uh, 3rd, the, um,
You know, spend a lot of time
outdoors like we all do a great
deal of New Mexico's uh
sort of the, it's a lot of Pino
and juniper.
You know, we're not Washington
state where you have, you know,
120 130 ft trees, what have you.
Mr. Chair, uh Representative
Deputy Forrester.
is one of the features of this
bill that it's gonna allow us to
better manage a lot of the small
diameter timber that's sort of
more unique to our area or is
this all focused on large
diameter.
Uh, really mature andresentative
Small.
It encompasses all of what you
just said up to and including we
actually are trying to get a bio
plan in.
And all the leftover we're gonna
take to the bio plant and and uh
generate electricity out of it
because we have to get that fuel
out of the forest and if we
don't pull this together, Mister
Chair and Representative Small,
our insurance companies it's
just our, our communities are
not as attractive as they used
to be.
They're overgrown, they're
mismanaged, and we have to start
to.
In insurance. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, my sense is
that uh
fair that this is sort of all
encompassing.
One of the unique needs and
features for New Mexico is a lot
of the smaller diameter timber.
For use in different areas. And
if there's something in, in
probably Mr. Chair,
representative.
Uh, Forrester outside of,
outside of sovereign tribal
lands.
Um
And probably deeded lands, a lot
of the high elevation areas are
gonna be for service by and
large.
A lot of small, I, I wonder if a
lot of smaller diameter timber
on state or other sort of.
Where that supply is. And Mr.
Chair, saying just a quick
comment.
Um
You know, as the 4th most
biodiverse state and a state at
risk of sort of continued
catastrophic wildfire and
flooding.
We've got this balance to walk
and you and I, we've visited
about it.
Um
I'm excited for us to push more
into uh an active management
space, but very aware that
Uh, repeating past mistakes.
Which are sort of cut
everything.
Don't do any fire on the
landscape, which is not in
keeping with practices or
including sovereign tribal
practices.
You know, we've sort of been
Um
The forests
Evolved without us.
We went probably a little too
hot.
With how we approach things with
no fire.
All sort of logging and now
we're in a very much too cold
place.
Where there's not enough active
management.
Uh
I will fight for things that
sort of restore that balance.
I'm, I'm gonna always.
As I know many are, Mr. Chair,
sort of be cautious, and I know
some of you think about this a
lot as well.
About striking that balance.
We're enhancing and protecting
our biodiversity while at the
same time protecting our
communities, enhancing economic
opportunity.
in
My sense is it can be done, Mr.
Terror Representative, is that
your sense and Deputy Forrester.
Mr. Chair and Representatives
small yes.
And Mr. Chair represented small.
I want to thank you as well as
the vice chair, uh,
Representative Dixon.
And all of those on the
appropriation for at least.
Looking at the vision that we
have because I really think that
we're going to show.
New Mexico.
That we can grow our own.
And we have we have people that
have skills and they're gonna be
great timber graders and we're
gonna start really showing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
The Representative Garcia, do
you have uh questions or a
motion? I would like to put
forth the motion, can I come
back to you? I have a couple
quick questions.
Um
Any other questions from the
committee?
So, um, uh, Vincent, I had, uh,
perhaps 3 questions.
Uh, so on page 4 of the bill,
line 25.
It says,
Well, turning on 24 structural,
structural timber, maybe using
all residential and commercial
buildings in the state. Um,
I, I just noticed the term
structural timber, um.
It it's a little vague and it
doesn't specify for structural
purposes.
Perhaps that can be implied. Um.
Uh, you know, my concern
originally was like, yeah, you
can use this wood for cabinets
or, you know, whatever, but I
think it needs to be clear that
you can use it for structural
purposes. I guess that's.
Mostly covers it. Um, are we
gonna have to revise the
building codes? Is this now in
conflict with the building
codes?
Mr. Chair, I, I don't take it
that way at all and um so if I
would have brought this, if I
would have brought this bill
with exactly what we were gonna
teach.
I think it'd be twice as big as
HB 2.
And I don't think that would
have made the committee very
happy that the the.
Emer and the state forester are
going to come up with a
curriculum.
That, so let me just get you off
in the interest of time. I'm not
asking about the curriculum. I'm
asking about it once we do this,
we have a curriculum we're
grading timber. Do our building
goods say that you have to use
structural timber that meets
this other standard.
Now we're adopting a state
standard. Do we have to go back
and revise those building codes.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I don't believe
so because we still are going to
go through CID. They still have
their standards.
We still have to provide the
kind of lumber that they.
OK, and
And I don't know what those look
like, like if they say you have
to provide structural lumber,
you're fine. If it says you have
to provide structural lumber
that complies with such and such
code.
Then you might need to revise
that, right?
Mr. Chair, I don't believe so
because we still have a, we
still have a standard through
CID and if, if we're not putting
the correct lumber in those
houses that CID says has to be
in there and you wouldn't be
able to purchase it. OK,
so I might be a detailed look up
but.
Uh, last question, page 4 lines
13 and 14, um, part of the, the
label includes the location
where the timber is to be used
to, I mean, I think of lumber
yards and there's inventory and
you go, I need, you know, so
many 2 x 4s.
Do you always know the location
where the timber is going to be
used? I mean, is that something
you can always include in that
label?
Mr. Chair, I think that a lot of
that had to do with if so these
independent uh.
Sawmills, if you went to buy
directly from them, that's
where.
That that information would go.
So I think it could go twofold
if you're if if Foxworth Gilbert
is buying, you know, that
timber, then you know I would
say it's going to Foxworth
Gilbrai and if it's going to
Chairman McQueen's house.
And
They'll put your address and
everything.
And when that label be?
Produced at the time of grading.
That's correct, Mr. Chair.
OK, so I might not show up for
my tend that yard for 23 months,
6 months before I show up and
want to buy some.
Uh, it's just a logistical
question. Yes, sir.
So that that certificate will be
with that lumber wherever it
goes. OK, I'm just suggesting
you might.
You know, sometimes you're doing
a job, you know, for a purpose
and that's
That's fine.
But sometimes you also might
just have.
trees that your, you're cutting
and you're putting in the yard
and you don't know who's going
to use them yet, so something to
think about.
Uh, Representative Garcia on
scale 553.
So we have a motion and the 2nd.
Um,
Is there any opposition to that
motion?
OK
See none, you have a unanimous
to pass. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you very much committee.
uh, we'll get uh agenda now for
Thursday, we'll be thinking
