Local as close we have a quorum.
Please rise for precision
colors.
Silvercity Daphne oracle goes B.
group thirteen twenty eight
staff sergeant E. five John pays
their force started the five
Frank Donahue US marine corps.
The gentleman.
From Kettering grant The Little
Falls graces with today's
implications Representative us.
My god.
As we gather today we lift up
our state our country to you.
We humbly ask for your
blessings.
And that your hand be over us to
help us to help guide us in the
right direction.
Open our ears that we may hear
and know your voice so we will
not get lost in the path you set
for our lives.
We pray for the safety of all
those in this country our state.
And in this great nation this
daily in the armor of god so
that we may stand firm in the
face of adversity.
We ask you to protect us from
the un needed division that
distracts us from our true
calling and the love we have for
one another.
Give us the strength to defend
the vulnerable the voiceless and
bring justice to those who have
suffered injustice.
We ask a special blessing on our
military our officers
firefighters first responders
nurses teachers are minors and
all those who work hard to make
the beautiful state of New
Mexico what it is.
Please provide the appointed
leaders of the state with wisdom
and discernment to make
decisions that honor you care
for your people and improve
their lives.
We may not know what tomorrow
will bring.
Help us to rest in you
relentlessly trusting in your
perfect plan.
Thank you for your kindness
mercy and your divine love.
Grant us your peace that passes
all understanding pour out all
your many blessings upon Grant
County New Mexico and our
beautiful state of New Mexico.
Legislative learning and I see
it as a quarter percent of how
to me please creases with the
pledge of allegiance.
Agents to the flag of the United
States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one
nation under god indivisible
with liberty and justice for
all.
William F. linking of data
Representative Vincent with the
pledge to New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Thank you.
Thank you to the color guard.
The gentle lady from earlier
centuries.
Mr speaker I move to go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business an
objection it is so ordered
joining from Bernalillo
Representative on the on our
new.
Thank you Mr speaker I am very
excited to welcome the return of
Andy I New Mexico to the floor
of the New Mexico state house of
representatives and the I. New
Mexico is a youth development
organization that serves
elementary and middle school
children and ninety public
schools and thirty two community
statewide they teach over two
hundred classes per week and
have given over two hundred
three thousand hours of
instruction across all programs
over the last twenty eight years
so they have served over one
hundred fifty five thousand
children across New Mexico
through in the eye and New
Mexico's youth development work
they prepare young people to
meet the challenges of
adolescence and adulthood to
achieve their full potential
third party evaluations have
confirmed to the ND I New Mexico
programs are effective at
improving confidence health and
academic achievement on average
and the I. students had better
GPA scores by a full point and
significantly higher scores on
standardized assessments
compared to their non
participating appears please
join me in welcoming and the I.
New Mexico's board members and
supporters artistic director
Lizelle ganic and the anti I New
Mexico is super wonderful
advance team swat.
Thank you so much Representative
thank you everyone for welcoming
us here today it is such an
honor to be here to perform for
you and the I. New Mexico is
founded with the knowledge that
the arts have a unique power to
engage and motivate children the
purpose of our purpose is to
teach children disciplines a
standard of excellence and
believe in themselves that will
carry over into all aspects of
their lives are statewide
programs bring dance discipline
and joy to children in public
schools in rural and urban
communities and in every corner
of our state one thing remains
constant our children need
resources including internal
resources to experience well
being and achieve success
throughout our history our
objective has been to provide
access to programs for our for
students who need it most we
provide a positive and safe
learning environment that
celebrates diversity and build
students resilience helping them
overcome the challenges in their
lives through the pandemic we
partnered with New Mexico Public
education department and the
department of health to support
social emotional learning for
students and as we emerge from
the pandemic we continue to
support physical health social
and emotional health through our
programs all over the state this
outstanding group of dancers who
are here today are showing what
they have learned from anti I
New Mexico which is excellence
in energy and that they can
achieve excellence at anything
they want in their lives if they
work with the poor for work hard
do your best to never give up
and being healthy thank you so
much for allowing us to perform
for you today and thank you for
your continued support without
further ado the index I New
Mexico dancers I will move out
of their way to answer is.
Thank you so much.
Dancers with excellence come
home.
Thank you so much for letting us
share our joy and hard work with
you today and thank you for your
continued support of our public
school programs statewide we
always say thank you and goodbye
at the end of every and the I.
class in a special way it goes
like this I go first thank you.
Thank you.
Mid
thank you everyone so much.
Thank you India thank you
dancers.
Maybe there should be an NDA
provided or performance.
Gentleman from Santa he's going
to volunteer to get is going.
Other announcements and get the
gentleman from catcher and
granting other benefit us us.
Thank you Mr speaker
first of all I want to remind
everybody today is Grant County
day Mr speaker and
and so you'll see on your on on
the members desks you have a
beautiful cookie and and this is
this is Grant County day from
the prospectors are appear in
all around our building that's
why you can't find parking space
for like three miles.
And then we've got Freeport gave
us a wonderful keychain for
every member made a solid copper
you know we can I come from
copper country Mr speaker and
and so the.
And a pen yeah and they give us
a pen that's right I gave money
away just right now but you get
you got a real nice prospector
spend a lapel pin that you can
where and support copper of in
in New Mexico and I also have
some some special guests that's
behind me if I forget my wife
that would be horrible at
extensible my wife Mr speaker
Mandy who takes care children
when I'm gone all the time we
all have as far Sanchez part of
the the one we're we're away we
depend on they pay all the light
bills and all that stuff you
know all the shape and take care
of things at home this is my my
other half welcome to the house.
Mr speaker I also have some
guests on the rostrum is this
good time we have Kim Clark
actuals please stand Kim and she
was born and raised in Grant
County has family ties the back
to eighteen eighty she's been
involved the committee for many
many years and it was recognizes
twenty eighteen volunteer of the
year by the source of the grand
chamber of commerce.
Mary Rachel stand she's in in
which Kim and ties to the
community university run of the
year and university run deep in
addition to a decade of service
to western New Mexico university
she's also earned a master's
degree in business
administration from western
she's alumni with me and
continuing the most sacred
tradition her daughter raelynn
and all's also recently
completed her bachelor's degree
in interdisciplinary studies at
western so welcome.
Christine Ortiz she loses of the
Clara she served at the clerk at
the as a clerk treasurer for the
city of bear for twenty seven
years Christi now serves as a
community leader there is on for
the rural partners that work
with USDA and she has been
married for twenty two years has
two kids and attended New Mexico
State University.
And our mining lady Laura
Phelps.
she and usher in office sure
there you go our our report this
is our mining people Freeport
mac Moran in New Mexico
Coppermine supporting the
community development programs
in Grant County our minds
generate more than three hundred
and sixty six million in
economic benefits for for New
Mexico in twenty twenty one and
nearly a hundred fifty million
for just crinkle County alone
some of our recent requests
include funding for was for New
Mexico's electric charging
stations and the Silvercity rec
center water rights for the
mining district municipalities
in support of a regional system
and thank you Mister speaker
you've been very gracious today
is what is been very gracious
working with that with with both
parties I do have some against
up on the on the gallery if
you'd like to.
Let people know who's up there
thank you Mr leader gentleman I
believe you'll have a Morial
that we'll get back to here in a
minute I want to welcome in the
gallery from Freeport we have
Eric Bauer general manager we
have Randy Ellison general
manager at channel we've got
David Lim out business
development Freeport sherry
Bernalillo casted environmental
engineer as well as Tom Shelley
Berman Jeannie and I guess there
is no copper production today
because you all are here with us
thank you for joining us.
Back to the gentleman from
catching grant to the local
office of the US.
Thank you Mr speaker
I ask that
unanimous consent that house
bill memorial nine of the move
from the speakers table and be
made the next order of business.
Sen objection it is so ordered.
For the record reflect that all
actions necessary for placing
House memorial line on final
passage has been taken and the
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentleman that was my part but
thank you for doing my thank you
Mr speaker I got off my line
thank you Mr speaker.
Just trying to see.
Mr speaker.
Thank you to the point Mr
speaker you just did so we'll
leave it at that wanted to have
the clear green the memorial
thank you Mr speaker I love
we're having a good time I love
that.
Click to read.
House memorial nine introduced
by Representative ten us us and
the Senator Hemphill.
Oil proclaiming February first
twenty twenty three the forty
seventh annual Grant County day
in the house of representatives
were as Grant County is known
for its mining ranching in our
communities blend of Hispanic
native American and Anglo
cultures blue skies with three
hundred sixty days of sunshine
per year fast mountain
landscapes and small town
atmosphere and where as Grant
County is the gateway to the
vast Hilo wilderness and whereas
grant county's largest city and
county C. to Silvercity is the
only municipality in New Mexico
still operating under the
territorial charter issued by
the legislative assembly of the
territory of New Mexico in
eighteen seventy eight and
whereas Grant County is the
richest county for mining in New
Mexico producing numerous
precious metals including copper
an essential element of green
energy and electric vehicles and
we're as Grant County is home to
western New Mexico university
established in eighteen ninety
three the state's only liberal
arts and sciences university as
designated by the legislature
and whereas the western New
Mexico university museum has the
world's foremost collection of
ancient memories pottery and
we're as Grant County is known
for its true west history that
includes prehistoric native
Americans sure call patchy and
robless characters such as Billy
the kid lawman Dan Tucker and
madam Millie.
And where is Grant County is
where in eighteen sixty six
company B. of the one hundred
twenty fifth United States
colored infantry regiment known
as the buffalo soldiers was
established at Ford fired and
whereas Grant County is honored
as the home of many veterans in
Grant County shares New Mexico's
heavy burden of the members of
New Mexicos two hundred coast
artillery regiment many of whom
were subjected to the Bataan
death March including a late
representative Tom Foley.
Where as Grant County straddles
the continental divide trail and
national scenic trail at six
thousand to seven thousand feet
providing cool summers as well
as uninterrupted views of the
Mexican border to the south and
we're as Grant County hosts the
annual tour of the Cuba New
Mexico's premier cycling stage
race which attracts national and
international teams and Bruce
awareness and use of the trail
of the mountain spirits national
scenic byway and we're as
western New Mexico university's
early childhood programs for
designated as the New Mexico
center for excellence for early
childhood education during the
two thousand twenty two
legislative session and we're as
Grant County has many well known
festivals including the blues
festival clay festival festival
of the written word in south
west print fiesta and where's
Grant County recognizes
lieutenant governor how we
Morales of Grant County now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February first twenty twenty
three be proclaimed the forty
seventh annual Grant County day
and the house of representatives
be it further resolved that
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to members of the
board of county commissioners of
Grant County.
Is there debate on house
memorial nine.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott thank you
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from control grant to the local
channels.
I do.
I've only been to Silvercity on
a couple of occasions both of
these were in the context of
interim committee meetings in a
couple of things that impressed
me about the community was a
gracious wish perception so
we've got our bed and breakfast
and how long it took to drive
north of the city to the cliff
dwellings it's not over for.
Google maps said it would take
me an hour and a half two hours
to get service.
Yes.
The road is narrow winding
twisting but well worth the
effort following questions I'm
not sure to Silver City for the.
For the interim committee
meetings on formal impression
was just how for the airport is
from town.
It's a track thank you Mr
speaker thank you for bringing
this forward thank you gentlemen
the gentleman.
Not the John R. from the the
gentleman from Chavis and you
know that Representative
Townsend.
Mr speaker you on the state of
the other all guided the I knew
you wanted to say that.
No Sir.
Well I would have been had been
happy to have that thank you Mr
speaker with the gentleman yield
I will.
The gentleman
Isn't Silver City.
The home of the Donna would.
You know Mr speaker that is she
is she it was our home oral
museum was was their family home
at one time Mr.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
I don't think it was my first
time Silvercity but it was one
of the most memorable.
times to Silver City when she
took the time to take a group of
us around Silver City and tell
us stories about Silver City and
I don't know when I've laughed
any harder and enjoyed in the
evening more than we did that
evening
You know Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The.
The impact of the mines and
Grant County or very very
important in New Mexico.
as you know
We have some money set in in our
district and our community as
well but.
There's not anything that we do
in the energy industry that is
not supported by the copper that
you guys work so hard to produce
and I just hope the body
recognizes that because it
doesn't make any difference
whether you're in Sandia lab are
here fighting fires or you're
trying to drill and all well or
whatever you're doing copper is
an intricacy force of that and I
I really appreciate what they
bring to New Mexico and Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
for this memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the gentleman the
gentle lady from Katrin set us a
quarter of violence and
representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker I stand in full
support of your memorial I'm
still waiting to drive.
The big dump truck at the mines
they would let me drive it Mr
speaker so they said maybe I can
get into a simulator but it's
interesting I've toured it twice
a with chairwoman Lundstrom on
the LESC interim committee and
the great to our guides of
wonderful place to visit and I
really appreciate the memorial
and I appreciate copper.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
ladies for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell Mr speaker
thank you very much well the
gentleman from Katrin have Dogo
and grant deal please I yield to
the gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for all these beautiful
people that are here today
because they are great great
people some of my fondest
memories are going over there
for not only interim committee
meetings but there was also a
New Mexico cattle growers
meeting over there one time we
had a great time over there the
hospitality of the people from
that area is out standing.
Also.
My grandmother went to college
over there Shearer's teaching
certificate after her husband
was killed.
And the that will always hold a
special place in my heart.
I appreciate what Freeport mac
Randa's for that area to the not
only the jobs they create but
what they are doing.
In the having to deal with all
the restrictions and everything
the viral middle.
Rules that are placed on but
what they are doing.
To get this more.
Into the twenty first century
with all their contributions so
I appreciate you bringing this
memorial forward in the.
Ladies and gentleman from that
area of the state thank you for
taking time out of your busy
days to be here thank you very
much Mr speaker I yield thank
you ladies for the debate the
gentleman from one is here
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I can tell you from
growing up and spending a lot of
time on it so wonderful times
and we got to go and play the US
over city fighting colds and the
COVID you so I can tell you that
the the the hospitality that's a
place where I can as a place of
wonderful people supported.
In the Senate so I I stand in
full support of this memorial I
thank the committee for being
here and I think you
representative at that office
for bringing this memorial
folders the gentleman the real
question is what was a win loss
record.
Not the the best money would
also order so I'm a little upset
about that but thank you Mr
speaker for an that old wound.
Welcome Sir thank you for your
honesty.
Any further debate on house
memorial nine.
The gentle lady from.
Rio Arriba Sandoval Santa Fe and
Taos Representative at a thank
you Mr speaker will the kind
gentleman yield I yield the kind
lady.
Thank you I have many happy
memories of Grant County having
been there many times but I must
stand and salute Silver City and
the leadership there I don't
know if everybody in this
chamber knows it but they were
responsible for the beginning of
home visiting in in our state
and it was about fifteen years
ago that I came to this
legislature and we model that
appropriation of one million
dollars to really look at home
visiting and the state of New
Mexico and it was the former
pediatrician don Johnson and his
wife Vicki Johnson that worked
with their local health council
to provide home visiting long
before it was a state model to
the people of Silver City and
their their results were amazing
and so we looked at that as
Landel foundation and we're
looking at programs for birth to
three and we went to Silver City
talk to all the home visitors
talk to the families and my
board decided to support that
the match that funding of
million to and then we got a
million to begin home visiting
in the state of New Mexico I
also want to recognize Tony and
as C. C. Trujillo you wouldn't
think the head of the money
would be responsible for
bringing home visiting to the
state of New Mexico but it was
absolutely true he played a
major role in CC played a major
role in making that happen for
the state so I just want to
thank the people of Grant County
and certainly the leadership in
Silver City for bringing home
visiting to the state of New
Mexico thank you so much Mister
speaker.
Thank you ladies.
For the big house more aligned.
I'll take a.
Thank you let's see the
gentleman from Chavis eighty
eight Representative Mason.
Yes thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman yield idea of the kind
gentleman thank you Mr speaker I
have been through Silver City a
few times I'm not one that's
it's beautiful country I know
that is the main reason is that
is there brings to mind that of
all the great things in New
Mexico what we're really about
is the people in each of these
counties and the diversity of
our.
The Economic.
By the you know and in New
Mexico that stand copper he said
is one of the.
Products everybody has got
anything electronic your phone
your computer your airplanes one
one material that this world
will not work with that.
And I like to stand in support
of the Grant County days and
bless the people of the county.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John.
Take some speakers Braga
gentleman and also appreciate it
very much Grant County B. and
your memorial.
I've not been to that part of
New Mexico I will go this
spring.
As I said earlier at grand
Committee meeting I've been
everywhere in New Mexico at
least two or three times but
destiny as they're taking me
down there
but my grandfather on my dad's
side was a migrant worker
working those mines for many
years and I'd like to go walk in
his footsteps and see you know
see the same plays that he
walked all those many years ago
and
very much appreciative to him
and the people who still live
and work in that community
seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close thank you Mr
speaker
my father also my grandfather
any my uncles many are from of
the people in this room have
working that money just so you
know something to eat the is or
you it's considered born in
space with those people who were
born there is born in space
because it was the middle of
that it's it's grown that big
and so beautiful
the site to see you can't
believe how of combined the
whole can look like that but
please stand back from my office
you can see the nearly nine and
I have a I have a picture the my
beautiful wife took Mr speaker
in my office of the money and
are nearly non there are iconic
the million on but I can tell
you we have a beautiful
community they're they're all
here and I appreciate their
support they're wonderful people
are that mean to work together
all the municipalities work
together the counties all those
elected officials if you want to
see Billy the kid's mother's
grave me to being the mortician
it's a memory lane that's a lot
of people don't know that ma'am
Billy kit is to run through
their we have our our beautiful
campus of western mystery
University we have is a gateway
to the healer actual forest we
have a lot of places to recruit
for recreation our our kind of
the continental divide trail
goes right through there for
those of you the like to hike if
you want to ride horseback we
have a an area where it's called
the dragonfly trail you can walk
and see the picture lives and
stuff of of what the team is put
it is a beautiful beautiful area
I encourage you guys to go to
the museums and the to read into
laws by the way Mr speaker and
so we appreciate your the time
that you took to allow us to be
feel welcome here and and so
with that Mr speaker I I also
want to thank all those who
could debated and in support of
this bill and so
I close with that Mr speaker
thank you gentleman do you also
rules that house memorial and
pass India's unanimous consent
that house of the record show
that the rule has been called
and all members present voted in
the affirmative I do Mr speaker.
Right there's been a motion to
show all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered we are on final
passage of house memorial nine
the vote is now open.
What is a close by one of
setting for seventeen in the
affirmative and you're in the
negative house memorial line has
in the past this house
congratulations Grant County
day.
The gentleman from.
Learning where a cell again you
Colfax Representative Chatfield.
Mr speaker and it was my great
honor this morning to introduce
my neighbors from the Luna
community college.
the first one that I would like
to recognize this Martinez
which she was here earlier this
morning so I don't see said
there right now but the she's a
student success story she is a
graduate of the concluded
community college she now
operates a food service business
within the collagen and so I
just like to recognize her this
morning.
I'd also like to recognize the
students in the if you guys
would stand when I call your
name Kim Baca sponsor.
Page go and Senator.
Madeline Johnson Senator.
Well the remains of that is
Senator.
Give me Garcia Senator.
Women's softball.
Randall encouraging coach.
Judy a yellow.
Who's.
Men's baseball.
Very just step
as soon where a.
Diego quinones.
Mr speaker I was able to visit
with these guys this morning and
I was really impressed with how
polite in and well spoken they
were and I think their goal is
to keep New Mexico kids in New
Mexico how about that.
The gentleman.
Want to recognize the gentleman
from Simeon and torrents are
percent of gusty and thank you
Mr speaker I would also like to
welcome our students from the
college hi Mr staffs and right
above the right here also thank
you guys for coming by you know
this is a.
College
Mr speaker and members of the.
The chamber I was served on the
board there for thirteen years.
Six of those years I was
chairman and actually when I was
chairman we started the baseball
team and a college so I'm very
proud of the.
The baseball teams softball team
and I just want to welcome you
Mr chairman and thank you for
taking the time other data bear
with us thank you Mr Chattfield
for having here with us in the
breakfast was great this morning
Mr chapel said this doing great
she preparing healthy meals for
the people Las Vegas and thank
you guys for being here it's an
honor to with you guys today god
bless you.
Thank you gentlemen welcome
community college.
The gentleman from Colfax K.
Harding quay some yelling you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker for
allowing us to introduce them
and I thank you for
Representative Castellano for
loan me some of his
constituents.
The gentleman from someone
Torrance Mr speaker I think
there are constituents and
Representative as well
Representative as well as well.
Chatfield Mr speaker thank you.
Thank you both thank you going
to college welcome to this house
representatives.
Other announcements gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker I'm
pinch hitting for with the pants
Penske so the teddy bears on
your desk today are from the New
Mexico primary care clinics
the three hundred and seventy
thousand New Mexicans they serve
are grateful for the support
these clinics have received from
the New Mexico legislature for
over forty years around the
state the clinics serve one in
three of New Mexicos uninsured
and sixty percent of all New
Mexicans with incomes under a
hundred percent of federal
poverty annually they provide
over one hundred million a year
in high quality uncompensated
care in ninety New Mexico
communities a hundred and
seventy five sites provide
medical dental behavioral health
and school based services to New
Mexicans at the right time in
the right place regardless of
ability to pay in many of New
Mexicos rural communities they
are the only access to health
care today February first is
primary care day in New Mexico
and I ask you to join me in
recognizing the clinics for over
fifty years of service to New
Mexico's most vulnerable
citizens thank you.
Thank you deleted.
The gentleman from billion
Representative small thank you
very much Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet today at one
thirty PM in room three oh seven
thank you Mr speaker members
take note the gentle lady from
Dallas for us thank you Mr
speaker and members you should
have received your VIP card from
ski in New Mexico if you haven't
please I don't know if raise a
ruckus
Michael Donovan's the chairs the
New Mexico and he has given us
these cards as a thank you for
all the work we do and ski the
ski industry is super important
to New Mexico in our tourism
industry in the winter months
and I whole heartedly support
these passes if you don't use
that you can transfer them to
somebody who does ski and please
don't be like my nine year old
who just called in store from a
full day of skiing.
Thank you gentle lady the
gentleman from the onion
Representative Lara thank you Mr
speaker I'd like to announce our
the first democratic caucus
meeting tomorrow room three
seventeen after the floor
session tomorrow room three
seventeen after the floor
session thank you Mr speaker
thank you.
Representative Lane invited.
Though is going to more than as
for Mr Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Lincoln in a
better Representative Vincent.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce that today is
Lincoln County day and I would
just like to pray blessings on
everybody that's traveling down
here for today and also I would
be honored if you would
recognize some of them have
already left but if you would
recognize some of my friends in
the in the gallery that have
come down from rid also only do
County today.
To all those folks who came up
from Lincoln County and read
also thank you for joining us
here today I know it's a far
drive I know it's a treasures
drive sometimes but we really do
enjoy seeing you and visiting
with you when you make these
trips every year so welcome
welcome to the house of
representatives and will
recognize with a round of
applause.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
This is.
We go to that order of business
committee reports to no
objection it is so ordered.
Click to read.
Mr speaker thank you very much
point of personal privilege
please J. lady would you mind
holding that would for
announcements right after due to
reports.
Thank you if you will refer to
me later please thank you you
had a generated thank you
Secretary.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill seventy
has had it under consideration
report so with recommendation
that to pass an answer for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Dayan Hochman Vigil chair Mr
speaker move adoption adoption
of a book report for house bill
seventy all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Pose me the eyes of a committee
report opted.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to miss been referred
house bill seventy eight has had
it under consideration point
same as recommendation that it
to pass as amended an answer for
the taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Dan
Hochman Vigil chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
in adoption of a federal
committee report for house bill
seventy eight all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose Nate the as have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your agriculture
fasciculus and water resources
committee to is been referred
house bill two zero five has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that do
pass and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Susan K. and at a
chair.
They were able to report on
house bill two zero five all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose name the I. seven
committee report opted.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to is been
referred house bill one twenty
one has had it under
consideration point state with
recommendation that it to pass
and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
of the thousand grounded option
federal committee report on
house bill one twenty one of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Couples may have it would report
up to Mr speaker point of
personal privilege please
related to your point Mr speaker
I request that house bill one
twenty one titled Water Rights
lease effective date be sent to
the house agriculture acequia
and water resource committees
before referring it to House
Judiciary it should have been
sent to health.
Acker culture at water right
house agriculture thank yous and
water resources committee.
Prior to being sent to House
Energy Mr speaker I do.
Hopefully that will be sent
there for us to consider because
we are the water committee thank
you Mr speaker.
On a personal privileged Mr
speaker state point.
Mr speaker I also have concerns
about this bill.
We believe as representatives of
the state of New Mexico we have
the right to represent our
constituents.
And I have a lot Ag people in my
district.
And I know a lot Ag people
across the state which this is
going to greatly affect.
And we would like this bill to
go to the water committee it's
it's.
Plainly labeled Water.
And and why and then go to the
water committee in the first
place where it should have been
is beyond me.
Mr speaker.
Thank you John thank you
deleted.
The motion is out of order.
We're on adoption in committee
reports and I had already we had
already adopted the can report
in the next stop for this bill
is House Judiciary Committee
gentlemen and gently as we spoke
yesterday about this bill in in
my office.
I told you that we would work to
find a solution that would work
for everyone hopefully if we can
and that is my intent your
motion is out of order and will
continue with committee reports.
Click to read.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
one ninety seven has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation that do pass and
it's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair of the
granite option of federal can
important house bill one eighty
seven all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
A post made the eyes of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to Mr
referred house bill sixty nine
has had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
I do pass as amended and thence
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted during Y. Gallegos
chair Mr speaker move adoption.
Not for the federal court house
bill sixteen and all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
The school's name the eyes are
committed Ford opted.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to is been referred house bill
one eighteen has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for the appropriation
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Doreen Y.
Gallegos chair Mr speaker move
adoption where an option of
federal committee for the house
bill one eighteen all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was named the I. seven committee
report opted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to ms been
referred house bill one twenty
six has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that I do pass an
this referred to the Education
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair Mr
speaker move adoption.
Yes we are adoption of federal
control board announced bill one
twenty six of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
All those opposing the S. have a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker here commerce and
economic development committee
team has been referred house
bill one twenty seven has had it
under consideration point some
of recommendation that it to
pass an answer for to the
Education Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair with the caption on
Federal Combe we're at option of
federal committee for vials bill
one twenty seven all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
The school's name the I. seven
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house bill
one sixteen has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
Mr speaker move adoption read
option of federal committee
board and house bill one one six
all those in favor signify by
saying aye.
All those bills name the eyes of
a committee report up to.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to
miss been referred house bill
one fifty has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendations that do pass and
is referred to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted a sale Lee Alcon chair
Mr speaker move adoption word
optional Federal committed port
and house bill one fifty all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose name the eyes have a
committee report opted.
Elated over years of chasing.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation similar objection it
is so ordered click to read.
House Bill to sixty one
introduced by Representative
Ortez and Johnson and act
relating to wildlife expanding
the unlawful taking of big game
to include have a lean as bears
and Cougars making conforming
changes House Bill to sixty one
introduced by Representative
Ortez and Johnson House Bill to
sixty one having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house energy
natural resources committee
ends the house Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill to sixty two
introduced by Representative
Garrett and act relating to
broadband amending sections of
the connecting Mexico act
transferring implementation of
the grant program from the
connecting Mexico counsel to the
office of bread broadband access
and expansion making technical
corrections providing
definitions House Bill to sixty
two introduced by Representative
Garrett.
House Bill to sixty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
thence the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House Bill to sixty three
introduced by Representative
Lujan and Hochman Vigil and act
relating to public health
amending the harm reduction act
to create the overdose
prevention program limiting
civil and criminal liability for
people acting pursuant to the
harm reduction act House Bill to
sixty three introduced by
Representative Lujan and Hochman
Vigil House Bill to sixty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill to sixty four
introduced by Representative
Chavez and act making
appropriation to the Legislative
Council Service to hire a
consultant to analyze the fiscal
viability of the Medicaid
managed care structure and
develop methods to make the
managed care system more
transparent House Bill to sixty
four introduced by
Representative Chavez house will
to sixty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee them's the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to sixty five
introduced by Representative how
to meal and act relating to
state parks requiring a one
dollar increase to the cost of a
day use permit per vehicle for
each state park which is shall
be distributed to municipalities
adjacent to state parks for the
repair replacement and
construction of critical
infrastructure that provides
access to the state park
creating the state park adjacent
municipality fund making
appropriation house bill two
sixty five introduced by
Representative how to meal House
Bill to sixty five have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee vents the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to sixty six
introduced by representatives of
Johnson and Lundstrom an act
relating to education and acting
the equal education
opportunities scholarship act
providing for tuition
scholarship organizations to
grant educational scholarships
to low income students to attend
certain public and non public
schools creating income tax and
corporate income tax credits for
contributions to tuition
scholarship organizations that
provide educational scholarships
for low income students to
attend a public or private
schools for the students parents
a choice house bill two sixty
six introduced by
representatives Johnson and
Lundstrom house bill two sixty
six a minute twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then it's the house taxation and
revenue committee.
House Bill to sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Harper and Representative Harry
Garcia.
And act relating to driver's
licenses providing for reports
by experts to be used by the
motor vehicle division of the
taxation and revenue department
and addressing restricted
licenses repealing a section of
the NMSA nineteen seventy eight
House Bill to sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Harper and Representative Harry
Garcia House Bill to sixty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee then so House
exhibition and Revenue
committee.
House Bill two sixty nine
introduced by Representative
Harry Garcia and Representative
Harper and act relating to
driver's licenses requiring the
motor vehicle division of the
taxation and revenue department
to use reports from the federal
commercial driver's license a
drug and alcohol clearing house
in issuing and renewing
upgrading downgrading and
transferring commercial driver's
licenses for commercial
learner's permits providing
content to be included on
commercial learner's permits and
commercial driver's licenses
hospital two sixty nine
introduced by Representative
Harry Garcia and Representative
Harper House Bill to sixty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered print in order for
referred to the house
transportation public works and
government prevents committee
then so house taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill two seventy
introduced by Representative
Harry Garcia and act relating to
motor vehicles amending sections
sixty six dash seven dash four
oh one NMSA nineteen seventy
eight the laws nineteen seventy
eight chapter thirty five
section four seven two to
authorize the secretary of
transportation to issue orders
suspending or modifying
requirements for vehicular size
weight and load pursuant to
chapter sixty six article seven
NMSA nineteen seventy eight for
the duration of the national
emergency declared pursuant to
federal law would emergency
declared by the governor
pursuant to the emergency powers
code providing that the orders
are required to be published on
the department of
transportation's website house
bill two seventy introduced by
Representative Harry Garcia
house bill two seventy having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then so House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House bill two seventy one
introduced by Representative
Sanchez and act relating to
motor vehicles amending sections
sixty six dash seven dash two oh
seven NMSA nineteen seventy
eight being lost nineteen
seventy eight chapter thirty
five section three ninety six as
amended forms of the apparent
damage amount for a vehicle
accident that requires a
reported the accident to the
department transportation from
five hundred dollars to one
thousand dollars house bill two
seventy one introduced by
Representative Sanchez house
bill two seventy one having been
read twice by title is it a
printed and referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee vents the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two seventy two
introduced by Representative
Figueroa and act relating to
health updating the protocols
that are used when youth
athletes have suffered a
possible brain injury to include
chiropractic physicians within
the definition of a licensed
health care professional house
bill two seventy two introduced
by Representative Figueroa house
bill two seventy two have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee thence the house
government elections an Indian
Affairs Committee.
House bill two seventy three
introduced by representatives
little and Dixon and act
relating to property enacting
the uniform co habitants
economic remedies act providing
a right of action to co
habitants for contractual and
equitable claims arising out of
contributions to the
relationship of the co habitants
establishing requirements of eco
habitants agreement providing a
right to third parties to
enforce judgments against
cohabitants providing remedies
house bill two seventy three
introduced by representatives a
little and Dixon house bill two
seventy three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two seventy four
introduced by representatives
Sapan ski Fund you nor do Chasey
Roybal Caballero and Senator
Stewart and act relating to
public holidays the meeting the
first Tuesday of February of
each part number here as Asian
American and Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day hospital
to seventy four introduced by
representatives of pants ski
onion or new Chasey Roybal
Caballero and Senator Stewart
house bill two seventy four
minutes of the totals of printed
and referred to the house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
thence the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House bill two seventy five
introduced by Representative
Mason and Representative Allen
Martinez and act relating to
motor vehicles creating the oral
fluid roadside detection pilot
project to test for the presence
of drugs when the driver stopped
for suspicion of driving under
the influence of intoxicating
liquor or drugs collecting data
to determine the magnitude of
the problem of driving under the
influence of drugs influence of
drugs and the success of the
pilot project specifying your
use of participation in the
pilot project making an
appropriation hospital two
seventy five introduced by
Representative Mason and
Representative Allen Martinez
House Bill to seventy five
minutes was by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee sends
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill two seventy six
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
Chandler and act relating to the
environment amending the oil and
gas act authorizing the oil
conservation division of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources department to require
proof of insurance and fiscal
solvency when submitting a
permit application providing
that a permit application may be
denied based on poor compliance
history house bill two seventy
six introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and Representative
Chandler house bill two seventy
six seven min read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee house
bill two seventy seven
introduced by Representative
Harper Representative Vincent
Representative how the air
Martinez Representative Chasey
and Representative just a Penske
and act relating to first
responders increasing
supplemental death benefits to
the surviving spouse or children
of firefighters killed in the
line of duty from two hundred
fifty thousand dollars to one
million dollars making
application of supplemental
benefits for survivors of
firefighters New Mexico mounted
patrol members for reserve
police officers applicable to
the to the deaths of those first
responders in the line of duty
on or after January first twenty
twenty two amending sections of
the NMSA in nineteen seventy
eight house bill two seventy
seven introduced by
Representative Harper
Representative Vincent
Representative hobby err
Martinez Representative Chasey
and Representative Sapan ski
house bill two seventy seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed referred to
the house.
Labor veterans and military
affairs committee thence the
house government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill two seventy eight
introduced by Representative
Trujillo K. A. goes on corolla
and Thompson and act making
appropriation to the higher
education department for
purpose dress physician
shortages house bill two seventy
eight introduced by
Representative Trujillo guy a
goes on Google and Thompson.
House bill two seventy eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee thence the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two seventy nine
introduced by Representative
brown centers Kernan and Padilla
Representative Jones and Senator
Diamond and act relating to
public education amending
graduation requirements
requiring one half unit of
personal finance prior to high
school graduation house bill two
seventy nine introduced by
Representative brown Senators
Kernan and Padilla
Representative Jones and Senator
Diamond house bill two seventy
nine hundred twice by title is
our printer for to the house
consumer public affairs
committee that's the house
Education Committee.
House bill two eighty introduced
by representative Lente and act
relating to higher education
providing for the establishment
of two American Indian Education
technical assistance centers in
the state providing powers and
duties requiring requests for
proposals for the operation of
the centers making appropriation
house bill two eighty introduced
by representative Lente house
bill two eighty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed referred house Education
Committee then it's the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill two eighty one
introduced by Representative
Nyberg and act relating to
business and acting the revised
uniform limited liability
company act repealing and re
enacting a provision of law
pertaining to restated articles
of incorporation making
technical and conforming changes
to the business corporation act
and chapter forty seven article
one NMSA nineteen seventy eight
providing penalties house bill
two eighty one introduced by
Representative night birds House
Bill to anyone amendment twice
by title is ordered printed
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then it's the house
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two eighty two
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to orders
of protection providing for
permanent orders of protection
for victims of certain felony
offenses providing health
penalties house bill two eighty
two introduced by Representative
Lord.
House bill twenty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
house consumer public affairs
Committee then so House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two eighty three
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to public
schools impacting the school
marshal Act providing powers and
duties requiring qualifications
training and law enforcement
certification requiring the New
Mexico law enforcement standards
and training council to develop
a school marshal training course
allowing school marshals to
carry concealed weapons house
bill two eighty three introduced
by Representative Lord house
bill two eighty three amended
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
it's the house Judiciary
Committee
House bill two eighty four
introduced by Representative
Lord and act relating to
children and specifying specific
steps the children youth and
families department must take in
its diligent search for adult
relatives or fictive kin of a
child who has been taken into
Department custody providing for
the establishment of the family
funding team in the department
of providing duties house bill
two eighty four introduced by
Representative Lord house bill
twenty four admitted twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house health and
Human Services Committee vents
for House Judiciary Committee.
Two eighty five introduced by
representative Thompson and
Chasey Representative G. Andrés
Romero and act relating to
special education creating the
office of special education in
the public education department
legislative powers and duties
providing for inter departmental
transfer house bill two eighty
five introduced by
representative Thompson and
Chasey and Representative G.
Andrés Romero house bill twenty
five amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then it's the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House bill two eighty six
introduced by Representative
Harper concern Jana and Senator
Padilla and act relating to
motor vehicles altering the
restrictions on sun screening
materials used on motor vehicle
windshields twelve to align with
federal law posted to eighty six
introduced by Representative
Harper and Syriana and Senator
Padilla house bill twenty six
and then returned by title is
ordered printed referred to the
house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee that's the house
Judiciary Committee.
Hospital two eighty seven
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
motor vehicles and acting in new
section of the motor vehicle
code to establish a special
license plate to support driver
safety awareness and remind
drivers to look twice for
motorcycles making appropriation
house bill two eighty seven
introduced by Representative
Chandler house bill two eighty
seven I've been read twice by
title is ordered printed
referred to the house
transportation for the working
capital improvements committee
then the house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill two eighty eight
introduced by Representative
Borrego and act relating to
disability accommodations and
acting the closed captioning Act
requiring places of part of
public accommodation that
display television programming
to provide closed captioning
requiring the Attorney General
to enforce the closed captioning
Act providing penalties house
bill two eighty eight introduced
by representative for radio
house bill two eighty eight I've
been read twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee then set House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill two eighty nine
introduced by Representative
Kate endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee an act relating to the
New Mexico sentencing commission
revising the rules of data
collection House Bill two eighty
nine introduced by
Representative Kate.
Of the twenty nine have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election in
Indian Affairs Committee thence
the house Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution eleven
introduced by representative for
echo a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
article eighty section five of
the constitution of New Mexico
to provide a property tax
exemption for certified full
time the state and local
firefighters house joint
resolution eleven introduced by
representative for echo house
joint resolution eleven having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee then
so house taxation and revenue
committee.
House memorial twenty one
introduced by representatives
Armstrong Armstrong Townsend
brown Representative Allen
Martinez Representative these L.
A. memorial declaring February
third twenty twenty three New
Mexico rural electric
cooperative day in the house of
representatives House memorial
twenty one introduced by
representatives Armstrong
Armstrong Townsend brown
Representative Allen Martinez
and Representative the cell
house memorial twenty one I've
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed in place on
the speakers table.
Oil twenty two introduced by
representatives serin yana hello
Colin Representative Harry
Garcia Representative Allen
Martinez and senator pope
memorial requesting that the
public education department
assessed the progress of
development of the purple star
public schools program and
report on the status and
effectiveness where the program
has been implemented in New
Mexico public schools House
memorial twenty two introduced
by Representative serin Jana el
Cajon Representative Harry
Garcia Representative Allen
Martinez and Senator pope.
House memorial twenty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee.
House memorial twenty three
introduced by representative
Thompson and how to meal a
memorial requesting that the
governor designate the month of
may twenty twenty three as
better hearing and speech month
house memorial twenty three
introduced by representative
Thompson and have a meal House
memorial twenty three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee.
House memorial twenty four
introduced by representative
Thompson and how to meal a
memorial proclaiming February
twenty fourth twenty twenty
three as New Mexico speech
language and hearing association
day in the house of
representatives House memorial
twenty four introduced by
representative Thompson and have
a meal House memorial twenty
four have been read twice by
title is ordered not printed in
place on the speakers table.
House memorial twenty five
introduced by Representative
Lord a memorial declaring
Wednesday March first twenty
twenty three foster care day in
the house of representatives
House memorial twenty five
introduced by Representative
Lord House memorial twenty five
have been read twice by title is
ordered not printed in place on
the speakers table.
House memorial twenty six eight
introduced by representatives
more of all Mario Armstrong Baca
and Representative Harry Garcia
a memorial commemorating
February six twenty twenty three
as Valencia County day and the
house of representatives House
memorial twenty six introduced
by representatives more ball
Malia Armstrong Baca and
Representative Harry Garcia
House memorial twenty six
amended twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Gentleman from doing on a.
Mr speaker Mr move that we go to
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections so
ordered.
Members are announcements.
lady from reality by us and.
All those beautiful counties.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to announce that your house
committee on agriculture the
second is and water resources
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine o'clock A. M. and I'd like
to invite all the members from
the chamber if you're interested
in coming particularly if you're
from rural communities CEO
Marquita Russel is going to be
there to talk about the changes
in the water transport grant
applications and loans and these
are all new initiatives that I
she has brought forward and I
it's it's very important if you
haven't heard about these to
learn about them thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman from
Santa Fe.
Mr speaker in Santa.
And Santa thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
we will have your care the two
bills listen on the goldenrod we
also plan on meeting Saturday at
nine and we'll publish the the
gym the as soon as possible
thank you Mr speaker members
signal generated from banana
thank you Mr speaker your house
consumer public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow.
After our caucus
like ten minutes as soon as
we're done thank you ever say no
to.
The gentleman from the union
Thank you Mr speaker
I move that we adjourn.
Now stand in recess answer I'm
sorry those Senate recess till
ten thirty AM tomorrow morning
I.
That's not a problem motion but
you on your motion is on the dot
thank you members for a great
day the house says in recess
until ten thirty tomorrow
morning.
