Roll calls close. We have
quorum. Will the gentle lady.
From
Ber Leo McKinley.
Valencia.
Sokoro
Nibula representing Abita lead
us in today's invocation.
Thank you, Speaker. Everyone
please bow.
While we can
We thank you for this
opportunity to be present.
To congregate and to make good
decisions for the people of New
Mexico, the animals, the
environment.
And all that come together. We
ask that you please bless
everyone in this.
House, our family members, our
community members, and help us
do today's work.
hustling hustling hustling, ja.
Well, the gentle lady from Curry
Roosevelt and Chavez,
Representative Reeb lead us in
the Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
And will the
Gentle lady from Si and McKinley
representative Martha Garcia
lead us in the pledge to the New
Mexico flag. We ball.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, good
morning, Mr. Speaker. Good
morning, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Good morning, members.
Good morning members. Good
morning to you as well.
Um, we've got some special
guests on the rostrum. I'm gonna
go first to
The
Gentlemen from.
Chavez, Representative Murphy
with some special guests to
introduce Mr. Speaker. I'm
really pleased to welcome uh
members of the All Saints
Catholic school from Roswell.
The students are all 8th
graders.
And they are here as part of the
New Mexico history, uh,
curriculum.
They're currently studying
statehood to present.
Last fall, they studied about US
history and so now they're
focusing on the state. I'll
start on the right with the
instructor, John Umberger.
Next, Sophie Hernandez.
A in Rinnan and Ariana Massino.
Welcome to the house and you've
got some folks in the gallery as
well, um, I believe they are
your guests as well,
Representative, uh, folks from
the, uh, New Mexico speech and
hearing association Warren Scott
Isabella Zamora, Monica Solis,
and Refugio Solis. Welcome to
the house.
lady from Berna Leo
Representative Herndon with some
very special guests to introduce
Mr. Speaker, we do have some
exceptionally special guest with
us today. We have with us 115
students from El Dorado High
School along with their uh with
their sponsors who are here.
First, let me introduce Mr.
Speaker, the, the, uh, faculty
members who are with us, we have
Shawn Thomas, who teaches AP
government. Will you please
stand so we can welcome you.
We have Ramona Gallegos, who's
uh teaches government and econ.
Would you please say it?
And we have Cablin Grimes who
teaches government and world
history, so she's here. They,
they brought them here to learn
about what we do here at the
state capital and in the House
of Representatives. And then,
Mr. Speaker, I have some special
guests on the rostrum who are
students and they are
exceptionally wonderful. So
first, I would like you to meet
uh Charlie Epp. He is a senior
at El Dorado High School with a
deep interest in political
process, he participates in the
community services club at
Eldorado.
High school, which is called
Community Outreach, and he
serves as their president. He
recently was awarded the
selfless senior of the Year,
Charlie Epp.
We also have Miranda Huerta. She
is a senior at El Dorado with a
deep interest in political
process she participates in the
community services Club at El
Dorado High School, which is
called Community Outreach and
Modern UN. So welcome, Miranda.
And then we have Kaylane.
No, and then she's a senior at
El Dorado. She plans to pursue a
bachelor's of political science
before attending law school to
become an attorney. She wants to
follow in your footsteps, Mr.
Speaker, and she is here to gain
more knowledge on the
legislative process behind the
passage of laws and the
etiquette that is expected in a
government setting. She's also
the student body historian,
Spanish National Honor Society
vice president and a
competitive.
answer. Her parents are both
from Vietnam and she is also
able to speak English,
Vietnamese and Spanish. Welcome,
Kylay.
And then there's Emma Travis,
who is a senior at Eldorado High
School in Albuquerque. She is
committed to the University of
New Mexico and plans to study
pre-nursing through the direct
entry program. She's interested
in government because she
believes every citizen has the
ability and obligation to use
their voice to influence policy
for matters important to them.
Emma is all about women's
health. Welcome, Emma Travis.
And 2 more, Mr. Speaker, we have
Adelina, Adeline.
Arena and she's a senior at El
Dorado. Next year, she plans to
study anthropology, archaeology
at New Mexico State University.
Our interest in archaeology
stems from her desire to
preserve history and to see that
she can learn from it in the
future. She's interested in the
government for many reasons,
creating connections with
government officials. That's why
she's here today, gaining
experience with leadership and
critical thinking and exploring
how laws get created and how we
get many of them on the books.
believes having these.
connections and knowledge will
help benefit her with her future
career as present as
preservation laws often go hand
in hand with what archaeologists
do. Adelina Arness, so she's
here. And finally, Mr. Speaker,
we have Miranda Huerta, who is a
12th grade student. She is
studying um community service,
and she is most interested in
marginalized groups and then she
continues with her future, she's
gonna be studying advertising
It affects marginalized groups,
Miranda Fuerta, thank you very
much. Did you stand?
And Mr. Speaker, would you
please welcome the rest of the
group that's in the, in the back
in the gallery over 100 student
visitors from El Dorado High
School for El Dorado High School
day, please rise to be
recognized and welcome to the
house.
Although I still remember.
freshman year in high school, we
wrestled El Dorado,
and they made me wrestle the guy
who was at the time the JV all
metro champ.
And he broke my ribs. So welcome
to the house, but you know.
So remember the pain.
The announcements.
Gentlemen from
He's gentle lady from Berlin
Gurola.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also
have um a guest, uh, my chado
from El Dorado. Her name is Zoe.
She's a queer public school
student from El Dorado High
School, um, I met Zoe because
she reached out to me about a
bill that we are sponsoring she
was assigned by her teacher uh
to write a paper about a uh
issue that she she cares a lot
about so she wrote a paper and
when she was doing her research.
She found out that the bill was
exactly what she was writing on
on the paper, so um I'm very
proud that she came to talk to
me about this and I invite her
to be my shadow today so she was
not expecting to be here today
but she's already advocating for
things that are care to for her.
She likes to read. She's an
active thespinian and she wants
to go to UNM to be to get a
degree in the technical theater,
sorry, uh
help me to welcome uh Zoe to the
house.
Welcome to the house.
gentle lady from Bern Lee
Representative Garrett with an
announcement.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on each
of your desks you're gonna see a
lovely red bag. This is because
it's golden apple day at the
Capel Capitol today, the bright
red bags come to us from the
Golden Apple Foundation for
excellence in teaching and the
New Mexico Golden Apple Scholars
program. The scholars are
preparing for a teaching career
in New Mexico schools a number
of the scholars are here today
and you may probably
be meeting some of them. I hope
you enjoy the gift bag which has
an actual golden apple so you
can see our future teachers are
concerned about our health.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker.
Announcements
Anyone else announcements,
gentle lady from.
Berlio McKinley, Valencia, San
Juan Socorro civil
representative
thank you Speaker. I absolutely
loved Awesome counties first,
just for the record. I'd like to
introduce all the way from the
Navajo Nation Heritage and
Historic Preservation
department, my special guest,
Mr. Richard Begay. He's the
department manager. He's served
for in this capacity for over 35
years and he's from Nasri, New
Mexico, and he has traveled the
world speaker in his industry,
and he's never been to the
house.
So today he supported one of my
bills and he's my special guest
for today if we can all welcome
him.
Welcome to the house.
Alright, folks, I've got some
very special guests sitting
there on the uh to my right side
on the bench we've got um Girl
Scouts of New Mexico, uh,
trails.
And they serve approximately
6000 girls and adults throughout
Berlio County, Catherine Sibula
Colfax create the Baca Guadalupe
sounds like mostly Chatfield's
district.
Uh, Los Alamos McKinley Motaquay
Roosevelt, San Juan, San Miguel,
Sandoval San on the face of Coro
Towers Torrians Union in
Valencia Counties. Girl Scouts
of New Mexico trails is
headquartered in Albuquerque,
New Mexico and has two beautiful
camps in Angel Fire and in Cuba,
chartered by Girl Scouts of the
United States of America, Girl
Scouts of New Mexico trails
Bills girls of courage,
confidence, and character
through caregivers, volunteers,
and staff working together to
deliver on their promise of
giving Girl Scouts access to
life-changing.
experiences that inspire them to
do something big.
Visiting today and please rise
to be recognized. Junior Brownie
and Daisy members from Troop
10,460. The troop has monthly
meetings on a variety of topics,
but most recently they've been
hard at work studying and
earning their Girl Scout badge
for the subject of democracy,
please join me in welcoming
Alejandra Alass Caroline Garcia
Kyla Chavez, Grace Buffett, Daff
Johnson of the.
Nina Salazar Traust Paloma
Salazar troust Phoebe Pena, a
big Abigail McDade and Francesco
Hardrove and of course I think
one of the moms is our very own
uh office of the Speaker policy
analyst Kian Salazar King.
Welcome to the house, Girl
Scouts.
And I believe you probably have
at the very least 70 very
generous interested people in
this chamber who are going to
want to buy some Girl Scout
cookies.
So if you have some now's the
time.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan.
Hey, Mr. Speaker, um.
Do you know what today is, Mr.
Speaker? I don't know, gentle
lady, tell me. February 28, the
last day of February.
It also, so, and to note this is
not a leap year, um, but it's
also another special day, um,
and I'd like to recognize, um,
one of our members, mothers
today, she couldn't, she's not
here because she's at home,
celebrating with her mother and
and her family, um, today I'd
like to recognize and honor
Selena Sally Martinez Borego,
who was born and raised in
Chimayo, Mr. Speaker, um, Sally.
has been a it's proven that 90,
90 something is the new 80
something.
Um, Sally is a beautiful and
caring and nurturing northern
New Mexican, uh, New Mexico
woman, mother, sister, auntie,
and businesswoman, Mr. Speaker,
um,
So in recognition of Sally and
for our member, uh,
Representative, um, Cynthia
Borego, we'd just like to honor
her today on her birthday, Mr.
Speaker. Happy birthday to Sally
and gentle lady. Will you lead
us in a rendition of Happy
Birthday for Mrs. Martinez
Borego. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
123, happy birthday
happy birthday to you.
Sally.
Happy birthday to you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and for
Sally who's listening in to all
the family. Happy birthday to
your, your mama, your auntie,
your grandma, and uh thank you
Representative Cynthia Borego
for bringing this forward. Thank
you. Congratulations and thank
you for covering, uh, and making
sure he got sung and celebrated,
gentle lady. Jo lady from Bern
Leo Torres Velasquez.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to
introduce my special guest who
is my shadow from El Dorado High
School. Her name is Denise
Huerta. She's interested in
pursuing medicine here in New
Mexico and studying here in New
Mexico. She's involved in
community outreach club DECA and
president of Spanish National
Honor Society. She's looking to
advocate for rural medicine in a
leadership role. She's a senior
at.
Eldorado High School and she
brought me a bill ready to go
for next year on recess, um, in
relation to our childhood
obesity issues and so she's um
almost ready to be elected.
She's from my district, District
30, even though she, um, attends
El Dorado High School and I'm
really excited and would you
please help me welcome her.
Welcome to the house.
Just as a matter of, of
information when you have that
bill ready, uh, make sure
representative Torres Velasquez
has it ahead of time because
she'll have to get a message
from the governor because it is
a 30 day session, um, just as
part of your lesson in
democracy, um, welcome to the
house.
And the announcements, gentle
lady from Berley or set of
Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Today is New Mexico national
board certified teachers
recognition day and it
recognizes the incredible
dedication and impact of
national board certified
teachers in New Mexico, which
was established 24 years ago
this teacher network has been a
powerful force in promoting
accomplished teaching.
And leadership in our schools
throughout the entire state.
The national board certification
process is very rigorous and I'm
speaking here for Representative
Soriano can't be with us today,
who is a national board
certified teacher, and it
recognizes the best educators in
the nation. They continue to
inspire, mentor, and elevate our
students as well as their uh
fellow professionals they are
making vital contributions to
the future of our children and
Mr. Speaker Ken.
I introduced the 3 board
certified teachers that are on
the rostrum, gentle lady.
First of all, we have, um,
please stand up when I call your
name. Maria Isabel Alornao
Gutierrez. She teaches in the
central consolidated School
District at Newcomb Elementary
School. Her specialization is
exceptional needs specialists,
early childhood through young
adulthood, mild and moderate
disabilities ages 5 to 21.
Welcome to the house.
Congratulations.
And our second is Carri Pettis.
From Las Cruces Public Schools.
She teaches at Camino Real
Middle School. Her specialty is
world languages, early
adolescence through young
adulthood, Spanish.
Welcome to the house.
And the third person we're
honoring is Selena Roybal. She's
from Espanola School District
Alcalde Elementary School,
physical education and early and
middle childhood.
Welcome to the house and
congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and I'll be bringing up
their certificates now. Thank
you. Thank you gentle lady.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business Committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
safe and water resources
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 427 has had
it under consideration report
saying with recommendation that
it do pass as amended, and
thence referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Cristina Ortez's
chair.
Mr. Speaker, I have a due pass
move adoption. We are an
adoption of favorable committee
report files Bill 427. All those
in favor of sending up by saying
a.
I supposes name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick and water resources
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 482 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then refer to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christina Ortez chair. Mr.
Speaker, we move adoption. We
are an adoption of a federal
committee report for House Bill
482. All those in favor
signified by say I.
I suppose nay, the IAA report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
safe and water resources
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 569 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and the referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Cristina Ortez,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, you may move
adoption of a favorable report
in House Bill 569. All those in
favor, signified by saying aye.
I suppose nay
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor veterans
and military affairs Committee,
to whom it has been referred
House Bill 438 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do not
pass.
But that house
Sorry
But that House Labor Veterans
and Military Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 438 do
pass and then referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption favorable committee
report House Bill 438, but a
favorable community report for
house labor, veterans, Military
Affairs Committee substitute for
Asville 438. All those in favor
saying if I say no.
Bona. Yes, I have a community
report is adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 494 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
taxation revenue Committee
respectfully submitted. Patricia
Rodwell Caballero, chair.
Mr.
Speaker, move adoptionsville
494. All those in favor and if I
say no.
All the supposed nay, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 149 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable report
for House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 149.
All those in favorsina.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to has been
referred House Bill 206 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass, respectively submitted
Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
favorable reports Bill 206. All
those in favor saying it up by
saying I.
Others suppose nay, the ISA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 518
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrari chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption report for 518. All
those in favor if I say I,
I was supposedna, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, consumer and public
affairs Committee team has been
referred House Bill 554 has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that it
do pass as amended and he
referred to the government
elections and Union Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption 554. All
those in favor C5 by C 9.
I suppose nay, the ISI committee
reported up.
Mr. Speaker, a consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to him
has been referred Senate Bill 17
as amended, has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and the referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joan J.
Ferrari chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are adoption of a
report for Senate Bill 17 as
amended. All those in favor
saying it up by saying I.
I suppose, yeah I have it be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, consumer and Public
Affairs Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 72.
Has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted. Joanne
J. Ferrari, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption. We are adoption
of a favorable committee report
for Senate Bill 72. All those in
favorabba say I.
On the supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, a consumer and
Public Affairs Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 470
has had it under consideration.
Reports same as recommendation
that it do pass as amended, and
this referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
to Anne J. Ferrari, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption. We are
an adoption of a report for 470.
All those in favors, but say no.
Oh it was me. I have a report
adopted gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
to read messages from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed
Senate joint resolution 11 and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhans Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 7.
Senate Bill 38 as amended,
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 115
with the emergency clause Senate
Bill 283 and request the
concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansen at chief clerk will be
entered.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Joint resolution 11
introduced by Senator Trujillo.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend Article 7, Section 1 of
the Constitution of New Mexico
to permit school elections to be
held at the same time as
partisan elections. Senate joint
resolution 11.
Senator Resolution 11 have been
read to us by title is ordered.
I referred because it was
already printed in the Senate,
so I'm just referring to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 7.
Introduced by Senator Scherer an
act relating to municipalities
authorizing municipalities to
acquire, operate, and maintain a
municipal utility.
To provide for stormwater
service and charge a fee or
advance payment for the storm
water service, adding stormwater
facilities to the definition of
municipal utility in the
municipal code. Senate Bill 77
have made by title is referred
to the house.
Agriculture, a secas, and water
resources committee then the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate Bill 38 as amended,
introduced by Senator Stewart,
an act relating to special
education enacting the special
education Act creating the
Office of Special Education
providing powers and duties,
providing for the transfer of
certain federal fundings from
the public education department
to the early childhood education
and care department reorganizing
the office of the state Special
Education on BU by removing the
office from the developmental
disabilities Council to the
public education department.
recompiling the special
education on but Act in the
public school code making
conforming amendments. Senate
Bill 38 as amended. Senate Bill
38 as amended have been read
twice by title is referred to
the House Education Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Finance Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 115
an act relating to finance
authorizing the New Mexico
Finance Authority to make loans
for public projects from the
public project revolving fund
declaring an emergency.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 115.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 115
have been authorized by title is
referred to the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
the House of Reropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate Bill 283 introduced by
Senator Bergmans and others, an
act relating to children
requiring the Children, Youth
and Families Department to
determine federal benefits
eligibility for certain, for
children in its custody apply
for federal benefits and either
act as the child's
representative payee or
determine an appropriate
alternative setting forth the
department's obligations when
acting as a child's
representative payee.
Prohibiting the use of federal
benefits to pay the department
for the child's care requiring
the department to provide
financial literacy and planning
tools setting forth provisions
for the release of federal
benefits provided to children in
legal custody of the state.
Senate Bill 283 Senate Bill 283
have amended by title is
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee.
House Memorial 46 introduced by
Representatives Lord de la Cruz
and Sanchez, a memorial
recognizing May 25th, May 2025
is motorcycle safety Awareness
Month, House Memorial 46. How's
Memorial 46, haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
Please, I'm sorry, I screwed up.
Won't be the first time
Representative Block.
Houseror of 46, haven't been
read twice by title is order not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered.
Members have 2 announcements,
um, one of them is.
Another mistake made by me, I
know.
Hard to believe.
2 in 2 days, Representative
Block.
Um,
I did clear this by both
leaders. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bills 21 and 22, I read them in,
I read it in and referred to the
bill.
To
The house Energy Committee,
followed by House Judiciary, the
referral should have been to
house water. I said yes, I'm
sorry, to house agriculture, as
I guess and Water Resource
Committee, the the House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee. So
essentially I'm dropping the
judiciary referral, adding the
water referral, and then
switching the order. So again,
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bills 21,
22 is referred to the House
Agricultural asset gas and Water
Resources Committee then.
the energy environment and
natural Resources Committee.
See, no objection that is so
ordered.
The second announcement I have.
And I'm gonna steal your thunder
generated from Bern Leo because
I was.
Specifically instructed to
deliver this message today.
There's a party going on tonight
at 6:30, 100thfield party, um.
It is at the rail yards from
6:30 to 10:30.
I believe tickets have been
passed out to staff. I, I, I
understand, so all the staffs
you have tickets, um, I don't
know about the legislators I
guess you just show up and.
Flash your badge.
Um
It is generally a really fun
time for the staff, um, and it
is a fun time for us as well,
um, and it is a nice time to
just decompress a little bit
and, and, and have a a safe but
good time, so that is tonight at
6:30 at the rail yards.
Any other announcements?
All right, we're gonna do some
3rd reading, um, now and then
we're gonna break for committees
later in the afternoon.
And then we'll break for the
day.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
There's a gentle lady from Los
Alamo Santa Fe Sandoval.
Read an item.
Number 15.
Um, yes, Mr. Speaker, will you
get me to that point the record
reflect that all action is
necessary for placing House
commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. We are here on House
Bill 11, formerly known as the
Paid Family and Medical Leave
Act, but now with the commerce
Committee substitute, Mr.
Speaker, it is known as the
Welcome child and family
wellness Leave Act.
I'm very excited by this bill,
Mr. Speaker.
We've worked very hard over the
last year or so listening to
many public comments inputs from
the business community in input
from stakeholders.
And we've come up with a
proposal that I think is unique
to New Mexico and it's uniquely
appropriate for New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker.
So the bill has two components.
It establishes the, as I said,
welcome child and family
wellness Act.
It creates the family wellness
leave fund.
It launches the Welcome Child
Fund.
And it as in prior versions of
the bill is under the
administration of the New Mexico
Department of Workforce
Solutions.
The family wellness fund is a
fund that is much like was that
was in the original bill. It's
essentially an insurance
program.
Wherein employers and employees
pay into a fund upon which they
can then draw benefits if they
qualify, and those qualifying,
um, events I'll talk about in a
minute, but before I do that at
at this point the fund, it will
be funded by employees
contributing 0.2% of their wages
and employers will be
contributing 0.15%.
We have maintained, Mr. Speaker,
the exemption from having to pay
into the fund for employers with
fewer than 5 employees.
And we have a maintained as in
prior versions of the bill, um,
the requirement of an actuarial
study that will be conducted in
2026.
The family wellness leave, um,
provisions are as follows. There
will be 6 weeks, um, provided
for medical leave and this
medical leave is paid and
granted to an applicant to care
for themselves or another family
member with a serious health
condition.
Or to manage the applicant's
health condition.
There's exigency leave, military
exigency leave and that is leave
based on a need arising out of
an applicant's family members
active duty service or notice of
impending call or order to
active duty.
We have maintained safely, which
is paid leave granted to an
applicant who is experiencing
domestic violence or stalking,
sexual assault or abuse.
Bereavement leave in the case of
a death of a child, um, younger
than 18 years old.
And foster leave for um a family
who is welcoming a foster child
into the home. Those are all 6
weeks of potential up to 6 weeks
of potential leave if the if the
working person qualifies and Mr.
Speaker, I want to underscore
that again this applies to.
Individuals who are working.
And contributing into the fund.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I'd
like to yield to my co-sponsor
representative of the gentle
lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Cerrado lady from
Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady
from Los Alamos. I'm excited to
talk about the Welcome Child
Fund that this bill also
creates, um, this bill is now
truly a uniquely New Mexico, uh,
solution to ensuring that
everyone, the state, employers
and employees are contributing
to building a strong and healthy
and vibrant.
workforce in our state, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. This
fund would establish that any
time a child is adopted or born
in our state, one parent will
receive a $3000 rebate each
month for the 1st 3 months of
that child's life, and the
parents both would have access
to um job protected 12 weeks of
time to bond with their child.
This $3000 rebate is really
important in those first few
months of life, as we all know
in that time, it's it's incredi
di b ly difficult to find
childcare for the 0 to 3 months
old age range of infants, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady and, and
body, um, so this would ensure
they would have that funding for
that and gives them that
financial stability that they
need to bond with their child in
these critical months at first
on that aspect will be paid for
by the state and they the job
protections would remain there
for up to 12 weeks, uh, gentle
lady, I'll hand it back, uh, if
I may, uh, hand it yield over to
our colleague from uh the gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
representative uh Roybo
Caballero.
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and will
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
yield? Yes, I will yield, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker, and
members of this house.
I'm here today.
Not only as a sponsor.
But also as a mother.
Grandmother
Having been a caretaker of
elderly parents.
And I've been taken care of by
my working children.
Oftentimes when you take care of
elderly parents.
We are referred to as a sandwich
generation.
I also was a caretaker, Mr.
Speaker of my father-in-law and
mother-in-law.
Some of the most important
things, Mr. Speaker, employees
look forward to every day.
Is knowing that they have a
happy.
Healthy, secure and safe
workplace.
One that offers a living wage.
And above all benefits such as
good retirement options.
And most importantly that they
be protected.
With a good paid family and
medical leave.
Which today
I'm happy and excited.
To be
Sponsoring
The welcome child and family
wellness Leave Act.
All employees come from
families, Mr. Speaker.
And families have unforeseen
circumstances come up.
Often necessitating working
family members to help.
It's comforting to know.
Employees can do so without the
risk of losing their employment
or employment status.
Employers, I believe, having
been one myself.
Want a happy and thriving
productive workforce.
And they should always strive to
provide these quality working
conditions.
For all workers of New Mexico.
I want to also add.
That I come here today.
Also on behalf of our hard
working families.
Who have been asking for.
These benefits and this piece of
legislation for many years.
I am very excited that we are
before you all today.
To have a vibrant discussion.
answer your questions.
And pass this bill.
For all the hardworking families
of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I yield
back. to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Los Alamos and Sandoval
Representative Chandler. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. We're prepared
to stand for questions. There is
debate. The gentleman from Bern
representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I
appreciate the time.
Uh, does general flea yield from
Los Alamos, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Bernalio, I
yield.
Thank you so much. You know, one
of the concerns that I had and
as I spoke to employers and some
friends actually that are
employers that own businesses,
their concern is, you know what,
Art?
I'm gonna lose all these
employees. He's gonna call in,
they're gonna say, you know, the
Speaker, I, I, I can't make it
to work today.
And now I'm not gonna make it to
work and in fact I'm not gonna
make it to work in the next 6
weeks.
Can that happen Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, not under our bill.
They would not be eligible, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, for, um,
family wellness leave under
those parameters, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you describe a little bit what
that process looks like, sounds
like because I want the viewing
audience, all the members of the
body to understand that it isn't
a simple phone call that
qualifies you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Well, in fact,
there is a very detailed
process, Mr. Speaker, that an
applicant must follow, so let's
assume the employee has a
serious medical condition.
That employee must apply to the
Department of Workforce
Solutions and provide backup
documentation from a a health
care provider that establishes
the um condition.
And provides the proof and it
will include things like an
estimated time, Mr. Speaker,
when, uh, the, the individual
employee may return to work. So,
and then that application is
reviewed by the department and
approved or not approved through
various processes, so it takes
an effort on the employee's part
to establish the requirement and
the um um eligibility for leave
just as if you had a private.
disability insurance policy, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, you would
apply, you, they would ask for
information, you would submit it
and at some point you would be
approved, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Thank you, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker.
That is a concern and I'm, I'm
glad that in this bill that
question is answered and it and
it, it makes sure that it isn't.
That an employee, Mr. Speaker,
can't just arbitrarily
electively just decide that
they're not feeling well enough
to not attend for 6 weeks. That
is an important aspect.
I'm glad to hear that that's
sooner.
Let's talk for a minute, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if you
would talk about cost because
Mr. Speaker, in my district.
I have a lot.
Of employees, many employees
that are low wage employees,
they are minimum wage employees
or barely above minimum.
wage
And
I would be concerned, Mr.
Speaker, that this would be
detrimental to their pain so
that they would have.
You know, they would be impacted
negatively because this is just
very, very expensive. Can we
spend a minute talking about
that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, I'd, I'd like to
talk about that because we
worked very hard as sponsors to
look at the cost to the
employees and the employers and
with the coupling with the the
um welcome child fun we've been
able to lower the cost
significantly so if you are
employed as a low wage minimum
wage.
worker, you will be paying.
A dollar a week, Mr. Speaker,
for off of your wages and your
employer will be paying 75 cents
per week. So that's $4 a month
and what you get is a very
robust, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, insurance policy
essentially that the state is
administering for you and
supporting uh for you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
A buck a week
75 cents for the employer.
4 bucks in a month for an
employee.
3 bucks a month.
On the employer's part, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, and
remember we've maintained that
exemption. So if you're an
employer with fewer than 5
employees, you won't be making
any contributions into the fund,
but your employees will and they
will be eligible for the
program, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, generally, thank
you for that, for that answer.
Now, one of the things that I
hear and I, I got emails to that
effect, Mr. Speaker.
And I had a couple of people
meet me in the hall. I'm, I'm
not talking about people who
don't support. I'm talking about
I'm speaking with people that
were
Reticent or totally against
this.
This bill and the consequences
potential consequences of the
bill.
So that being said,
When I heard Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is, we
are imposing
attacks. Can you describe the
difference between a tax and a
benefit.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, I
argue that what we're supporting
is a benefit because by paying
into the fund this very small
contribution.
You are getting protection and
security we are Mr. Speaker,
providing those working
individuals who are paying into
the fund the benefit of knowing
that if something serious
happens to them or a family
member and medically or some of
these other, um, leaves that
we've outlined, they have the
backup and support that they
will need to become to get well
and then go back to the employer
and be productive, so this is a
benefit.
You know, there's a lot of hype,
Mr. Speaker, about the tax and
so on, but what it is is those
individuals who are specifically
paying into the fund, we'll get
the specific benefits, Mr.
Speaker. Unlike attacks where
it's very broad and one does not
know exactly what portion of the
Governmental activity they are
supporting Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate that, you know, Mr.
Speaker, when I was a younger
man,
I didn't want to pay in peril. I
was a government worker. I
didn't want to pay in a pair
because I felt that it was gonna
take away from my paycheck and I
had better things to do with my
money.
That's how I felt at that time.
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
Every
Year
I have to pay in a significant
amount for the vehicles that I
own motorcycles, cars, trucks,
whatever.
Mr. Speaker
Sometimes I don't like paying
that either.
But Mr. Speaker,
General Ley something happened
along this road, pardoned upon
that I have to pay insurance on
my vehicle.
Is that a tax?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
it's not a tax, and I point out
it's also mandated by the
government that you, you carry
auto insurance and that you pay
an insurance company in this
case, Mr. Speaker, we're paying
into our fund that we manage and
we control and we control the
benefits unlike a commercial
insurance company who dictates
the terms and conditions, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate that answer.
I thank God that I've never had
a catastrophic event where I or
any of our family was hurt in an
auto accident.
But had they had that occurred,
Mr. Speaker, I would have been
glad to have that benefit of
being able to cover costs in
that situation.
On the other hand, I have been
in accidents where I was not
hurt. The vehicle was
significantly damaged that the
insurance paid for it and for
the other person or vice versa.
I thought that was a pretty good
deal at the time. Now, Mr.
Speaker, General Ley.
Going along that same train of
thought of things that
government often mandates.
Mr. Speaker
Gentle lady
Who funds our firefighters who
funds our police who funds the
folks that fix the water lines
when the water lines break in
the city streets.
Mr. Speaker, um, and gentlemen,
we do, we do through our taxes,
some of them are local taxes,
some of our our state taxes and
they're all things that we need
to support our health and
well-being and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, of course, I would
argue that this is up there in
terms of public safety and
health, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, General
You know, in this country, one
of the things that I love that
we've done nationally.
At the state level.
At the local level.
Is that we have an agreement.
We enter into a contract as
citizens that we are going to
help each other.
Now, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
If I pay 4 bucks a month.
Well, not me. Let's say one of
the younger women.
Pay 4 bucks a month.
And they need to take maternity
leave.
Would that 4 bucks a month
cover.
All the 12 weeks, all of that,
uh, benefit that they will get
financially will it cover it
solely by itself, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, so I
think we need to think about,
um, pregnancy leave a little
differently. So on my dear
colleague from Santa Fe can
speak to uh welcome child piece,
but the welcome child piece is
focused on the the the child
well um birth of a child or
adoption and maybe at this
point.
It would be appropriate for me
to uh yield to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen and thank you
gentlemen from, uh, Bernalillo.
So in when someone has a child
that is being paid for through
the state funds that we are that
we have going and this would be
$3000 each month for the 1st 3
months to cover a lot of those
costs that come about when you
have a child, including that
early care that children need at
that time. Um, I can tell you
from my own experience for the
months of 0 to 3 months old,
there is, there is nearly no
child care that's available. And
for so many.
parents who have been putting
together for the history of our
state, but especially nowadays
when families are relying on
every single income to that
home. It has been increasingly
difficult to find a way to find
an in-home person to help take
care of your child while you're
working at the same time, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Now,
should this person or should you
be referring to someone who
might have injuries, maybe a
young person who was in a car
accident or something like that
that's the beauty of the family
wellness fund is that because
we're all contributing together
to that.
It is ensuring that whenever
somebody has an emergency
because at any given point
somebody that is related to a
working person or a working
person themselves will have a
need for medical care or we'll
have to take some time off to
heal. That fund will be paid for
by the small contributions from
across the state and it builds
up that strong, that, that fun
strong. I go back to the gentle
lady from Los Alamos.
Mr. Speaker, gently, I
appreciate that answer. I, my,
my light.
My thinking in my line of
questioning relates to the
notion.
Of the
Collective contract that we've
entered into.
And that collective contract
that we've entered.
That we call our government.
Sometimes asks us to do things
to help each other.
And
I individually could not.
fund a fire station across from
my house.
A police station across from my
house.
Or an individual to come and fix
the pipes on the street in front
of my house. That agreement says
that we're gonna help each
other, we're gonna take care of
each other.
And that's the way I view this
particular bill is is a benefit
that individually you might not
be able to do yourself but that
collectively.
We can do because we care about
each other, at least I think we
care about each other when
something happens that's
difficult and is not and is
usually out of the ordinary.
Because we don't have babies
every day.
And we don't get catastrophic
illness every day.
But when we do,
As New Mexicans and as Americans
we agree that we're gonna help
each other. We're gonna take
care of each other.
Mr. Speaker, I have one more
question.
One of the things that concerned
some of my business friends and
I would like to have addressed
at this time.
Is the idea
That anybody will now qualify as
a family member, you know, I
have a heck of a great dog. His
name is Cisco.
I found him in the street and we
adopted him.
The Cisco qualify as a family
member that I can take for 6
weeks off if he gets to feeling
bad.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
absolutely not. And Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, we did adjust
the, the definition of a family
member this past um year so that
now tracks the family member
definition in the working in the
healthy workplaces Act, which is
our sick leave law thinking it
made sense because employers
are, you know, how to work with
the sick leave law that's been
in place for a few years now. So
now we're relying on the same
definition for the.
the um
Family wellness um definition
and the welcome child fun.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I'd
like to talk about that a little
bit longer, you know, we have a
heck of of viewing audience
today, you must understand that.
And I want to know what
qualifies as a family member. I
think it's important for us to
share it with the body.
Uh, but also so that the viewing
audience knows what we're
talking about here because I
don't want speaker, I don't want
anybody to think that my dog
Cisco is gonna qualify.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Well, it includes,
uh, a biological adopted or
foster child a stepchild or
legal ward, um.
And or a child to whom the
applicant stands in as a parent,
um, but it also includes a
biological foster step or
adoptive parent or legal
guardian or a person who stood
instead of an apparent, a parent
as as a minor child,
grandparent, grandchild, a
biological foster step or
adopted sibling, a spouse or
domestic partner of a family
member, an individual who's
close association with the
applicant or the applicant.
spouse or domestic partner is
equivalent of a family
relationship, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that is the
definition of family member, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, thank you.
Thank you, you know, hearing the
list, it's clear to me that
it's, it's real family.
Cisco's not gonna make it, Mr.
Speaker.
I'm gonna close with with this,
Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady
I got a lot of emails.
I got a few written letters.
Both sides of this coin.
And what I feel, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that we are
doing something new and
different for the state of New
Mexico.
I have no doubt that once upon a
time it was difficult to create
something called.
Public
Employee benefit whether it was
ERB or PERA.
But
Many of us in this chamber, many
out in New Mexico or or
beneficiaries of that agreement,
that contract that we entered
into and it is a benefit.
Yeah, when I was 21 years old, I
might have thought it was a
taxi. I wanted to go buy some
beer with it.
But it was a good deal.
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a
good deal for New Mexico. I
think it's a good deal for our
businesses, our families, single
people, everyone.
Now we're going here to do its
attacks.
But as we hear this, let's
remind ourselves that it is
indeed a be.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate, the
young lady from Grant Hidalgo,
and Sierra, Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
from Grant Hidalgo and somewhere
else. Um, I'm sure it's lovely.
I yield to the gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and you know, I
I don't think there's any
disagreement in this body that
we want to do everything we can
to strengthen families. And, um,
I put myself, you know, I, I, I
put myself as probably you guys
did, what it felt like when I
was 19 years old and found out I
was pregnant, 18, um.
I had it about $20 in my banking
account. I was uninsured. I was
in college, eventually became
the first person in my family to
graduate from college.
Um, I had received a
scholarship.
And
I was very excited about, uh,
being in college and the dreams
I had for my life, and it's, it,
it's quite shocking when you
have an unplanned pregnancy.
Um
I think about what this would
look like for someone who
receives that benefit and how
wonderful that would be and how,
how nice that would have been.
I put myself in that position,
you know, when my daughter was
born, and now, and, and my
husband and I would go out once
a month, we would go out to eat
and we'd go to Taco Bell. I'm
gonna date myself because the,
you know, there's not even
dollar menus anymore, but we
used to go every other Sunday
after church, drink water and he
would get 3 bean burritos and
I'd get 3 tostadas, and that was
like our splurge.
And we didn't have any savings.
We were both, uh, working for
companies without benefits and
so every time we could squeeze a
few dollars out, we'd go buy a
silver coin.
I mean, I
We recently moved and when I got
out those silver coins.
I looked back at the decisions
that we were making, first to
choose life.
Second,
to make every investment we
could as often as we could, and
at times it was a silver coin
and in those days, those coins
were about 350. 1 time we bought
one at Christmas that was $5.
I have stacks of silver coins in
a safe that we had an opened for
a long time.
We did that together, we made
sacrifices, my car would break
down. I've run out of gas. I
have like tires. It was like a
Ford LTD four door. I don't
even, I don't even know what it
was. It was a really old lemon.
It was a bad car.
And I think about those things
that brought grit and resiliency
and this courtesy that we're
trying to offer to families that
we know
experience those same
circumstances.
I also put myself in the
position of an employer.
Because at the age of 26, I
opened the first licensed early
childhood program in Sierra
County, and I did that because I
went back to the town that
raised me because I saw families
in crisis. There was no early
intervention programs at the
time in Sierra County because no
kids were getting screened.
There was no um
uh federal health clinic because
no one had a
They they weren't getting
prenatal services, mostly. I
mean, this is, I'm dating myself
because back in the day, long
before we had insurance like we
do now in Sierra County had the
lowest immunization rates.
Really dire statistics in the
community that raised me. So at
26, we left corporate world and
moved back to Truth or
Consequences New Mexico and
began.
Serving families. And, um, I
remember when we did a business
model, the um CYFD at the time
managed childcare licener, and
the average was 25% of families
were on childcare assistance.
And so I naively made a business
plan assuming that 75% of
families would pay a private
rate.
And of course, we wanted to do
great things for children, so we
based our standards on best
practices. It was nationally
credited standards and we had a
cost per child to meet those
standards.
And every family that came in
the door had that childcare
contract. And back in the day,
they were paying more to hold a
stray animal at the animal
shelter than we were paying for
infant care. New Mexico has done
great things for families with
children. We've done, we've made
a lot of progress.
But I think about as an
employer, how hard it was to
make ends meet. It was a
nonprofit.
So tax exempt, so there's that
tax fee that wasn't there. Um,
but
Many times, my mom.
My husband
My children and any volunteer
parents I could round up, we
would drive to Las Cruces.
Go outside of the Pan in Center
and so glow necklaces at
concerts. 4th of July, I mean, I
was doing that to make payroll.
So as an employer, I also know
how hard it is to keep a small
business open in New Mexico,
especially when the state sets
the standards.
Set your pay, your square
footage, your teacher-child
ratio, the group size cap.
Your pay scale, teacher
qualifications, and they
determine the reimbursement
rate.
And a lot of um employers, you
know, really, really have to
make ends meet.
I've, I've been the cleaning
lady. I've done all these
things. And I know the stories
that I've heard.
Around 70,000 of them are here
on these tables today of over
500,000 that we received
expressed their concerns and
why, and everybody's was a
little bit different. Um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. So I, I
want you to know that I take now
this title is legislator, as
everybody in this body does very
carefully. We're making a law.
We don't change laws very much.
It's not often that we amend
laws and we have the, the, the
numbers we need to go back and
fix something when we make a
mistake.
And Mr. Speaker, were the
appropriators.
And so, um, when I think about
the bill and I ask these
questions, please no, it's from
my perspective first as a
parent, that was by definition
in crisis, in poverty, that
would benefit from something
like this as an employer and now
as a lawmaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, in general,
Lady, I'm, um, just on the
fiscal points, um, the $9000
childcare rebate that has an
estimate, I mean, there's 22,000
births estimate is what we're
estimating. So I'm, I'm assuming
that that's going to cost the
state about $1093 million in
benefits, not counting
administrative costs, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, is
that what you're assuming that's
gonna cost based on our birth
rate and the benefit per child.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would like to, um.
Refer that question to my
colleague yield to my colleague.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, and thank you
gentle lady also for the
question. um, so actually our
estimates, you know, as we've
seen in the FIR I would argue
are conservative, um, because I
believe they're at the high end
of that, and I'll explain why.
This is a tax rebate for those
who have been contributing to
the fund for the previous 6
months out of the 12 months, um,
when we had Milliman, uh, do an
estimate on the original bill.
They were assuming that both
parents would pull from it and
that would mean that both
parents would receive a benefit
and they assume.
to be about 17,000 claims on
that. Uh, and some of our
earlier estimates, we thought,
uh, there would be about, about
8000. We're anticipating the
actual number of, of, of parents
they would call the parents of
children, they would qualify for
this benefit is significantly
lower, and my guess is something
closer to about 8 to 10,000
individuals that would qualify
for that, uh, $3000 each month
for the 1st 3 months, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and, and
I'm gonna yield it back to the
gentle lady from Los Alamos.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle ladies. So only even
in
the childcare, even in the um
welcome baby child rebate. Only
families contributing can
receive that.
Mr. Speaker, um, generally,
that's correct. They're working
people, they're contributing
their taxes and so on, and they
will get a rebate, um, you know,
if they qualify, Mr. Speaker,
generally. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies. So,
um, if, if
If, um, hang on one second.
Mr. Speaker, lady, can you
point, can you point to me on
the page where that is that
They need to be contributing in
order to receive that.
Mr. Speaker, generally, let's,
if I said that, let me correct,
they need to be working, Mr.
Speaker, generally, they need to
be working for 6 months of the
previous 12 month period, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
They, they need to be working
people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and thank you gentle lady. Now
I, I am making an estimate. I'm
assuming that we're gonna
promote the heck out of this and
that it's going to be available
to every eligible working family
and based on workforce
development numbers, that's
about $193 million in benefits
and Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
After we look at the federal
government rollbacks. I'm, I'm,
I'm, I'm just asking you to let
me know where is this?
100 on her estimate, 193 on my
estimate. Where is that money
coming from?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
from the appropriators in this
body, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
when will we appropriate that
money?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we, we could ask our, our budget
chair, but, uh, our expectation
it will be next year and next
year's budget, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the fund was
created, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady in this year's budget Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I have
been listening to your debates
prior, you know, we're halfway
through the session. And I
recall you asking the question
repeatedly. Is it appropriate
for us to obligate future
legislators to appropriations in
future years, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, could you explain
to me, you're thinking on that
and why there's an exception in
this one. Mr. Speaker,
generally, I appreciate the
comment you just made. I've
never made such a comment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Um, so,
Uh, you know, I'm happy to talk
about that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but I've never said that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, OK, go
ahead and explain to me why it's
OK. In this case, to appropriate
future bodies to a future
appropriation, to obligate.
Speaker, gentlemen, we passed
public policy all the time that
obligates future, um,
legislatures, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, all of the tax
credits that we apply, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, are, are
forward moving. They are not on
an annual basis. They, most of
them are on a recurring basis.
I mean that that's just one
example, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. We threw our budget
process allocate funds on a
regular basis. We're beginning
to develop um commitments to
those programs, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this is not unusual
to expect other legislators to
other legislature, legislatures
to be living with the decisions
that we have made and those
legislatures, of course, have
their legislative prerogatives
as well, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So the basically,
Mr. Speaker, generally, if I'm
understanding you, the entire
$11 billion budget and the
reoccurring in it. We start anew
every year, therefore, we can
make commitments in the future,
uh, on estimates and is that
what you're saying, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure
that I'm saying that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speakerinlay.
So $2 million that will come.
In the future in 2 in 2028,
that's two years from now,
appropriately $2 million per
year for the benefit. We're
going to obligate in the passage
of this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, do we know how
much, um, rollbacks we could
expect
The rollbacks are currently in
the federal funding that we
have.
Uh
I, I, let me just, let me
reframe, let me make a
statement.
With the uncertainty that we
have and what we have to cover
if we want to maintain current
programs in New Mexico that
leverage federal dollars or
other, um, federal sources. We
could be facing a shortfall. And
this is in, and then this would
be an additional 2 million that
we must be obligated to. So 200
million. So on the fiscal impact
report that I'm looking at in
House Bill 11, it provides 3
different uptake scenarios, low,
middle, and high. The highest
estimate is that 8% take up
rate. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
is 8% take-up rate. I mean, some
states have 10, Connecticut has
10, um, at 8% take-up rate, the
FIR says that we, this budget in
its 2nd year, the fund will have
a deficit of $106 million by the
3rd year, the fund will have a
deficit of 350 million and by
the 4th year, the fund would
have a deficit of 63 million by
the 5th.
year, the fund deficit would be
870 million. That's the um
fiscal impact report is 8.
% of citizens
are working eligible employees.
Participate in the program.
Um, these are very large fund
deficits and, and it, it will
require massive increases
somehow. Um, do you expect, I
mean,
I think the number is 8% by
2030. Where are we expecting to
add?
More contributions because the
contribution in your bill
doesn't reach these numbers of
8% of people, eligible people to
participate, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, so, um, you're
referring to the highest uptake
estimate that's contained in the
FIR, Mr. Speaker, generally, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I arrived at that
because it's the average in the
other states that are
participating. So you're, you're
relying on the highest uptake,
um, information, notwithstanding
the fact that the FIR said it
was more likely to be closer to
5 or 6%, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, the FIR says that
they expect it to be higher than
other states. So higher than
usual. So 8% would be only less
than 10% of eligible folks will
participate in this program. Mr.
Speaker, generally, I think
we're interpreting the report
differently.
Um, my recollection of that
report is it's more likely to be
closer to 6%, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and not only that,
the report makes very clear that
at this juncture it is too
difficult. It's very difficult
to have solid uptake numbers for
this particular, remember we're
talking about the family
wellness program, very difficult
to have solid numbers in terms
of estimates, which is why, of
course, we were very pleased to
accede to the request that there
be an actuarial.
study, Mr. Speaker, um, in year
2026, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
then we will have clear numbers,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
this is an estimate and it's
acknowledged as an estimate in
the FIR clearly states, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that it's
very difficult to estimate, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yet it
feels urgent enough that we pass
it before we know and do the
study to give us some estimates
even the Department of Labor is
saying as high as 15%. Mr.
Speaker, Jenny and Lady, if the
actual
Study hasn't been done. Why
would we pass the bill in before
the study is done. Mr. Speaker,
generally, because we need to
know what the program parameters
are, and we need to understand
through the payroll process how
many people will be
participating, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker General Lady, that's
what an actuary does, is it not?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Um, I'm not an expert on what
actuaries do.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
what an actuary does.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I'll just for your numbers,
let's just say half of the 8%
participate in the program.
Let's say it's 4%.
4%, so 96% of employer employees
will participate to 4% of the
people who experience the
benefit. Let's go off that
assumption and so the mandatory
tax deduction from the 94% of
the people that 4% of people
will benefit from. I'll just cut
the number in half. In the first
year, we'll have a $53 million
deficit.
I'm sorry, in the 2nd year. In
the 3rd year, we'll have a $175
million dollar deficit in the
fourth year we'll have a $300
million deficit and in the 5th
year we'll have a $435 million
deficit. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I went with less than the
6%. I'm going with 4%. Where
will we realize those funds.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
know what you're referring to.
I'm looking at the FIR and I
don't, and maybe I'm not
understanding how where it is,
but maybe you can show me in the
FI where it's at, Mr. S.
speaker gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
there's a projected shortfall,
do you?
Do you believe that this number
is the only number we will ever
see, will ever need.
And that there will never be a
shortfall.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I do
not believe there'll be a
shortfall, and that is based on
what other states have done and
how their programs have gone and
there have been very few
actually
None.
None that have become insolvent,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, we're not, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we're not talking
about solvency, we're talking
about the need to create more
funding to generate more
funding. The state of Washington
has tripled the amount that
people have to contribute to
remain solvent. I do realize
that your bill says shall remain
solvent. I'm wondering, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if we
have a shortfall, where will
that shall, that increased
contribution come from.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, there
are a couple options. One of
which is after the year 2030,
there is the ability to, um,
adjust premiums up or down.
There's also the ability of the
state to support the program as
well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I would point out, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that, um,
Washington State is one of the
older programs in the country
They started um premiums that
were extremely low and as a
result have had to adjust over
time, Mr. Speaker, General Lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what is Washington's current
premiums?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, generally, we
can look that up and uh if you
if you want to ask me another
question while we're doing that,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um,
There's a 1% cap.
On the amount of the payroll
tracks can be increased and
increased and the cap results in
a payroll tax that's only
generating about 55 million in
revenue per year.
The legislator, I feel like with
the Xiao language, Sao remains
solvent, shall remain.
Um
It's going to have to go to a
payroll tax or we'll have to
amend the bill and, 00, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gently. Mr. Speaker and
gentlely, I have been remiss. I,
I need to introduce my expert
Tracy McDaniel from the
Southwest Women's Law Center.
She's been, um, working
diligently on all the financials
and knows very much about all
the programs across the country.
So Washington State, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is at 0.74%
and um I should point out, Mr.
Speaker, that includes the
parental.
Leaf portion, Mr. Speaker, and
it's noteworthy that the the
welcome the family wellness
portion does not include the
parental leave portion that's
taken care of by the Welcome
Child Fund, Mr. Speaker. So
actually our, our estimate I
think is quite realistic, given
the fact that 60% of the claims
are, are generally for uh new
parents welcoming a child into
the family. Well, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I don't think
it's realistic because there's
nothing.
appropriated for the paid.
parental leave when a baby is
born. There's no, no
appropriation for that. The
balance for that contribution is
0 in this bill. Is that not
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gently, this
isn't a budget bill. Um, the
budget has created the welcome
child um component and it will
be funded as we move forward
through the budgetary process,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, could
that be funded through a new
mandatory payroll deduction that
you don't like to call a tax?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no.
As the bill points out.
Uh, is not through um a a
premium in the way that we are
applying to the family wellness
fund, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, but
I do believe that 100% of our
$11 billion comes from taxes.
So somewhere, someone will be
taxed. Um, thank you. I, I also
heard in the numbers do not add
up. I'm very concerned that as
appropriators and as the
lawmakers, we are setting up a
fund that almost certainly based
on Department of Labor, the FIR
will be in deficit within year
2.
At the very latest year 3, if we
do not raise premiums. Um, and
so I, I wanted to thank you for
your work and you mentioned in
the interim that businesses were
participating with you. Can you
tell me the business
associations that are endorsing
this bill as amended Mr.
Speaker, I have not been updated
since we've amended the bill. So
I don't know, um, so I can't
help you with that that we've
amended the bill substantially,
as you know, just a couple of
weeks ago, so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I asked a group this morning.
For those who are still in
opposition, I'm sure this isn't
exhaustive, but at this point,
these are folks in opposition of
the bill that we are hearing
today as substituted, um, we
have the associated Builders and
contractors, New Mexico
Restaurant Association, Las
Cruces Chamber of Commerce, New
Mexico cattle Growers
Association. The Gallup Chamber
of Commerce, Santa Fe, Chamber
of Commerce, New Mexico Chamber
of Commerce, Hispano Chamber of
commerce, New Mexico.
Hospitality Association
associated contractors in New
Mexico, Greater Albuquerque
Hotel and Lodging Association,
New Mexico Homebuilders
Association Rio Rancho Chamber
of Commerce, Dairy Association
of New Mexico, homebuilders of
Central New Mexico.
S
RGF action
RGF actionop CAR I think that's
car, New Mexico, um, SMAC N A
mechanical Contractors
Association, Asian-American
Hotel Owners Association,
Homebuilders Association of
Central New Mexico. The New
Mexico farm and Livestock
Bureau, the Rio Rancho Regional
Chamber of Commerce, Hobbs
Chamber of Commerce, New Mexico
utility Contractors Association,
Farmington Chamber Association,
New Mexico Business Coalition
and.
and lists are coming to me as I
asked, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, if this is so
good for business.
Why are they still in
opposition, Mr. Speaker, and I'd
like to supplement that list
with virtually every labor
organization in the state
representing workers, people
under understand what workers'
needs are, support this bill,
Mr. Speaker. The small business
majority supports this makeer in
a number of small businesses
have stepped up to support this
bill, um, it's a good policy for
workers that's understood, Mr.
Speaker, and it is also a good
policy for businesses, Mr.
Speaker, because
Lawyers will feel secure. They
will return to work after they
have become well or bonded with
her child. This is a good
program all around, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and I, I, there's
so many positive points and
there's so much agreement on
many of the points that have
been made, Mr. Speaker, I do
have a substitute.
OK, will you kindly get that up
to the clerk.
And we'll get that read in and
passed out like a roll call,
please.
Gentle lady, what is the number
on the bottom left? Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. It is 0231242.1,
get this passed out and up on
the website and then I'll come
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask a
call of the House.
call is not granted.
Does everybody have this floor
substitute.
Yes
Right, is it
And it is online, the gentle
lady to explain the floor
substitute.
Gentle lady, we're back to you
to explain the floor substitute.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, um, gentle lady. I do want
to make sure that I add the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce because they
specifically requested that I
named him as opposed, and I'm
sorry if I missed other people.
Um, I think the folks that I
named pretty much touched each
of our districts. These are our
yes sir. Yes sir, I am. These
are our um small businesses.
These are our community leaders.
These are the folks who fund our
little leagues and our parks.
And our, our annual events and
give our, our veterans jammies
at Christmas and, and support,
um, our efforts in our
community, backpacks.
For kids and these are the
people who are the backbone.
of New Mexico. There are small
businesses are mid-sized
businesses. We really don't have
that many big businesses.
Um, and so I, I do have a
substitute. This is, um, I'm not
the only sponsor on this. Many
of the Republican caucus have
signed on. We don't like always
voting no.
We came here to improve the
lives.
Of our communities.
And all New Mexico citizens.
We wear a hat of our unique
districts.
And in my district, when I think
about the large employers,
They're mostly government
employees and this, this benefit
is available in many ways.
I think about the small mom and
pops, one in particular who
called me yesterday.
Asking about this bill and two
others.
Together
This business
That is multiple family
generations, um, an iconic
restaurant if I named it, you
would know. We'll close their
doors.
Frantic asking me to find a
solution.
Please consider the solution. So
this, the substitute that I
have.
As far as implementation, who
manages the program.
Um, and, and that part.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, we
simply mirrored your bill. But
what this does is cover paid
parental leave.
This substitute provides for 6
weeks of paid leave for
employees and self-employed when
they have the birth of a child.
When they have adoption or for
foster parenting.
This, um, parental leave
compensation is paid with an
appropriation from the early
childhood.
And Care Trust Fund. The
substitute changes the current
law to allow the appropriation
from the trust fund.
And the substitute provides for
if you want more pay, this is
for 6 weeks.
Same perimeter, same benefits,
same factors, everything there
is yours.
If you want more than 6 weeks,
then you can choose to
contribute. A voluntary employee
contribution of 0.5.
There's no contribution in it it
required from the employer.
And the additional voluntary 3
weeks is at the employee's
discretion if they want it.
The amount of the paid leave
mirrors yours.
And it has the same appeals,
same adjudication, right out of
the substitute that we're
hearing on the floor.
This program would begin in
January 28 when the Early
Childhood fund estimate is over
$11 billion.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
did this for a couple of
reasons. We did this for a
couple of reasons.
We've been asked by nearly every
reporter. Our conservatives
willing to compromise?
Our answer is yes.
Are Republicans always the party
of no, the answer is no. Do you
care about children and the
working poor and the small
business of New Mexico, the
answer is yes, of course we do.
We're parents.
We're business owners. We're
here to serve our families. This
alternative gives us the chance
to do an actuary.
It allows us to see what the
impact.
Of
22,000 births, 2100, I'm sorry,
21,
every year, yeah, 21,000. OK, I
was like 2100. I know our birth
rate's dropping. Yes, 21,000
births a year.
For those folks to have paid
leave.
To, for the birth of a child,
adoption, and first-time
fostering.
We can step back and say, what
did that do to the workforce?
Were we able to cover the
nursing ratios? Were we able to
meet infant toddler ratios,
could we find a backup operator
for the heavy equipment operator
of the Department of
Transportation job.
Were we able to make sure that
folks that our behavioral health
clinics and behavioral health
service providers were adequate
to cover when someone takes a
leave.
And it focuses on families when
they need it most, when they're
young, when they're starting
out.
And when they need our help the
most. So we are offering a
compromise, and we hope you will
consider it, Mr. Speaker, I'll
stand for questions and I do
need to call the house. Yeah, we
don't have the call of the
house.
OK.
It is not granted.
OK, you've got a call.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We
forgot to raise our hand.
Procedurally.
All right, Sergeants else.
Please members, if you're in the
chambers, sit in your seats so
that we can get a proper count.
Folks, please take your seats so
we can complete the call. Thank
you. I appreciate it.
All right, I am informed by the
sergeant at arms that's the call
is complete.
Gentle lady from Los Alamos,
Sandoval Santa Fe, back to you
on the floor substitute. Is this
a friendly house floor
substitute, Mr. Speaker, um, I
appreciate the sentiment in
which it is being proposed, Mr.
Speaker, but it is not friendly
because in our view it does not
satisfy the needs of working
families in the state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. There is
debate on the lady from Santa
Feerrato. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Will the gentle lady
from
Uh, Dona Anna here in Socorro
yield. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentle lady from Tawles
County.
Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Well house is lovely.
I like it where I'm at, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
curious, you, you cited in here
the funding source. Can you
explain to us how this is
funded, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, the early
childhood, um, education and
care fund was created in July of
20. It's generated from
distributing excess oil and gas
funds, it, um, transfers those
dollars into the fund. Um, it's
for early care and education,
which
by definition is prenatal
through 3rd grade. Uh, the
current balance is around 9
billion, it's growing pretty
quickly and will grow to over 11
million. And, um, you know, I
chose this fund because as we
created the fund, it was this
vision we've, we've created over
200 funds now. And the vision of
having children be born healthy
and have all of their needs met,
you know, and, and ready to be
proficient readers and
succeeding in school, by the
time they're in 3rd grade. So,
um, in
act, the money in the fund is
subject to appropriation by the
legislature for early education
and care services and programs.
That is the directive of the
fund, so it's at our body.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, and I'm
curious, do you have an estimate
about how much this would uh
take on the, on the fund, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
getting that FRR FIR.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
this is based on the bill being
heard on Monday in Health and
Human Services Committee, the
FIR estimates that it would cost
up to around $8.2 million a
year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I want to go
back to this real fast because
there's two things that you said
that I thought were really
interesting. One you mentioned
the, uh, that there are more
than 200 funds that we have. And
I think it's really important
for the body and for the
audiences that are watching
right now to understand how
those funds work, right? We
created a, a, a very substantial
principle that we're earning on
and that we're that's growing,
right, constantly. And as that
principle grows, we get a return
on that from interest that we
earn. Now, we in New Mexico are
very lucky. We have a very
strong investment arm that is
able to get some substantial
returns, sometimes.
9%, sometimes even more, but it,
those numbers scare me because
they're so high. So when we talk
about a fund having $11 billion
Mr. Speaker, or, or $9 billion
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. We're
not actually talking about
that's how much is distributed
annually, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. That's how much is
anticipated to, um, that's how
much is just sitting there
collecting more interest, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. And I'm
glad you referenced this fund,
but also the other funds
because, you know, there are
some concerns that we are
feeling from the federal
government and the loss of
benefits that Americans have.
been paying into for years that
they have come to expect for
years that our New Mexicans have
relied on for years, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and in, in
the good wise decision making in
this body and in our, our
friends across uh, across the
way, um, you know, we have
looked to create investments
that have really begun to grow,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. So I,
I appreciate that effort and I,
I think it's fascinating that
that's the cost we see, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
solely for parental leave, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
correct? Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
I first I need to correct
because the FIR is actually
closer to 19 million. So I need
to correct that. I'm gonna make
sure I tell you the right
information. Um, but yes, this,
this is, well, no, it's a couple
of things. Yes, it's for paid
leave at the birth of a child,
adoption, and foster care. It's
to create a pilot, you know, to
see what this looks like since
we don't have an actuary, and
it's to provide a relief, uh,
that there is no burden on the
employee or employer, so it has
many benefits. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, Generallani.
But Mr. Speaker, Mr. General,
uh, gentle lady and two
questions here. So 19 million
would be the cost of the fund,
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies is
the estimate, and second, you're
saying that this is again for
the birth of a child, fostering
a child or the adoption of a
child. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Yes, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, because
we already have sick leave in
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
So, uh, in the cases when a
patient is going through
long-term cancer, uh, treatment
or a patient is going through uh
complications from having a
child.
For example, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, many people, I myself
had an emergency C-section when
I had my child, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, um, those medical
incidents would not be covered
in this fund, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
example you give would be
covered. In fact, my
daughter-in-law had a C-section
and she lives in Washington
state and she received this
benefit and all, all mothers
when they birth the baby would
have the 6 weeks and if they
opted in to an employee
contribution, then they would
get 9 weeks. So yes, more than
the length of the C.
section recover, you know,
what's typical. If they were
opting in, which I'm sure if
it's as wonderful as we all
believe that this is, then they
would opt in voluntarily, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in the
case of somebody who has cancer
and who's going through
long-term cancer treatment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, will they
have access to 6 weeks or 3
weeks, um, in this bill in this
substitute that you're, uh,
bringing forward, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, if they had just
had a child, if they are
adopting, or if they are doing
foster care, yes, um, otherwise
they would use the sick leave.
And once we know that we've been
fiscally responsible in our
estimates are accurate because
we're not doing an actuary
first, then we could certainly
expand. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle ladies. So
with the answer I'm hearing is
no. If somebody is going through
cancer treatments, they will not
alone without involving a child
they would not have this benefit
available to them, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and this is really
interesting to me because we
have a lot of illnesses that do
affect our families, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. I do know
that there was an actuarial on
the original version of House
Bill.
11 that looked at um people
utilizing this for the many
illnesses that do come up in New
Mexico, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, complications from
diabetes, cancer, um, other
issues that may come up from,
you know, our history as a state
and otherwise, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I know in that
actuarial, the uptake was around
5%, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
And so I bring that information
forward just so we can kind of
go forward with what that would
affect, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and we know that New
Mexico is one of the, has one of
the largest populations of
sandwich generations, Mr.
Speaker, General.
where parents, a lot of us in
the room and I'm sure many on,
on both sides of the aisle are
expected to take care of not
only our children, not only our
parents, but our aunties and our
uncles and our cousins, because
that is what we do in New
Mexico. It is cultural it is
fundamental to who we are proud
to be, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
What often happens, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that work is
often taken up by women, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and my
concern is that when those women
in particular, but men as well,
I don't want to offset that are
expected to care for.
family members or themselves in
one of these emergencies that we
put forward there's nothing in
this bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that anticipates that Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and so
should a person fall into one of
those categories and I'm getting
the question, uh, should a
person, uh, fall into one of
those categories, um, what, what
do they do with their jobs, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, at that
point. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I'm really glad that you
asked that question because one
of the things that the bill, not
my substitute but the original
bill assumes is that employers
and employee
don't have this trust and
relationship among each other.
We're talking about 5% of the
population, and, um, I, I, my
mom lives with me, but I'll tell
you this, we take care of each
other. So we, we share
responsibilities. I know that
will change as time goes on, but
for now, uh, she does live with
us and we take care of each
other. And so, you know, I,
there, there is, that's not
unique, but what happens today
is that folks talk to their
employer and they work it out.
And in
The assumption that employers
are not making these
arrangements.
Is, is an assumption that we
should, we should not forget. We
need to consider the
relationship. I'm looking at
some of the of my colleagues in
this body that, I mean, they're
accommodating their employees.
When I have had those situations
in my own family that went
beyond my sick leave, my
employers, I went to the board
was a nonprofit, and they made
accommodations. We make
accommodations for employees.
Um, so, so an assumption that no
one does anything unless it's
the government mandates it is a,
is a, is not the accurate
assumption to make.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Now I do want
to be clear, I'm not presuming
no one does anything. In fact,
you hit on exactly my point on
this. Is it in New Mexico we
take care of each other. And
oftentimes those small
businesses are often the only
small businesses in town that
are able to support a lot of
what's going on. But let me tell
you what happened in my
nonprofit that I worked for when
I got pregnant and I had to have
a C-section that I mentioned
earlier. What happened there,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, was
that we had, uh, they said a
said they're gonna work really
hard and ensure that I could
have that anyone who had a need.
Medical related in their family,
etc. could get 4 weeks off to
take care of that need and get
better again, 4 weeks. And at
the time, I was just thankful I
had anything. Again, I was laid
out. I really couldn't walk
after my C-section. It was a
very, it's a very difficult
process. And, uh, and I remember
I started getting back to work
after those 4 weeks, they let me
come back part time in that
nonprofit. It cost them, let me
ask, Mr. Speaker, generally, do
you know how much that costs my
employer to put to allow me to
take that time, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
lady.
me, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that cost my employer $4000 to
allow me to take that time off.
Now, here's the thing about
illness is that it doesn't care
who else it's affecting at the
same time. A colleague of mine's
significant other was going
through something similar,
something else as well, and she
had to take a lot more time than
she expected. She was young and
it was a surprising event that
happened to someone also young.
And for her, Mr. Speaker, she
too took that time off as well.
So, $4000 5000 dollars for each
of us, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
under the, the bill
As it stands, the contribution
that people would have to put
into it. It would have been for
a payroll of $2500 a year, uh, a
quarter of a million dollars, it
would have been $31 a month that
they would have had been paying
every month, the equivalent of
$375 a year and both myself and
my colleague would have been
covered, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that, that kindness is not
a, no, I don't wanna say that.
That sounds rude. I don't want
to say that. Uh what I wanna say
is that that consideration in
in calculating the books for the
emergencies that do arise, um,
doesn't, isn't covered in here
and I, and I took back that word
because there is a kindness in
here. And I appreciate the, the
thought and the effort that
really went into this. I don't
want to dismiss that, but I do
want to acknowledge that the
place that so many of us in this
room occupied taking care of
each other, right? Parents
taking care of us, us taking
care of our parents still, um,
is, you know, I believe that is
fundamental in this, Mr.
Speaker, generally to
acknowledge the ongoing work of
everyone, Mr. Speaker, General
lady. Now, let me ask you a
question.
One thing you mentioned, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
when we look at our funding, we
have to acknowledge that
taxpayers pay into this and
we're all contributing to this,
this fund, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So when I look at this
fund, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
this is telling me that only
birthing parents up to 22,000,
you know, parents of 22,000
babies would be able to utilize
these 6 weeks, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and the addition of
anyone who's fostering or
adopting Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Well, first of all, and, and
some of your comments, we're,
we're drawing in an arbitrary
figure here and this one is 6.
In the bill that I'm offering a
substitute for it's 12 cancer
lasts longer than 12 weeks,
caring for a parent with
dementia or Alzheimer's last 12
weeks. Is it, is it unkind to
only extend this to 12 weeks out
of 12 months out of the year, we
are setting law.
We're taking into consideration
the cost and the benefit to the
taxpayers, 90, 6% of according
to the presenter, who will never
draw down the benefit. 4% of New
Mexicans will benefit from this,
that all all working New
Mexicans will contribute too.
Those are her estimates, um,
mine were a little less. Uh, so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, 6
weeks, 12 weeks, we, we're
drawing the line somewhere. Not
everything's included in uh the
original bill as well. In
addition to that, I think we
your, what you're suggesting is
that the early childhood fund is
in jeopardy, but it is so
healthy that the ECECD, uh, this
year alone, the agency is asking
for an additional, we're going,
we are passing law to take out
more money than we did just one
year ago by $250 million the
increase. And so this is
something for 19 million that we
do have to come back and
appropriate that we can make
adjustments to and that we will
have the flexibility to respond
to
Changes in federal benefits,
changes in oil and gas prices.
This is one of the most solvent
funds we have that's
specifically designed for
children. So, this bill that I
have introduced is for the, the
paid family, the, the leave when
a baby is born for adoption or
first time fostering.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I, I want to go back to one
thing you just mentioned. And I
wanna go back to the idea that
12 weeks, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is random. Um, this is not
a random number that's come
forward, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. This is from the Academy
of, of, um, AAP, the, the
pediatrician's Academy that
comes together and, and
actually, to be honest, they say
that you should be breastfeeding
for 2 years, uh, which is a new,
um, pressure, I would say for
first-time moms who are figuring
out how to breastfeed already.
Um, it's a pressure, but they do
recommend 12 weeks of time for
children to be able to bond with
their with their parents.
So that is proven, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I do want to point
out that, that again, we're
looking at this timing and this,
this 6 weeks that you also
mentioned as well. And again, I
bring this only in response to
what your question was, was
actually is actually a
reflection of what we're seeing
in other states that the average
leave is taken, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and, and to your
point, you know, again, we're
asking ourselves in this bill.
That this is only the amount
this amount that's being
collected, the 6 weeks that will
be being paid out, it will not
question the, the fund solvency
because I agree and I think
Myself, my, my co-sponsor and
yourself and many in the body
agree that there would be funds
for this, which is why I think
both proposals have this state
funded portion, so I see that
there. But what I'm pointing to
right now though is that this is
forcing New Mexicans to invest
solely for parental leave, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I
think that we have to look at
the whole worker because as you
mentioned earlier, your mom
helped take care of you. Um, you
know, my parents, uh, one of my
parents still works and he helps
take care of us and should he
need that time, that leave to
help take care of a
scenario that may arise with my
children or may arise with my
partner or may arise with me,
and I want to be very specific.
I'm presuming this would require
the documentation that is needed
in all those cases, right? That
he has paid into it as a
taxpayer in New Mexico, he would
be able to draw from it as well,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, but
what I'm seeing from this
committee sub is that he
wouldn't, unless he was a
parent, having a baby and he's a
worker in his 70s, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Are you seeing it
that same way, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, absolutely, that
this is a narrower scope.
Using the early childhood fund
which generates over 500 million
a year, um, to, to
Look at the impact on workforce
and to determine the actually
determine the take-up rate. So
not, not saying let's pause and
let's do nothing until we get
the study back. This is saying
let's try something that we know
does not take away from the
employee or employer's take home
pay and let's start with what
that best practices and we have
agreement on, um, that we need
to do to try something out and
to start where families need it
most. So yes, that is correct,
and I'm sorry, I need to correct
myself again, um.
They paid time off for cancer
leave is 6 weeks, and we all
know that when we have a
terminal illness much longer
than that. So we're, this is 6
weeks, 9 weeks, if they, a
voluntary contribution. So we do
fall 3 weeks of what best
practices recommend, which is
12, we're at 6 for everyone, 9
if they choose to contribute and
um I'm glad that you mentioned
the other fun because we're
making an assumption, and I, I
could be wrong, that the money
for the $9000 would come
from the early childhood fund.
That estimated cost is over 200
million and this one's around
20.
To to try this out without
having a huge impact on
employees, employers and
workforce capacity, and I'm
thinking about my rule, uh
critical access hospital. I'm
thinking about everybody's small
business that's calling you and
telling you that they would
close down and, and the
assumption that we make that we
know better than them, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate it, and I also
appreciate that there is,
there's a lot of confusion. I
will say this as well. I think
there's a lot of confusion on
how much this bill would cost
because I've run into that. I
had a great conversation with a,
a farmer down south. I don't
think he's in your distric.
We had a good conversation about
it. He had a lot of reservations
around earlier version of this
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and not another version of this
committee sub or floor sub, but
you know earlier version of
these conversations, Mr.
Speaker, and his concern was
along the lines of how much it
would cost. And when you pull up
that calculator, employers at
home and employees at home,
employers, the calculations is
0.0015, 1500%, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would be the cost
because I hear that come up as a
serious concern, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And what was
interesting in his case and in
this.
case was that it is for what
we're looking at in the original
is 6 weeks of time off, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. My
concern, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is I'll go back to the
question again that I, I wasn't
in the answer that I'll ask,
I'll ask again if what happens
now if an employee needs more
time and is unable to come is
cannot work, but their employer.
has to have them back, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. What
happens to that employee at that
point, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
other than the source of the
funding and who's eligible.
Because this taxes no one, it
uses the interest from the early
childhood fund.
The rest of the bill mirrors uh
Representative Chandler and
your, your bill. So whatever
your parameters are, are the
perimeters in this bill. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady, except in the case
that if somebody does have
cancer and has to leave for
treatment. They have no time off
per se, and they try to work it
out with their employer, but
their employer just says, and I
get it, $4000 for me to just
have to pay you is not possible
under the original bill as
presented by my colleague and
that I'm, I'm co-sponsoring, we
would be $31 a month, 30.
$75 a year for a payroll of
$250,000. I mentioned that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, because in
your substitute, my concern is
that what's happening right now
is that people aren't going back
to work and my example comes
from my own experience. I had a
handshake agreement that after I
had a baby, they would honor
some paid family leave, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and they
honored nothing. And now this I
give you just because it was my
experience having a baby. That's
where I am in life. I'm lucky
enough that my medical incidents
have been causes for joy and not
causes.
for panic or fear. I've been
lucky.
But in any case of that, when
that person is ill enough, when
a family member is ill enough,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
don't go back to work. They just
stop working because their
family is calling Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and it does make it
difficult. My concern with this
substitute for employers and
employees to make, make it do.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
there a reason why we didn't
include even a short amount of
time off, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, for those kinds of
emergencies outside of
parenting, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, on the example of
your employer paying $4000 your
employer would
still had to pay $4000 because
they're going to have to pay for
a sub.
So the cost to the employer to
cover the sub is nowhere in the
bill. So that, that the employer
cost is not alleviated at all.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
and your example again was the
birth of your child. This covers
6 weeks for the birth of the
child, 9 weeks on involuntary
contributions. So we're
following 33 weeks short of, of
the bill that's being proposed
that, that I'm, I'm offering a
substitute for, and I just want
to remind you that your bill is
for 6 weeks for the illnesses,
the chronic and, and, uh,
terminal illnesses that you're
seeing an example of. So I'd ask
you.
Where you drew the line at 336
weeks versus 12 weeks, you know,
I mean, so we can go back and
forth. This bill is a smaller
bill that takes into
consideration, we're considering
hundreds of bills in this body,
and if we look at the ones that
are moving forward.
Some of them reduced the
teacher-child ratio and create
800 less slots for infants. Some
deal with nurses ratios. Some
deal with taxes, whether it's
liquor or tobacco. Some deal
with penalties for noncompliance
with ratios in classrooms.
There's all, there's penalties
for not getting a road job done
in the round amount amount of
time. What, where I came up with
my numbers is keeping these
small businesses open so that
there will be a job to return to
where we came up with this
proposal this compromise is
thinking about uh the GRT that
cities and counties depend on
where we came up with this
compromise is looking at the
likelihood of the other bills
coming through that also have a
cost, but also have an impact.
And what we're thinking about is
revitalizing our communities and
businesses have to be able to
cover these costs and stay open.
If I'm underestimating, I'll be
here with you to expand it.
But let's start small and expand
bigger. We've made mistakes
before. Let's not do that again.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate you, you know,
acknowledging that in the bill
that was presented in its
original form is less of the
amount than was originally
recommended for the broader uh
medical needs, family wellness
because it is, that is part of
that compromise, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I get, um, I, I, I,
I want to point out, I, I just,
this is a question, groups that
don't, uh, that aren't dealing
with pregnancy groups like the
lymphoma Society, American
Cancer Society, um, the, uh,
AARP, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
are any of them endorsing
Or or speaking in favor of this
substitute, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the disabilities, some
folks from the disabilities
Coalition, um, I've gotten lots
of calls from the folks that I
told you're opposed to the
original bill. Um, I did not
write those down. If you guys
want to start texting folks and
telling them that you support
it, that would be great. um, but
particularly some folks, I'm not
gonna say the associations
because there's not an official
endorsement list, but folks who
do home health care, they've
looked at the reimbursement
rates, which on the
and the most generous ones that
they've negotiated with, uh with
uh their Medicaid rates or their
NCO reimbursement rates
certainly will not cover this
cost, folks that are, um,
providing disability services,
home health care, child care,
although there is money in the
early care and education budget.
I so I suspect, I mean, I, it
was not answered directly,
that's part of the 100 million
that we need extra for early
care and education is to train
this workforce for the subs. Um,
but Mr. Speaker,
I'm getting texts even as we're
speaking from people saying,
this is great, thank you for
doing this. We support this. So
I'm hearing these associations
and businesses say we support
our workers. We think this is a
good compromise. Um, so anyways,
I hope they're texting you too,
Mr. Speaker, before we continue,
I'm gonna ask folks to please
let's, this is our place to
debate, uh, let's not be asking
people or viewers to be texting
or calling people, uh, we are in
the middle of debate and I don't
believe it is appropriate to be
doing that.
Uh, while I appreciate and
encourage uh our, our viewing
audience and constituents to
engage in the process right now
we sit in this chamber debating
this bill, uh, between, uh, uh
two phenomenal debaters, I might
add, and I would like for that
to continue without us being
disrupted by outside, um,
influences. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, in general, was it me
or you? It's on me now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. The, the
point I was getting to though is
that what I'm looking at is
that, and what I didn't hear.
was the societies that represent
a lot of the folks that are
going through sudden and
shocking medical illnesses that
they, their families just
weren't anticipating, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, you
know, I, I believe the one thing
we, we should be anticipating is
that, you know, what is the full
amount that a group needs, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, you know,
going back to that 6 weeks,
that's on average what we've
seen for other states, that's
the evidence we can prove again,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
it's looking at what, you know,
again, having lowered the amount
that they pay into
significantly, 1500%.
you know, should anyone want to
calculate that for themselves.
Is it an important aspect, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
wanted to ask this question. I,
I, I, you saw me flipping
rapidly, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. How much do workers pay in
to get that additional 3 weeks,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, they
voluntarily choose 0.5.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
workers would have to put in uh
5/10 of their pay to uh to, to
have that extra 3 weeks, right,
Mr. Speaker. Generally, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if they
believe they want it and that,
that's also part of this bill
that I think is important. It's
a voluntary opt in. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, my adorable and
wonderful first child was not
anticipated, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I was not expecting to
have a beautiful, wonderful
daughter, uh, at the right young
age of 30 something, but still
she was unexpected, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
these cases when you don't
expect to have a kid and you
have not been putting into the
fund but you have been working
for the previous year, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would you
be up for uh paying into and
receiving those benefits. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the
premiers are the same as your
bill. Now, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and this is why we talk
about this a lot. I know we go
back and forth. Is it a, uh,
insurance, is it a tax, you
know, what is this, Mr. Speaker,
gently, this is why insurance
works the way it does, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when I was
young, I never thought I'd be in
a car accident.
I was younger, I never thought I
was gonna have a baby at that
time. You never, you know, never
think about this, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. You know, I, I, I
think one thing I want to
mention is in the debate
previously, we mentioned it's
about 5%, 4% of who will be
taking out from this fund, Mr.
Speaker, generally, that's
annually, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I mentioned that
because I presume annually
you're assuming the same uptake
rates, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
for parenting or would it be a
different uptake that you would
anticipate from the workforce,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, whoever
wants to be the benefit.
of birthing a child, adopting or
first time fostering and the,
the 0.5% is a tax, but in this
case, it's voluntary. The IRS
has determined it's a tax. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the, the
reason why I, but we don't have
an uptake number, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, for what this
substitute would be, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, can you repeat the
question uptake, Mr. Speaker
Speaker, what you anticipate
that to be in this bill, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, let's
go with your figure of 4%. OK,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
reason I bring that up is that
again we're asking them to
volunteer to put in 5/10 of a%
into a fund.
If they expect that they might
have they might want to use 3
extra weeks for a pregnancy they
don't know that may be coming,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, they
would have had already put into
it. This makes me very nervous
about solvency, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when you don't have
an established number of
individuals that are putting
into the fund, um, when you're
not requiring everyone chips in
just a little bit, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, you know, I
think that's, that's a concern
to me, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Is that a concern for you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um,
women are pregnant.
For, uh, 40 weeks, and so they
could contribute any time. Women
often anticipate when they could
be pregnant or when they are of
childbearing age. So it would be
up to them to choose to
participate.
Mr. Speaker, General Eddy, thank
you so much. I mean, this is,
but part of the concern for me
is, we don't know what the pool
is gonna be that is putting in
that 5 10s, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, for solely 3 weeks of
payout from it, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. As we know, uh, uh.
I don't think anyone here
presumes that any worker is
immune from getting sick and
their families are immune from
getting sick, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I'm just gonna
presume we all agree that at
some point, someone in a working
person's life is going to need
some medical care, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I, I, I'm gonna
make that presumption. Is that
fair to make, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, yes, it is, and if
they are a state employee,
they're captions for that in
addition to the um paid leave
that we have now, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but I mean, know a
lot of folks that aren't.
In my district, even in Santa Fe
I have a lot of folks that
aren't state employees, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my concern
is that all of those folks and a
lot of retirees that are in my
district who have their little
jobs that give them just a
little extra pay to get by so
they, they can supplement their
income should they need to take
time off for cancer. Should they
need to take time off because
they're going through something
egregiously awful, like the
death of a child, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that they won't be
able to draw from anything else
and the problem for me is Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is the
additional
stress that causes on them, Mr.
Speaker, General lady. Do we
agree that the stress of going
through a medical emergency can
actually create worse outcomes
for those individuals, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, can we
first agree that retirees and
folks on disability and fixed
incomes, do they qualify for
this? Not, not my substitute.
They don't, but for the original
bill,
uh, yeah, I can answer that if
that's all right, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if they're
working and they're contributing
to the fund, for they would
qualify for the family wellness.
So Mr. Speaker, they have a
small site
then that income would be Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, not
this bill because this bill is
because we have no actuary
study, and this is to give us a
smaller scale in response to the
majority of business owners and
operators in this state, as well
as the employees who have said,
we don't want this, so that we
can try something smaller out of
a permanent fund, it's pretty
conservative. We are
conservatives. So it's a
conservative proposal that says
let's start small and see how it
works from a, a $9 billion fund
that's
Going to $11 billion that is
intended to benefit families
with children under 3rd grade.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I want
to just go back and remind folks
that are watching and anybody
here that that is the entirety
of the fund. No one is looking
to take out that. I don't think,
I, I personally don't want to
take out that fundamental amount
because if we took out that
entire $11 billion at any point,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
would not benefit the kids in
New Mexico in the future. I
think we agree on that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it's an
11, it's a $9 billion fund and
growing to 11 billion of which
we're
So confident in the funds that
the Secretary of ECD has asked
for a 50% increase in the
withdrawal, which we'll probably
be voting on soon. She's
comfortable taking an additional
$250 million out of it and this
is a $19 million cost. There's
no tax on any employee, um, and,
and we're not staying on the
bill because the substitute.
Is about parents who have a
child, adopt or foster. Mr.
Speaker, General Lydia, we were
talking about the fund, which
is, which is part of the it's in
the title, so it's, it's part of
that. When we're talking about
the $11 billion or $9 billion
that is the entirety that is in
the principle of that trust
fund, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and when we decide to change
that principle, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that in my opinion
should be taken into
consideration beyond a floor
debate. It should be taken into
consideration a lot deeper that,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, which
is why the appropriating process
is significant in how we.
doing this, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Going back to what I was
asking a second ago, and this is
my concern is that again those
older individuals that may be
working a side job that gives
them the little extra they need
to, you know, make their
grocery, you know, trip each
month or, or whatever it may be
this they do not see a benefit
that they they might need for
that financial security and
going back to my question I had
asked Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
there people do have worser
outcomes when they have the
additional financial stress when
they're undergoing.
chemo, and when they're
undergoing these things, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I agree
with you that we need to be
handling these issues very
conservatively at times, and
that's why I think compromise is
an important aspect of it. I
think also asking employees in
their limited incomes.
To pay 5/10% was a stretch. And
that's why I believe that the,
the original bill that we
discussed brought that down, but
this one keeps it at 5/10 per
percent. That may be more of a
stretch, as I heard from my
colleagues throughout the past
sessions, and that is a big
reason why we wanted to make
sure everyone contributed. Mr.
Speaker, that, that's the end of
my questions. I appreciate the
debate. Thank you.
There's for the debate, gentle
lady from Santa Fe, Zansky.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Donana Sierra
and Socorro Yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I yield
to the gentle lady from Santa Fe
County.
Thank you gentle lady, um, I've
been looking at this substitute
and comparing it to the original
legislation, um, and the other
gentle lady from Santa Fe raised
a lot of important concerns, um,
that I also share, uh, and I I
wanted to ask you a few
questions about some other
aspects of this proposed
substitute, um, so the funding
for the parental leave that's
proposed in the substitute is
coming wholly from for the 6
weeks from the early childhood.
Education and Care Fund. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker and genial lady,
yes, and I made the assumption
that we are setting up uh an
obligation in the original bill,
that would be around $200
million to pay for the $9000 per
child, and so this is 19 on the
4% take up, um, so yes, that's
correct, and as the funds
currently generates in, in the
interest that we can spend 500
million a year, and the original
bill has a cost of
200 million a year from that
fund and what we're proposing is
a fraction of that.
Thank you gentle lady, um, and
is there any actuarial analysis
in this legislation in the
proposed substitute.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, as
in your case, no, there is not.
So this is uh a much smaller
smaller scale rather than
saying, no, let's do nothing.
It's a yes, let's do something
now, but let's do something as
we study.
Uh, gentle lady, um, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, the
original legislation that we
were debating does have an
actuarial analysis, and I think
that that and it actually
requires Department of Workforce
solutions to hire an actuary,
um, which I think is really
important and.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, are
there any protections for the
early childhood care and
education fund.
In this bill, for example, if
the distributions for the paid
parental leave, say we, we have,
you know, another baby baby
boomer generation, right? We
have a lot of kids being born,
that's what we're all hoping
for. We want our population to
grow in New Mexico, um, and so
the payments from the early
childhood care and education
fund uh uh under the substitute
would start to increase. We
would start to see a faster
drawdown, what protections does
this substitute have for the
Fund. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and wouldn't that
be awesome?
That would be amazing if our
birth rate was going up. Um,
yeah, that's on in the current
fund, uh, the early care and
education fund, it, the money,
this is 100% of what's in the
fund regarding the distribution.
The money and the fund is
subject to appropriation by the
legislature for early childhood
education and care services and
programs. So we do that, we make
that determination as we are
right now and may hear the, the
bill to ask for another 250
million, we may hear it on the
floor tomorrow. It's sitting on
the, the, um, 3rd reading.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, and I believe
you mentioned that this
substitute is very similar to
House Bill 446 that you
proposed, is, is that, is that
right, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady? Yes, it doesn't require
that we use the other, the early
childhood fund, but it does
authorize it. So we could come
up if we didn't want to touch
more than, uh, if we didn't feel
comfortable, we would use other
funds as we do regularly.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
could you point me to where in
the substitute the Department of
Workforce Solutions or any other
agencies sort of recalibrates
the amount of drawdown from the
early childhood care and
education fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
leave that to this body of 70
people, and when we pass it over
to the other chamber to them.
That's the job of the
legislators and we retain that
authority in my bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
you know, I have a lot of
concerns about that, um, you
know, many folks around the
state worked very, very hard to
embed into our constitution the
right to early childhood
education and uh this uh
substitute actually basically
drills a tap into that early
childhood education and care
fund and starts to draw funds
out of it with no limits, with
no protection.
with no requirement that the
agency actually look at the
early childhood care and
education fund and I think I'm
reversing those, the early
childhood education and care
fund and actually.
You know
Decide, oh my gosh, these
drawdowns are happening too
quickly.
This benefit is great for
families, but it's being drawn
down, um, and affecting the
corpus of the fund and so now we
need to sort of tilt that
backward. I don't see any
protection in this legislation
for the fund and that is really
concerning, um, the, uh,
estimates on House Bill 446
which, uh, as the gentle lady
has stated is very similar, uh,
although not entirely identical
to this bill, um, as.
estimates a lot of investment
revenue loss right away to the
early childhood and education
care fund, um, and it also
estimates that there will then
be reduced distributions to the
early childhood program fund,
which is one of the major
vehicles we are using to find
early childhood care in the
state, um, so those are things
like pre-kindergarten childcare
assistance, home visiting
services, and so we rely, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady on the
corpus.
us to generate that investment
revenue and uh the early
childhood education department
is actually estimating that
those services could be impacted
because we have opened up this
port into that fund with no
limits and uh and no actual
mechanism built into the
substitute in order to protect
the corpus of that fund, Mr.
Speaker, is that a question or
not yet, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but I, I promise I will
get.
Um,
How, um, in addition, if the
corpus of the fund begins
reducing at a more dramatic rate
than is expected, the SIC is
then gonna have to restructure
the funds and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is there anything
in your substitute that
addresses the SIC making the
necessary changes for the corpus
of that fund, um, to ensure that
the investment revenue could try
and meet the demand for the
services. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if you would go to my bill
on page 3.
On online 21.
F
You'll see that the legislature
may
Appropriate money from the early
education and care fund, May.
So
We maintain all decision making
and, and, and to get past, it's
earning 500 million and we're
requesting 250 million, so it's
still exceeding, uh, over
several $100 million. So to do
that, we, our birth rate would
have to quadruple, which would
be amazing again, I would say,
and um that would mean that
we've turned the tide and we're,
we're really attractive to
families who are in that age to
grow their families, but the
word nay exists in my
Bill.
In our bill
In the original bill, only the
word shall exist and and so
that, that is of great concern
because it's actually the
substitute that gives the
mechanism to draw the money from
the um general fund or from
another fund, whereas the
substitute House Commerce and
Economic Development Substitute
only refers to the word shall,
shall remain solvent.
And we have no idea where those
dollars are coming from. So
everybody on this floor who has
a project or initiative that's
in the general fund, is
jeopardizing the sustainability
of those funds when the word
shall remains in um house
commerce and Economic
Development substitute bill for
House Bill 11, whereas in my
substitute the word may is
present.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
thank you for that. I think my
it it.
Initial concern, um, still
stands because without the
suggestion of the early
childhood education and care
fund in this legislation, there
is no funding source available
for this particular parental
leave program, um, and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, there's
also.
Nothing in this bill that
prevents the legislature from
going back in and saying, you
know what, we don't want to
touch the early childhood care
and education fund and so we're
going to pull it from another
source, um, up to and including
creating a new uh assessment
structure for employers and
employees, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, secondly, I wanted to
talk about um the optional
parental leave. So in this
legislation you're proposing
that individuals could opt in
for an additional 3.
weeks of parental leave, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
right?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
then they could also tag on
their paid leave, which is an
additional 64 hours. They're
sick leave.
Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and I wonder,
uh, you know, this goes back to
the question of having no
actuarial analysis in this
legislation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, are you familiar with the
term loss ratio, adverse
selection. Could you talk about
those in relation to this
optional 3 week program.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady can
you specify where you're
referencing in the bill?
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Give me just a minute.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
starting on page 7.
We see
Uh, paid parental leave
programs, supplemental paid
parental leave program employee
contributions and I think Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, this is
where we are laying out the
additional 3 weeks, uh, that are
optional. Is that, is that
right?
Um, and how do you see this
working with adverse selection,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
what are you, what do you, I
don't understand your question.
Just put it, I'm not, I don't
understand what you're asking.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
One of the things that happens
when you have an, an optional
insurance program, which is
basically what is being set up
here is that you run the risk of
something um that that I'm sure
you're familiar with as well
called adverse selection. And so
that means that while, you know,
as previous debaters have
discussed, sometimes you don't
know that you are going to have
a a pregnancy and you have an
unplanned pregnancy, however, if
you are planning to have a child
in the next year, say, you are
much more likely to opt in.
to this optional 3 weeks, which
means, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that creating an optional
program like this, um, with an
actuarial analysis without any
caps on the charges that could
be assessed on these employees,
you're basically gonna end up
with a bunch of folks in this
program who know that they need
the additional 3 weeks. Um, and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you from, do you know what the
current recommendation is for
recovery for a C-section.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
difference here is that we're
not subsidizing their leave with
anybody else's, and no one else
is subsidizing their leave. This
is voluntary. It's opting in. I
think what you're talking about
would apply when you require 96%
of the population to pay into
something that only 4% according
to the sponsor are going to
receive. That's why it's a
mandatory tax.
And this is a voluntary opt-in
benefit.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I would say that the
optional nature of this as
actually creating sort of a
sense of false benefit, um,
because.
There is, there are no
mechanisms in this legislation
to ensure that this fund stays
solvent.
So for example, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we could have 100
of us and we each put in $10 and
we assume that uh for some kind
of benefit, you know, say it's a
lunch fund and
Some of us are gonna eat lunch
that day, maybe not all of us
are gonna eat lunch that day,
and that is how we pay for
insurance programs we, we
distribute the risk and so by
creating a pool of folks.
That
No, they are going to need this
additional leave that are going
to disproportionately opt into
this lead because say for
example, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if you've had a C-section
once you are much more likely to
uh need to have another
C-section and so if you've had
your first child, we implement
this substitute, uh, this
substitute is enacted into law
and then you realize, OK, it's
time I'd like to try for
another child, um, you know
you're gonna be much more likely
to need a C-section and the
average recommended recovery
time for a C-section is up to 6
weeks, so you know that for that
1st 6 weeks, you're gonna be
extremely limited in what you
can lift and what you can do and
your physical activity and you
need to be extremely careful.
You may have additional medical
checkups that you need to go to,
um, post C-section, and so you
are going to need that
additional 3 weeks so.
You are gonna be more likely to
say, yes, I want to sign up for
this additional 3 weeks, um,
same thing if you've had a
challenging pregnancy in the
past or you have a child with
special needs, for example, or
other family obligations that
you need to address that mean
that you are gonna need that
additional 3 weeks at home,
you're gonna be much more likely
to opt in and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the way that I see
the contributions being assessed
is that basically, um, the
On page 8 of the substitute, we
have 10% of the employees' wages
up to the earnings cap
established by the Federal
Social Security Administration
program.
Pursuant to the Federal
insurance contributions Act, so.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it,
it, it looks to me that the
employee.
The employee payment is set by
the substitute is that, is that
right? It's set at this sort of
flat percentage or does it
adjust?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
mirrors the sponsor's bill.
It's a different rate, but it it
it mirrors all rest, all the
perimeters, near the original
bill, the substitute bill that
we're debating.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, could
you point me to the part of the
substitute where the
contributions required by the
employee are recalculated based
on the benefits being paid out.
Mr. Speaker, generally, there's
not a provision for that.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
a very important piece of the
original legislation because it
allows for that adjustment, um,
up to 0.1.01% um of each year to
go up or down based on the
number of claims paid out. So,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
we have a pool of individuals
that know they are going to need
this additional 3 weeks.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
are.
tapping they're setting the rate
for their contributions. So how
much is going into the fund is
capped at um this uh half of a
%
Um, 10% of their wages each
year.
Um
Then we're going to basically be
seeing that fund for this
optional supplemental parental
leave gets smaller and smaller
and smaller and smaller every
year because you're gonna have a
group of employees that really
need this benefit, sign up for
it, they're gonna say yes, yes,
I want, I want these additional
3 weeks, um, I may have a child
with special needs. I may know
that I'm gonna have a C-section.
I might know that I, in addition
to taking care of uh my.
new child, my husband, maybe,
you know, traveling or uh
unavailable to help me. I know
I'm gonna need this additional 3
weeks for recovery. Maybe I've
had some very unfortunate side
effects in my pregnancy or other
issues, uh, maybe I have a
co-occurring, you know, medical
condition that just makes it
recovery from uh uh a birth, um,
much more intense and so you're
gonna have much more demand on
this fund.
Than what this current rate
would allow, which Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady means that, you
know, in a few years with no
adjustment mechanism in this
bill.
This fund is going to need to be
funded by the legislature.
And we are gonna have to come
back year after year and say,
oh, again, the premiums didn't
cover the payout, you know,
again these collections from
these employees didn't cover.
How much benefit was paid out
and so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I feel that this
particular optional 3 weeks is
very unsustainable, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um.
Could you just
Uh
Explain if, if you do have a
reason why there was no
adjustment mechanism built into
the bill or why there is no
actuarial analysis built into
the bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, I can't explain that
because this year,
Our new money.
The one time money plus new
money.
was around 3 billion.
Dollars
And this bill says the
legislators, we are the
appropriators, so we don't leave
it to a third party or another
agency or someone with a cap at
1%. We say we come back every
year and decide as we roll this
out. And Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, if your estimate was true
and more and more people were
taking this up. More and more
people are taking this up then,
then, then my, my hypothetical
at the beginning of the debate
where we would be insolvent by
almost, you know, over $800
million would also be
true. But in this case, if what
I'm suggesting is wrong, and we
have 4 times the birth rates and
we don't have enough take-up
rate, um, and folks don't
voluntarily participate. We may
be looking at 200 to 250
million. We could look at the
early childhood fund. Maybe we
are comfortable with 20 million
out of the early childhood fund
and the, the 80, you know, the
$75 million dollar balance is
going to come out of the general
fund and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I feel comfortable that
with the parameters that we've
made in this.
body and um the experience of
this body and setting an $11
billion worth of funding that we
could find the solution much
easier than it would be for us
to find the solution if the 1%
in the shalls versus the maze,
uh, come to, if we look like
other states, we will be
insolvent within 2 years and
almost a billion dollars within
five years. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, I appreciate
that. I think that
unfortunately, this substitute
also is going.
to be.
Insolvent and and require
continuing appropriations long
into the future, um, in part
because it doesn't have the
stability of spreading the risk
across a broad risk pool. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the, uh,
the 6 week benefit is completely
dependent on appropriations by
the legislature and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, what happens
when we have a lean year, say in
10 or 15 years where we don't
have adequate, uh, funding to.
Uh, uh
Backfill this fund, um, as the
gentle lady has indicated we'll
need to do, um.
Will the, do the benefits
automatically reduce in that
scenario from the 6 weeks, do
they do or does the amount of
the wage reduce if there's not
enough money in the fund, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, no. So
according to Department of
Labor, we will need to increase
the employee employer
contribution by 0.8% in there in
the original bill in the subs in
the
In the
House Bill 11 without this
amendment, without the sub, um,
and in, in, in the bill that
we're proposing, the
conservatives are proposing, we
leave it to the body. This would
never become solvent unless the
body decided not to fund it
anymore.
So, our 97, or 94, 96% of
taxpayers and small businesses
and employees gonna pay for it
or as we as a body going to use
our $11 billion budget and this
$9 billion fund or any other
fund to make this decision
annually. So the one that's at
risk of solvency is the um house
commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11, Department of
Labor says it's almost
immediately insolvent. This.
cannot be the substitute cannot
be.
It's insolvent unless we choose
not to appropriate funds to it.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I guess I, I am confused because
this substitute requires that
the department provide leave
compensation at certain levels,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so.
We are putting into law in this
substitute a requirement that
Department of Workforce
Solutions provides 6 weeks of
leave without a specified
funding source, um, without a
calculation to ensure that
these uh the the the
contributions can adjust year by
year, and
We're basically making a promise
without any indication of the
funding that is going to be
required, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the uh the optional
3 weeks, um, is, is certainly
going to be insolvent very
quickly because again Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the people
who need it the most for
whatever reason are going to be
much more likely to opt in and
that's something we've seen time
and time again with all kinds of
insurance programs, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, whether it be
health insurance, there's
certainly a number of other
optional insurances that are
available on the market long
term disability insurance, all
kinds of insurance programs that
some employees have the
opportunity to opt into or can
be purchased on the private
market, um, and when those
programs are optional often the
premiums are very high because
the people who need it the most
are the most likely to use it.
It's one of
reasons that life insurance is
so much more expensive, the
older that you get because the
chances that you are the
unfortunate reality is that the
chances that you're gonna use
it, uh, go up, the older that
you get, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I wanted to also ask
you about the appeals process in
this substitute, could you walk
me through, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so the
uh section 11 of your bill, um,
could you, could you just
discuss that process, uh, uh,
uh, and who it's meant to apply
to.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, can
you tell me the page number?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it is, uh, starts on page 21 by
my reading.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this language, which language
which mirrors the language from
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
House Bill 11.
Oh, the original House Bill 11,
um, it, uh, it applies in this
case to someone who has a baby,
adopts or fosters.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
this is basically uh setting
forth.
Here, if I am reading this
correctly, that an applicant or
an authorized representative um
who had an adverse determination
on their application could does
have the right to appeal and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, could you
explain what um what would be an
example of an adverse
determination in there, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if
someone had a baby and the
agency in charge said they
didn't. If someone adopted a
child and the agency.
in charge so they didn't, if
they were fostering and the
agency said they didn't. The
adverse, it would be a denial of
an eligibility, an eligible
applicant or beneficiary, which
would be
A family that has a child,
adopts or fosters.
Real quick, if folks want to
remove their coats, you may do
so.
Not all at once are Senator
Fernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
And so as I'm, as I'm going
through this appeal process, it
looks like you, you must, uh,
once you receive notice that.
Uh, someone is challenging the
fact that you have adopted a
child or that you uh have had a
child, um, that within uh.
15 days, you need to file that
appeal. You can go through this
process, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, one of the things that I
noted as a major difference
between this bill and uh this
proposed substitute in the
legislation it's proposing to
substitute is that um there is
no opportunity for the employer
to appeal.
And I think this is really
important, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because you could have an
employee and may you may have
questions about whether that
person has the legitimate right
to take uh this parental leave,
um, and there's no opportunity
in this substitute for the
employer to file that appeal,
which I don't think is uh very
balanced and one of the things
that I really appreciated about
the original
legislation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, was that there is a
balanced opportunity for
everyone involved to appeal. So
whether that be the applicant
who is applying for the leave,
the employee, they're authorized
representative if there's
somehow uh so unwell that they
are unable to uh to uh do this
process, um, and the employer is
allowed to file an appeal, and I
think that's really important,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, to
make
sure that we have those
protections here for the
employers because there are
gonna be those situations, uh,
unfortunately where employers
have questions about what an
employee is maintaining or
stating um and I, I didn't see
that, uh, opportunity for the
employer to appeal or go through
this process, um, except for,
you know, it's, it's possible
that they could bring a
administrative action which
could require hiring an
Attorney, um, if they feel that
there's a violation of the law,
um, the administrative appeal
process is generally a pretty
accessible process, uh, and so
that is something that uh.
Is, is designed for someone who
is a say a small business owner
or an employee to go through and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, um,
You know, just, just to
summarize, um.
There are no protections for the
early childhood education and
care fund in this legislation we
are opening up sort of a drain
into that fund, um, with
absolutely no stopper safeguards
to ensure that that fund is
protected, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um.
I think the optional parental
leave, the additional 3 weeks
will be insolvent, um, uh, very
shortly after its inception
because of adverse selection,
because those loss ratios are
going to be so high, the claims
that are paid out are going to
be much greater than the
contributions potentially, and
there's no safeguards in the
substitute for that. And then
finally, the employer's voice is
not, is not present when they
feel something is wrong, so the
employer has.
no ability to say, hey, I don't
think I don't think this this
leave processes is either being
done right or should be granted,
and there's none of that
administrative appeals, so with
that, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, uh, I respectfully stand
in opposition of this
substitute.
There is further debate on house
for substitute number one, the
gentleman from Catrin grant any
Hidalgo representative Terazas
you Mr. Speaker, with the gentle
lady from Socorro, Sierra and uh
Donana please yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from in Hades.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, first of
all, I wanna say thank you for
bringing something that is.
More scope down
Easier to, to, to.
Uh, administer.
And easier to understand.
Um, I wanna say, you know, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, first of
all I think everyone recognizes
we wanna do something.
The scary thing, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that we are
hearing.
From the other side, all of the
same concerns we have about
their bill that is 4 times
probably I don't know how many
times bigger and I don't know
how many times, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because we have no
actuarial work.
An actuarial um uh assessment
takes generally from a few weeks
to a few months to get.
We've been talking about this,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady for 2
years at least, maybe longer.
And so why didn't we get that
study? Why don't we get hard
numbers so that we can actually
see what's going to happen.
What I like about your bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
it's easier to track. It's a
smaller scope.
It's, it's births, right? And,
uh, in a small expansion of
that.
Where we can easily track
there's a little like 21,000
births. We were talking about
C-sections, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it's about 25% of women
get a C-section talking about
55, about 55, 50 5200 women a
year that gets that it's
something that can be easily
tracked and understood.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I was
listening to as I'm listening to
the debate, we keep hearing that
it's not gonna be that's not
gonna be solved.
You offered in your bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, to fund
this from the ECECD fund, is
that correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
from the numbers that I heard
from the, from the other
sponsors from the sponsor of the
bill, they said there's $11
billion and they're getting 8%
return.
That's what I heard and and so
with that number if you just do
a simple, simple calculation
that's $880 million if those
numbers are correct,
conservatively, let's just say
there's.
5600 million that's being
produced every, every, every
year.
I never, I don't understand why
we would touch the corpus, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when we
already have this fund, uh,
generating uh uh revenue, you
know, uh, interest or whatever
off of the the corpus why do we
feel like we would, do, do you
plan on using the, the, the
growth from the fund or the
corpus, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, let
me first say that our language,
this is our bill, not my bill,
but
Thank you for signing on and
giving your input as well. Um,
this is May. We're, we're
directing this body to the early
childhood fund, which definitely
has enough money and we would
not touch the that.
No way in the world would it
touch the balance. And, and I
remember the debate, you and I
were here, I, I think you were
here when we passed the early
childhood fund was 20, and we're
here.
Maybe not. Anyways, when we
passed the fund, um, we talked
about all the things that it
would be for, like this year, we
expanded it for home visiting.
We expanded it for, uh, to to
pay higher rates for home
visiting to address family
infant toddler program. Um, it's
been used for maternal child
health, parent-child
psychotherapy, it's been used
for many things. This is
absolutely in line with the fun.
Until today, I never heard
anyone say that it was only for
the early care and education,
and I've also heard many people
who are supporting.
a substitute House Bill 11, that
this $9000 for every child born
would come out of the early
childhood fund. If it doesn't
come out of the other other
early childhood fund, we are
obligating this body 200 $200
million out of the general fund
moving forward. So, if it's not
out of the, this is such a
smaller amount out of the early
childhood fund. I don't know how
it can be insolvent, and if it
is insolvent, then how
substitute for Bill House 11,
the substitute for House Bill
11, is extremely insolvent.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, you
told me $19 million is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, generally?
Mr. Speaker, and, and, and
gentlemen, if we go
conservative, I hope more people
take up and even redo it and say
it's 40 million, and every
parent participates, but the
sponsors are going much more
conservative, um, and so that
would be around 19 million. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, here's the
thing is, uh, we talked about
what happens if they want to opt
in and I love that, Mr. Speaker,
generally, because what we're
doing is we're easing uh.
toes into the water rather than
jumping in headfirst in this
with your legislation, the
legislation that's been proposed
that that you're trying to
substitute is definitely jumping
in head first, whereas this you
kind of easing your way, you're
saying, hey, let's just see what
this does similar to them, but a
but a much smaller scale and so
that and I appreciate that very
much. The nice thing is if they
want to opt in to the um to, to
get in the, the extra uh 3.
Weeks, uh, they can, they can
actually they know they're gonna
be pregnant, you know, for 9
months and find out in the 2nd
month or you know they still
have enough time to to
participate in in funding that
and participating in in your uh
deduction.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the,
the other thing that I like
about this is is it's a, it's uh
your bill is because it is
scaled down we're not looking at
the compounding effect that the
other bill has of someone
getting sick because it's such
an open deal in a in a family
like mine, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, well I have 120 cousins,
first cousins and second cousins
Primos compadres and the whole
nine yards myself, uh,
lieutenant Governor Morales'
family and a couple other
families which.
shut down Grant County.
I think probably the Manzanos
too. We gotta add the Monzanos
and, and it's the truth, Mr.
Speaker, generally, and I think
that compounding effect that
that would be there would would
would be uh very, very
detrimental to our to our county
so I, I, I wanna let other
people talk so thank you for
that. I, I'm, I'm done. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. There's
further debate on the floor
substitute, the gentle lady from
Donana and Otero Representative
Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady, um.
I, uh, excuse me, I'm feeling a
little sick today, but um I am
wondering.
In the bill, uh Speaker general
lady which employees are exempt
from
Uh, this substitute.
Thank you Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
substitute is
The eligible
Employees.
Actually, everyone's, everybody
who bursts, we're expanding
this. This is everybody who has
a child, everyone who adopts and
everyone who fosters.
They are all eligible because
they are growing their family,
whether they're disabled,
whether they're on fixed income,
whether you're a grandparent,
there is no employer or employee
contribution. We pay for this
out of the uns suggesting that
it comes from the early
childhood fund or any other part
like this year, $3 billion that
we had that was discretionary.
Last night we heard a bill that
had a $4 million cost. This has
a $20 million cost. It could
come from anywhere.
You don't have to be an employee
to receive it. You have to have
a child, adopt a child, or be a
first time foster.
Uh, thank you, uh, speaker and
gentle lady. I also forgot to
ask if you would yield, so I
apologize Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that's fine.
Thank you. um, so help me
understand on page one and line
19 it says accepting certain
employees, um, and then again on
page 5,
line 3 employee does not mean an
employee of an employer subject
to the provision.
Of Title 2 of the Federal
Railway Labor Act or an employee
is defined in the federal
railroad unemployment Insurance
Act. Can you explain that to me?
Who, who is that? Thank you
Speaker, gentle lady. Yes, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
that mirrors the other bill, and
this does not apply to federal
employees and the Railroad Act.
This is typical language that we
see when we pass taxes on
employee paychecks.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so this is for
anyone who is pregnant and uh
Buringer has a foster child or
is adopting, is that correct Mr.
Speer and gentle lady, um, the
same exemptions or the same
non-qualifying employees that
are like federal employees
living in the state or with the
railroad. It's the same language
in both bills.
Uh, so this includes, uh, thank
you Speaker general. This
includes H2A workers as well,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is for all New Mexico
residents.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and uh again.
You, um, this bill exempts uh or
doesn't include folks who have a
family member who's ill, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
asked and answered.
Sorry, I'm again I'm sick uh
today, um, which is the irony of
it, but um thank you for uh
indulging me in that, Mr.
Speaker and General Lady, we're
not eligible for this. If you
were sick, you would not be able
to take time off from the
legislative body. Clearly thank
you Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um,
in the floor.
Um, I just wanna say in, in
2019, um, an immediate family
member.
Uh, got very ill and my husband
needed to quit his job entirely
to care for them, and then I had
to take on the burden of our
family's budget.
Um, and then there's my spouse
who was ready to reenter the
workforce in 2021, he got COVID
and then that turned into long
COVID. He was nearly bedridden
for a year.
And at 40, I had become a
caregiver.
To my partner and needing the
support us financially
simultaneously.
I had to quit contracts.
Suddenly and without notice and
it hurt my business, uh, but it
also hurt my spouse because I
couldn't take him to
appointments. I couldn't care
for him in the way he deserved
and it probably slowed his
recovery, uh, Speaker general
lady.
And the anxiety and pressure to
financially provide for my
family as someone.
Who was self-employed was
crushing.
If I had lost one big contract,
we would not have made that
house payment, maybe 2.
And the feeling is terrifying.
And Speaker, gentle lady, I know
you know that feeling given your
own testimony earlier today and
we're not out of the woods yet
as a family.
And he just got back to work
this year and so this is fresh
on my heart that these stories
are happening every day and
often and they happen by
surprise.
And so Speaker, gentle lady, um.
I, I understand the.
The choice.
To say let's start small.
Um, or let's start with just
this population.
Um, however, if this body
refuses to offer families space
and relief.
To care for loved ones when
they're ill or to care for
themselves when they're ill,
it's gonna resonate for
generations. And so, um, with
that, um, I, I'm done thank you
gentle lady Representative Block
on the substitute.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
and with the kind gentle lady
are Republican caucus chair from
Donnie Anna Sierra and Socorro,
please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman from Otero
County. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
I've been reading your
substitute, and I have some,
some questions here. And first
of all, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I, we've established
that this is opt-in, so it would
be voluntary for the workers and
then can you tell me how that
plays into the actual employers
as well. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, thank you for the
question. This is every single
New Mexico family when they have
a child.
However they define family.
When they have a child, when
they adopt, or when they are
fostering would be eligible for
these funds. There is no opt-in.
They just have to ask for it.
Um, there is no employee
contribution and there's no
employer contribution. However,
um, I do, I would like to make
reference to the employer's, uh,
Where's that page, that last
page on um
The employer does have a say on
page 24 in section 14, um, the
department can adopt the initial
rules to implement this program
and so they can, they, they can
adopt policies for the employer
if they wish. It's, that's for 6
weeks.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
someone wants to add 3 weeks,
that gets them to 9 weeks, they
can opt in at 0.5. It, it took
5 10s. It's a, it's higher than
the current one, but it's also
this is a voluntary benefit
versus a mandatory tax. Now, if
you were to take 9 weeks, that
does not preclude you because
the rest of this bill is mirrors
the original from, from stacking
the 6, your sick paid leave as
well. And not all employees do
not some, most employees allow
you to roll over. You can keep a
percentage. So there's, there's
additional weeks to get you to
12 that are already in New
Mexico law.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that, that helps me
on that because I was just
trying to figure out, OK, who,
who's included, who's not
included, and then I also wanted
to ask a little bit about the
actual fund. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I believe we're
gonna go with the ease, whatever
the fund is that the ECECD looks
over that has a 1 trillion
billion gazillion dollars and it
feels like it's actually like 9
billion, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the bill, the fund is called the
Early Childhood Education.
And care fund.
Um, and so that, that fund is at
$9 billion. The interest rate is
around $500 million and if we
pass the bill that's moving
through the body right now,
we're, we're gonna take out
another 250 out of that. And Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I
referenced that bill because so
many members of the body in the
majority suggested that the
$9000 that newborn families with
newborns would have would come
from that fund. And so, um, this
was a smaller amount to come
from.
Not fun, but it's a me. The
language in this bill is me, and
so we do have like this year we
had $3 billion in discretionary
funds that we could have put 19
million towards this project.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And so this would
give the legislature, the
ability to do that. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I know I
was here in committee a lot.
People say we want to strengthen
the legislative branch. We hear
that a lot. Let's strengthen the
branch and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it comes to
this legislation, how do we feel
that that could strengthen our
branch by giving us the
opportunity to choose the
funding streams on this
legislation, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that's the entire
point. Well, there's a couple of
There's a couple of points.
We are, we are obligating
ourselves.
To an insolvent fund.
That
If estimates are right and
there's a tech-up rate of other
states, and if we go with the
Department of Labor's estimate
is going to have a shortfall of
over $800 million in its 5th
year.
Which will require us to do what
other states like Washington
have done and gone back and
double and triple the employer
and employer contribution.
We don't know that. This is all
hypothetical.
So at least we are using.
fiscal prudence.
And following the mechanism that
we're sort of shifting to, we
don't get junior money anymore.
We don't get legislative grow
money, never grow money anymore.
We're this is sort of like a
mini grow fund. It's kind of
like and saying let's, let's see
what this looks like because we
can fix it, and we can put more
money in. I mean, we're willing
to invest in what we believe in.
From this $11 billion budget
that will probably grow since
it's grown 70% since the
governor's been in office,
that's a high growth rate. So
we're, we're willing to spend,
but it can't come from our
citizens who are suffering, who
are another tax deduction,
another employer contribution,
mandatory tax on payroll that
you cannot opt out of.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and I, I did see
that as a concern that I had
with this bill, the original
bill, and I think that you're
substitute could alleviate that
because Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I believe we were trying
to to arrive on a figure of how
many people would be actually
utilizing it. I know in some
states it was as low as 4%. It
was even lower in some states
and I think it was Rhode Island,
where it was about 10%, but I
believe Rhode Island is a lot
less population, very highly
densely populated when it comes
to.
fo lk s who live there, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I'm
just wondering when it comes to
other states like Colorado and
or Utah or whatever states
already have opted in, can you
tell me a little bit about the
differences that people have
when it comes to rural New
Mexicans versus a state that's
very highly concentrated with a
lot of folks who live in big
cities. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I believe I
understand your question. Um, in
many of these counties in New
Mexico have a very low
unemployment rate.
I mean, I'm familiar with my
home county, Sierra. The average
citizen is 58 years old. The
working population is very low.
We do not have enough teachers
as it is. We don't have enough
social workers as it is. We
don't have enough healthcare
workers as it is. We are, are
the costs at the New Mexico
Veteran's home is almost all
contract labor, which is
Significantly higher. So there,
that the workforce doesn't
exist.
That, that's part of the
problem. But in other rural
states that have this, you know,
there's, I think there's 17
states. I don't, I don't want to
get this wrong, but I believe
there's around, there's less
than 20 states.
Most of them are voluntary, opt
in, all, all of it's voluntary.
When we talk about New Mexico
being unique.
We're unique because we're
mandating this tax on every
employee and every employer.
There is no opt-out option. And
we're unique in the fact that
we're making 96% of the
workforce pay for something that
for
For the sponsor, 4% of folks
will benefit from.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
General Lee, and I, I find that
to be really scary, at least
with the original idea because
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
have so many people, especially
in my community, which does have
some young, young families that
come in, a lot of them come from
the base, uh, their stationed
there at Holloman, and Mr.
Speaker, General lady, a
majority of the population's
actually elders, a lot of people
who've retired in New Mexico and
so a lot of those people are
still working actually. And
those people, it would, it would
be probably unlikely.
that they would receive a lot of
those benefits because they also
have a veteran benefits that
they've already gotten from
retirement. They also have their
Medicare and all these other
things. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I did hear some concerns
uh regarding businesses and they
were scared that.
There would be a large amount of
time that I think it's 6 weeks
and that 6 week period, if it's
a highly skilled job, something
that requires a lot of training
and a lot of on the job
knowledge, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, how would your substitute
affect any of those businesses
since there, there would also be
some kind of downtime, but I
believe it's a little more
muted. So could you just go into
that a little bit for me and
tell me any of those changes
that could, that could incur
with this legislation, Mr.
Speaker.
gentlemen, I mean, we are, we're
guessing because we don't have a
study and we haven't tried
anything yet. And so, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
concern remains. I don't
We could not figure out how to
rectify that. So if we have 2100
births plus adoptions and
fostering. This is still going
to have a huge impact on the
workforce. We don't know the
impact. I think about my
community and even rolling it
out at this scale, it concerns
me and I, I'm hearing that from
businesses. We're hearing that
from our communities, especially
where the popu I mean, I think,
um, my old district was 2 people
per square mile. I might have 3
now. Um, it's, it's, it's very
sparse.
And so there's not a nurse
around the corner. There's not a
heavy equipment operator around
the corner to fill that. And
those, those employers, um, they
are going to have to pay us up,
um, but it will be a sub and
paid leave and it won't, I mean,
they're still going to have to
do training.
If that employee has to have
practices and they have to have
a certain child protective hold,
and they have to have a certain
nurse ratio. All those barriers
still exist. So, I mean, I, I
hope it works, but it's a sure
less of a burden on our small
businesses than if we go full
scale right away. And, and, and
the word shall versus the word
me.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and in, in my
2 years here in the legislature
going on 3 on this year. I've
heard that is a very important
word and it's been a very
important word in my
legislation, shall versus may,
because it's a mandate versus an
opt-in. And so when it comes to
opting in, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I find this to be a lot
more targeted toward helping
those folks who, who are having
children in the state, and Mr.
Speaker, General lady, I believe
yourself and, and myself, we've
sponsored legislation that helps
hopefully try to promote people
to come to the state.
Ray's families in New Mexico and
when it comes to raising a
family in New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think we
also want those businesses in
the state to actually employ
people they want to come live
here, right? So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, that's why I
come from the business
perspective because I, I'm from
business world but also when it
comes to the actual family unit,
we want to make sure that
families come to the state.
Live in the sea and build in the
state. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when I'm looking at this
fund, this early childhood
education care fund. I wasn't
here when, when you all voted
for this a few years ago, but I,
I believe that it's grown so
substantially that we are indeed
trying to take a lot of money
out. I think you said maybe a
total of $500 million in that.
From that fund and with current
legislation, I don't, I don't
want to get off the substitute,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
can you repeat for me a little
bit about that, that number that
we are projecting in the next
few fiscal years for what we
would be tapping from that fund
potentially to help fund these
certain cases that would be.
In the in this committee
substitute or this floor
substitute, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, if the, the body
chose to chose to use the early
childhood fund. It's grown since
20 to $9 billion the projection
growth over the next few years
is to $11 billion. I've heard
higher I'm being conservative.
We currently are taking out
around 250, and the secretary of
the ECECD is asking to take out
500 million, um, so,
Such a drop in the bucket
compared to this. So I don't,
there's not a solvency issue
with that fund, but we also had
this year, uh, around 3 billion
that we could play with, you
know, that was, that was
non-reoccurring for our
obligations. And by the way, I
mean we're not even meeting all
of our other obligations, but
yes, this is a pretty solvent
fun.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I, I
think when it comes to the
funding, I really care about
that because I want our state to
grow and I want our funds to be
there. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I did hear that
there was in the original bill
that we were venturing to
potentially have a deficit of
800, was it 800 million that I
heard and that was on an 8%
estimate, right? So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it, if it's
about 400 million that we're in
a deficit from
Do you, can you tell me the
differences between the funding
streams of both bills, and yours
is potentially from ECECD's.
Whatever the fund is, I, I
always forget what it's called
versus the bill.
Current bill, would that be
general fund where that is
tapped out of and then Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what would
happen on a, on a rainy day when
the stock markets crash and, and
our budgets, we have to start
ransacking budgets, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would the state,
since it is a trust fund, would
they also be ransacking that
fund to to try to come up with
the funds to just keep the
lights on.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
hope that's a hypothetical that
never occurs, um, but, but at
the most conservative. If our
take-up rate was lower than the
other states in the nation that
are doing um paid family medical
leave, which the IRS determined
as a tax, a mandatory tax
deduction from payroll and
employer. Um, if that tax is
imposed at a minimum, we'll have
a, the projections from
Department of Labor, DFA, that
fiscal impact report is a
minimum of 400 million deficit.
Um, if, if we have the take-up
rate that that Department of
Labor and other folks suggest we
will based on the makeup of our,
our state and our body, then we
would have close to an $800
billion deficit. We could only
make that up.
By going back and imposing more.
Because it shall be made
solvent. That's what the bill
says, shall you need solvent.
And remain solvent, then we
would have to impose an
increase. That's what Washington
did. They're now at the 0.70%
when they started lower and we
would or this body would have to
appropriate it out of the
general fund, or they would have
to take it out of the early
childhood fund, but Mr. Speaker,
ladies and gentlemen, that's
just in regards to the um
That's just in regards to the
family wellness Leave Act, which
is only 6 weeks, um, but as far
as the welcome or for both those
parts, but as far as the welcome
child and family, the $9000 we
have no idea where that's coming
from.
We just know that it's going to
come from somewhere. So house
Bill 11 and substituted
obligates the body to around
$200 million that we don't know
where it's coming from.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and whenever we
hear about that, there's a
gaping hole in a budget where we
may have to fill a gap with some
funding, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that also rings in my
ears tax, because there's,
there's not a lot that we can do
to get more revenue in the state
other than either cutting
programs which this body has not
had the proclivity to do or
raising taxes on the, on the
people of the state or if we are
blessed enough to have.
these budget surpluses even
though we keep on spending that
money out the door very heavily
in my opinion and not putting as
much as necessary in reserves,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I, I
do like the idea of this, this
change because it does number
one does not have that coercive
kind of tax element that makes
participation in voluntary
benefits, not, not, uh,
voluntary, actually mandatory,
and then it, the current bill.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady versus
this bill, there's a, it's a
garnishment of wages, right? So
it's an actual percentage of
wages garnished off the top of
every, every worker and then
every business versus if you
would like to participate in
this program because there we do
want people foster families. We
don't want people to, to
continue to have babies in the
state. We want to grow our
population because in my
opinion, I want another
congressional seat in New
Mexico. I want more people in.
my district to represent. So Mr.
Speaker, General waiting, can
you tell me how this actually
could benefit people to grow our
population and maybe even
attract more people to New
Mexico by instead of having a
coercive tax on people who are
working folks who work hard
every day instead of forcibly
taxing people with the current
bill, how would yours be more of
an incentive for people to want
to come to New Mexico, grow in
New Mexico, build
families in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'll
reiterate, this is our bill. Oh,
I don't know. I, you didn't sign
on. But anyways, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, for um for most of us
who signed on to this bill, um,
from the conservative caucus.
Um, we look at it as growing
business and and keeping those
businesses in place. We want to
see small businesses thrive and
to be able to add more employers
and to add more, um, uh, options
and, and to be bigger than they
are today. And what we're
hearing from folks is that this
bill.
making a macro look at the other
bills, it's too much. So you're
not going to go to an employee,
you're not going to go and raise
your family in a community where
a childcare center can't stay
open.
Or where you're on call to see
if, if they have enough workers
that week. Let us, we'll let you
know if our ratio lowers so we
can, you can bring your a
drop-in situation, which exists.
It exists. It exists in the
state. Um, they're not going to
come if the rural Access
Healthcare clinic closes.
They're not going to move here
if the schools don't improve,
and how can a long-term sub
Meet all these standards that
are being imposed. How, how can
we meet our educational outcomes
and our goals. So looking at
this from a macro level, we take
a small bite out of this knowing
that it's something that people
want and something that this
body is committed to and we say,
let's support families because
they're our workforce, they're
the folks that we need to, um,
to attract and to retain, and
they're the folks who are going
to care for the person on
hospice. They're the person
who's gonna care, me and those
aging and long term, you know,
the aging.
in, in long term care centers
and the nursing homes. They're
the folks that are going to be
at the domestic violence
shelter. They're the ones that
are our servers, so they're the
workforce. And so this says,
let's start small, let's make
New Mexico open for business
because it's going to be
innovation and, um, it's gonna
be the freedom to build a
business and to invest in your
community and work with your
employees as you see fit. That's
going to make New Mexico a
reliable place for people to do
business. So, for me, it's
about, I don't, I don't want to
see
this restaurant that called me
closed.
There's 2 restaurants left in
Socorro County that are open on
Sunday. One of them is gonna
close.
Um, and that's what we're trying
to prevent here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And on that point
regarding the, the restaurants,
I've had restaurants in my
district reach out to me and
tell me, because I, I've worked
in the restaurant industry for
years before while I was in
college and and getting my
degrees and working hard and so
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, when
it comes to these margins at
restaurants, they're very small
margins, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and so these workers that
are pertaining to your
legislation, who, who could be
benefiting from this. These
workers, uh, a lot of the time.
that I've heard, these
restaurants are scared to death
of having to lay off workers
because the margins that they
have on these restaurants, for
example, are so small, the, the
amount of.
Garnished wages and the amount
of forcibly making these
businesses take out a percentage
could really harm the bottom
line because it could, like in
some places, I know a place in,
I, I have a friend who has a
Chinese restaurant in
California, and right now they
have one person in the front.
And they have one person in the
back making the food.
And that's it. And I'm horrified
that if that's something that
has to be adopted to somewhere
like New Mexico, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that we could have
that kind of business model or
those small mom and pop shops
would close down, leave the
state for good, or at least
leave the, the workforce for
good and not be growing jobs. So
Mr. Speaker, General Wai, would
yours help try to promote the,
the current jobs that we do have
in the state, Mr. Speaker, and
if you could just address that
for me, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and thank you, thank
you for the question.
When we impose a mandatory tax
on employers.
They have to, the consumers pay
the cost.
If it can be absorbed.
You know, you, you, you
mentioned that Chinese
restaurant. I happen to follow
you on, on X. It's very exciting
to follow you. And, and I saw
that you were served your food
right here in Santa Fe by an
automated robot. Um, there was
no server that brought your food
to you. It was delivered
electronically with an with an
artificial intelligence device.
Um, and I, I, the last data to
file bills was last week and I
really asked for my share bills
and put a lot of work on
legislative council services. So
I went to get them some donuts
from my favorite donut shop, and
the
dozen donuts was $31.
A dozen donuts. They're, they're
pretty fancy, but they were $31.
But the guy who was um operating
the cash register, asked me if I
was a lawmaker, and he said, he
mentioned a couple of bills,
this is one of them. And he
said, you know,
We are already, we no longer
have employees, we can't afford
it.
He and his family operate the
business. They can't afford the
employees and employee benefits
and that is resonating with me.
These
70,000, 75,000 letters
unduplicated letters that have
been sent, this represents,
there's 500,000 we couldn't
print anymore. This represents
folk who reached out who told
individual stories and said, why
this doesn't quite work. I don't
know that the substitute works,
but it's a whole lot less on the
employer and employee, and it
gives us a chance to try it out.
Um, I
I don't want to this.
With another bill and another
bill and another mandate and
another regulation to shut down
these mom and pop businesses,
these 4th generation farmers.
The folks who are so resilient,
they just say, can the dust
settle? Can I create a business
plan that makes sense and is
reasonable and is accurate for
more than one legislative
session. That's what they're
asking us for. And for the
35,000 people that I represent
that include parents who will
benefit from this. My mom, who
may be sick, that 6 weeks we, we
are a community. We come
together, we solve problems.
We've got to start small. We've
got to listen to this. I have to
listen. We have to listen to the
citizens from our district and
they're telling us we went too
far. I'm trying to scale it
back. I don't know if it's gonna
work, but that's what we've
chosen to do.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and uh I appreciate
that sentiment and I have the
same sentiment in my district. I
talked to people across the
district who do all kinds of
things. I have talked to
plumbers. I've talked to people
who are builders of houses. I've
talked to people who own
restaurants, folks who work in a
maintenance services and there
are such a vast amount of
people, not just from a specific
industry who've reached out to
me about this bill, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
But
All kinds of people from all
kinds of socioeconomic classes,
people who haven't even voted
for me who actually hate my
guts, who've reached out to me
and said, John, we need you to
vote against this bill and tell
me, tell me how I can say no to
the majority of people who
elected me, Mr. Speaker, and
then also to the people who
didn't elect me, who want me to
vote against this bill. And so,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when I
see that, when I see a
uniformity with the entire
district leftist right.
Middle, center, people who don't
even care and think the
government's crazy, which I
humbly agree with them sometimes
on and so Mr. Speaker, General
Waiting, I, I think this is kind
of a unifying effort against
something that that we're really
scared of because a dollar
matters.
2.
That money that doesn't go into
that paycheck, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
It can't help my community. It
can't help pay their bills. It
can't help buy a dozen eggs, uh,
a gallon of milk. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when I'm,
when I'm thinking about the
working folks of our, our
districts.
substitute,
I think of the people that we
want to come here to the, to New
Mexico to live. People who want,
we want to stay in New Mexico to
keep here employed in New Mexico
because I have a lot of friends,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady who go
to New Mexico, they go to our
our colleges which are now free
and then they leave the state
for Texas or they leave the
state for somewhere else, and I
want them to come back, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I'm
sure you, you want them to come
back to your district as well
to.
grow your district. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to the actual
Legislation, brass tacks.
Is this something that your
bill.
Is this something that's prudent
fiscal policy, and is it
something that is kind of
gambling on the future of the
state with something that we
don't know what outcomes we will
have versus something that could
cost $800 million in deficit
that we may have to raid funds.
We may have to even lower
teacher salaries to get back to
even.
Mr. Speaker. Hi, Mr. Speaker.
And gentlemen,
If
This is more fiscally prudent,
of course, because it has less
physical impact.
It's more fiscally prudent
because it comes from a fund
that is growing at a rate of at
least half a million, $500
million a year.
It is more prudent, um, because
it
Is something, it's a bite size
that we can take and that we can
assure based on the growth of
our budget.
And the revenues that come from
oil and gas.
And other extractive minerals,
primarily, and the projected
sales of those and revenues
generated from it. There, this
is not a solvent, it's, it's
absolutely certain that we can
fund this. Whereas the other
fund
In every analysis, whether it's
a 2% rate intake or whether it's
a 4% intake, whether it's an 8%
is almost immediately insolvent,
and we have to come back for
more. Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
The language in our substitute
has main language, the language
and the other substitute has
Shao language, Mr. Speaker, this
obligates and gentlemen, this
obligates us to around 20
million if we want to go on a
high end.
40 million, the other obligates
us to 800 million in as many as
5 years, and obligates future
bodies. We don't know where all
the money comes from, it's not
all identified.
And I mean, I, I guess I, I
could go on, but what I, but I
want to say in response to your
question is you mentioned the
folks who hadn't voted for you
before. Those folks are reaching
out to me too, and they'll tell
me, I disagree with you and I'll
list this whole thing. But when
it comes to paid family medical
leave, now the new name, Welcome
Child and Family Wellness Leve
Act, please vote no. Thank you
for fighting against that. Our
business has been here, business
has been there. This, I don't
have a business that called and
said yes.
But there's 500,000 that said
no. We have 2 million people in
the state.
Half of those are children or
seniors or outside the
workforce.
Who, to put that burden, this
uncertain burden burden on a
small workforce is not a way to
attract growth in New Mexico.
It's just not. And, and you said
fighting back against, I don't
feel like we're fighting back
against. I feel like we've come
to, we're proposing a compromise
in the public for the press and
the radio and the TV and the
print that is said to us, why do
you bother introducing a bill?
Why even bother? And it's
because I'm here, we're here to
do what our constituents brought
us to do. Rules are for the
minority. That's what we're here
for a lively debate, but I hope
that folks here what we're
saying.
The small business in TRC.
That has a declining enrollment
at the public school, a
declining enrollment in the
community. They're not going to
have a new customer to cover
this cost. We're putting the
burden on them.
We have the ability in $11
billion budget and a $9 billion
early childhood fund to take
that off the plate.
And we're shortening it to give
them a chance to see what it
looks like an application, and
if we can handle this with a
workforce gap that we know we
have in this state.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and I, I echo
your sentiments and I think it's
cool if like a robot comes and
delivers my food maybe, but that
scares me cause I think of that
one server who doesn't have a
job anymore.
And I think of all the other
people who would be out of jobs.
I have a, I have a buddy who
works at Walmart and they
already have all the, the, the
screening devices to check
yourself out, and there's one
person with a little iPad or
something who makes sure that
everyone is doing their job, but
all those people could have been
cashiers, and so I already see
that, that shift, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, from actual
workforce people actually on the
job doing working jobs versus
Something that's automated and
that really does concern me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and so
when we're also talking, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we talk
about economic development in
the state a lot. We talk about,
oh, we want, we want jobs to
come to New Mexico. We want to
build these beautiful buildings
we wanna create cool things and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
agree. I think we need to create
cool things. We want awesome
things to, to build upon what
we've already established in our
state from our amazing history
that and I love our our state
our state.
motto, it grows as it goes,
because I want New Mexico to
grow. I want us to prosper, Mr.
Speaker.
And I want to make sure that
those jobs in the state stay
here. And so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when it comes to the
actual trust fund that is going
to be funding this. We're not
creating a new fund because it's
already here, right? So when it
comes to these dollars and
cents.
They all matter to the working
class people and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, I heard a few
questions about how much time
Uh, it takes to
Take off and have a baby, like
paternal and maternity leave. So
Mr. Speaker, generally, uh,
maternity maternity leave and
paternity leave, sorry. So can
you tell me a little bit about
that and I know you have
experienced in early childhood.
So can you tell me a little bit
about that and how it will
benefit those folks and how is,
how is the time frame on your
legislation different than the
original bill, and can we go a
little, little more into that
for me because I'm not exactly
sure about how everything works
because maybe I'll have a kid
someday I would love to have a
child someday, but.
I want to know a little bit.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
what I heard today is best
practice is 12 weeks. And the
research says that the best
place for a child is in a
healthy home with 2 parents, 2
caring parents, and so, um, but,
but I heard, uh, the sponsor of
the bill say that 12 weeks was
their, their goal. And so this
does 6 weeks for everyone out of
the early childhood fund if
that's what we may choose to do
so as the appropriators of over
$11 billion and and hundreds of
funds. Um, and then 3 weeks.
additional if they choose to opt
in, and that does not preclude
their paid sick leave. So they
could tap on to the 9 weeks,
another 64 weeks and even go
beyond 12 weeks.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that helped me a
little bit on that and I, I
think I'm gonna continue to
listen to the debate and read
your bill, and I also just want
to reiterate that I, I do think
that what you're doing is a
compromise, and I don't
necessarily agree with
everything in, in your, in your
piece of legislation, right? I,
as, as a, as a fiscal
conservative, I'm against the
government doing just about
anything, pretty much, but when
it comes to this, I find it to
be a compromise when it comes to
something that was really bad,
that was a coercive, forcible
task.
on the poorest of the poor, and
everyone working in the state,
including employers, including
just everyday citizens who have
jobs, work hard. I have, I have
friends who can barely pay their
rent as it is right now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and it
would horrify me if those people
who work at all subs, uh, they
work at Walmart, they work at
all these great places in our
state would have to either lose
their job or they would be
significantly cut down on hours
or things like that. So it
really concerns me with the
original bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
But I certainly appreciate you
for being steadfast and working
to, to try to bridge a
compromise here, and I think
that's what this body is about.
It's about compromise, and I
think that's something that
you've done well in this
committee substitute, and I
appreciate you for bringing it
forward and for your passionate
testimony today. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. That's all the
questions I had for the good
lady.
Thank you gentlemen. There is
further debate on house floor
substitute number one, we go to
the lady from Catherine Sierra
Socorro Valencia, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind gentle lady from Sierra
Donana and Socorro yield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I yield to my
neighbor and friend.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I,
um, I wanted to make sure that,
that, you know, the body
understands that we're not
against this type of, of uh of
leave. We, we encourage Mr.
Speaker, uh.
People to take time off,
especially when they're having a
child.
So Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I, I
wanna just tell you a quick
story about, uh, an employee
that we had one time, um, that
had a was diagnosed with ALS.
And we sat down with him and,
um, as an employer.
Uh, we had another lady that
that was having pregnancy issues
we sat down with her. We had
another family that had a child
that was, was very ill.
And all of those people, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentlemen, we were
allowed as an employer to sit
down.
With them, have a conversation,
support them as much as we
possibly could.
And for the best outcomes for
their family, for themselves and
for the company.
And Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
With more and more and more
taxes implemented on New Mexico
businesses it's getting harder
and harder and harder to be able
to make that make those
decisions when these taxes are
implemented, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, does your substitute.
Would it require?
Anyone, especially workforce
solutions to hire 210 new
people.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's so scaled back it would
not.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, would it cost the
taxpayers of New Mexico $35
million just for a computer
system to be set up.
At Workforce Solutions, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, it may,
I, I can't say that it doesn't
because we remember we mirrored
the protocol, um, that was in
the much, much bigger bill. And
so it, it will have a cost to be
administrated by, by Workforce
Solutions. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, kind lady, and would
there be recurring cost and do
you have any idea what that
might be right now the estimate
for the, um, the committee
substitute would be around 25
million.
recurring
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
the cost of the substitute, um,
by year 5, according to a uh 8%
take-up rate. So if, if 8% of
the 100% of workforce who pay
into it participate, then we're
looking at 800 million or more,
and I'm sure the cost would
grow, um, I, I just can't
imagine that it doesn't. That's,
we've never had static
government program in the state
yet. This year, just on the
implication.
of, you know, the the liability
insurance, most agencies needed
huge amounts of increase for
their insurance premiums. They
needed increase for
cybersecurity, and they almost
always have at least a 4%
increase in the um in the pay
and benefits, and we're always
adding to costs. I have not seen
any agency or, um, initiative go
down in cost.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and kind
lady. Um, I agree with you. I
think that um this is a much uh
more um amenable cost for we,
that we can deal with. It's
exactly what you said earlier,
Mr. Speaker, um, kind lady, that
this is a scaled down model,
but.
But still
Promoting family.
And still promoting um uh
employees and people of
childbearing age to be able to
have uh uh a child and have some
kind of support with that. uh,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I think
most businesses, um, would do
their best and uh and on a
handshake would always honor
their a good business would
always honor their handshake.
So Mr. Speaker, kind kind lady,
um,
Who would
Who was the rules are
promulgated pretty much in your
substitute. Is that correct?
It's black and white, you know
what's going to happen. Uh,
there is no gray area, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I, I feel like it was correct
and the page 24 is somewhat a
catch all that the, the agency
can can promulgate the rules
that are needed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and kind
lady. I, um.
I just want to bring to uh the
people's attention that, um, you
know, I had an entity reach out
to me. It was a childcare
actually in Las Cruces. And, um,
and she was totally against it.
She's still totally against it.
I sent her the committee sub and
she is a, uh, child care
provider with a Spanish emergen,
um, she is Hispanic. She served
two tours in Iraq, Mr. Speaker,
kind, kind lady, and she is so
scared that this is going to put
her.
out of business because of all
the caps and the mandates that
we do on childcare, all the
rules and regulations which uh
many are needed, but many are
not in my opinion, that this is
going to put her out of business
and, and she is begging me. I'm
not her representative. She is
begging me.
To not do this.
The 500,000 plus letters that
were sent to us, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady.
Begging us not to implement
this, begging us to come up with
a solution, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and the difference is we
came up with a solution that is
um a grand idea that we still
get the, the purpose done of the
bill and that we are still
supporting families in the state
of New Mexico where not every
employer and not every employee
are bearing the burden. The
employee can can do this.
stated in your bill, so I, I
also want to bring up, uh,
Russell Hernandez.
The mayor of Massa, who
testified in our, uh, during the
interim and um he also owns um.
Salud, salud de demasia.
And he begged us, he, he
testified in front of us and
said please do not do this. My
business will shut down, Mr.
Speaker, kind gentle lady, and I
said to him at that meeting.
I said I will always say
remember Russell Hernandez, if I
could, Mr. Speaker, kind gentle
lady, I would hold up this
picture so everyone would
remember his face because he
begged us to not do this to him.
And so many businesses have
begged us to not do this to
them.
And not only businesses, Mister
Speaker, kind lady.
Employees.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, they've
stood up and said,
I need that $1.
I don't take my dollar for gas
to get to work.
So Mr. Speaker, kind lady.
I
Just want you to know that I
appreciate.
Your committee substitute. I
appreciate, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, that we are bringing
solutions, not just saying no.
We are bringing actual solutions
and Mr. Speaker, kind lady, uh.
Your sub for.
House floor substitute for house
commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 11 would not be
the biggest tax increase in the
state of New Mexico as the other
one is.
We are not doing this for New
Mexico.
On the, on the original bill, we
are doing this to New Mexico.
And ultimately, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, I hope everyone in
here supports your sub so that
we're not crushing.
Business in the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady gentle lady, lady
from Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker, this
matter having been under
consideration for 3 hours, I
moved to close debate. There's
been a motion to close the
debate. All those in favor by
saying a.
Opposing 8.
The eyes have it. The debate is
now closed.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move the table
house for a substitute for house
commerce and economic
development substitute for House
Bill 11. We have a tabling
motion.
On house floor substitute number
one for house commerce and
economic development Committee
substitute for House Bill 11, a
vote of yes and the substitute
bill would have been tabled, he
would have known and we are back
on the substitute.
32nd clock. The vote is now
open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 40 in the affirmative, 29 in
the negative house floor
substitute for house commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 11 has been tabled.
gentle lady from Santa Fe Los
Alamos. Yes, ma'am. I don't get
to close.
We we just tabled the
substitute.
Gent lady from Los Alamos Santa
Fe, Sandoval. Um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I do move that house
commerce economic development
committee substitute for House
Bill 11 do now pass. We are on
final passage of house commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for Bill
11. The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 38 in the affirmative, 31 in
the negative. House commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 11 has
duly passed this House.
Before we continue to the next
item, will the gentle lady lift
the call the house.
Mr. Speaker, I lift the call.
Right. The call has been lifted.
Gentle lady from Sandoval, are
you ready?
An item number 13.
Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, yes, the record reflect that
all action has served for
replacing House Bill 238 and
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you. I'm introducing House
Bill 238. This is um a bill
relating to public schools
allowing up to 60 instructional
hours per school year to be used
for professional work hours for
middle and high school grades
this will align in middle and
high school professional work
hours with elementary and I also
have an expert Lauren
Hatchirrean of Public Schools
general council here in case we
have any questions. There is
debate, gentlemen from Otero
Rosenator B block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind gentle lady from Sandoval,
please yield.
Yes, I.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So this is very
awesome that you get to debate a
bill first time on the floor,
your bill, I'm very excited for
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I wouldn't let you get away
with it without getting a couple
of questions in. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I do have
a few questions. Can you tell me
a little bit about how this.
How this helps teachers when it
comes to professional hours and
what does it do to give more
flexibility to them.
Uh thank you.
So this will allow um,
Them for professional work
hours, it allows them to be able
to do home visitings, parent
teacher conferences, educator
educator training and
professional, uh, development,
mentorship, coaching and
collaboration between school
employees, which is embedded
within the school.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and so currently is
it, where do they get those
those hours from currently?
For professional development.
Well, currently they have um I'm
sorry, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, sorry.
Um, thank you. They are
currently at 30 for middle
school and high school teachers
they currently have them
embedded in the school day.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and I did see
something on the FIR that it
will have a fiscal impact of
about $85 million Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that going to be
built in the budget or can you
tell me a little bit about that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
actually the FIR goes to 0 and
then it goes on up from there.
So we expect how it is done
right now, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that it is actually
embedded into the school day
right now, so right now there is
no additional costs because
we're not extending it. However,
if Mr. Speaker Angeline, if they
want to extend the days that's
where the additional costs to
come.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that, that did help
me on that. And then when, when
it comes to the SCG, does this
change any of those SCG
allocations when it comes to the
state equalization guarantee and
gentlemen, um, no, it does not.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then, uh, one
of my last questions, will
schools need additional staff or
technology to track and report
these professional work hours or
is it just gonna be the same
systems currently?
I'm sorry, could Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, could you repeat
that? I didn't hear that. Oh,
you bet. Well, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, will they need
any additional software
resources in to to have to track
these hours of professional
development. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, no.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I appreciate the
answers. I just had a few of
those from folks in my district
that I wanted to get to them.
So, uh, thanks for bringing
forward the bill and uh.
Good luck.
Yeah, there's for the young lady
from Berlin and Torres,
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Sandoval
County, please yield. Speaker
and kind lady, can I say no?
You can, but I wouldn't
recommend it, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
It's for your kind lady, of
course, yelled, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is this your first
bill ever to be hitting the
House floor.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, yes,
it is. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady did it pass unanimously in
two houses?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, yes.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
just briefly tell me about how
awesome your bill is.
Miss
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, it is
very awesome. This will align
the middle school and high
school teachers having the same
hours as they do in elementary.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this may be my shortest
questioning ever, but I couldn't
let you pass without getting
some questions and so
congratulations on bringing your
first bill to the House floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seeing
no further debate, the generally
to close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 238 do now pass. are on
final passage of House Bill 238,
the vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 238 has
passed his house.
Congratulations on your first
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady to sing or rap.
Yes.
OK, this is scary. Mr. Speaker,
so somehow, um, I was joking
around with somebody and somehow
you got wind of it and um so I
Reluctantly agreed that I will
be doing this, but however, I'm
going to make representative
Hernandez come up here with me.
So,
because it was Sky who uh let
you know the webcast will hear
us.
The webcast lives forever.
OK, mister, OK, Mr. Speaker, um,
I guess here we go, so this is
just the course because we
otherwise we'd probably get in
trouble for the rest of it, so,
all right, you ready?
OK.
This is bad, OK?
I'm Slim Shady, yes, I'm the
real shady and all this shady
are the same,
so one with the real slim she
just stand up, please stand up,
please stand up
because I'm so ha.
And it's a just imitating to
walk around slam, please stand
up stand up
please.
Well, now we know who the real
Slim Cheney is.
Gin lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports ordered clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
revenue Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 19 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house taxation
revenue Committee subs for House
Bill 19 do pass, respectfully
submitted.
Mikaya, Lara Kadena for Derek
Jaylin the chair.
Mr. Speaker, please move
adoption.
We're an adoption and
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 19 as amended, but a
favorable committee report on
house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 19 as amended. All those in
favor signify by saying aye.
I suppose nay, yes, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 298 has had it under
consideration report saying his
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Deanna Johnson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of favorable committee
report in House Bill 298. All
those in favor say aye.
I suppose nay, the report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 444 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that house government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 444 do pass and it's
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Do you
Wanda Johnson, chair, move
adoption. We're an adoption of
an unfavorable committee report
on House Bill 444, but a
favorable committee report of
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House 444. All
those in favor of.
Casino.
I suppose, yeah, I have it be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 31 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted D. Wanda Johnson,
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We are on adoption of favorable
committee report and House
Memorial 31. All those in favor
seen by say 9.
Obosna, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Union Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Memorial 37 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectful
submitted Dewana Johnson chair.
Ruga Dobson.
We're adoption of a favorable
committee report of House bill
of House Memorial 37. All those
in favor 5 by say I.
I suppose,
the report adopted.
You a lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 31 as amended
with emergency clause, Senate
Bill 143 as amended and requests
the concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhans Senate chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 128.
Senate Bill 158.
Senate Bill 345 and request the
concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 101 as
amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansen a chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Los Alamos Sandoval and Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
House Judiciary Committee will
meet 15 minutes after the
conclusion of the floor session,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 3:30 in
room 307.
gentle lady from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. House Commerce
will meet at 3:30 and 3:17.
gentle lady from Berlinvaninarnu
with
announcement.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, please
come and get your dance on.
100 bill party at the rail yards
at 6:30.
Be there or be SpongeBob Square
Pants.
Gentlemen from Lincoln not that
or are you gonna get your dance
on?
I am a smooth dancer, Mister
Speaker. I'm not gonna lie. But
Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to,
um, and I do plan on going to
that party if I can get there.
I, uh, just wanted to mention
that the pins that were on your
desks.
They were, that was a little bit
of a mistake and representative
uh Matthews was gonna apologize
for that, and I told her there's
no need for an apology. I'm glad
everybody got the pin, but then
some rumors started to fly that
maybe the racetrack had been
sold to Albuquerque and Miss
Matthews or representative
Matthews was supporting that. So
there, it was just a mistake.
There is no problem. We hope you
enjoy the pins and, and I still
do like the racetrack. I'm not
against them, so it's all good.
Thank you. I am very confused.
But we'll take y'all's words for
it.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just
wanted to remind folks about the
event that we're having on
Sunday, March, uh, Sunday at one
o'clock at the Violet Crown
Theater, um, as I mentioned,
it's a film called First We Bomb
New Mexico. Many of you all have
met Tina Cordova, who's been
organizing Downwinds for many
years now, um, we haven't had a
ton of RSVPs and I know that
RSVPs aren't something that we
do these days, but it's really
freaking out, Tina. Um, she
really wants you all to show up.
1 o'clock on on Sunday at the
Violet Crown, and so I hope you
can make it. Thank you.
Members take note any other
announcements. I've got one
announcement, um,
In consultation with both
leaders. House Bill 347 was
written in yesterday and
referred to the House Education
Committee, the House
Appropriations, I am dropping
the House education referral and
instead referring it to House
Health and Human Services
Committee. So now the referrals
for house about 347 should read
House and Health House Health
and Human Services followed by
house appropriations and
finance.
Uh, House Bill 347.
Uh, referred to house health and
house appropriations.
See an objection that is
ordered.
Not barring the confusion up
here, see no objection to
disorder, gentle lady from
Donana. Mr. Speaker, the
consumer and Public Affairs will
not be meeting tomorrow.
Members take note.
Right. Members, thank you for a
productive day, um, we will be
meeting tomorrow on the floor at
one o'clock after committees
concluded their work. General
lady from Berlio, Mr. Speaker,
I, I, I don't believe we've had
a joke yet if anybody has a
joke.
Somebody's slacking.
Gentlemen from Sandoval with a
joke.
Are you talking to me?
00, saved by the bell, gentlemen
from San Juan.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
what do you call Johnny Cash's
grandson.
What do you call Johnny Cash's
grandson, what do you call him,
his gentleman?
Johnny Bitcoin.
Uh
Uh, it's pretty good.
Good work, gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Uh, I'm gonna try another joke
if that's OK, Mr. Speaker. It's
a space joke since the planets
are all aligning tonight. I
think you guys want to see that
30 minutes after sunset. Pretty
amazing, won't happen until 2040
again, so pretty important. So,
Mr. Speaker,
How do you get a baby astronaut
to sleep?
How gentle lady?
You rock it.
Hm
Got competition.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until 1
p.m. tomorrow. The resciss until
one o'clock tomorrow. Be safe
tonight.
