House district forty six in
northern centre county we are
also home to for sovereign
public.
Good afternoon representative
liz thompson house district
twenty four which is the near
northeast of alba kirky
including up town and window.
Hi everyone my name is and
helicopter will be all and I
serve district thirty five which
is a downtown last crucial
historic historical districts in
moscow's and all the surrounding
traditional neighborhoods.
Yes
good morning afternoon good
afternoon everyone i'm represent
him stepped me lord I am now in
berlin county and torrents
county founder program women in
here.
Thank you madame chairman state
representative john blackhouse
district fifty one in beautiful
terror county my district is
pretty much the city limits of
alamo cordo and i'm really
really blessed to be here
representing the great white
sands as well as all the good
things that we have going on
down back home which I miss and
we love our guns we live our
second amount rates and we
absolutely love our constitution
absolutely so thank you madame
chairman great to be here thank
you after god bless.
Thank you let it represent joint
ferrari house district thirty
seven and lost crucials and i'd
like our staff.
Good afternoon my name is sheral
bush on the committee assistant
for the consumer in public
affairs committee this is my
second you are doing this it's
i'm happy to be here and help
out the committee members and I
live in santa fe.
The.
The.
Next we'll take a roll call.
Yeah.
Representative.
Present representative lord.
Representative of ramaro.
Representative thompson here.
Vice chair madam rubio yeah
edit madam chair for
we have a quote that insurer.
Ill we're going to hear is house
build twenty seven extreme risk
protection order changes.
The.
Good afternoon metal sharing
committee were happy to be here
where the sponsors myself show a
guaranteed representative of
christine chamber we're
presenting on the house consumer
and public of fairs committee
substitute for house built
twenty seven the extreme risk
firearm protection order act
changes and after this will
abbreviate it by both as expert
witnesses today we have chief
depending attorney general james
gray son from the department of
justice and commander met desire
he's with the albacurky police
department crisis intervention.
A division.
So the report act was signed
until all by the governor four
years ago and february twenty
fifth twenty twenty in the
nearly four years that it's been
in stout shoe this law has
allowed immediate family members
and others close to individuals
to see an urban petition when
they fear that an individual
opposed significant danger of
causing imminent personal injury
to sell for others with the fire
aren't.
The changes that were putting
forth in house bill twenty seven
today come from requests of law
enforcement officers judges
district attorneys helped
professionals and others who
have actually used the statute
or try to use it and have
identified amendments needed to
clarify it this is a civil
proceeding and without
alternative mike over to
representative chamber
we
fail to take a motion because
you have a community committee
subsid.
Second okay thank you.
Okay we'll take.
We have to accept the committee
subst.
This is.
Yeah.
Representative.
No
representative lord
now
representative ramaro yes
representative times them yes
madam buys chair rubio yes.
Madame chair ferraro yes.
Okay
forty two for a discussion on
your committee substitute.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chair I will be
brief we we recognize that the
discussion today is not about
the original purpose and i'm
scope of the original urbo bill
but it is to hear do address the
specific changes that we are
proposing I would know that
um these changes are derived
from the behalf of many law
enforcement officials across the
state.
And as um the introduction
previously made it notes we have
two of them here today with us
t.
I'm only going to highlight to
the changes that are contained
in the committee substitute and
those are the more significant.
The others I would category
categorize largely as technical
and clean up um language the
first change to who can.
And there has been some
confusion that has arisen in the
courts where in at least one
district court concluded that
law enforcement may not be a
referring party in there for
could not initiate the process
of removing firearms when the
person poses a risk.
We wanted to clarify that point
and we did so in th.
The second change I wanted to
note for you madam chair and
committee is the forty eight
hour provision.
Uhm for reasons that are unclear
to me the original bill allowed
the person who is subject to
either the temporary to the
temporary order or clearly the
permanent in order to provide to
relinquish the guns for the
eight hours after receiving the
order to do so.
Um this um frankly poses a
threat to lawn forces and
possibly others because it gives
opportunity for that individual
who may be a threat to himself
for others to act on those
impulses so it provides a
process for a lot of enforcement
to retrieving those uhm guns
those those arms immediately
after.
So those were the I think the
most significant substantive
points madam chair and without
will stay o.
Is there anything you would like
to add if I may madam chair.
Mr.
Madame chair members of the
committee might have james grace
and and the cheap deputy at the
department of justice.
And the torment of just.
Substitute for house bill twenty
seven and we believe this bill
makes important clarifications
to the.
Oh madam chair members of the
committee i'm bad util i've run
the christmas mention division
for the operator police
department that generally minced
mental health and we've used a
slot about thirty times over the
last few years I really want to
highlight a couple changes that
will really make the job easier
in terms of getting these filed
the first is that reporting
party clarification.
Of the thirty week file.
All but two have not had an
outside reporting party.
I think their several reasons
for that not just using their
family members the people close
to them.
The the backlash those people
would have to face for filling
one of these could be pretty
substantial.
So the reporting party is long
enforcement would be huge if we
could get that done the next is
a twenty four seven judge
availability we have had cases
where we get a call and friday
night and we can not fill for an
extremely fire and protection
order until the next monday I
think we can all see how that is
a huge problem.
Those are two changes that would
make law enforcements job easier
to keep people safe and I urge
you.
This.
And with that we stand for a
questions.
Thank you first will go to the
audience for those in opposition
and i.
Those who are in opposition if
you don't necessarily wanna
speak but in we want to show
your opposition to raise your
hand.
And those who are signed.
The.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay so you can stand and speak
from wherever you are anthony
sugar.
You were signed up to speak in
opposition is that right
correct.
And one minute
for everyone so the weekend.
I don't.
My around with the new mexico
association.
Arguing for generation
thirty five.
I stand in my position for a
hospital forty seven it's a
controversial bill
amongst legal experts and
general public.
The postage force that the
authority to obtain a search
warn for civil orders without
the necessary.
Having a price.
This is an abdorable expensive
police powers and has raised
serious concerns about the
potential violations of where
the constitutional right.
Threat worse with the ability to
obtain such working without
evidence of a private activity
I determined the protection is
trying to force a moment of the
US
language in the bill
provide clear guidance as well
as the issue of such more
leaving the door open or
potential.
And
I like to also keep your
finance.
The.
Afternoon chair
yes
should not be considered as
the legislator ledges like short
as for suicide in the past
mexico thirty dash two dash
four.
Problems
not the additional law
and medical personnel which is
not.
Officers legal action will this
yeah
not conviction which are most
processed in order thank you
i'm sure it will be.
Thank you times and next we have
terra lica.
Yeah.
This madam chair committee
members terrible with the
national rifle association in
opposition house bill twenty
seven we have concerns about law
enforcement officers being both
the recording party and the
petitioner for bill we feel this
would remove oversight
personality and process and
potentially increase the risk
for abuse of such borders.
The committee said it would
moves any requirement that the
officer even receive credible
information from a recording
party and requires them to file
an
overall cost to believe someone
danger this all I was long
forced to initiate process and
five passed the reporting party
steps in the process another
concern wise with the removal of
the forty eight hour surrender
provision and the requirement
that a responded immediately
surrender fires this would all
but the option of them to a
federal firm's licensee and
force them to surround with them
to unforce that.
Okay next is
jim gillman.
Yeah.
Madame chair my name is
remoteable speed i've been a
health care professional for
over thirty years I served
understood rural areas uninsured
underinsured a marginalized
population i'll be the first one
to tell you that people there
are people that who do not need
weapons of any.
But they have the same rights
should not be the target certain
demographics such as place
american indian and hispanic
mails because those are the
people that statistically are
listed as the most likely to
make a home saturday suicide by
every town research.
We need to carefully consider an
address that underlying causes
such as middle disabilities
illness p t s d poverty and
other contributing factors this
bill is one needs to be taken
back and rewritten the law is
written in over reaching broad
and safeguards for the accused.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you madame chair
representatives.
Regarding.
This is another minor incursion
into you
and in french med on our
constitutional rights.
The big picture is that we have
an incursion on our border.
I've untold.
Size the mention military.
Then primarily.
And it is the wrong time even
six years.
Any disarmament.
Are defensive weapons amongst
the few patriots actually you
know where is going on and
understand.
We put a name face to reporter
military it is more some dog.
Excuse me can you keep it to the
build them.
Can you keep your comments to
the bill
this relates to that because of
this bill passes.
You will have the immediate
ability.
Did this arm anyone perhaps
appear.
As myself also know as a
domestic
thank you I hope you understand
thank you
next we have the annual.
Okay
I I
contradicting laws because the
first is
one of the specials in new
mexico it's our prohibition.
This is reflect was allowed to
see the problem prior to a
criminal convention.
This
provision on civil action
prevents the state from season
property on the property budget.
What their passions
are principle.
I I hate to see it if you can
not simultaneously
in favor of this law and and he
opposed.
The.
It just seems like our
legislative house is to be.
Is expanding on the buildings
trying to expand over the
promotes.
Yeah.
Yeah you hear me yes you can
hear you
why did it please okay yes
ma'am.
The constitution gives us the
right
to be protected from a little.
Yes it's patrick now.
Oh i'm sorry patrick married I
live in albert.
Thank you the constitution gives
us the right other people to be
secure in the person's houses in
papers and effects against the
reasonable searches and cheeses
and I shall not be violated red
flag laws are a violation of a
constitutional rates and they
also don't work your city
chicago
all the gun violence occurs in
areas that have laws like these
plus these laws can be abused
what they can do is is they
could go ahead and make it till
that people who have not been
convicted of a crime can have
their property season where does
it stop our next week to decide
people can have changes people
can't be allowed to drive
vehicles this is just giving
government too much power to
abuse the people we know that
they don't work and we know that
they don't make places safer but
what they do do is they make
plus more at risk from
government to hear them thank
you.
State your name and also.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee need asking
here on behalf of over seventeen
hundred members is the rifle and
pistol club and the album area
of the concerns are at the core
about basic civil liberties and
do process farms policy touches
the issue but is a notice core
the rule of discretion from
courts on page seven a still
raises issues in the committee
sub our section four three which
represent channel settle still
in mandate that a court order
the target of an orpo relinquish
is the fire this can't be
complied with the castle in the
stake one that's all too easy to
make in the game probable cost
telephone where the respondent
may or may not actually have a
gun if they can't produce wonder
a linguish they will necessarily
be held in contempt and thrown
in jail indefinitely I don't
think this comports with any of
our sense of justice thank you
matcher.
Yeah.
The.
The next person please state
your name.
And you have one minute.
The.
Hello
my own yes
my name is poble martinez i'm
from galved in mexico a member
of the public the sunny public.
I just wanted to say a few
simple things about this
I believe i'm constitutional
bill and law that has been put
in the place
the overreaching and outright
own constitutional seizure
property
replacing the process with here
said it is it's just a
tremendous infringement on our
rights in our constitutional
rises second amendment you guys
all know that and you need to
please take a step back and
realize what you go on near your
chip in a way at our rights and
and people I wish people would
stand up more for them and would
be there in person I wish I was
there in person as well but go
back to what we
always lose are based upon the
constitution which he teaches
you to get back to
taking our rights and doing your
job thank you.
Opposition if you could keep
your comments directed.
The.
Okay
are you hearing me okay
okay jim gardening silver city I
just want to reiterate with the
other folks said around due
process it seems like the
immediate seizure doesn't allow
for due process
so I would like it considered
maintaining at least the forty
eight hour clause I think that
exists now.
Yeah.
We'll go to the audience for
those who are in support.
Of the bill if you just want a
region.
And.
Nine people who would like to
speak and we'll start with
kathleen mostly.
Members of the committee.
My name is kathy mosley
community health nurse for
thirty years here in.
And I would like to just note
that my professor in public
health was killed in a mass
shooting professor cleary is a
picture of her.
She was very well complex in her
shooter died by suicide.
One of her favorite prices was
the best predictor of future
performance is passed
and this was by a study by duke
university shows that there is
one life saving for every ten to
twenty six issue.
Um.
I have had the opportunity to
help with community awareness
about this bill with detecting
maxwell from a pds crisis
intervention unit and I we've
always outlined all the due
processes available in he has
in particular said this would
much help utilize
thank you.
Next week
alicia.
Yeah.
Hi abolicio terrible with the
new mexico's procedures for
justice.
Um.
I am here to speak with the
families the victims of homicide
and bill because I believe that
it would have instance you
become more common
everyone always says after it
happens if they sold signs the
things like this would ever have
been and I feel like if this
bill was in the effect we could
probably on these signs before
they do have them thank you.
Thank you.
Next is chris.
Michelle.
And chair and reserve the house
committee I can hear a represent
the alliance for the violent
solutions and we are claims to
see the changes which will.
Protecting process.
Through the judges
of the cases while.
And because we know law
enforcement knows the criminals
who are most likely to be
dangerous
i'm not worried about a mistake
a police state occurred.
Thank you.
Yes.
Rena
so i'm
actually we've seen how file
extreme rise protection
has been about again since we
have a two thousand twenty now
have unique opportunity to
expand on the current law and
further in power off to help
those in crisis and save lives
thank you for voting to pass
them.
Next week I think uh.
Manager
thank you for cannot
hopefully
see this epidemic of that mexico
continue to program for eleventh
is a way to be considered a
pretty spread of the high school
myself receiving school we can
learn driving people that we
can.
Here i'm terrible.
The.
Chair numbers.
The alliance for good violent
solutions.
The.
Yeah.
The.
Thank you manager and members of
the committee i'm very nature
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters new mexico and
also as a member of the alliance
for gun while solutions
and we really appreciate all the
work that it's gone into proving
we have a huge problem in the
mexico as we've heard
many people working on
along with the sponsor to
experts want it under issue.
And we really approved the
provisions that are and the
member.
And I want to just clarify here
that the is not seizure.
Yeah yes it is worth in this
temporary british life
when there's credible fear of
violence prices when there's
domestic violence or there is
somebody's
really do have to make sure that
we're clear about
your support.
Thank you
and then we have just.
Review and members of the
committee finding is also a
community leader I have a kid
from the west side
and working together
organized
representative on the west side
on august twenty sixth.
We had over any people
and what was the top issue that
was conversation with gun
violence.
Teachers and students report
violence on campus in your
neighborhood
that's learning and living
safely at home.
House twenty seven with media
bunfishment will say lives on
behalf of west like new members
who took two hours saturday to
share the concerns I for the
past house twenty seven for this
committee this type of action.
Yes.
Sorry.
Madame
let's start.
The application members of the
committee my new
school
compliance were one hundred
percent support house to twenty
seven we've spent the past two
years to training
health professionals and
domestic violence advocates and
we identify while we are
training those hundreds of
people that there were problems
desperately the way to make it
work better in addition to that
also something that actually is
an art set forty eight hours
it's going to get somebody and
saw somebody for was given it
forty eight hours to get rid of
that home on what is that person
hours
it's an extremely peace part of
this legislation that we need
to.
Could you repeat your name
of the president of the mexicans
thank you madame chair and
packs.
And I think for me the saving
point is that these changes were
proud by people on the front
lines
mental health.
The.
If they are bringing
suggestions
means about good luck with the
making even the more effective.
Think I would check the member
side often with the sample
center
do you women experiencing
domestic violence and peace on
forty eight hours or something
very strongly about considering
a half sports
and and
whether they have time to get
their weapons to be only number
continuing to go hunting without
those guns being wished so you
do know that some people with
that window will try to get
around the system
I trouble support.
I'm soon if you could please st.
Yeah.
Go here.
Okay this is my name is regina
greek oh i'm
standard action survivor
membership lead and i've
speaking out in favor of the
airport changes I believe that
this is going to expedite things
when people are in crisis and I
believe the officers have the
opportunity to know when a
particular situation is going to
escalate and I asked to believe
that a mistake if made can be
remedied fairly quickly and so I
am in in adamant support of the
article changes they've been
very effective in the limited
use they had.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes my name is mary garcia I am
the managing a policy director
at the mexico coalition against
domestic violence we stand and
strong the part of house bill
twenty seven and the improved
provisions that have been
brought forth by those who are
actually doing the work and
issuing these orders and finding
the loopholes to increase
survivor safety and our
community so we standard support
of this for all survivors of
intimate partner balance on
behalf of our thirty two program
statewide.
Thank you.
The.
Next.
And there my name is lazar's
letter and then with the every
town survivors network I believe
the attack that I suffered would
have been previous answered had
twenty seven proposed changes to
urban benefit fact as I live
with the trauma and memory of
darging eight bullets I hope the
committee passed as these
revisions that know new mexican
experiences what I did and that
we all have the right to live
peacefully thank you.
Yeah.
I'm sorry
Um
next we'll go to the committee
with.
Representative and i'd like to
do as many
comments is concise offer there
are questions is concise is
possible and also and to go
there
the changes.
We have
it on the close cast but where
she sitting she can't see it
how you
doing
who would be willing to trade
with her sorry
that's also
yes thank you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Okay
madam chairman and thank you
after coming up today to
give your opinion
madame chairman
representative tandler
representative gear it and
experts.
I will just start just by going
through the whole bill with the
questions I have that i've
marked up here so madame
chairman representative
representative chandler experts
a minute start on section two on
page two.
Of the new bill I have the new
bill i'm just going to confirm
with the committee that it's the
correct to a two number it ends
in four five four point two
that's when we're looking at
that's correct public manager
thank you madam chairman thank
you for that.
Okay so on the section two here
madame chairman I see on I
believe it starts online six and
it goes through line nine.
It talks about where a petition
or a red flag protection order
is filed some madam chairman I
see the struck out language says
in the county in which the
respondent residents but the new
language here says the petition
is for an extreme risk fire in
protection order where it is
filed in district court so
madame chairman i'm just
wondering does that court have
to be within the same county
where the the individual
oversights or candy file it in a
different county let's just say
if i'm i'm in no terrible
county.
I helped her professional in
less you say donate and
accounting wants to.
Make this complaint and fill
this order can they do it and
done and a county or must they
do this in terror county where I
live madame chairman.
Madame terrified understand the
question.
The respondent returned resides
and oatero county and in the
petition can be filed where in
the district court where in our
terror county for certain um if
the conduct occurred outside of
oatio county it could be filed
in with the district court that
covers that county.
I've covered your question madam
chair.
And madame sure representative
it's on page four section three
a b and c it's for safe.
And and manager I may correct a
premise that was in the original
question there's no reference to
a red flag
the reference is to temporary
extreme risk.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that answer
I will.
So can you can you give me a
short acronim so I don't say the
whole thing manager i'm happy to
say extreme risk by around
potatoes in order five hundred
times but they may not be as
judicial said with as we'd like
manager madam chair I appreciate
your interest in being.
I would use the term and we I
all understand that to me
extreme r.
Okay so not per
cause there is fire i'm in there
right I got that okay okay thank
you madame chairman
i'm good run the same pattern so
madame chairman of
representative thank you for
that for pointing me to page
four on that I will look at that
in a moment but still here on
page two.
I'm wondering madame chairman
represented hand the
representative of gerry.
It says on mine fourteen c here
fire means any weapon that's
what the former language said
now it's as a weapon so do we
know why we where we change that
vernacular
to two letters are manag.
Better english manager
representative.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative for.
Clarifying have poorly written
the first bill was appreciated
that madame chairman
representative.
I will continue here on.
Am I seventeen d health care
professional.
We're talking about anyone.
I believe under the medical now
practice act
etc etc until line
when twenty five on page two
that correct so anyone who's
under that jurisdiction can be
the individual who is
making a report or reporting is
that correct madame turn.
Madam chair i'm not sure
understand the question the
definition and speaks for itself
a health care professional means
a person licensed by the state
to provide medical or mental
health care services pursuant to
and there are numerous license
act six
interact.
So i'm not sure what what you're
referring to in terms of anyone
the person would have for it to
be qualified as a health care
professional under this law
madam chair would have to me.
Paragraph.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that
representative channel
but underneath paragraph d you
have subsub sections here that
say one two three four five and
six.
So for example madam chairman.
Is this only limited to folks
who have very knowledge of this
individual's personal health
including their mental and
behavioral health or can this be
any kind of physician who is
licensed or any kind of medical
professional not even a
physician who is licensed under
these acts for example let's
just say someone.
Let us there in my county let's
just go back to terror county
list just the i've i've made an
enemy of the pediterrance in
town madame chairman.
Okay the foot doctor doesn't
like me okay listing or whatever
so madame chairman if the food
doctor doesn't like me they are
licensed they could potentially
file this complaint is that
correct manager.
Me five may report.
Yeah.
That police officer.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you representative and I
know you're an attorney so.
I asked I just learned though
can I can a pediatrist make this
complaint or listen let's not go
with productors let's just say a
nutritionist can a nutrition is
to his license under these acts.
Technically if they have
probable cause filed this report
that's all i'm asking madame
chairman.
Madam chair.
Replacement it is.
I do not know if a pediatric or
a nutrition asked is an
individual who qualifies under
the side six sided acts I
believe they are not
so I the premise behind your.
Think amount chairman thank you
for that representative well I
would I would assume medical
practice act your medical
practitioner a medical practice
or would have to be certified
and that could include a
nutritionist or if the diteriors
so there is validity behind the
question so madame chairman I
will continue because obviously
we're not going to get an answer
to this today unfortunately but
I will continue here
in share and management I did
not ask a question thank you
manager.
For the rules of the house.
I'm i'm still i'm still asking
questions I just did not have a
question
thank you manager.
So continuing here madame
chairman i'll go to page three
blank two.
We say long forcement agency
means the police department of
the stricken languages be the
city or town.
Now we're adding minister
paletti or university madam
chairman representatives can you
please give me specific cases at
UNM
and miss you western new mexico
university eastern mexico
university and any college in
the state in new mexico where we
have had a need for this as
we're calling madame chairman.
Um madame chair i'll defer to
maybe mister.
Representative block I am not
aware of a single incident
involved in the university
directly however.
There have been times when the
university police have turned
over information two p d because
the person who they are
concerned about resides in our
jurisdiction.
Okay thank you madame chairman
and thank you for that mister
expert I forget your name can
you please restate it for miss
way referred to you is more than
mixed mister madita
thank you mister dieze so
with these these cases that
you've dealt with.
Can you give me a ball park of
how many your department is had
since we have enacted the.
The previous law that was
originally enacted madame
chairman
better share representative
block with file thirty in my
division alone i'm the entire of
those thirty have been after the
previous attorney generals
opinion that line forcement
can't file prior to that we had
not failed a single one because
we did not have any reporting
parties on cases that we were
considering filing on.
Thank you madame but regarding
the university it was around
thirty with evidence that
correct this is total filings
across the board cross the board
including university okay thank
you medicare.
Okay.
What we're going to the next
page quickly we could ask
thank you madame chairman.
Continuing on page four.
I'm just gonna go to the bottom
the page here it says line
twenty three b the respondents
conduct gave rise to the facts
supporting the petition so.
I don't see many clear details
of what these the conduct may
have been can you just flash out
a little bit for me madame
chairman what kind of evidence
needs to be presented with this
new portion of the law.
To get the facts that are
necessary to present for the
case madame chairman.
The representatives.
Representative block in every
filing that we have had as law
enforcement in october it's
always been a threat to someone
else.
Or a threat of suicide that in
dangers another person the
example that i'm going to give
is we had an individual just we
failed upon who.
Was threatening suicide firing
rounds outside of his home.
And telling his girlfriend that
if if you know the police show
up we're going to take everybody
down
police went out they did go
ahead and file charges on
negative use of a harmet over
weapon.
But.
The girlfriend had been
basically security taking away
his firearms because she was
scared of him and so when we
failed upon him they returned
with four rifles in a hand gun
that he wasn't even aware that
he had because he was so deep
into that cycle is a cycle.
So.
Generally when we file it's
going to be a threat to someone
else but suicide can be a reason
to fi.
Thank you madame chairman and
that's thank you for that answer
so.
So let's just say the medical
report that we're going to get
from any medical person even if
they they deal with feet or
whatever
madame chairman with this would
just have to have this detailed
facts of evidence with time
stamps of the times dates that
this person made these threats.
The.
Is that is that kind of what
we're looking for and a medical
report that we're adding to this
bill madame chairman.
Madam chair representative block
we aren't going to receive time
stamped
this statement was made on on
this you know hour of the day
we're gonna get a very general
report from that provider that
essentially says this person
came in my office they made this
statement they they said this
thing about this firearm with
this person.
And that's going to be the
extent of our petition now when
this goes to court when it goes
for judicial review that
provider is going to be in the
courtroom to provide that kind
of my new show of what exactly
happened and where it happened
in that first hand knowledge.
Our petition in that situation
is more of a support to get him
into that quarte.
Some adam chairman.
Experts so we're not going to do
all the fact finding.
Manager better share
representative block.
Every single petition that we
have filed has had some
background work done by the
police department to determine
you know this is person have a
history beyond this event there
is a one off thing
in all of her filings there have
been previous events necessarily
of over violence but things kind
of indicating that they're
heading in this direction.
My division has the ability to
do home visits just a kind of
talk to people get an idea of
where they're at.
That's not necessarily
condeplated in the light or in
every single jurisdiction but
when we file we generally talk
to them for see if they're
willing to speak with us.
Okay thank you madame chairman
so we talked about.
Some kind of history.
What if less you say somebody
lost their job and they had
their their angry with the world
and they have no men no history
whatsoever medical or criminal.
And this is the first time that
they've even made some some kind
of statements such as this would
they then under this.
Provision that we're talking
about right now would they
qualify for this
matter.
Manager representative block we
have filed several earth pose in
that exact situation the last of
her of employment is a major
crisis factor to push someone
toward an act of violence or
some kind of other crisis.
The.
Okay thank you madame chairman
thank you for that and i'm sure
that might have kicked up with
other lockdowns that we had in
the state
madame chairman representatives
I will go down to page.
Six.
The.
So madam chairman
representatives I see here that
we're saying the word.
Probable.
Online too after when an officer
has probable caused.
But then on the next page I see
here on.
It's seven line sixteen.
It says good cars are these two
different occurrences and could
you just clarify for me why we
have changed one from probably
though one is good madam chair.
Madame I will ask mister.
Made of chair representative the
first instance of probably
caused
the standard that is necessary
for filing a petite that is the
standard.
The standard on seven line
sixteen is a standard for making
an oral.
Of a written petition the
following day.
Thank you madame chairman and
this is just to pick you back on
that question so.
Can you just give me i'm not an
attorney so I don't know the
difference between probable and
good can you just give me a.
Rudimentary introduced to what
the difference between probable
and good our madam chairman.
Madam chair representative block
the standard for probable causes
well defined is reasonable
grounds.
Under the law.
The standard good cause is not
as well defined but it is
something less.
Okay so thank you madame
chairman so good cause is okay
to start the process but we need
probable cars to.
Have a successful orpo is that
correct.
Madam chair representative block
that is incorrect causes
necessary to initiate the
process probable causes.
If that petition is filed
in writing then the goods cause
standard doesn't apply it off if
the officer has good cars to
make the filing orally and this
goes back to the commander's
point.
The petition cannot be made
then that's when the good cause
standard would apply it does not
apply at all to
the standards with an issue
thank you madame chairman and
thank you for that answer so.
Just to be crystal clear when
you if it's a verbal it's good.
Correct.
Madame share representative
lock.
It is good cause to make the
petition orally.
The petition that has made
orally must be supported by
horrible cars as stated on page
six line to.
So probably cause it always the
standard.
Thank you madame chairman.
Okay proceed that so next next
time in a go on page seven am
stone page seven here manager.
Starting on.
Lines twenty two ending online
twenty four i'm going to point
you to the words immediately.
And eight and forty eight hours
so it says when I want
enforcement officer declines to
follow request petition for an
extreme risk.
Irpo
the law enforcement officer
shall immediately notify the
reporting party of the officer's
decision and within forty eight
hours provide a reporting party
with written notice stating the
reasons for the decision some
adam chairman in an experts
we will put it in the system
essentially immediately but they
have until forty eight hours to
process is that correct madame
chairman.
The.
I believe I think we need to
understand this is when the law
enforcement officer has declined
to file a petition madam chair
and so the as manager this
imposes an obligation to
explain.
So madame chairman so I guess
the explanation would be forty
eight hours is the cap so if
they're forty nine hours then
they are not in complaints at
the law is that correct.
Or or less you say if if you put
this on their record and they're
in the next system and they
listen to they want to buy and
by any firearm after they've
been cleared how long does it
take for them to be clear madame
chairman madam share
representative block this is for
the instance when officer
declines to file so they don't
feel that they have the probable
cause to file no ones being
entered into next in that
situation so this immediate
notification to the reporting
party is to make sure that they
know there is no protection in
that person still has their
firearms.
It's to get them that kind of
they don't have a false sense of
protection when there is
within forty eight hours for the
notification that's more for
let's say an offsir makes that
phone call in the homicy comes
out well they're gonna make that
phone call and tell that that
person and they're gonna go
ahead of that homicide so the
writing is kind of give that
that kind of realistic gap
between i've notified them but I
can't type on my computer right
now I have to go look at a
homicide.
Um kind of that gap gets there
okay thank you madame chairman
and thank you for that so it
kind of cleared it up a little
bit for me but we're talking
about the next system now.
Tell me when specifically in
this chain of of events.
Would this individual be put in
the next system would it be the
first report or would it be
record appearance would it be
when they go into the next
system madam chairman.
With with this infraction madame
chair represented like how we
handle it at e p d is as soon as
the judge signs that temporary
extremers fire protection order.
That temporary is sent to the
next system for entry.
We make it very clear at the
expiration date I is all the
documents or stamped in terms of
expiration so that ten day or
poes in effect for ten days.
The fbi will email us back and
say they've been entered from
this date of this day
once we have the ten day hearing
we get a second
full of both.
And that our poe is sent also to
the fbi with that same time time
stamp and time frame.
The fair respond back to urs and
say this person is prohibited
under nicks from this date to
three hundred and sixty five
days in the future.
Um and and it does they do
actually send me back something
that says they will be removed
on this day so that three
hundred sixty five day that
removed.
The nexus system has actually
removed everyone we've entered
and haven't re upped a new for
pine.
So the system seemed to be
working very well on the federal
side.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you for that answer.
So then I will just keep on
going here then.
I'm i'm on page eight.
Now the top of the page one
three three.
A district judge can be
available to review a petition
for an extreme risk fire on
protection order so madame
chairman an experts i'm
wondering what kind of.
What kind of are we dealing with
here is this a civil case is
this mister feloni what
i'm pretty much asking do this
does this person get a public
defender in the case.
If they can't afford an
attorney.
The bill does.
Financial new language new
language at the top and page
eight lines one through three
language but this is not what
you're asking about yes ma'am
that's exactly what i'm asking
about its page eight
times you have a public
manager i'm i'm wondering
management.
Yeah.
Madam to report order it's it is
the role of the chair to
scrupulously be fair and rulings
in the in the chair.
And that's why.
Talking about.
Thank you
mate all i'm asking madame chair
I guess the question would be
with the new language as I will
use as a pretext.
When the person goes to court to
fight this.
If they cannot afford an
attorney.
Can they be represented by a
public defender.
Madame chairman representative.
Madam chair representative I do
not interest with this as a
criminal.
Would qualify and of course
there
income things.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you for that I I just see a
huge.
Discrepancy here because madame
chairman if less you say i'm i'm
someone who is not of means and
this happens to me and let's
just say it's the frivolous case
that I believe it's frivolous.
If I can't afford an attorney I
have to go proceed and we all
know proceed cases are
essentially thrown in the trash
so madame chairman i'm i'm just
wondering if we could at carvin
a loophole here to allow public
council to this individual to to
fight this madame chairman cause
this is taking away a court
constitutional right and so I
think it's very important to
have that individual have the
proper council in in this case I
mean you have to have any
thoughts on that madame chairman
representative experts.
Madam chair representative many
people present themselves pro
say in civil proceedings and do
quite well and madam chair I
would speculate representative
that.
Thank you madame chairman
appreciate that I hope I never
end up there the
manager but I I do want to just
make sure that people know that
if this if this happens to you
you cannot get a public defender
and that's something that we
need a very strongly considered
I wish we would do that in the
rewrite the map will revise it
again and we'll find other
terrible languages that we we've
seen slip through so.
Madame chairman representatives
I will go down to page.
The.
Promise on page.
Thirteen what's
actually let's go to page twelve
let's make it fun.
I'm gonna go to the middle of
the page lines eight through
eleven we're talking about
instead of seeing the words one
year
the words three hundred and
sixty five days.
Madame chairman representatives
we all know there's leap years
there three hundred sixty six
days white why did we make it
very specific why couldn't we
just leave it a year that covers
everything madam chairman.
Um madam chair and
representative I I suggest you
that three hundr.
When one is talking about one
year it's often debatable as
which date you start.
When you're counting days I
think.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you for that so so we're saying
the first bill one year was not
specific enough.
I mean everyone would assume if
the leap year three sixty six
it's not a leap year three sixty
five.
Rate I don't I just don't see
it.
Granular in my opinion to be
adding the words three sixty
five because we had that in
pitts twelve and on page
thirteen that is new language so
hopefully don't get gaveled down
for the.
So madame chairman.
Representative I just I just
would like the the one year to
stand about in a leap year's got
to have a place somewhere right.
Thank you matter think you
represent the I will keep tiny
on
here
let's go to the end of his
twenty.
Alright thank you madame
chairman thank you just to
clarify this is also new
language.
Eat the page number is twenty
twenty on.
So madame chairman
representatives
we're talking about strong the
weapon after one.
Year or i'm sorry three hundred
sixty five days as we
meticulously added some adam
chairman representative.
I'm wondering let's just say if
this person.
Well
is I want to make sure that
we're clear.
If this happened after this was
just in this past first and
let's say no other
gundashrelated bills passed in
this legislature.
And the firearms that were taken
away from the person.
We're less just say
a firearm that they want to
prohibit in the future.
With that individual then be
able to get back their property.
That.
That was prohibited during the
year that they were banned from
having it madame chairman if it
is prohibited new legislation.
Chair representative I don't
understand your class
so I mean maybe we could
simplify so thank you
matter let's just say you pass
we have someone who's in tune
frequency
medical representative block I
believe you're asking
so let's see the your foes is
not extended we don't go back to
court and it's dismissed it
three hundred and sixty five
days
that person get their fire and
back as soon as they can get to
while we get it evidence so
there's a good down there
they have a copy of the order
there is a timer on the evidence
tag that firm is able to be
returned to its own
thank you madame chairman thank
you for that so my my question
also is regarding less to say
that farm was prohibited during
the time that it was taken away
from the individual.
Unless you see there was no
grandfather class in the law
that just passed right
so can they can they get the
fire and back even though it
would technically be banned
under the new law.
After they they are cleared
after a year.
Manager.
Represent madame chair
representative block.
As soon as that like let's see
there's one in evidence right
now today and as soon as that
becomes the one year as a
certain now not nothing.
They can still get their fire
and back as soon as the irpos is
expired
okay thank you madame chairman
chair our other
please thank you.
Block I believe your question.
But the possession must be
locked
Okay so.
On page two and our new section
about help third professionals.
When you say a provider of
medical and mental health care
and you you list all these
people out which is very
specific.
Um.
How are you banking on the
contents.
That they went to go see that
professional and they
specifically said what words i'm
going to kill my girlfriend I am
going to harm myself I am going
to harm others what are the
exact words that they're looking
for.
I'm sure this could be
supplemented by their experts
but I think there's no any one
specific.
A police officers routinely
evaluate the information they
receive and make a determination
as to whether or not they meet
the legal standard to file up
the.
Okay so madam chair represents
experts so the person is.
It's to the therapist discretion
then and because there's it's
very specific right when you go
to they don't call fifty one
fifty when you do a california
when you do a semiter all hole
you go in correct enforcement
you say do you how many
intention of hirming yourself or
others are those going to be the
questions that these medical
professionals are looking at do
you have intentions to harm
yourself or other.
Um madam chair I think we are
now delving into the original
bill.
And I
agree please because to I would
note that to answer it I would
have to refer to original
provisions of the bill this
simply adds madame chair a list
of medical providers who qualify
as reporting parties it does not
go into any other information in
terms of what they have to rely
on that is all in the original
building.
I would say it does pertain
because we now have it's
different not sure
representatives and experts
everyone.
Is making this claim I think
are.
Constituents and new mexico
deserve to know what is it that
these people are looking for and
right now it sounds like we've
added health care professionals
but I don't know what they're.
I don't know what the problem.
It makes it very difficult for
me to look at the spell silk
we've added these people I know
at law enforcement probably
causes but I don't.
What their probable causes
representative that wasn't
changed the probably caused just
as everything to do with this
this is not long health
professionals do not have
probable probable cars is a long
horseman I just don't know what
the health professionals are
looking at.
To then say hey we need to move
forward with this that there's a
real disconnect I get the water
first but understand what these
guys are looking for now madam
cherry standby my previous
answer thank you okay so does
everybody knows we don't know
what the discretion is for these
people we don't know if it's
harm themselves or others we
don't know did they say i'm
going to go kill somebody we
have no idea
at all.
Can ask you are they going to
get special.
Learn how to recognize that
somebody may actually want to do
this
manager that is that is not
addressed in this legislation.
Sure because we're saying okay.
We are now corporating health
care professionals to m.
Probable cars.
I have zero idea I know I know
that if you're mental his my
degree in psychology if you have
a degree
and somebody says i'm in a harm
myself for others.
You can call and say this person
is going to harm of cells and
and have them take enough.
This one I don't know what words
you're looking for for them to
make that other than just their
discretion they have more
special
so this is a huge disconnect
because there's no problem
because there is no problem
cause in health care so again we
have no idea.
Managed her.
What the criteria is I mean
there's a criteria for
everything.
Again if somebody goes into a
third place officers i'm gonna
harm myself for others law
enforcements should be called
and there is immediately they're
taking a certain tour hole.
So there we go I have no idea
how to even answer this
or what is going to happen
okay
so mountain chair just
representative.
Again i'm gonna go to page six
and state that again with law
enforcement we have probably
the health care of conditions we
don't have trouble cars.
I had questions
I appreciate all the good
questions that you asked.
I was not totally clear on page
seven.
Walked me through this again so
we have the first part on
sixteen.
Good
so.
The officer uses their
discretion to believe there is
good cars.
That we should have this
petition file within twenty four
hours.
Orally you know.
Represents act.
Who are they telling that to
orally are they calling somebody
in the courts or who is it that
their contacting.
Madame chair believe they're
calling a judge but I will
deferred a mister.
Madame chair representative work
that's correct the after a week
to based on good quality good
cars and good cars typically me.
And a police officer will
contact you judge orally which
could be in person it could be
by phone but that would not be
in right.
The officer still must have.
So the problem caused standard
is this these standard for
initiating the action.
Or whether it's filed right and
thank you.
Lawn force but has this problem
caused how's good cars calls the
judge and then it's.
Twenty.
Petition shall be filed within
twenty four hours and that is up
by the law enforcement after
that they will file that.
Okay and where does that get
filed were to next up in the.
And i'm sure representative it's
the same as spiling a petition
in writing the initially it's
filed with the court.
Because this is now we're using
the courts madame chair
represents experts.
So the courts can't do I just
made sure.
So does that now fall on wall
enforcement to enter this into
the next system and how long
from that okay take me from here
good cars calls judge.
Twenty four hours
the judge says yes and then how
long is that that.
It's reported to next.
Madame chair representative lord
as soon as we have something.
Signed by a judge with the seal
on it we can send that to the f
b I for entry so i'd be as soon
as we receive that do.
Report twenty.
Twenty four hours and then how
long does the judge how to make
a decision on that.
When once it's.
So it went from oral sort of
manager were from oral it went
from now written in twenty four
hours it ghost the judge how
long does the judge apps I
couldn't find I do not renew
it's a serious question how long
before the judge makes that
decision have we put constraints
on that.
Like how like they have to do it
within.
Madam chair representative lord.
A parallel example to this is an
emergency restraining order
let's save a domestic violent
situation the afster calls the
judge tells the judge the
situation that they have all the
facts of the case and the judge
signs and an issues that
restoring order right there on
the phone here you go.
I see this is similar so as soon
as we have something signed by a
judge indicating that this
person is restrained for owning
or possessing a firearm.
Um that would be entered in the
next okay thank you manager of
digits and
madame chair representative
I believe your c.
And and again as the commander
mentioned this is.
The judge is required to leave
review the petition immediately
there's no limit on how long the
judge has to consider the
position.
So the judgement must review it
immediately but has.
That is true of the original way
just yeah and thank you that's
what I was trying to manager is
trying to get around to that
case i'm trying to.
Take your new language
incorporate it into the old
language second under.
Can you just tell me what quick
briefly on this manager is the
person who.
Cause a lot of times victims
think that the stuff is
immediate I think formed by the
w.
The.
Madam chair are you talking
about the original law yeah yes
you are I will differ to the
chairs earlier ruling that we
should stick to the change thank
you move to just trying to
figure out how long this.
Now let's go down to page seven.
So when a long forcement
answered declines to file.
Okay.
The.
So they have to.
If the law enforcement officer.
Although i'm trying to get the
soul street yet believes that
there is a does not probably
let's see somebody says hey my
neighbor acts I want to go check
on my but they.
If they didn't go forward cause
and nothing was probably cost is
that when they.
Is it just been defiant or is it
in the case where there is no
problem cost they have to tell
the person who called in.
That we're not going to move
forward with a six explain this
section to me and how this
works.
A madame cher representative
lord what you describe is
exactly it we would go back to
the person who was originally
saying the reporting party in
this case we don't have probable
cars to move forward and that's
not going to go anywhere so
that's not verbal advisement
within forty eight hours
probably a police report will be
given to that person it doesn't
necessarily say it has to be a
police report but that's how ap
were documented based on our
other policies.
Yeah.
Okay
if they don't feel that there is
any probable cars and this those
into th.
But there is.
And that person does go harm
something somebody.
What ha.
How does this play out with them
because you know they're going
to get repremended so what what
is this board they can look into
this.
How does this play out for the
law enforcement offering this
new sorry.
If they did not they declined an
ended the person did do harm.
Madam chair representative I
think it would depend on the
circumstances it would depend on
the basis for.
If it was a frivolous basis then
there may be some disciplinary.
So this is a.
So I think it would have to
depend.
Thank you madame chair and
represent experts I kind of s.
The.
If someone is trying to use
mental enforcement offi.
Totally fine and then that
person goes and does something
there I just see them on the
hook and we all know that for
law enforcement going before the
hearing board happened.
I would rather have seen this
how many spelled out a little
bit differently where you give.
It's this is going to be on law
enforcement to look at this
portion so you know worked.
We decline this we know it's
gonna happen they're going to go
before the board and I I don't
want to see law enforcement if
they're using their best
discretion.
The.
Um chair
go to eight.
Oh I did have a question because
mentioned rips it's experts.
I believe it was you could
brought we're gonna judge his
twenty four hours a day to be
acce.
Madam chair they are now.
It would go before the twent.
Again i'm trying to connect the
dots without talking about the
do.
Yeah that's most trying to get
to think you are managed here
represent so.
If we're going to be using this
more I don't see in the fiscal
impact report that we may have
to hire more staff and more.
We're just going to kind of
crambles on the judges now or do
we need.
A system that works if we're
putting more reviews.
Madam chair representative lord.
I can only speak for bernaldio
county because that's the only
place in the state i've worked.
Uhm but those judges are already
on call for the emergency
restraining orders in the dv
sections.
So I presume district court
would just utilise the judges
that already exist.
Okay madame chair and.
Experts I didn't see in here is
there something.
Is there something here in the
courts were they agree and they
think that's fi.
Madam chair and representative I
spoke to representatives of.
Suggesting except for.
The.
The reason i'm asking is because
that that's a very important
component with this manager.
Representative experts is I
don't want the judges to be
overwhelmed and they're just
like okay.
Um.
The.
Okay so I want to make sure that
we're clear in this so.
We have the person.
They do the oral.
Get.
Yeah.
The order.
This is a very important part on
nine.
Yeah.
They're going to relinquish
their firearms.
So from day one
there's all report filed in the
courts there's no real time
frame the judge does that but
then once they do then who goes
it in the the law enforcement
goes and rates or relinquishes
all firearms.
Relinquishes how is there
because it is a big question how
are they being relanguished to
who how does.
The.
A madam share representative
lord
this is another one of those
where once we have a signed
order whether the temporary or
fall temporary is usually when
this comes up.
We go to the person's house if
we do know them well enough to
call them first we'll come in
hey are you at home hey we're
gonna come see you.
And then we would present them
with the order at that time with
these changes and I will say.
Every extremer's fire and
protection order we have filed
the judge has elected to have
immediate surrender already on
the team so there was the forty
eight hour thing didn't come up
for us it was all immediate
based on the facts of the case.
And so we've dealt with this and
we've been doing this for the
past three years where we go and
we serve the person and we if we
know they have firearms will
make it very clear that continue
possession is a mister meter and
they can come to court for that.
If we don't know for sure if
they have guns or not
in those situations we just
basically have to tell them.
If you have anything now I would
be the time to surrender.
Um and they may go through that
receipt process evidence all
that good stuff that I described
earlier
thank you madame chair richards
expert thank you mister dies or
so so that explained it so
you're gonna because
because we don't have databases
so there's no way of knowing
that they have a firearm so you
would go to their house or call
them in on the.
This order came up.
And you can no longer be in
possession of fire.
Restrain order order protection
they can't have fires.
So we're going to them say you
cannot h.
But anyway sorry I did.
You tell them you can't have
those and if you do it some mr
meaner and you should sure under
them because this is going to be
a mass that correct is that what
i'm understanding
madame chair represented the
floor so generally if we think
they have firearms it's because
the family member or somebody
with the reporting party someone
had seen them with a previous
firearm so they might describe
that firemangreat detail in
terms of.
The caliber the size hand good
rifle of whatever it is and that
would be the gun were
specifically asking for.
Okay so it managed rips and
experts so you got if somebody
said.
But you really I mean you can't
because they have to relinquish
so you're not.
Same we we saw you with a
picture you have pissed all and
you can't get a warrant right
and go in to go take it you're
just asking them is that
correct.
Madam share representative lord
as the was written today and
effective at is right.
So
percussion that's a mystery.
That's correct you
okay.
Yeah.
In a mandate and they can't go
by winkers are in the next
system but they could still go
get one illegally but you've t.
Okay.
The.
Yeah.
Okay
manager so in the new in the new
portion on page twelve b where
it says this is in effect for
three hundred sixty five days
and i'm gonna ask you because
this part retained to the old
field ideas.
Manager represents.
Is there still the chance to
appeal this it's all I want to
know.
The.
The.
Ok so.
On page fifteen number nine.
If the line first faster has
probable caused lead their
responders and violation extr.
Whatever the officer may request
a search one okay that leads me
to in this new language manif.
What would be the probable cars
like the girlfriend calls and
the white who would be.
I guess it would be opened at
anybody is that correct.
That anybody could say.
I believe this person has a farm
like family
initial person who i'm gonna
guess that's going to be
anybody's excure their
stipulations on who.
Could say.
Because it would somebody would
have to report that somebody
would have to say other than law
enforcement whose you guys
wouldn't magically know right so
who would be who would make the
complaint there's a but i'm what
i'm looking for
madam chair representative this
bill clarifies that a police
officer may make complaint on
their own initiative based on
information that gives rise to
probable cause and probably
cause is something that police
officer.
Medicare I I don't question that
one that I understand the
problem.
Yes my question on the specific
part on page fifteen or nine.
Who's the who's how would them
how would they know if they're
getting a warrant because you
you can't just say I think this
person has drugs we're going to
go in it's we have probable cars
where witnesses we've been
watching the house we believe
that they're dealing drugs and
we think the drugs are in the
back room it's a very specific
warrant of who who how would
they know that they believe
there.
Police officers receive
information that give rise to
probably cause there could be a
variety of circumstances.
That's the answer to this
question.
So my con.
And you you go when you park
outside and you got your team to
go to all these teams are
watching these people we know
they're selling drugs we know
there's a crime.
Usually just don't go off of
hay an information told me
otherwise you guys would be
having warrants all day that
that that's kind of a huge issue
for me allowing.
She the question.
About the extreme risk and h.
The.
Yeah.
So.
The.
Yeah.
I'm a lot of this.
I've always had a hard time with
this.
I do have one more question is
there any.
If you said it's not.
Was anything.
Any repercussions.
I don't think there was anything
in there just I didn't see the.
Is that madam to hear there are
no amount that's.
The.
This could passively be.
Representative when the said a
little of a firearm.
My question is
I guess i'll ask the experts
because they would know how do
you properly destroy.
Atm.
The users are certain where you
destroy fire.
It's on the ats website they
have very specific ways are
they're going to be destroyed
like that or tell me what
destroyed means for law
enforcement.
Manage a representative lord I
can only speak for AP d and just
going to follow the same
procedures they used for
destroying.
Firearms that have been an
evidence that are no longer need
for court cases but the person's
permanently prohibited from only
yeah I think I just want to make
sure m.
Very specific instructions on
how to dispose of a firearm and
I want to make sure those are
being done correctly has to be
chocked places at a forty five
angle cause wouldn't want.
We want to make sure that these
are all handle correctly
because.
If you don't dispose in them
properly there still a regulated
so.
If you could ev.
I want to talk about how you
guys dispose of your f.
So.
Going through all this um.
The.
On all the new material.
Especially.
Healthcare providers and i'm not
telling you why
I don't want health care
professionals out th.
They should have.
Because like I said if you go to
a therapist you say when a
harmer software other sets
immedi.
Instead of how people who were
listed on here that when this
bill passes at some point are
going to be informed that they
can do this.
And be like well what is that
mean what is what is the house
this different shape from
horror.
My problem with the bill as a
hall is besides to do process
and besides I have a going to
help your professionals that
don't know how they situat.
My problem is always been taking
people stop with that or fair
trial my grand we don't.
There's.
And what we should have done
from very beginning as.
Pick them up on the semi to our
hold how the judge and go
through this system so they have
some sort of do process and then
determine if the fi.
Immediate trial there should
have been giving them a chance
to have a lawyer so they don't
have to try to represent and to
meet effects the p.
And I just see it punishing the
people who cannot afford a ford
lawyers or representation so
my boat on this.
I'm over do not pass on house
bill twenty seven and a due
pass.
Manager and I I still had
questions madame chairman
according to the rules that we
all agreed upon no we did madam
yes manager you agreed on when
you became a chairman says
motions to limit a beat should
not be allowed and there should
be no limit on the number of
times any committee member is
permitted to speak for mason
section six thirty eight
madame terminal chair madame
chairman we were out of order
this
madame chairman this is the real
then moved we will now take a
roll call management I I raise
my reading
chairman if this is supposed to
deliberate body madam chairman
that's all madam chairman okay
great of order.
Madame chairman I move to table
I second although we don't need
a second.
I'm sorry your motion was not
properly made
madam chairman I moved to table
the committee substitute for
house bill twenty seven.
I second.
Yeah.
The.
Representative
no and I would like to explain
my vote we're taking a vote to
table yes yes to table thank you
manager.
Representative lord
yes to table
representative of a mirror notes
table
representative thompson no.
Madam vice chair rubia
madame chair ferrari no to table
the four to two and
representative block in his vote
thank you madame chairman
I am explaining my vote because
I I believe we need more.
Deliberation on this bill but
unfortunately the rules have
been broken.
And the civility that that the
speaker of the house mentioned
in his opening address to the
house has been broken in this
committee and that's a shame
thank you madame chairman.
Because the motion failed.
We have.
Representative.
Yes sir no
representative law no.
Representative
yes representative thompson yes.
Madam vice chair rubia
madame chair ferraro yes.
Do not pass on house bill
and do pass on committee to
house filled twenty.
Madam chair we up next on fire
on protection one fourteen yes
thank you.
We will hear.
House bill.
Uh one fourteen fire arm
industry accountability.
Thank you madam chair and you
have received a committee so
i'll get my glasses and leave it
to a number and I imagine
someone will be interested in
making emotion the last four
channels.
For this
week
you're disposed.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thinking
for a house bill fifty two
that is going to be heard
thursday
first thing and also and this
was.
With the approval of the
sponsors and also house bill
seventy two will be heard
thursday warning I mean i'm
sorry first thing thursday
afternoon and we might be here
and we will hear after this bill
house will one twenty
incarcerate person.
Yeah.
Manager.
The.
Yeah.
Could you give us a two o two
number so we can
absolutely matter the last
digits are for eight four point
one okay thank you do I hear
motion to.
The committee substitute for
house
thank you.
Okay it's been seconded by
representative.
Membership of.
Okay
so I will take the roll card
for discussion on subsidy.
Representative
no representative in board
now
represent a ramaro yes
representative thompson yes
madam vice chair rubio
madame chair ferrari.
Forty two.
Moved for a discussion about
roll call the four to two in
favor of discussion so your
proceed thank you very much
madame chair this bill
recognize is that manufacturers
and sellers are firearms have a
rough responsibility to ensure
that adequate controls are in
place so that.
Individuals who are not entitled
to have those are not in
possession.
By example I thought I would
talk about the photograph that I
handed out to all of you.
New jersey has a similar law.
Failure to control it's a
nuisance or a member of the
industry to not adequately
control those via arms in the
photograph you hear is actually
part of a law suit that shows
how poorly.
Controlled and
maintained in the store
and this work they're out in the
open they're close to windows
they were not put in locked
areas in the evening and we know
that because and they posted
photographs of their store in a
way that looked like this so
when one searching fraud
some bad actors search but got
for guns where you can you
purchase guns in new jersey and
they found this what did they do
they broke into the store and
they stole multiple firms from
this dealer
i'd like to think we can all
agree that this is not a
responsible way to store
firearms near doors near
windows.
And as a result those firearms
were read some of them retrieved
and they were in the hands of
criminals so.
That's one instance where a lot
such as i'm proposing for you
could be utilized.
The attorney general has the
authority madam chair to enforce
adequate controls in recover
damages if
controls are not in place and
private individuals who may be
harmed by the failure of someone
in the fire arm industry may
also bring soon and recover
attorney's fees and damages if
if for the same reason.
Another example madam chair
would be
someone who is engaged in
encouraging the creation of
ghost guns ghost guns are.
Guns that are not traceable
so for example another case.
A fire member of the fire and
interested was found
in okay he says here since
twenty thirteen we've helped
thousands of people build their
own guns from the privacy of
their garage no serialization no
background check no government
fee will this.
The energy that's involved in
and that conduct in some other
bad conduct is also the subject
of a lawsuit and also under um
laws such as i'm proposing here
madame chair I think we would
agree that advertising and
encouraging people to not follow
the law in the team.
Um firearms that are not
identifiable to the serial.
Number is bad acting and
irresponsible and puts the
public at risk i'll remind
everyone it's illegal to have a
firearm that is does not have to
see real number and without
madame chair I am happy.
Again is does not have a what a
serial number on.
Is there a madame chair
will go to the audience
a lot of people signed up there
were not sure our still here
and we're going to have to limit
it to.
Fifteen people.
Yeah.
Okay how many people are still
here that wanted to speak
against the bill.
Um
because there's probably a lot
of card.
Yeah
hopes this is because it does
not have
adequate reforms
process.
There's no knowledge of no
nation
would require.
Yeah
that's okay I
have to take steps
the person who quote
this was really surprised for
the fire the purpose of our
lawful.
The vvmarkquote.
This requires.
The.
Your unless they have.
How do you know if somebody's
motive engaged in.
The overall fascination is the
creative action for
private visuals
yes.
I think that remember the
community
I am tour the older elders.
I think that's
that that's being faster than so
large and all likely to say
the mexico.
That may not be the attack of
the legislation that the united
states is pretty secure.
Are there not second hands
on the produce.
Yeah.
Alternatives.
That
could be like to chase
this
purchase through the.
Trace
system system.
The.
Yeah.
Thank you i'm sorry
for
okay
thank you
for address the representatives
first to address representatives
of implication that
are required and they have a
done
this incorrect serial number for
person
off work
with the
company
because
he sixty.
This part motion to activist an
attorneys to a far complaints
and litigation again
delivery criminal actions of an
intermediary
circle
for which.
United states we hold
for someone else committing
as the use
not just
subject.
Okay
Yeah.
With the mexican firm.
I'm in addition to what else has
been said the state on first
provide for all industries
will open the industry list
washington.
No industry has such a whole
brother are now crashed before
you.
Many people think the protection
of the commerce and
all set.
It does exceptions.
Why.
Track
normally violated statute which
includes the current train
practice.
If there's a breach of contract.
There's definite damage to a
design
if there's a violation of the
national violence
with the unfair straight
practices.
This person.
To grow with the new mexican
shooting sports association one
thing that I want to bring up is
this build any restrictions or
punishment for the actual run
doors the person in section is
three
or for the purpose of them
unlawful commerce working sells
the purchase is actually a
strong purchase made for a
person that is prohibited under
the state federal law from
possession that fire.
So we need to look at that are
also on this
thank you.
Yeah.
Manager representative
my name's william fireis
private citizen.
I stand in opposition
specifically target summit and
citizens and business others are
state the providers of our gun
shops and launch their man with
a tiny minority who don't they
obey are gone sales.
Federal firearms licenses are
last lined against illegal sales
the administrative background
checks and prevent bad guys from
accessing fire so we should be
supporting them rather than
harassing them.
In section seven this feel
actually encourages frivolous
accounts these people are part
of citizens they will have to
defend this insurance rates and
drive them out.
Thank you.
Many members show what the
national rightful association
fourteen
this will open the door work for
the fire industry to be held
liable for criminal acts or
misuse of lovely sold legal
products by unrelated third
parties settle penalties to be
issued at five thousand dollars
for violation but
have no limitation at all we
hope certain members of the
business community are paying
close attention to hospital
fourteen as it provides a
template we're targeting
industries to spave her
despaired by those.
The amount of church governor is
the national shootings worth
foundation
determined
bringing forth of substitute
from tight but we think this is
still very losing
and asem significant
uncontention consequences one of
this is a little we think of
these situations that we're
going to be seeing someone soon
and name lesser faceless
faceless corporation that's not
how this is written because of
the word of person is in this
piece of legislation person to
find it's an individual work
entity in the state of the
mexico for the example of the
four a horrible tragedy that
occurred in wisconsin during the
christmas parade.
Not only with forty day under
this law to motor vehicles with
would be liable the salesman.
The repairment the advertising
agency that that advertised
anyone else
on the certainly becomes a
member of the fight would become
a member of that industry so
you're not only talking about
these voice corporations you're
talking about the minimum wait
single mom at the front desk who
she then becomes the point of
who gets suit civil in this they
can
go to the side.
This is.
Yeah I I just.
Yeah this several months
several months ago.
They absolutely decide now
she's questioning that because
we're here is a place being the
absolute mission
so it just leaves it through
questions how health is
the absolute and what sharks
does she can what tracks on
their power is she considered.
Not to me the true horror
is beautiful culture if somebody
causes the drawing driving
accident.
This is intensive just now
somebody calls me because the
crime they so this is just
intensifying
that that's what that's a big.
My name is all spencer private
individual citizen and I don't
want to send anybody from the
the gun obviously
like that but
I have a question for you why
are you focusing on citizens who
are trying to make a living to
provide goods to those who are
legal citizens and our ability a
lot.
Why are you focusing on the
border with all these immigrants
coming over bringing in federal
actually positively because in
damage to our communities to me
this makes me feel more afraid
that i'm not to be able to deal
with the need to depend my
family and why because of what's
going at the board.
Why are we focused on.
People who are trying to make a
living legally here in the
states of america.
The.
Yeah.
And also federal fire.
In my business in our.
This bill is break to growth I
think.
And is in all of the bills.
It focuses on.
The privacy the law five in
participant citizen and not the
criminal.
One instance on there
if somebody says me.
They were I have to figure legal
things.
The.
And if I will I have no recourse
the thieves.
With me is very well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay now go to.
If you're on if you can state
your name and
well timing you for w.
Go ahead.
Thank you mam chair members of
the committee again need escape
here on behalf of over seventeen
hundred members it's the arrived
when personal club in the
albuquerque area a first all
echo the correction is
completely legal to make in
possession unserialized home
made firearm in new mexico in
the vast majority of this
country I could be making one of
my three printer right now and
violate no longer doing so the
fact that actual harm isn't
required to see only public
nuisance creation with an
overbroad definition of what
constitutes public nuisance is a
major issue while i'm not sure
that this is a first and
american off it would certainly
be an extreme outliar power the
end of itself isn't the blood
policy instrument to drive
retailers out of business the
cost of defending these suits
foreign excess of five thousand
occurrence we'll do the job
there's another attempt at law
fire to get the access of new
mexicans to the tools they need
to defend themselves thank you.
Oh jim business citizen from
silver city and I guess i'm
concerned that we're focusing on
the item and so if we had
someone assaulted with a knife
or a baseball bad are we gonna
then construe the eventually say
we can assume baseball better
manufacturers and and knife
manufacturers I mean we need to
prosecute the action not the
items thank you.
Yes my name is jacob weber from
albert kirki and thank you for
the appearing today i'm in a
opposition to this because it
obviously violates the bruin
decision and also violates the
lawful commerce act able not
survive court hearing once he
gets to a federal cord it it
basically
makes the unfair trade practices
very misleading
for those who were our have to
the discretion of who ever
decides that what is misleading
to one person is is not
misleading to another
I can see this being badly
abused by it by the anti gun
groups
will who that they decide is is
good and bad ugly
this this is a very bad bill and
should do it be voted down
please do not vote for this bill
please said it it will not
survive under neither new mexico
constitution or federal law
thank you.
Next.
The.
The.
Go ahead.
I think you are motion committed
my name is a david finance
aggressive courty and I started
opposition to you the spell out
hospital when fourteen s
for recent set up but have
already been stated thank you.
The.
Um I guess if you have to.
Alright.
Go to those of who are in
support.
Yeah.
That industry isn't special
provisions that protected from
any circumstances i'm doing
under this proposal the farms
industry members would have to
take basic steps to avoid
selling guns to people who
aren't allowed to have them and
carefully protect them they
still from being stolen from
their stores to make sure that
they aren't marketing guns
dangerously it is also given it
will also be.
Survivors of victims of their
balance away to hold the gap
industry actors accountable for
destruction they're called their
weapons cause thank you
i've been.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um then we'll go to janet
williams.
That you are members of the
committee general.
Yeah.
Members of the committee i'm
making them speaking on the
legal women voters to cope and a
w mexico and I believe that I
may have a colleague from
another bridge online
but I am also a member we
remember the lights for gun
violent solutions and I don't
understand even the comments of
the opposition it's they haven't
read the definitions of food you
know what the fire arm industry
is and about the unfair
practices and so on this feel
real stand
it is not a list then
I we strongly support it thank
you.
The.
The.
Yeah.
Carolina
okay.
But got violence who stand one
hundred percent support
household on work for not
really.
More good
and then in terms of safe
storage and no sharp.
Yeah.
But
okay thank you.
And then
element.
Yeah.
Federal beater my.
Yeah.
Um and chris.
The.
Is there anyone else.
The.
Okay.
Are the person on zoom please go
ahead you have one.
Thank you my name is the lane
miller I am representing months
amount action and I am asking to
for you to support this bill
with savings support thank you.
Thank you next time soon.
Hi my name is doctor rougina
greeko and I am survivored
membership leave for mom's
demand action and I am also AP h
d engineer and I can tell you
that the gun industry is up
holds a privilege that no other
I have worked in mri systems I
worked in in in high car second
systems at cnda and the gun
industry holds no other
privilege then what they do and
we do not hold them accountable
and I support this bill and I
hope that it's the beginning of
doing things like supply chain
analysis and things like that
please support this bill thank
you
thank you.
My matter of chair members the
committee on bill jordan with
the mexico voices for children
and we also stand in strong
support of this legislation and
want to thank the committee and
especially the sponsors for
bringing the forward thank you.
Thank you.
Next person.
State your name one minute.
Anyone else okay that's it.
Thank you.
Other remarks
very briefly madam chair of the
committee substitute
narrow the scope of the original
bill and I believe you know some
of the comments madam chair
redirected out
unfortunately practices issues
that we may revisit in the
future but we wanted to focus on
the specific one because we felt
it was the clearer st.
People to focus on.
Um.
Will go to committee members
representative lord thank you
madame chair thank you
representative experts so I have
a record question I know the one
expert who who is your new
expert and what is his expertise
thank you madame
my name is on the leader
students at okay
i'm used to public comments
to instant action of new mexico
and so I work with students
across the state and in my own
school district every ratch of
public schools which are
graduated from an
event on balance in my.
The.
Men of chair representative are
either of your experts
expertise and ffel do you have
an actual film epipheld dealer
here today for economic a bunch
of effort questions do you have
an expert in f f l.
Um madam chair or either of you
have an.
I've used enough
rate but I yeah I think aged
enough
yeah but do you.
Up madam chair.
Okay
for the audience but it was
sorry so that's our so when you
go into the gun store has to be
federally licensed and their
experts on how to do a gun
transaction.
And they rely on a national form
that is
what is that form
for four I wrote f f I know I
didn't so it's a four four seven
three so that's the stuff i'm
gonna be asking you.
Yeah it's on the fl means
federal fire licenses.
The.
I like to go
back to or so so we don't have
an extra okay
the first thing I want to bring
up is that pre nineteen sixty
eight al.
The second thing is this picture
was entered as evidence where it
works just picture from.
The.
The.
A lawsuit.
Okay but I would be happy to get
that yet thank you matcher I
just wonder what you know this
is not new mexico that's right
yeah okay madam sure I did not
represent it after new mexico
when I pointed out it was in new
jersey lawsuit just want to make
sure you excited some sorry
matter charge which people text.
Okay so if i'm understanding
correctly this is all new
material.
So let's go into you
on line to
so you have fire arm industry
member
and that means a person that is
engaged in sales manufacturing
making important district but he
has anything to do something but
you have advertising and
marketing of a fire so madam
chair representative expert with
that means somebody if they
hired somebody is a as a
advertising a marketing person
is that we're trying to say that
they are also now part of the
firearm industry.
Madam chair and representative
they could be if they are
rip of engaged in the sale and
marketing of firearms as defined
in the bill.
Okay so I guess what I was
trying to say is a frustrative
chair we hire consultants.
So.
With this b because i'm reading
it means a person engaged in.
Advertising or marketing of a
firm product so if they hired an
outside team to
say this is the coolest one
ever.
Are is that market now my books
are with its worded that's a way
it appears
madam chair if if an entity is
engaged in marketing or
advertising a firearm that leads
to that encourages.
The.
Illegal distribution or of a
firearm for example or ghost
guns for example madam chair
they could be potentially
liable.
Okay.
Product.
So we have fire environment
component but then we have
accessories so the wage this is
worded and the way that I see
this is this goes after somebody
who is a leather.
The.
Because that's an accessory
matter.
Sheer representative i'm sorry
also up with let me repeat that
yeah please.
So on page two.
Five and six a fire product
means a firearm form component I
get tripped up on accessory so
accessory to mean means like
whose on weather crassmen who
makes holster.
So would that be a person who's
included at it that cause that's
a fire accessory right so that
includes them in this bill that
correct
it may madam chair but there are
other t.
Yeah i'm yeah I have firearms
there's lots of accessories
mentioned dual things you can on
there those perhaps there's you
you can manage here I wasn't
finished with my apologies.
However
it would not give the highly
unlikely that the unsafe placing
on a controls on a leather
accessory would give rise to
any.
Sorry I can finish sorry yes I
am okay thank you I meant sure
is that I would disagree because
it throws them.
A large company here that makes
grips we have people to make
accessories all of the states
are they need to.
Very much pat.
Okay so.
Then I go down because this is
all new trying to figure the
southern page too.
Ten to you intended to be sold
made manufacturers tributed
advertised so it goes back
again.
And I think it answered my
question because I asked you
about that earlier if somebody
is advertising that throws them
into the group.
I'm still having a hard time
wrap in my header that I think
you're really a question just.
I'm having a hard time figuring
how.
I.
You.
It's that.
If they possess it and the
state.
Explain this because it is not
real clear so it's possessed or
used in this date or there's
likely to be zast or you made a
minute possessor used in this
state or that is likely to be
possessed.
Madam chair it doesn't.
Is it what is the difference
between these two sta.
Madame chair and representatives
that difference is
that it's currently unpossessed
and used in this day or that it.
Will likely meaning in the near
very near future be used or
person
the the product is known to
likely do being moved into the
state of new mexico
okay.
So would that.
I i'm not there is that
something you're saying if you
bought it out of stay.
And brought it into the state
okay so you're saying if it's
out of state you bought it and
that would.
Madam chair our laws do not
extend into other states it
would make them potentially
libel in our state.
Okay so are you trying to see
that in the future matter of
chair that in the future that
it's likely to be possessed.
Yes I mean people purchase
firearms and have them delivered
to them at their home well no
usually to a f f l and so if the
ffl is in new mexico I think it
would be fair to see
that the person selling it or
marketing sir one are under an
notice that it's likely to be in
held in our state.
So then we go on to reasonable
controls and procedures so I
firm industry member which ca.
Shall establish an implement
reasonable controls and
procedures regarding the sale
manufacturing making import etc.
Can you please define for me
what you mean by.
Like especially going to what
it's reasonable control over a
sale what what what is that.
I can imagine the situation
where there is there are two
people uh in a store
and they are talking with one
another and.
Fact that it's really a
strawsale where the person be
and qualified for the sale is
one person but in fact it's a
second person and the failure to
acknowledge that an insurer that
the gun is not i'm really being
purchased for the person who
does.
Could fall within this
description.
Thank you madam chair and that's
kind of why I wish I had an fell
because when you go.
When you look at the form the
forty four seventy three eleven
eighty most important question
are you the actual transfer
buyer the firearm warning if you
are not actual transfer by and
you acquire in the fire on
behalf of other person.
Biscuit seeing this is a straw
purchase of you not the actual
transfer license license you
cannot transfer the firm to you
so the whole point and we
actually passed a straw purchase
bill last year so we already
have that in place and from what
i'm talking to when I do talk to
ffls.
I guess that's we're just going
to jump into this then right
now.
So if we're talking about
reasonable control for them to
sell the firearm they must fill
out this form the person checks
no I am not doing a straw
purchase
and it's a normal looking human
being the car.
What would be a bother.
Is this.
I'm trying to figure out.
Assistant after the fact.
That they did do a sharp
purchase got found out later or
somehow are they supposed to
have a abilities beyond to know.
We should not have done the sale
to a person or is this
sufficient if they fill out
this.
This four seven seven three form
and they check now
how how when this is really
legal white white what would be
a beyond that.
This reasonable the reasonable
controls of a sale because it's
already allowed.
It's a law that someone feel out
of form and confirm that they
are putting purchasing for
themselves however if the seller
of that firearm has reason to
believe that that is not in fact
the case and that there may be
indishot and how the transaction
go down or the overhearing of
conversation
that might be a basis to
say the firearm seller did not
have reasonable controls in
place knowing that.
Rings at the point the firms
gives I I actually have hung on
and.
They filled this out
there their probe not prove
sometimes it's hold on this so I
guess.
It's a straw purchase.
Prove that the effort fell new
it was a straw purchase because
of people that I know personally
and I know very well they are
very consciented me if they even
have a slight suspicion that
they think this person is
sketchy and i've actually seen
this first hand if they think
that person sketchy they already
monitor so so how I guess i'm
looking at this as punitive and
how with the lawyer prove.
That the ffl was responsible
they knew and they should not
have sold the gun to them other
than this one form how would
they know where that that
conversat.
Madam chair and representative
there may be many factors.
Firearm seller had a reasonable
basis to.
We can go on and on and I would
like to say madam chair and
representative
the very large majority of.
Sellers are firearms
manufacturers of firearms those
and g.
Are followed
this is intended to address bad
actors and truthfully i'm
surprised that the good actors
that are in the room today are
opposing this bill because bad
actors make the industry on the
hole look bad and anyone who is
in the industry from my
perspective of madame chair
would want us to be going after
the bad actors to ensure that
the good actors get the credit
that they deserve so this is not
punitive to those who are good
actors this is punitive to those
who are bad actors madam chair
well.
The.
I would hate for an fulfilled to
find themselves in a position
where they are now open to
lawsuits because anyone
ok we just had incident in
berlier county where there was
an allege attorney who was
paying.
So not everyone is perfect so
what I don't want to see as
somebody goes in and there's a
straw purchase.
And they say well it's the
effort fills fault and now they
got a lawyer up and ponia
because this puts the burden on
them to prove that their
innocent
and I even know how they do them
unless they have recording and
witnesses and if this year I
mean if this is years later it's
definitely going to end up
punitive against them because
they're doing their due
diligence by asking them and
again I have talked to all all
these fil.
Look right they look suspicious
I don't want them punished and I
see these reasonable controls of
the sale that could very much be
punitive because they have to
prove their innocence now.
I want to go on to.
To nineteen hundred and eighteen
a.
This a big question for me
prevent the loss or threat of
firearm product from
financially.
Exactly how because everyone I
know doesn't want their stuff
stolen nobody wants or stuff so
and so they have the gates are
going
they have i've seen bars on the
factors and they do all kinds of
security
what would be the standard that
they would need to use to
prevent the was or theft of
fires products and does not
describe how how exactly what
that happened
madam chair and represent it I
think it would be fair to say
that they should use reasonable
care.
This is a perfect.
What could give rise to
liability.
In the scenario madame chair
that I described was these were
left out during the day and
after the store was closed the
store was easily broken into and
firearms were stolen and were
found to be in the hands of
criminals.
Don't but i.
Um.
Yeah.
So prevent okay so I guess we're
getting stuck on that mentioner
is.
What when things aren't defined
that means the lawyers get to
define it the courts get to
define.
This I mean without it being
very specific again I see it is
being punitive because they're
going to say.
I did I have got a bor.
Well that wasn't enough you
should have known better so so.
Have some massive heartburn on
that.
Um we go to twenty one issue
that foreign industry members
comply to the provisions they
are.
And I see we are going with that
you're saying if they're not you
know if they're n.
Next page.
So this is a part that we had to
so we're trying to prevent the
unlawful and fraudulent sale or
distribution of a fire in
product from a person who
can seals our ten service in
membership i'm sure and seals
are intense to conceal that the
purchase of fire and products
has been made unbeh.
The.
This rate here is biggest.
Issue because they are filling
up.
The person says no i'm not doing
a straw purchase.
There's no time one on this so
if they get if there is a strong
purchase
and they've tried to do
everything possible and they're
due diligence to make sure it's
not a straw purchase they don't
have sake abilities so again to
me my insurers in the end i've
been extremely punitive.
Unless you can prove that they
were like not sure how this
didn't do all the chats and
balances
but at falls on these guys to
prove their innocence and I
would heat for
lawyer like the one that is a
bad after very bad lawyer that
was there and album who is
paying o.
Lawsuits directed towards him.
So.
This is a huge issue of it's
almost like were saying.
Five years later two years later
one year later you should have.
Not their fault because of
people that i've met in the gun
industry are wonderful people
and they don't want their stuff
going out to the wrong people.
But this opens it up and I don't
have a question f.
Is that now they're the
punishment star purchase.
And then if I go down which an
also
twelve is prohibited for
possession firm that's one of
the questions on there.
So
they're really doing everything
in the.
The bad actors and honestly and
bad actors are getting their
fire.
So it isn't that th.
So online fourteen so it's again
and thirteen and three were
punishing them because they did
their due diligence.
If I am industry member has
reasonable caused leave.
There's a risk of using a fire
product car.
Okay.
Madam chairman representative
and experts.
How
are they supposed to know other
than a person saying i'm going
to kill somebody with this farm
how are they supposed to know if
they've done their due diligence
and mind you nobody just comes
in and buy its farm their one.
How would they know if this
person appeared.
The.
Like your average person
and then that person went out
and used the scan the first.
How would they know that how
would they know that that
christmas imminent harm.
And again explain to me how this
is a punitive.
Madam chair you gave a very good
example if someone is talking in
the store about harm
I loved one complaining about
some
some attribut.
That would be a basis for
someone to say you should not
sell that person fire not
withstanding the fact that they
might pass their background
check.
All man of chairman and
representative they always have
the discretion of not selling
what my question was I said and
less they come in and they say
i'm going to harm myself or
others.
Average joe.
They don't know something a good
person in the chatten of the sp.
The fire industry member has
reasonable.
So they w.
If they don't know.
If the
industry member.
Does not have reasonable cause
to believe they will not be held
liberal under this provision
minimum chair and representative
understand what you're saying
but again these guys with the
fells have gotten approved
themselves to be innocent
lawyers get a hold of this old
man every single thing.
I do not want this to be used to
put her fell out of business.
So.
Section.
The.
I've never seen the term public
new sense you used.
Knowingly a recklessly failing
to exercise r.
Distribution.
Can you explain exactly what you
mean by them being a public.
Madame chair it's merely a
definitional term it's
it says it's a public nuisant
for them to do with the
following things so that's it
defined it is defined within
that pro.
Madam chair representative so on
the form force or seven three
and also house if you're going
to provide the farm to prohibit
person or use it to commit a
crime so all of these things are
already answered in here but
again it's still leaves.
The.
Criminalism.
So many chair madam chair just
to be with a correct madam chair
there was an inaccurate
statement it was not not
criminalizing anything madam
thank you for that clarification
so mountain page for.
So we see that the first part of
this is the courts.
May award a civil penalty for
five thousand dollars okay.
And then private service can be
a civil action but that's civil
action is unlimited could be for
millions or no limitation on
that.
Madame chair the courts apply to
standard.
The.
What I see here.
So they get a five thousand.
Basically s.
The.
We put the fulfills out there
for last suit.
Is that
they can't they have to go to
court to prove their innocence
they have to say I filled out
this form okay they get first
we're like a lawyer up there
thousands they have to go to
court they have to say that okay
they did this form I saw the
person they look normal I did my
due diligence lawyer step soon
lawyer says a half i'm gonna go
after everyone.
The.
Finally.
Now what they're in court they
have to prove their innocence.
And lawyers will use especially
and scrupulate i'll put that way
better unscrupulous I don't sell
ways as group is lawyers will
use this to say they advertised
it the marketing
holster the gun store let's go
ahead and see the heck out of
them because we can tie them up
and court they have to spend
thousands of dollars defending
themselves i.
Wish I had ever fell that get
asked the question.
A lot of these questions
how in the heck are they going
to prove their innocence that's
the part i'm indeed they little
late are going to have to
if i'm thinking this through.
They don't have to literally I
don't know interview every
single person that walks in the
door with the camera I guess
it's what you have to do have a
camera set up I grab I don't
know how to do this because a
religion on the next in the
judgement.
To prove their innocence and I
assume the various lawyers just
will be man and time of the
courts and.
And the end of this just seems
to be getting rid of the ffls
and that's what I don't want to
happen I don't want our floors
to be continued to play as well
i've seen most of them going to
bob and beyond to make sure
they're not getting their farms
on the right enough their
firearms and there's really
nothing in here.
Other than the approvals having
to prove their innocence
continually.
And documented and recording and
ask.
Do you hear by promise you're
not going to go and harm
yourself for other that's the
only way to do this without them
having the back tell because
they have something documented
they could say well you tried to
our best but that's again
plan ashing people who are just
trying to do a business.
Criminalizing and how many
people may not want to work on
the floors because.
So for me I I don't
I mean i.
Meditar representative expert it
would have been nice to have a
fl fell the house but your
questions but i'm going off my
own experience of being invented
stores.
And no way person walks in the
door look like a fairly normal
person they come up and start
talking to you like to purchase
this gun you do your due
diligence to do the background
chat but unless your
specifically asking him are you
going to harm yourself or others
they're going to kind of get
screwed in this because they
have no way to prove it are then
the going to court and if it was
years ago trying to find the
person that worked there and
sold that fire they have to also
track them down to to help them
be an expert witness so managed
here and represent for all those
reasons and much much more.
I have to definitely.
The.
Thank you.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative and expert
looks like your other expert ran
away well
madam chair representative a
chair I think that's just
respect ipod person we do not
have the expert present in the
room as I can tell is that more
respectful manager
yes and if you can not be so
started
I will continue
madame chairman representative
so I just looked it up real
quick there's over a thousand
fills in new mexico according to
the recent.
The most recent data matter
terminal representative I know
in the in the previous bill we
talked about folks were stick
holders such as law enforcement
and you you had vast
conversations with medical
professionals law enforcement
how many other fills have you
spoken to regarding this
legislation and how many are
supportive.
Madam chair and representative I
have spoken to many individuals
about this bill I do not ask
individuals whether or not their
f l's or not when they
communicate with me so I can't
give you an answer in terms of
that but I have many
constituents in my community who
are fl.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you for that answer so madame
chairman representative expert.
So other than your your ffl in
your community
I said multiple ffs in my
community okay multiple other
than the multiple fell in your
community where they support it
the folks who you talk to in the
community who you know our ffls
madam chair
manager I just as I said in my
previous remarks I don't
question people as.
I certainly did receive numerous
emails being supportive of this
email as was indicated in al.
If you made him chairman III
don't believe I asked you if you
asked them if they were ffls I
believe you said previously you
know that there are multiple
ffls I just wanted to make sure
any of those folks who you
absolutely know you didn't ask
them if they were in f f l did
they support it that's all
masking manager.
If the question madame chair is
if a person whom I know to be an
ffel and I would say I only know
personally a few contacted me no
okay thank you madame chair I
appreciate that.
I'm gonna continue onto the
photographs here that you
provided and I proceed in the.
Just the hands on I like the
pictures you know pictures are
great so I don't go on this
picture and just look at what's
wrong here with the film so
madame chairman representative I
see it's very like I would never
go in here and by guide madam
chairman is just it looks like a
cluster madame chair
in the photograph from new
jersey correct.
Some out of chairman I see
there's there's guns that are
not secured agree with you that
that is not okay.
But I would just ask regarding
the precautions in the
photograph we see some bars on
the windows and the door.
Madame chairman representative
if let's just say we didn't have
guns just strewn about and they
were properly placed in their
cases.
This would I I guess in my
opinion I wouldn't really see
much concern other than the
clutter which as they said
before I probably would wouldn't
buy a gun here if it looked like
a place like this actually got a
sportsmen's or or a local effort
fell that I know so madame
chairman representative would
this be a reasonable precaution
that the bars on the windows if
they locked up after hours they
had bars in the windows they
locked the doors and they put
the guns and in safest would
that then be a reasonable
precaution
madam chair and representative I
believe a jury and a judge could
come to that conclusion but it
would be up to the trial of
active determine that okay thank
you madame chairman thank you
for that answer.
That is helpful
and have we did do we know of
any kind of cases in new mexico
where we've heard of certain
certain ffls that have been
stolen from and is that with
this legislation is meant to
stop the theft of a firms that
are not properly stowed in the
fills
in the stores animature.
Is that one of the reasons we
put this forward.
We do not know since we do not
have such a lot.
Okay representative have we
looked at any crime statistics
in the state of how many guns
have been stolen from gun stores
there may be such systems
statistics act.
I would just be curious to know
what the numbers are.
I guess i'll i'll do a little
more research madam chair thank
you for that i'm just going to
move over here to the fire.
Do you have a copy of the let me
find.
Excuse me manager is it written
by someone named
yes okay
awesome.
We are prepared all right the
manager represented I i'm just
wondering
I believe this was probably for
the the bill not the committee
substitute
because up mountain that's how
it's indicated okay madame sir
representative the changes that
you made in the substitute do we
know if those could impact the
fiscal impact at all uh in a.
Large smooth not large way madam
chairman.
Madame chair in representative I
think it's fair to conclude.
Analysis
based on the change in the bill.
Totally interested man of
chairman I I just would assume
it wouldn't be too radical of a
change from the current fiscal
impact looks like for fifty four
twenty five actually madam chair
I a good portion of the bill
relating to unfair trade
practices was removed for
future.
Actually I think.
Thank you madame chairman think
you representative
I appreciate that.
And then I think I circle
something here in the f a r.
It might have been stricken out
but please correct me if i'm
wrong madame chairman
representative.
So it says in the affair the
civil penalty is up to but we
struck that out and now it's
just a civil penalty we do not
listen number is that they would
current subsets minimum no
matter chair and represent it
similar penalty is outlined on
page for the bill in the amount
of not to exceed five thousand
dollars for each file.
Some page for the bill.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you representative I appreciate
that that update let me just.
Circle.
And then I guess i'll just go
back to the building madame
chairman representative
uh
i'm looking at page.
Two wind sixteen of the.
The committee substitute.
Page two line sixteen.
Yeah.
All right madame chairman
representative it says here
reasonable controls and
procedures regarding the sale
manufacturer making importing
distribution madame chairman
representative do we
do we know if these have to be
a certain procedures they need
to be written down or can they
be verbal so if I own a gun
shopping out and I have a
verbal.
Training for the folks who were
working for me can I give them
that verbal information as well
as whatever is required.
To get their f l madam chair
that madam chair and
representative that would be
within the perview of those
evaluating the totality of the
circumstances around whether or
not adequate contr.
Okay thank you madame think he
representative so this would be
for the fact finders to to
really look case by case is that
what i'm kind of hearing here
yes madam chair but I would
suggest you that often
members of an industry
choose to take on the
responsibility of developing
standards and controls that they
could then there look therefore
look to as this is the industry
standard which frankly I would
incourage in this bill would
likely encourage so that we have
some.
And then those who are then
challenged on whether or not
they've implemented reasonable
controls can look to what the
industry has satisfactor
reasonable controls and thereby
avoid liability.
Thank you madame to him think
you represented so talking about
the industry as a whole so I
think that they would be great
if we had them here as experts
as as we said earlier because
i'd love to see what what
they're saying because we said
earlier in the photograph case
that if
these were locked up if the
doors were closed and we were
able to properly secure them
then that would be probably not
liable if you were the fulfilled
so I I would just love to see
more clarity on specific locking
up of firearms at night specific
so who is able to access them
who has the keys to the store
room things like that minimum
chair I don't know if you had
any suggestions on that or if
you'd like to maybe.
Add some of those.
Madame chair and representative
I think it's better if those in
the industry take responsibility
for developing um.
Of course those could be tested
as if they are shown to be
inadequate but it seems like
that would be a sign of.
This.
Okay thank you madame chair
thank you representative well I
I think there were the concerns
that we're having our regarding
the liability that the industry
would have with this legislation
so if we added a provision to
the bill right after procedures
think something like provided
that.
The fell is following industry
standards then I guess that
would open a channel for
collaboration with the industry
manager I would would we maybe
i'm not now I wouldn't bring in
a minute now but maybe in
another committee be open to
such an amendment to add that
channel or.
Our industry madam chair and
representative I have to look
into what those industry
standards are and whether they.
The.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative I think they
would be great for the next
committee just to have that on
hand so I would love to see
what.
What certain manufacturers are
saying is safe with certain
sellers are saying it's safe
because something in new mexico
could potentially be different
than something in state like
connecticut arkansas places like
that so manimature I I
appreciate the answers there I
will continue here page three.
I'm just going to go are the way
down to the bottom of the page
to win twenty onward to twenty
five.
So we talked about public
nuisance for a farm and just
remember to knowingly and
recklessly fail to exercise
uh reasonable controls
the madam chair representative.
Knowingly and recklessly I i'm
just wondering if I was an
attorney going into court and I
was trying to prove this person
knowingly and recklessly did
this what would I need to prove
to meet both of those benchmarks
as a state of here
madam chair it's very hard to
give hypotheticals I think it's
it it would depend on the fact
of a particular case.
I proceed thank you manager you
speak that like a true judge
maybe that that's your new
upgrade
thank you
so many representative I proceed
that that answer
so I guess I would just.
I I want to know how do we know
what someone is knowingly do
doing something so if I own a
gun shop and I and I say in a
social media post with the best
guns on earth they're great
belicious a joe smell next door
to me actually the better guns
and at better prices and madam
chair representative and less
you say
something something happens to
that i'm not speaking the
absolute truth and it's not a
fair trade practice and it's not
and it's actually a reckless
trade practice that i'm making
what if the what if what i'm
saying is absolutely reckless as
the seller how do we have we
prove that I posted it on social
media someone who has my phone
didn't and how do we ensure that
that individual is held
accountable because after all
the the digital trail of these
these people cannot really
necessarily be rectified within
just it's here say at that point
madam chair how do we cause we
talk about advertising and
marketing right that's
advertising and marketing social
media so how do we prove that
the person who made that post is
the person working hold
accountable.
Madam chair that's a question
that comes up in all kinds of
litigation and.
Okay thank you manager thank you
represent do you have any any
first hand account of that kind
of litigation because i'm just
trying to wrap my head around
how do we prove that in a court
of law and I know we're saying
well I can't speculate I totally
understand is there a case
that's not necessarily regarding
this but you just put in the
word firearm for whatever it is
that we're trying to get the
meat of madam chair
I think I have to rely on the
answer that I was provided.
Okay manager thank you
representative.
I would love more smart clarity
on that because I like I want to
know what what's happening in
new jersey does new jersey have
a lost similar to this that
they're using to prosecute
individuals were not properly
following because this could
that could help me understand
what we're talking about with
knowingly or recklessly
madam chair actually the
photograph that I provided.
Um nuter.
Thank you representative and do
we know how they proved they
knowing I mean it's so obvious
that that one rate
how they knowingly and
recklessly let these guns out
they were not locked up and they
probably knew that they were out
there correct manager and
represent it on glad we can
agree on that okay thank you
madame chair thank you
representative.
All right so I I will go to new
jersey I won't actually travel
there because it really don't
want to do that in the middle of
thirty days session but I will I
will look at their bill and see
what else.
They have provided
representative I had a few other
questions earlier in the bill
here
or later in the books actually
here the attorney general or
district attorney someone twenty
five you're on page three
agreea
may bring a civil action by
verified complaint to a bay
public nuisance described in
this section so a verified
complaint how do we get that
complaint verified manager
madam chair.
The.
A verified complaint is
essentially a term of our it's a
it includes a sworn statement
you know that to the best of the
person's knowledge who signing
the complaint the facts are
true.
Okay thank you madam chair and
think you representative so we
we spoke a little earlier about
us an area where someone over
heard someone saying something
derogatory they they were going
to use the gun to to hurt
somebody.
If we used if we had this
complaint the fact finding would
be allowing that person who
overheard it to swear enough for
david that says they did hear
that person saying that madam
chair would that be included in
this complaint actually it
usually is the
it's usually an attorney or
someone involved in the case.
It up the person who overheard
it would more likely be called
to testify it trials and be
questioned after david.
You know.
To actually make the test.
Thank you
that helps me a little bit one
moment please.
The.
Okay thank you madame chair and
think you representative so
on here I see.
The.
There's definitions of firearm
first page then on the second
page industry member.
Person engaged in the sale
manufacturer making importing
distribution advertising
marketing of a phone product so
it's pretty four blown
comprehensive and that person
would be engaged in the sale so
I I remember in the interim we
talked about.
Let's just say I I order
something that may not be legal
for example I don't know what
that might be maybe maybe III
ordered a glock switch I believe
those are illegal in in the
united states so let's just say
I have made that sale.
From a person in new mexico.
So we're talking about anyone
with the making importing
distribution advertising
marketing.
Would this now include that
individual who.
Of that sale.
So yeah the person would be
would be liable if they were
selling it correct
madam chair and representative I
think my answer to th.
Level of knowledge.
Thank you madame chair think you
represent solicitors there I
just have a I have a shop that
only sells four groups for air
fifteen and they are totally
legal I have a bunch of at my
house and they're they're what I
sell but today I decided I
wanted to sell something that
was modified that let's just say
federal government says is
illegal.
But up to today I have been just
selling totally legal products.
Medams here represent to
if one day I just nap of my
fingers decided to put something
legal on my website and I never
had an infraction before.
Would I would that process or
now be knowingly engaged in some
kind of illicit sale because
they they've been my payment
proce.
Just now i'm making this maybe
something happen and I just
started selling them without now
make that person liable how do
you prove that madame chairman
representative all of these are
suffering specific and the fact
finder would review all of.
Manager represented thank you
for that answer i'm just
concerned that it's so vague how
do I know who is knowingly who
is who is you said earlier a
level of knowledge
on a reasonable basis
so.
What would that reasonable basis
be we don't have a basis here we
just say reasonable what is
reasonable as as i'm trying to
define here in this legislation
madame chair and representative
courts and routinely evaluate a
weather conduct is reasonable or
not the routinely evaluate
whether certain conduct is
knowingly done they routinely
value whether certain conduct is
reckless
so this these are not new
standards and.
Okay thank you madame chair
think you representative.
You know I just I guess I i'm
just saying I don't really have
the most.
Trust in every single fact
finder that could be involved in
this because they of course
everyone has a bias everyone has
a political motive and if this
is the someone who's.
Erociously.
Anti second amendment anti gun
owner they could potentially
make a complaint and then the
person who has the f f l would
be burdened with having to
defend themselves to say well I
was being reasonable your honor
you know I was being reasonable
I don't know what else I could
possibly have done with this
person still filed as complaint
is there some kind of kind of uh
appeals processed to or some
process to reclaim the last time
money litigation expenses that
the f l would go through if
they're found.
Perfectly okay so I don't see
that in the bill manager madam
chair I think we need to clarify
a few things
the individual.
Against him a complaint might be
filed does not have the
responsibility of proving
the plan.
Throughout this conversation.
You know what do we do this way
or how do we do this if the
implication has always been that
it's on the defendant to prove
something in our system of
justice a civil complaint
involves the person who brings
the complaint to have to prove
something so I think we're we
have started this conversation
with the wrong premise and i'm
sorry it's taking me someone to
clarify that since there were
never questions in front of me
when those long explanations in
the hypotheticals were being
post so i'd like to take this
opportunity to point out that
the system that we live with in
is not one where the person
accused is has to prove up the
case it is the person who has
filed the case who has to prove
up the case.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair think
you.
So.
The.
I I understand where you're
trying to come from but it's
still kind of murky forming I
apologize because madam chair
we're seeing.
Some kind of happening that
could be against this law and
i'm the one the fulfilled
getting soon.
I might not manage her if i'm
the one.
In the cross here's of whatever
mayor may not have happened with
whatever I sold at my store
a member of the fire arm
industry fails to act reasonably
fails to implement adequate
controls than that in.
Yeah.
Thank you manager thank you
representative.
Okay so then on so on page two
was it's kind of redundant my
opinion it says ensure that a
firearm industry member line
twenty one complies with the
provisions of federal and state
was and does not promote the
unlawful sale so as never fell
you have to pay the fee you have
to go through the training you
have to know the state laws you
need to know the federal loss
you already did that so why is
it that we are at this is well
saying well we need to make sure
that they did that of course
i'll be out of compliance if I
am out out of complaints with
federal law I won't be in f f l
anymore is the correct manager.
I don't know under what
conditions f f l can have its
his license revoke so I can't
speak to that what I can speak
to is this bill would apply to
an industry.
For failure to establish an
implement reasonable controls
and procedures that could lead
to the loss or threat of a fire
and our product that
does not ensure that they're
following a state and federal
laws and the other enumerated
items madam chair.
Thank you madame chairman think
you represent it so then under
that provision here we're
talking about sale manufacturing
making recording do we know how
many firms manufacturers are in
new mexico who are based here.
I do not.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you representative and some
making I guess we can
technically but making as.
If i'm selling something that I
made.
For as a accessory to a gun
unlike at zero something would I
then be I would technically be a
seller or manufacturer here.
And sale manufacturer making I
would be making it so i'm chair
I does see
self arms manager representative
they do sell accessories and I
have bought a couple there madam
chair you mean like leather
madam chair and representative
holders also.
The.
Uh but let's just say holders
for example yes with let's go
there let's just see there's a
high capacity assault poster out
there madame chair
representative with that high
capacity is holster make if I
made it would I be a
manufacturer that's all i'm
asking.
And i'm being i'm being serious.
The bill thank you minimum chair
I will I don't know if you can
with the draw question but no I
I will I will ask another
question.
Thank you madame chair
representative so my last
question I i'm just wondering I
I there's a gentleman up in last
almost steve porter he's never
fell did you consult with him
he's with less almost ammo.
No.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representatives that's that's
all the questions I had I
appreciate the candor thank you.
Thank you.
Representative i'm just gonna
train some arise what this build
us and it's just yes or no.
So.
The issue in this bill is
whether or not a firearm
industry member has taken
reasonable precautions not
holding them liable for
everything that goes wrong
despite the reasonable
precautions if there are
reasonable
precautions taken the fiam is
off.
Madam chair and represent it I
think that's a fair.
Thank you i'm trying to make a
substitute motion
to make the motion first
yeah.
I moved that we
move a due pass on house
consumer in public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill.
Yeah do not pass in house bill
one fourteen in a due pass on
ho.
Or do not house on house bill
one fourteen and do pass on the
committee substitute for house
fourteen.
Mentally make a substitute
motion for a
tabling on.
Committee substitute for
hospital one fourteen.
Table for a.
Yeah
believe it at that moment the
table whatever whatever it is
that the representative
will take a roll call boot.
The.
Yes the table.
Representative lord yesterday.
Representative remarried no to
table.
Met advice to your rubia.
Madam chair you have a vote of
forty two for no detail.
Thank you the tabling motion
does not
and we will go back to the
original on.
First motion for a do not pass
on house bill one fourteen and a
due pouce on many substitute
for.
Representative lock no man
representative lord no
representative of a mirror yes
representative thompson yes.
Madam vice chair rubia yeah
madame chair for our yes.
Let him sure you have a vote.
To do to do now pass on how so
it all right
I do not account on house bill
one fourteen and a do powers on
committee substitute
about uh
Yeah.
Thank you
next we're going to hear how
still uh
yes and if you please take your
conversations outside your
leaving
excuse me
yes
yes
please leave if you're in
conversations outside.
We're going to hear house bill
one twenty
representative I knew.
Thank you madame chair thank you
members of the committee I hope
I didn't keep you all up on
eight err now scouring through
my bill
quite simply
as stated this will make an
appropriation to fund the
purchase of mental products by
mcd and it requires the m c d
use that money to buy those
products and write to provide
them excuse me to the mates who
need those products and I will
allow my expert witness to
introduce yourself
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for having
us today my name is decorat and
the reproductive rights
community engagement specialist.
At the easily of new mexico i'm
so excited to be here today I
excuse me represent you have an
amendment you'd like to explain
first or next I don't have an
amendment at all you don't
misinformation go ahead thank
you
I am thrilled that the
representative is carrying this
legislation.
That is one small step and
improved support for
reproductive health.
The.
And that was really that's
that's it
nothing further display info at
this time I will stand for
questions thank you
thank you we'll go to the
audience is there anyone in the
opposition.
And then we'll go to the
audience and is there anyone in
support would like to be or you
can just raise your hands if you
just want to okay and would
anyone like to speak
okay anyway.
I would you like to say anything
else before we go to the
committee.
Um I would just like to say that
I think this legislation walks
dreamly this appropriation well
extremely straight forward
is important i'm glad we're
doing it and I just look forward
to its passage thank you.
Committee.
Thinking manager think you
represented and think you all
for being here
not as much public common on
this one
so madame to representative so
two fifty if the appropriate
amounts do we know what
currently is being appropriate
to the the correctional
facilities for these hiding
products manager represent yes
like you madam chair
representative there is no
appropriation currently for a
purchase of these products by n
m c
okay thank you madame chair
think he representative so do we
know how many of these instant
institutions I don't know if you
call it that I don't want to see
the wrong term these places how
many of these places.
That you know if provide these
services to the female inmates
manager represent.
So to answer their cushion most
simply.
In terms of how many
institutions provide feminine
products I do not know the
answer to that um
yet that's the the answer and
madame chair representative is
we're just not sure how many
institutions are already
providing
these products thank you okay
thank you madame chair and think
you representative so yeah I
mean I would like actually like
to see a study about that that
would be a good I mean good
information for a study you're
doing a bill but I would love to
see a study of how.
Much we're putting into them
from their operating budgets
because that's probably
straining certain certain pots
here in there so madam chair
representative
the two fifty figure did we base
that upon the number of female
inmates currently in the system
in new mexico or how did we
arrive at that to make sure that
we have enough funds for these
products madam chair represent.
Turned it off for very many
chair representative and to get
you the most accurate answer as
to why we came up with this
number I will let my experts.
The.
I i'm waiting for an answer
madam chairman members of the
committee
we believe that the two hundred
and fifty thousand is uhm.
Is a really solid start since we
don't know the current amount
and this would be for the twenty
twenty five year if it is too
much it does revert back to the
general fund and then we can.
Okay thank you madame chair and
thank you representative so I
have I have a question for your
expert
so is this included in hb.
Do we know if this is in the
budget madame chairman manager
representative and I can tell
you that it's currently being
worked on.
Madam to think you represent I
just don't want those are
friendly colleagues
appropriations say i'm sorry
it's not here and what work so
thank you for that madam chair
think you representative so the
do we have any definitives of
who is getting these products
you know i.
Are these going in all
correctional facilities because
that's what i'm kind of reading
from the bill is it only women's
prisons is that is it only
women's jails who's getting
these products madam chair
representative manager
representative you know we trust
the
leadership of enemy they know
who they are incarcerating and
as this is just an appropriation
and would carely get into the
week there but we just want to
make sure that these products
are available for those who need
them
thank you madame mature and
think you represent it so then
these products i'm guessing
you know I don't know much about
about feminine hiding products I
apologize are we going up for an
rp for this
is it going to be a a range of
different products.
Birth control things like that
or is it mainly just
the
just the main whatever the main
products are madam chair
representative black this would
be for pads and tampons.
Thank you madame thank you
representative and I don't see
it's like a fifty fifty like do
we take a pole like I want to
make sure that people are
getting what is the most
comfortable to them what's the
most excessible to them that
they prefer so I just want to
make sure that we have that that
data from.
Nmdc yes so as we enter
appropriate for both products.
As for the breakdown of how much
has spent
per product eight year I don't
know the percentages of that
they would probably be up to m
DC to establish I don't want to
save fifty fifty because the
products do not cost the same to
manufacturer so again without
getting into the weeds that
would be up to an empty.
Awesome
i'm sorry I think that it I said
is my best thing to represent
your representative so a person
in cars read.
Does that include folks who were
in jail as well as in prison or
is that only for prison or jail
man manager representative at
this time this would only apply
to prisons i'm jails they are
under a different system would
require a different type of
appropriation so this bill
applies to prisons.
Got it
thank you madame chair thinking
representative I don't think of
any more questions on this but I
proceed the efforts and thank
you so much thank you very much
matria representative.
Yeah.
I believe I remember hearing
that women in jails prisons
have to use their account that
they get for snacks and things
to buy.
Motion representative
is member little bit course
today and my understanding of
the current situation is that
under the new secretary of
corrections to foyer.
The situation has improved
however when products are not
available or not provided when
products are not provided in
means are often and required to
spend their own commercially
money on these products in the
market can be considerable and
so my understanding is that
under the current administration
of secretary to wear these
products are being an property
and distributed I would just we
just a requesting this
appropriation to guarantee that
the money is available and only
to be spent on these products
and only on their distribution
venture so would you say this
this will.
The.
Make up for the change in
correction secretary if this is
then the budget that no matter
who the corrections department
secretary is it will be ongoing
as opposed to this this year you
have it next year you want
madame chair representative yes
thank you that is exactly it's
purpose they thank you for
bringing th.
Merchant
is going to say madame chair
representative
madame chair at this point it is
not recording and because as
stated that to fifty is really
our benchmark number the
products are the remaining
balance or is any does revert to
the general fund but this really
just gives us a bench mark as to
what needs to be appropriate at
going forward.
Thank you madame chair think you
represent experts so I wouldn't
understand if I could.
Uses their budget is that
correct to give you.
Yeah.
And madam chair representative
just to give you the most
accurate answer to your question
I am I don't know where in the
corrections budget these
products are purchased from
at this point it's nut state
money so as unless we you know
asked the corrections that
apartment I could not tell you
exactly how these products are
procured unless my expert has
more information if not that's
okay
madam chair members of the
committee I don't have the exact
details on that budget but I did
want to make a clarification
that the department of
corrections only provides pads
to its mate.
In mates they do not.
Manager represent expert
because.
According to the analysis this
but would allow the department
to continue to offer mentioned
or products as needed so it
sounds.
That this is a reading their
budget.
So one of the things I would
appreciate sooners why
do they need this for their
budget yeah I mean if you made a
defense of all they don't have
enough money to continue.
It would allow and that the
woman's facilities have
typically purchased these
products out of their opera.
So it sounds like this is
already been taken care of.
I'm just curious as to why we
need destination it would be a
good question for somebody in
the new mexico corrections
department.
The.
And I think agree with our reps
and block a study would have
been good are further
explanation of we need this
money because they've cut this
out of budget.
Show that they're not given
enough.
So I do have
a question
about it and amendment.
Yeah.
Because but i'd like to see if
this is going to move forward if
we could strike and cars right a
persons and add female in mates
because i'm if I ment.
Are we looking at mental prisons
what is your what is it that
you're looking for.
Mention representative and we do
what to be sure that we included
transfolks in this language
because there are transfolks who
do men straight and we want to
make sure that no matter where
they are encourse rated that
they have access to these
products so I would not be
amanable to that amendment at
this time because it would
change the purpose of the bill.
Of the amendment two two seven
five four.
I'll make a second on that if
it's necessary.
The.
Second year
for an unfriendly up.
Yes.
Okay so.
So.
Medicare representative exp.
If you're anato.
You have the anatomy of you and
it sheds a lining every month at
that.
The.
You're in a female prison that
is my understanding.
Yeah.
They're not.
The point of that i'm trying to
make sure this money stays with
them.
The women that.
The amendment is solely to say
these are for.
Is it for whim these are for.
Biologically.
So the whole point of this is I
want to make sure that it is
going.
Are there
while logical.
People who identify.
Mentioned representative as that
is entirely outside of the scope
of an appropriations bill
I I don't know how I could
possibly answer that with regard
to the bill and in question okay
well medium terrorist at that's
a point I was trying to get out
is if we're going to do this I
see a lot of other states do do
this than I want to make sure
that the mo.
Yeah.
That as a whole.
We got this past but the money
got divided up between a men's
p.
So that is the purpo.
Tabling.
No to table
representative not to table.
Representative of a mirror.
Oh.
I was going.
Yeah yeah
nobody opposed it
I will vote yes and.
Representative thompson
yesterday
voice met and vice chair rubia
madame chair ferrari yes to t.
To
amendment it has.
The.
I would like to suit more.
How that's going to be
where it's going to go.
Where.
The.
And some more explanation.
Um thank you for bringing this
for.
And treating persons as far as
what we're trying to do.
Just as a quick little
background I did speak to the
secretary we had to add a
constitu.
Protecting folks in this way and
making sure that there was
budgetary
on
allocations to ensuring that
every.
Um I was assured that there was
adequate budget funding for that
at the time that sad montreal I
think the difference who is the
fact that
there's only one choice rate and
it's difficult it's going to be
the same thing in our schools as
well you know they're typically
the lowest cost item that is as
we've all sort of probably had a
very familiar
understanding is just that
they're they're not
applicable thing to every day
life and many circumstances so
I think a valuating and
understanding what the state had
spent.
While there work around that are
all.
For the commissioner commission
comma
opportunities I think that that
could be like one of those
questions of how is it that
we're choosing these.
Applicable to every day life arm
ends and compar.
Achieve hopefully not only.
Prisons and just understanding
that this is not a choice this
is something that is happening
every single day and we need to
be able to have basic health
provided for us so I really
appreciate it um and and just
encourage that ongoing dialogue
as we continue to get data from
our schools how it informs other
government agencies for for.
I did but I will again.
So i'm i'm sorry that's okay.
The.
It's been moved in second
for house bill when twenty.
Representative block no but I
would like to explain my vote
please
represent of lord no explain my
book with.
Representative remerrill
representative thompson yes
madam vice chair rubio
a madam chair for our yes okay
and on.
And.
What.
The manager think you represent
a I just want to.
Explain that I I do want to
study you know I like studies I
like to have data so I like to
make those data driven decisions
and
I want to make sure that the the
amount is appropriate for how
many
madame chair I also just wanted
to make sure that the
the products are getting to the
people who need the most and I
would hope that.
That would happen but I just
want to make sure that we have
those checks in balances so I
really appreciate it thank you
manager thank you representative
on you know.
I got it right right thank you
thank you thank you very much
man sharing committee members
thank you for.
And i'd like to think our
security
providing a screen organization
for all the people that were her
earlier.
And for hanging in.
