Representative small.
Sentence and.
I share Sarinana directing your
we have a quorum.
Okay first off the.
As this is our last meeting
just like to thank everyone.
Senator least with this year the
special like to thank the staff.
just reiterated the
I would nature but it's a lot
more to the than I thought so
thank you can I have
thank you for your assistance H.
as well.
The questions comments
suggestions for the for.
By the.
Here is our new thank you.
For school this morning is
Senate bill four fifty six.
Representative are you
presenting.
Misters Mr chair R. I'm
presenting as well as an
Representative Dixon and we have
a.
With witness Mister Jim chart
on.
And.
So I just kick us so this is our
country can committees of
supercenter so four five six
modify separate several
provisions of the prior bill
section one you provided the
investor owned utility will file
grid modernization plan with the
commission pursuant to its rules
that panel include evaluation
metrics as determined by the
commission which may include
measures of cost effectiveness
reliability of the distribution
grid and how the plans are
consistent with the state's
roadmap for grid modernization.
Section B. will require that the
commission and act these rules
as of October one twenty twenty
four and will cooperatives are
again exempt from these
requirements.
Mr chair we also have Mister
Abbas Akhil online is another
would expand which is.
That's what really happens we
merge to built into why Mr chair
I was before you prior with the
bill and I had in the pretty
modernization which is HB for a
two forty three so that section
Is addressed.
and the section with the public
and to provide public utilities
about grid modernization plan
with the public regulation
commission and operating the
public regulation to commission
to make rules regarding the grid
Martin plant and then the other
bill which is one before you is
for fifty D. six which will
create an energy storage
development target requiring
energy storage procurement and
deployment to be addressed as
part of the resource plans Mr
chairman and ask
Cosponsored Dixon to act.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning members so the second
component of this bill Senate
bill four fifty six is the
energy storage development and
planning act and it's taking the
critical component of energy
storage for that transition to
clean energy.
And it is requiring that the PRC
work with
the utilities to
Why energy storage over the next
ten years and so there are two
targets there's an interim
target for storage
set for twenty twenty eight and
then there's storage target set
for twenty thirty three and
needs targets are in line with
the overall roadmap for the grid
modernization so that we can
have at net zero by twenty fifty
so I think with that.
You know I think we can take
questions
and perhaps Senator semantics
may arrive then want to provide
additional comments.
What we do is.
The.
Of a.
so short.
This is the opposition this.
H..
The.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Bernalillo
treat.
Lobbyist for Xcel energy we just
came here this morning in
support of the bill.
The when we went to the bill
Sanchez they accepted some
changes we have the the bill
does not have mandate it has
targets which are in line with
what
our company is in is in position
with and so we just stand in
support of bill thank you Mr
chair.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee was gonna with the
Sierra Club you're gonna chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members and supporters
throughout the state we stand in
support of this bill would
require the inclusion of storage
in the integrated resource
planning process imposition New
Mexico as a leader in energy
storage behind the eight early
adopter stages at sorry states
some of the things that we might
think the planning is about
where will these projects go of
a communities will they serve
these projects benefit each a
communities which is important
because these projects can
promote economic development in
a region
in a region and provide a
cleaner source of energy for
those communities that have
historically borne the burden of
dirty energy production as we
stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Hi good morning chairman McQueen
members of the committee Carl's
to Sir with the Public Service
Company Mexico.
And we we are in support of this
bill we did work with the
sponsors and we thank them for
putting some changes that
especially with the date to
bring in energy storage for
discounted the if after or
before December thirty four
point after December thirty
first twenty twenty two instead
of twenty twenty three because
we do have a lot of projects of
when it comes to battery storage
in Q. and that's really going to
help us over the next twenty
years to be more carbon free as
in as we are we we speak now PNM
is at fifty percent carbon free
so that this works with our
goals and plus agreed my pieces
well so for those reasons we
support the bill thank you.
The.
Excuse us.
Thank you you.
You'll see these acts were.
Yes Department center people
came to have a few words.
Here morning
For.
Indian.
If you are.
That's great
Mr chair I.
You can now this was a
compromise on the course of.
It
should be used to this every
room is different the morning Mr
chair members of the committee
Representative Abbas Akhil was
my expert witness in one of my
committees this is of course us
substitute.
It is a negotiated peace between
the utilities the investor owned
utilities even the PRC gave us
language to change in the bill
and health advocates who had
some concerns came forward the
American clean power association
has over seven hundred fifty
members nationwide over thirty
members here in the state of New
Mexico that I know about
utilities renewables
The industry everyone thank you.
Is that yes.
This presents a questions Mr
chair.
So on.
so.
Course.
The.
For.
If you.
Well as of the calls.
Each package.
Sure.
I.
Mr chair in our it former
representative Akhil has the
answer that he might be in a
great spot to answer it
otherwise hi me that information
as well.
Thank you.
Mr chair committee members thank
you so much for allowing me to
speak the cost range anywhere
from about a hundred dollars per
kilowatt hour if each to some
other technologies our goal at
eight PM in some locations
across the about five hundred
seventy dollars as noted in the
FIR.
The officials for energy she
urged.
Six.
Up to two hundred fifty dollars
our.
Yeah I
need to this do we have the
option for.
Yes you are.
Is.
Last may have the answer to if
not the
Thank you I.
Mr chair yes.
But if you can please repeat
your question your argument
wasn't here.
Mr chairman and.
Looking for.
The levelized cost thank you to
the elector state.
From a natural gas fired power.
Mr chair and representative
Scott I think that's not a fair
comparison it's not apples to
apples
gas fired generation provides a
different kind of resource to
the great energy storage which
is a much more flexible
resources with the grid operator
can use and does come as a
becoming outdated today energy
storage with solar is coming in
cheaper than coal.
Thank you Mr.
I have
think
that's.
The age all
of us to tell.
This.
Mr chair and representative ****
yes it would be accurate
depending on the cost of gas at
that time.
So.
Mr Chairman representative the.
Four thousand megawatts.
Help.
Somewhere between the.
Three I.
Each.
The storage facility as opposed.
Sure you can use your
so Mr Chairman representative to
the state.
It is.
Projections.
As to what that want to.
Mexico she was stripped of their
electricity costs.
Mr chair representative we know
that yes it is up to you just
know about sources of energy
supply.
Hopefully you have and the least
cost and other storage offers
the most flexibility to as we
know it meeting though but is
also currently the extensive.
Requiring a large fixed amounts
of that is rich in the R. P.
will not result in the least
costly shin but the optional
equipment at this time we
understand that this is at the
same time we need to be moving
towards this as we're moving
towards our targets in our goals
for the ETA for our state and we
know that in in the future that
we're going to be as we get more
and you all online and reaching
those targets we need to that we
were all those prices will come
down.
Representative what we will do
three things.
Some of
the.
We.
The
target internet spans.
Each only exacerbate the cost
issues.
Research.
To discuss Mr Chairman these
these investor owned utilities.
We tell.
Thank you consul those actions
from the right.
Also.
But.
Judy was the the.
The.
This is this.
Well for this long.
This.
She rates.
Four to thirty percent.
The chief.
Mr Chairman.
Representatives.
How much.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Thank.
Thank you Representative is
Jane this morning not I.
The result to the.
Mr chairman.
Doctors.
The.
Mr chair and Representative
Townsend so the PRC is setting
the target for how much energy
storage should be on the grant
by twenty twenty eight and
twenty thirty three and those
are based on a long term target
the PRC is going to do an
analysis and then they can't
require utilities to procure or
deploy energy storage and the
utilities are incorporating into
their integrated resource plans
the amount of storage and
because they're investor owned
utilities they can petition up
for approval to constructor
choir at storage and get a
reasonable rate adjustment.
Mr chairman and representative
of.
Issue feel at we are years he
can look awesome.
Thanks for.
Mr chair and representative it
our expert can actually answer
that directly that making sense
of thank you
of Mr Chairman Representative
Townsend so other dared and you
might use yourself first hello
I'm sorry.
Okay okay I'll I'm Jim day
showdown I'm the executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico
and so Mr Chairman
representative Thompson thank
you for that question so the PRC
of course what all you the
investment owned utilities are
required to submit an integrated
resource plan and that is you
know there's a public process
for that were public can weigh
in on that but absolutely part
of that process which goes to
the PRC they have to consider
you know the best cost resources
cost.
That would be true of any form
of generation.
So.
Representative is here.
Your violate the.
Yes average wage.
how are source.
Is.
And will.
Because
Because in the.
Mr chairman Representative
Townsend that that is my belief
yes.
And general.
I mean the.
Doctor patient that would cause
me to share that belief I don't
have specific of Mr Chairman
representative Thompson I don't
have specific documentation
although there is information
from the US energy information
administration on this topic I I
think the quite honestly the
mere fact that
Little the utilities all over
the world are migrating to
energy storage and the very fact
that in twenty twenty two more
energy storage was installed and
natural gas generators in the
United States so there's clearly
a trend of going this direction
in.
These to do that are doing this
so that it that it out the
various technologies and come to
that conclusion.
Mr Chairman.
The the US.
Of regulatory requirements are
because.
They believe the X. force.
Continues this spectacle
of portable power conditions.
Yes Mr chairman Representative
Townsend I I believe the way you
state your your your question
you are correct I I I believe
it's a combination of policy and
what's most cost effective.
Mr chair that that what this
piece legislation does it sets
up the planning for that so that
that's where we're meeting our
goals and I will again talk
about the ETA we have a fifty
percent renewable part we should
we are to have a fifty percent
when you will report full year
by twenty thirty by twenty forty
eight percent when your
portfolio for your standard so
what we've done in this piece of
legislation to separate those
that time frame to speak for
those targets not necessary
those mandates as your
suggesting or asking about Mr
chair Representative Townsend so
that's what this be super wide
support to have this piece of
legislation and sensible it puts
forward those targets in a five
a five year timeline so that we
are matching with those so
departments are through the ETA
so we know that it's going to
take some time to get that up
there but do the research and
the information we know that
this will be
dispatchable
energy that can be used to
predict and that's why the
framework is so important Mr
chair thank you.
I wish I could share.
With offices in this time
period.
Twenty eight which would be a
competitive I I know we get
forces on
I get that.
We are.
But it just of the gentleman
it just causes me great concern
that we're.
I mean we're not looking at
other we're not looking at your.
That I think you should be able
to dispatchable.
Zero thank I.
All you need to.
For that.
What we're we're not we're real
careful.
Millions if not billions of
dollars read more news station.
I.
All of all of the issues that
come with the.
Not that are.
All possible
there.
But why we're not allowing.
Industry and the Americans.
Engineering.
Absolutely to make things
affordable and then the.
It really difficult for them
because I.
We have electric utilities that
have
the co ops Services specifically
the long wait
in line of the high cost.
And I'm concerned about that I
wish there was something in your
piece of legislation that
required it to be competitive in
options to consumers.
Mr chair and representative so
renewable energy so renewable
energy is actually.
Cheaper now than a lot of our
traditional fossil fuels and so
batteries that are storing that
energy our.
That cheaper solution
to your earlier point I would
argue that
All forms of energy should be
part of the solution and
actually are if you look at
international a whole range of
sort of projections for how
we're gonna have our electricity
source that include nuclear as
well as natural gas and and
other things during this
transition right it's a twenty
year transition batteries are
part of the solution because we
do need to be dispatchable
energy it is lowcost because of
the stores being renewable
usually and as more batteries
are made and more technologies
are coming online the cost
continues to decrease and if you
look at that cost increase of
solar and wind over the last
twenty years it's actually been
quite rapid and so I think that
most people are expecting that
other forms like batteries are
going to continue to have a
rapid.
Of the labor the point chairman
I.
I am all about it thank you all
right here we are in New Mexico.
To add that our leaders.
In the Energy.
A lot of their after.
What are the we have.
That we have a lot of facilities
in New Mexico that we should be
supporting.
And
I need permission the more.
Think we should be the questions
the mobile.
Make sure that we're providing
low cost dispatchable power to
the New Mexico.
And you're exactly right that
the price of million dollars.
Note that activity but the issue
is this back.
And the battery power is it is
more expensive than other
dispatchable sources that.
So.
I still have that issue but I
appreciate I'm glad it's not
Joe.
Not that it's not earlier in the
session and I'm that is not a
mandate.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam or.
Thank you Mr chair
representative of I really
focused on a couple issues and
and number one so location I
read the bill correctly it
requires the stores be located
in New Mexico and we in
southeast New Mexico
Are getting a great deal of our
power from.
The Texas panhandle our general.
It seems to me that the battery
storage needs to be close to the
places as generation.
And so I'm wondering if if
This is going to
be able to be accomplished with
respect to the southwestern
public service company our
utility in our area.
Mr chair.
Representative Nibert to respond
yes having sources close
together are usually better but
it doesn't.
Mr chair.
Mr chair.
And if we expert witness would
like to win a kids.
Mr chair and committee members
feel with is completely wrong
presume that the storage
has to be closed for generations
in fact better use of storage
for dispersal around right so
that it can provide services as
needed officials the idea of
combining storage with
generation usually works with
solar but in this case you're
not required at the storage he
that sold so Mister chair and
Representative Nibert thank you.
My second question Mr chair
representative is.
Everything that are.
Read about the issue of battery
storage is that it's going to
require tremendous amounts of
Minerals many of them rare earth
minerals.
And.
In New Mexico.
We have videos minerals present.
We also have a funding law that
does not really help us open new
markets and.
It seems to me if we're heading
down this path.
We have to do something to
courage
The extraction of those
resources that would be capable
of producing the batteries that
are necessary to deploy the
megawatts into one deployed by
the storage technology so Mr
chair representative any thought
on that issue.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative hi one hundred
percent agree with you on the
need for
Source responsibly sourced
minerals and rare earth minerals
but battery storage in this
context there's actually quite a
few different ways and
technologies that are currently
being used there's pumped hydro
probably wouldn't work here
compressed air what was all
there's a lithium ion there's
lead acid batteries their flow
batteries hydrogen and fly will
so we do have a lot of different
options as we're moving forward.
I hope one of those options
chair and Representative is a
we.
Look AT tire spectrum because of
for mandating the stuff for
requiring it we have to be able
to to secure the by products
that go into that and if we
have them in New Mexico you can
simply say well we're running
for all the stuff we need to be
willing to the the burden of the
other end of it as well and so
that would be more.
The other problems of.
We can requirements so right now
yes Representative you know.
The ability to to deploy this
much energy through this
technology
is maybe a bit of a stretch of
the current time.
Mr chair thank you
Representative.
The representative Nibert
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chair
In this
The.
If I could experts may begin
sorry.
Mr chair this is about Mister
Jim disruption.
Six.
Or.
We have to say your name.
so Mister speaker and and.
Have.
It was stated earlier that
That it still required to.
To purchase the least cost.
Here she's the technician so
have to.
That would require percent lease
costs but that has changed
What the definition of least
cost.
Could you explain that just a
little bit.
Mr Chairman Representative
Montoya I I don't know if I set
there require nine I know it's a
major factor in their
consideration and of course
these pasta best value are not
always the same so the PRC looks
at a number of different
variables in that situation
thank you Mr chair
The.
The difference.
Ten years ago these costs as
lease cost sources.
So yes the least cost for
utility was to go with natural
gas Sanchez.
Hold it was too it was for this
renewables in this matter but
now Mister chair.
We say least cost what we need
is we're mandating battery
technology.
In battery technology even if
it's way more expensive than
other sources.
These cost issues the definition
to the least cost battery
technology if we're mandating is
that correct
Mr chairman Representative
Montoya the one thing I really
like about this bill is that is
technology agnostic so it.
What's going to happen is you're
gonna look at the various
technologies see what is the
best fit and of course costs
would be a major consideration.
Mr chair and leaned expert but
that would be within battery
technology if we're now once
again we're not we're not
mandating that we're targeting
but it's still within.
Battery storage for storage.
Representative
is up.
Mr Chairman Representative
Montoya it is storage it's a
storage there's many different
forms of technologies that can
store energy so.
But if least cost is natural
gas.
It would be that they can go on.
Gas because it's not I'm just
saying we've we've changed the.
We change the definition least
cost used to be whatever when we
have the PRC and place Mr chair
it was for.
The charge was for
affordability and reliability.
That's the whole PRC used to be.
But now we're trying to hit
targets.
So for ability.
Almost isn't even part of the
charge.
It's.
These costs.
Within shooting are targets of
renewable would that be fair to
say.
Mr speaker Mr Chairman
representative Lente I I would
agree with that statement yes.
So as we've been doing this I
know in Farmington our utility
rates of almost double.
For the longest time Mr chair
those those rates were not
nearly as high as they are now
and my son have.
One of my sons.
It has the.
Misfortune of having to turn
people off.
For reconnect them and that has
gone up dramatically actually
works in the it's important to
utility.
And.
That.
Is a common occurrence in
support.
Mr chair that have their
legislation on.
now I think
once again since he works
utilities since I know people
who to utility we've talked
about those cost increases with
we did have one that is Baptist
a lot of our we have a.
natural gas plant it's not it
wasn't for much of the total
portfolio but it went down
Stewart have replaced that
power.
But the the cost overall funds.
Of the only.
With renewables.
Is more expensive.
And
Once again as I as of heard
about through my son.
I'm going to people's homes much
more often.
This is a much more common
occurrence once in support can't
afford.
And
at some point Mr chair.
We're gonna have to some sort of
course correct.
We can have very good goals and
targets.
and I would suggest that and I I
was as a coach to a lot of
sports we can aim for the stars
if you hit the moon that's
pretty good.
But if we demand that we hit
some of those goals and targets
without.
Considering the consequences to
the people have to pay for our
decisions.
I suggested going to form.
Thank you Mr.
There's a very.
Thank you Mr chair
you guys are talking my language
now when you're talking about a
plan in the study because that
is what I do and
so some of the questions that I
have Mr chair and representative
and senator thank you for being
here this morning
So
This this bill.
The plan I guess that because it
says group modernization plan
what exactly is does that entail
like when you're creating a plan
is that it planned to study
there is a plan to I mean is it
implementing at is it so that's
kind of my question Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr chair representative thank
you for asking with this bill
we flexes a gradual then your
growth.
And we implemented at the
plantation at a two point five
year intervals so that we are
looking at the PTA as I
mentioned before looking at
those schools that we have to be
eighteen with the fifty percent
renewable.
By twenty thirty and the next
slide twenty forty with an
eighty percent renewable
portfolio standards so as we're
we're meeting those standards we
have to.
What this bill does it right
certificates is it puts it puts
forward
the staff how that is going to
be we put forward and I think
For Representative boss if you
would like to at.
About us Mr chair.
Mr chair committee members
Representative but thank you for
the questions very quickly the
answer would be that great
modernization representative is
different.
Consideration for each of the
three of committees as I
listened nineteen coops in the
state so one with you could
modernization from eight AM to
one match of their own great and
proposed that the PRC to
implement all of the time.
And that's what you see below
about the origin of bill up and
modernization should not have
that it only took like projects
that as this is B. four five six
goes a step further and provide
concrete directions to the PRC I
I and implement the
modernization as suits that
particularly in the US service
if you thank you Mr chair.
So Mister chair and and
Representative is a yes
you know just from a planning
perspective you would be looking
at the state you would be
looking at different quadrants
of the State probably and.
Working with the PRC to look at.
What the capacity is how to
build capacity
help you know what those costs
might be even though it doesn't
say that in the in the in that
bill but I'm I'm just thinking
out loud Mr chair and and
representative
Sort of you know what would be
required to implement a grid
modernization plan for the
different areas of the state
that would maybe within time and
they say that you know because
it does talk about five years
and so on within time Mr chair
and representative Senator
you would you would develop the
there would be a plan developed
that would say.
For the southwest quadrant of
the State state for the
northeast quadrant of the state
for the northwest quadrant of
the state for whatever the
southwest quadrant of the state
this is how.
The state of New Mexico would
move forward with implementing
grid modernization that is what
kind of this bill in my mind.
That's kind of what we're
talking about here we're not
talking about actually going to
implementing the plan and this
is I mean and I I think that.
With that I mean that that tells
me that you know we are being
responsible because we are
looking at what's existing Mr
chair representative.
R. Senator.
What we're looking at existing
conditions what is.
What what each area might.
Have.
Already what they need.
The populations
sort of creating something for
the PRC to make some decisions
on later on which probably would
also include costs.
My on the right track here.
Mr speaker generally are haven't
had my coffee this morning so I
guess if I had it I'd really be
talking a lot but Mr speaker
generally have to have my copy
either but that is actually
right and one thing I would ask
you your what you're discussing
is part of the sources of
renewable so we have to have
everything comes together to to
build that up and that the
responsibility and are you to.
To work on the plan to the
pierces it is integral to the TV
we need to pretty good
modernization act.
So Mr chair the representatives
and senators so what we're
proving here today is really
just the sort of the right for
the PRC two began to study this
within our.
A specify time frame.
Thank you Mr thank you
Senator they go I think that I
don't we talk
stated I think we can talk if
you have a discussion about that
but what is already on platelets
are available because we already
have the activities place we're
trying to do with this bill is
to put forward plans to the we
meet those targets in working
without all those entities
are at the table for you for
this point share at a certain
point.
Yeah thank you okay thank you Mr
chair and and representatives
for that clarification I I think
that that that really in my mind
kind of tells me that we're just
what we're doing today is we're
just approving so.
Pathway I guess for this to be
implemented within time not
saying that this is what it's
going to cost these are
variables that they would be
looking at as this is all
developed.
Richard.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you Senator.
Need further discussion.
Percent for a second time.
Very briefly.
Our focus math to build to.
That indicates.
Just wanted to the storage.
Over two point two billion
dollars.
And that will have to be
recovered from that right.
Two point two billion.
Two million consent.
Mr Chairman representative for
experts our thank you Mr.
Thank you
there too much Mr.
Small I move that to the best
on.
Yes the small second from
Representative radio.
To take the.
Representative Braco.
Representative Dixon
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend no more.
I share Sarinana.
Chairman queen yes seven four.
The two thousand four thank you
thank you members.
Hang the DJ is.
The.
Review
this issue the issue is that we.
so I also before we we get
Senator Sanchez
There's I think terror Committee
instances with also think or
else will.
Thank you for your service.
Next with the tensions with
the fish after use programs and
senator Sanchez where's your
expert witness.
Well here's an excuse you said
you have to be in school or
something.
I don't let him off on that one
but he is watching you the
creepy the text although there
are want to get Senator Sanchez
whenever you're ready
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I bring this
bill three ninety to Senate bill
three ninety two
Real quick this bill doesn't act
costs the state nothing doesn't
add any programs
This was brought to me by
Eleven year old now has birth it
was just a few days ago Braden
McIntosh who was here in the
capital with Montana tour he's
with teen pack and he was seen
how.
A how the process will bill is
made and he brought this idea to
me so this is ideal I'm running
this bill this bill
When you go and purchase eight
game and fish Lysons or hunting
license it's all optional if you
want to donate this will create
a thing where you can donate and
this will go to the existing
programs that we already have
for quite resource education in
schools conservation education
school that the game and fish
provides to our schools also for
hunting fishing shooting camps
the offering for the ATV safety
programs so this these it
doesn't create any new programs
and it's optional if you want to
volunteer and that Mr chair make
it quick and I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you is there anyone in the
audience who would like to
speak.
In support of this bill.
the state one online speak in
support of this bill.
Is there anyone who they speak
in opposition so say no members
of the committee.
What does it.
but here's Sarinana
Senator Sanchez I just have one
question
so it is this I was told this
was serve around from thing or
is it I mean if you have a
dollars and you have five
dollars what's what's the
thank you for the question yes
you can you can add if it's all
dollars and ten cents you can
round up to the nearest dollar
or if you want to make a
donation at that time you could
make a hundred dollar donation
there's no Max or minimum to
wrap up.
The opposition to this motion.
