And in a small increase in
estimated revenue into the state
Representative I.
The.
It is eighty three point seven
million dollars higher than the
executive recommendation and
that's due to the LFC Revenue
including thirty million dollars
in fund balance that of the LFC
believe was available for
budgeted budget the.
The whole amount that the
department indicated was
available part of this process
but we didn't.
so the additional revenue moved
into in New York budget was
focused on making funds
available for projects including
ten million dollars for project
design
seventeen point one million for
project construction and twenty
six million for a department
meeting.
There was a I just mentioned the
other day to that service.
Departments projecting a slight
increase in debt service for FY
twenty four in the system money
need into that the good news on
that surface side is one of the
FY twenty four that amount is
expected to go down dramatically
Rep which when I bring new money
for the department to be able to
invest in projects in house yes.
in addition to the rogue
projects in those sections I.
Five six and seven.
Include US standard budget
adjustment language this allows
the department to do a couple of
things first respond to
unforeseen circumstances as well
as
we call.
All of rolling over so if you
projects don't always fall
closes one fiscal year so they
will project yes.
You're getting their contractors
and.
For those projects so that that
that language is standard every
year.
in addition the amendment
includes four hundred and ninety
seven million in general fund
appropriations for the special
transportation corporation on
section line of section eight in
the amendment because there's
only sections of the amendment.
That will be rolled into section
nine of the General Appropration
Act which is why the for for in
that way
you also notice there seven
million dollars in there's seven
million dollars special
appropriation for the week
distance tax identification for
fun in this section that's not
general fund
just note that this ninety seven
million is within the LFC budget
framework
and in keeping with past
practice other recommendations
included for project funding
through our throughout the state
for transportation districts all
across the state as well as
there's sufficient project
capacity for the Senate to
consider project needs
throughout the state as well.
and with that manager I'd be
happy to stand for questions
after Stephen is in the other.
Is very madam chair.
the LFC yes we are all consensus
on this a budget proposal that.
Thank you.
This is Kelly it is a very good
job presenting and.
You are the numbers today.
A pass educating thousands and
processes are.
Want to recognize our department
transportation secretary Ricky
Serna and his team or here today
thank you so much do you want
to.
Say anything are
In the I want to thank you see
the work that comes to you all
at this point we're in consensus
with funds we need everyone
thanks committee for your
consideration of the general
fund appropriations for the
additional work that we do
outside the state O. funding or
federal funding we appreciate
your insights on the projects
that you would like for us to
prioritize over the next several
years before working with you on
your own with the updates sure
that we're.
Thank you thank you much.
All right without the state of
the committee questions.
Madam chair thank you very much
I'm looking at page four of the
amendment and I'd like you to
explain to me I'm interested in
the district six project forces
and reject said sixty three of
seventy nine on interstate forty
in transportation districts six
what does that.
And so on madam chair there are
two exits there and this would
provide the department funding
for
there there's a wide variety of
the local projects but I believe
that specifically what the
department had in mind was.
the engineering study of those
two.
Support.
the need for and fox and and
just regular Senator father
trucks regular traffic to be
able to go over those bridges
safely and maintain those in the
event of increasing passed so
let me ask you madam chair is is
exit sixty three the belong
access.
I believe that that we're
commission we received from the
department exit sixty three is
that prove exist what seventy
nine that is I think the more
okay so those are the two access
and then
so this is madam chair however
spending a hundred and eighty
seven million dollars or a
hundred and so
Madam chair there's no specific
dollar amounts given to the
department for these these
specific projects that that
leaves a little bit of
flexibility in their
the idea was to include projects
that for the department to fund
but to leave sufficient capacity
for the Senate to be able to
weigh in on projects as well
taciti madam chair for the
Senate so do we it would be it
would be half of the hundred.
Okay so these projects are
identified for the house
recommendation yes.
The other question I have been
madam chair was what we're
looking at
Budget adjustment already for
fiscal year twenty twenty four.
Is it only Madam chair for
project design construction
programs or is everything.
Which would include this this
new section Sir so madam chair
The the program transfer
authority is for the department
section for operating budget
like to in other sections.
Well let me ask you the madam
chair if it's only for section
four section for money is.
Those big cold Mandall with
other section five and now this
new section how the second half
so madam chair and
representative the
I'm just Mr chairman is to weigh
in on this because the funds in
section four there's a
completely different process two
forty eight and.
Physically put them in the
system then all the all of us
back to the appropriations so
there's special project codes
for those
Work madam chair how does that
work for DFA you have multiple
funding sources part of it is a
section four section five and
section.
The budget separately the items.
For section eight nonrecurring
appropriations and budget using
it Department with Zico branded.
The is for all budget
adjustments.
All right.
I have the one final question
madam chair.
It is good that you have late
this all out so everybody can
clearly see what kind of funding
in this band in order to outside
of your operating budget as well
as the other sections I would
like to compliment the staff are
meant madam chair for for good
omens thank you.
Why I I want to just take a
moment to thank all of you for
the hard work that you've put in
to this amendment to working
with me and you chair in
teaching me the things I needed
to know about this process so
that I could is affected as I
could be in I also want to thank
every single member of this
committee who came together with
me to give me their thoughts on
specific priority projects they
had to ensure that all your
districts were properly
represented and so this was this
process is a pleasure for me and
I hope continue to get better at
it the more I do it so thank you
so much to every member every
one of you and every member of
this committee and my bank
surely something well thank you
madam chair well thank you can
we wanted you back there all the
audience for the state of New
Mexico and you know having your
tier.
It is not hard but it's profit
will do all these up I think
going through that but if you
can hear we need to work
committee and make sure that
every district as the chair of
a room is going to do what
they're doing a lot of time
money she's the water flows
districts for plans to hear.
There locally because this
committee right on out of here
not all districts are a
Representative I think that are
not.
But we are trying to make sure
that everybody fair share in a
and then the.
I appreciate.
After the amendment.
of the item that I would do so
at this time this.
For
more discussion on the
amendment.
The motion.
To adopt House Bill three is
amended Mr yeah.
So.
Representative.
Maybe call office federal.
Correct.
Yes Representative from yes
Representative yes
Representative delivers yes.
Yes Representative Jones yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid yes
Representative Pettigrew yes
Representative Romero yes
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
eleven zero three and I have a
minute on the minute.
we didn't need to discuss it but
in case anybody has any
additional questions now is the
time to bring them up.
Thank.
The amended.
Yes.
Representative Brown yes
Representative yes
Representative delivers your
order yes Representative Johnson
yes Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid is here
yes Representative Romero yes
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Thank you very much.
Thank you to all the for the
time you put into this join.
The.
Okay so now we're back on house
bill one sixty.
Good morning madam chair.
Well.
Here.
Committees.
you madam chair your was a
substitute that was adopted in
economic okay.
Two days.
RT.
That tactic thank you very much
at this point time with a little
bit about this yes.
Of this bill really is the
outcome of a lot of the work
that we've been doing these last
few years on trying to develop
ways to improve access to
broadband across the state and
most particularly areas that are
underserved and.
A lot.
A lot of rural New Mexico.
What we learned when we were
working on that connecting
Mexico act related taxes that
Transportation I just felt
constrained in its ability to
comedy in the to adjust the
structure or the and or please
see because of concerns about.
The anti defamation laws and
that was that we had a lot of
conversations about that in this
bill is a concept the fact that
our joint resolution.
This last year past builders and
now there's more flexibility
from the department to be able
just fees to certain things
sounds like it will advance the
ability to underserved areas and
I'm sure you know.
That economics is a problem
trying to reach homes that are
can fifteen or twenty miles five
miles apart because it just
doesn't pencil out often for the
providers to be able to do it
honestly in a way that they can
serve those communities so this
bill is yes the department the
ability to process that we've
fees and only rulemaking.
After all play out the
department is here their number
representatives ensuring the and
in the internet department.
This bill I believe the fully
supported the line is consistent
with what we have asked for.
Thank you very much madam chair
okay we're gonna go to a.
The public do we have anybody
here who supports.
Mr secretary.
Yes.
one of the representative from
she law was the.
This bill the idea that the
commission will have the
authority of the state rules in
the policy wrong way into the
overall legislative right we
need for the progress through
some creative support what we
work with of the Ohio office
at the department of information
technology is essentially that
practice of quantifying what
we're getting in return putting
a value on it and then being
able to use that saying right we
essentially determining when
someone is coming straight
through the state all public
benefit what will charge them
and public benefit is an issue
for us so we look forward to in
that you prefer to.
Who else is in support gentleman
in the back
discussed in this for the table
so ciation been working
Representative.
More so the more.
On this since our very much
appreciate the collaboration
most are the Representative
everyone else.
Yes in the back.
****.
Thank you my name is Melissa
Pickett I am speaking today for
the alliance for local economic
prosperity.
Broadband infrastructures allies
for our.
Is the sense of the stated it
life hacks is to do the
implicating things that we
always need to do with her life
Friday is also crucial driver in
our job creation small business
growth in local.
Very fast once.
Yes Sir.
The Baca the director of
government regulatory affairs
for movement in.
And we stand in full support of
hospital one six communities yes
ma'am the colorful strict.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee resigned last
on the deputy director for the
office of broadband access and
expansion and thank you so much
for allowing us to speak to the
office of broadband access and
expansion works very closely
with department transportation
the other states.
Agencies and tribes all right
of way issues so that we can
expand Roger quickly as possible
to this is a we support this
bill family ask for to pass vote
thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
chairs of the speaking on behalf
of the technology council I was
very constructs for.
Yes.
Yes madam chair of the members
of the committee see on the on
the avid A. R. P. New Mexico I
don't have words for thousand
statewide stand strong support
this bill considering about half
of those members live in rural
areas and so as high speed
internet so hive are for for.
Here.
Thank you very much.
Hey is anybody in opposition.
Thank you I'm sorry yes on soon.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm senator
Gerald senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce chambers in support
of this bill today one of the
biggest obstacles to
connectivity in our state is
navigating right to play
authorizing the state land
office to grant these rights of
way for the necessary
infrastructure across our public
lands I think it's a long way
getting people online in every
corner of the state New Mexicans
need broadband and this bill
will help bring connectivity to
them that much faster thank you.
Very much.
Anyone else online.
Right here.
The morning.
Your reserve the committee my
name is Pam Baker on United
States navy submarine veteran
representing both the New Mexico
democratic staffers and military
family caucus Sierra chapter of
the American veterans for equal
rights here in New Mexico.
And in favor of this bill for a
multitude of reasons.
one that comes to mind right now
is I would be able to attend
this meeting we didn't have
broadband reaching up here in
the small.
I thank you for your kind
consideration in order to pass
will on this bill thank you Mr
right.
If
we have anybody in opposition.
Madam chair I I wasn't supposed
to be Representative but I will
because I feel that being a
board member school board member
you know just gave us all along
the side just to the needs of
our children and so I was the
one that is needed comment here
and we need your except for that
so whatever you can to created
to better.
Council tax.
Thanks to the compact electric.
Yes and these people starting
from exactly what you know he
gave us a lot of health.
A lot more so please do consider
pass and your name please ma'am
merry study next yeah you make
thank you Mr.
Okay anyone else opposition and
or support.
Right this the committee.
First.
Representative occurs thank you
for your it's not so much a
question
of Representative of more for
Representative Lundstrom
selections that we approved the
public.
Public private partnerships will
this bill tell perhaps to some
I think madam chair that's a
good point thank you for
bringing that up Representative
it will be because there's going
to be certain areas this is just
private right of way now excuse
me public but I think when we
start getting into other areas
besides looking carefully to see
whether or not this
Representative cities and
counties and ranch lands and all
that other plan this is go down
I think the P. three could help
them in this long because we're
all transportation brought thank
you
all for your thank you madam
chair thank you enough.
Representative draft thank you
madam chair
Representative Chandler madam
chair I I really like this bill
I think it's going to help a lot
I know that.
General maths so roll with
We have a need for and and this
is been one of the stumbling
blocks is the.
Are meant to pay fees and so
madam chair the fact that these
fees might be wearable I think
is very good my only comment
madam chair and representative
is that Mrs may weights
administrative fees and I would
hope that would be applied even
handedly and because we need
this everywhere thank you so
much Madam chair representative
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative jail bringing
this.
So I don't have an issue with.
Where we're going with this but
I do have an issue with madam
chair.
Representative and the reason
why I'm gonna vote no on the
some of the described very
clearly.
So I
Our director of broadband and do
it has a very poor job but to be
working with the world's
communication co office.
Last year they they raised funds
for.
Putting out two different
Funding for projects with two
different co ops for rural New
Mexico and reality is either one
of those coops.
Station experience whatsoever.
And working yes my opinion.
Our our tele Commission
communications co us I've seen
the maps and looked at
everything I've been looking at
this for three years now.
And we continue to do that.
And.
When do it.
Records office first focusing
first work with our
communications and we start
truly looking out for.
Mexico.
Yes.
The other side of chair and
representative the other reason
is over the last several years
with the like our our state
transportation commission has
focused more on director State
and less on the water their job
is and until we actually get
them back in line to become a
strong cool Commission together
giving them authority right now
the last thing we need to be in
the state of New Mexico.
That thank you madam chair.
Representative actually have a
Representative partly.
Thank you madam chair Senator is
going to see this morning C..
So the just really a.
Comment to order so and sure
this earlier in the the
committee I
really believe that was starting
to for and that half dozen
lowers orbit satellite
constellations are going up for
the next five years half of us
are gonna be getting our cell
phone and internet Sir satellite
so I just caution us to care for
their respective state money to
the fiber in the ground and if
the funds are throwing money at
us we need to say much that's
fine.
But I really believe this to be
a lot of dark fiber that we put
the ground on the rural areas
for fo'c'sle end up getting
there and internet through
satellite
I like to think it is.
The state making a huge effort
to cover the ground right as we
started.
With the fiber revolution.
That said the fiber that we're
putting in the ground.
we want to make sure that the
the rules are in place to make
sure it's not wells that right
of way is becoming an issue.
And so I'm very supportive of.
This efforts to
make it more uniformed and and
not just challenging to get
those.
Access for for this work so what
thank you for bringing this bill
forward and and again just
caution us to be careful
because.
We could be spending all
hundreds of millions of dollars
putting infrastructure around
this reviews.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative representative
Garcia thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
being the bill up.
You mentioned.
Communities are miles apart from
each other houses in my district
no other hundred far from each
other and my concerns are.
Waving fees for rate of eight
minutes we need to work on
waiting fees people can afford
to get inside their houses
that's number one and you know
in my district madam chair.
So the people have remained
watered proceed.
But yet we still need to service
you know they have children that
are going to school and not want
to children involved in the
cracks the back of education or
the lack of the can do the work
you know we have where we can
and the shut down the hopefully
never happens again but if that
does happen we need to do more.
To address it then it is madam
chair given that.
We'll study that would.
And my district and frontier
novel so.
We need to address the issue.
Then just briefly on problems
but I under percent agree with
you madam chair.
And would love to talk with you
offline hello programs could be
developed.
Because I have some thoughts
about that thank you for reading
thank you to
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I had a question
for the department like to know
how many projects currently on
hold because of this issue.
But chair representative no
actually so what we were already
is the party for the use of
right away for utility expansion
across New.
The process is already been
established and so the need for
you to the needs of internet
providers phone providers can
come to see those permits from
the department to do the work
that they need to get out.
That that's the this point
especially for public regulated
utilities the for the use of
right away but essentially
encouraging that once policy for
the state so ensuring that it
coincides with the best of our
ability within the projects that
we have here so madam chair I
support the bill but I I'm just
curious what's the age we're
trying to scratch them if in
fact we've been allowing
waivers.
What what's the what's the H.
madam chair and representative
has a private.
I'm sorry Department sorry.
So madam chair representative we
have in the works now we're
making process that we are
provided free to the right we
for these utilities okay and so
this bill of course with.
Intersect with that
responsibility if there is an
effort for companies who are
running it through the state the
rule making that we're doing now
will allow for us to charge and
because people before I public
Mexico so you may have a company
that says on the street from
California to Texas on your
right.
Will make you process gives us
the.
To charge fees for right away
for us this bill of us to offset
that one viable public.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I just have a
couple questions that seem issue
madam chair so this is a it's a
donation costs issue correct
Your top department has
interpret.
Donation clause to to conclude
that they could not wait the
fees that they and developing
the last couple years.
Thank you madam chair.
So.
In the living this rulemaking
this allows the department to
still charge for right away but
situated it can drive a public
budget so that is a negligible
charger Howard how are you
getting around.
That issue in a way where it's
workable for both public and
private entities well the
department will.
Take what it I believe is pretty
broad language and develop rules
through the rule making process
which is a public participation
process to identify in what
situations they are willing to
waive fees what situations they
are not I believe madam chair
secretary of food to some
instances where it's already
been thinking about how that
might play out.
Thank you madam chair and so do
we know estimate the only state
that charges for right away and
Senator situation Madam that's
an interesting question and
talking with the various
providers they have noted to me.
The state has been one of the
state in terms of negotiating.
Just on a pencil out.
And there are others who have
more accommodating type
is yes.
It's thank you very much.
so
even.
Mr Burciaga.
Seconds later.
Representative from yes
Representative because.
Representative delivers yes
Representative Harper yes
Representative Johnson yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid yes
Representative Pettigrew.
No like to.
Representative Romero yes
Representative Garcia yes and
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
those ten to one and strictly
limit thank you
Chairman and chairman once again
nope I agree with some of the
implementation pieces some of
the problems we have a higher
level of trust for DOT.
Issues with with with forward in
its transportation commission
levels also have Commission wait
there's nobody there.
Working with but thank.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
The next house bill two forty
Representative Ortez.
I'm sure.
Thank you.
Representative eighteen to
forty.
A new.
Special license plate for I
think that's.
The second this fund.
This is it's very.
Our second.
Shares is fully here.
For
our
I think as a community decisions
have really suffered this year
with this past year the fires
any more faith in need double
duty and I think this is support
for this funds license plate
will.
Difference as they determine
whether technical needs are.
This does.
legal representation in the
state figure out what the next
step the next.
I have.
For for for for the.
Mr Chairman.
Question.
Well we're here this morning
thank
thank homes here in the half the
Knicks.
You and our president graph.
Yes this.
Life care of New Mexico image
just a commissions.
That allows me to be here this
this request to.
A license plate.
So that we can
you know we have lost six in New
Mexico New Mexico a little.
Pass it pass.
Sam this is what I think this is
is that what use that you're
engaged to.
Have.
The lancers.
And act as we have the.
So it is important for us.
And I am asking you I.
that's fine for us.
That I feel this is the.
The way to do it is to be simple
to be truthful.
The common ask because we.
I see a lot of license plates
out here in the state that
Representative Lara.
And I think that Pasek just
water is the most important
thing in our in our last so we
need to have some that that we
can we also have.
To show our kids that we did
something to that point I don't
know how many of you know six
are thanks a lot of people do
not here again like we can but
we grew up with them we grew up
working in a state cast working
it just to bring the water to
our lands so today we want to
thank these people in this way
and say that you need to
continue your culture and team
you stored value.
This is something that we're.
So that's why we're here today
and I also have
Mr Robert half of that from
where you see.
Did.
Our staff member so if you need
anything else that he can at
I'm sure you can so we're asking
you today to agree to give us a
chance to have a license plate
the success of New Mexico that
we slaughter and livelihood to
our people thank you very much
thank you Mr
thank Representative.
The number of cases and pass.
For being with us and for the
next concert and we're just so
happy for others we want to
thank you all for being here and
listening to us and we'll just.
About insurers questions okay do
we have anybody in the audience
who is in favor of this bill
okay Sir yes good morning madam
chair many members my name's
Christian I see registered
lobbyists for chevron Senator
supports HB two forty seven as
long as supporter of our staff
is requested number tells County
not only are as sick as
longstanding institutions
safeguarding our unique cultural
traditions a service strong
examples of sound Water.
General Motors Ford positive
resolution of the water rates
issues related to the request of
money so that we may need for
water rights local in
partnership with our sentence is
statewide are deserving of
recognition and additional
resources Senator therefore
strongly supports HB two four.
Thanks for your time the last.
The land rover.
Commission I thank you for
having us here today
was this the case so is our for
the on this political
subdivisions of over five
hundred years old so we've been
working out the state for many
years
the water use of
working on the new species a
number it assets with us
this is part of the fight.
It's a culture for New Mexico of
the through sport thank you
madam chair.
The.
Anybody in opposition to this
bill.
Committee member committee
members.
Representative perfect.
Thank you madam chair good
morning to you here.
So a couple comments to that
question
So first.
Appreciate this is an annual fee
not just a one time fee that's
that's appropriate.
the other piece of language
that's a the department
recommends that we've been
talking about your the committee
is.
Have a.
the baseline automatic repeal
bills in
so if this goes forward or if
we.
Aside to emerging this I
recommend that we would consider
adding that insurance share
with.
I responded that chair
representative we are open to
making this bill a strong safety
that we.
All right thank you madam chair.
Chair of the the the question I
have approves of Bill who is two
years or four years ago.
two years ago I'm seeing to
take.
A very small portion of the
gross receipts tax and
send it to the state is I I I
think we passed off the house of
the lord I don't know what
happened to do you remember
what.
And pass okay.
All right so so madam chair and
and I think this might my
comment is.
You know in addition additional
factor for stuff way more
license plates.
Need to.
we're looking at a party FY are
and.
Getting about two thousand
dollars a year.
And that might be a little over
major data for five thousand
dollars a year.
And so I just.
I think if if the.
We just want to be proud of our
state use and a license plate
that's one thing but if we
actually want to give if you
actually want to help with
funding I think this is the
right approach to something else
that Madam chair.
And services I understand I
think first and foremost really
it's about the price of the
asset care also percent this the
commissioner I am a person that
before commissioner I resign my
commission so they can serve the
legislature.
And the I I working in the
trenches with folks all over New
Mexico who knows sectors of the
life blood of our communities
and I know that my experts can
attest to that as well so I I I
appreciate that our second are
also severely under funded there
are
different pots of money lots of
different costs but none of
those pots have nearly enough to
support the the watershed work
the restoration work that the
growth we see the infrastructure
that's required to keep the
suspect is going in I think this
won't have much you may be
interesting Madam chair
representative the question is
who are really license plate but
every dollar makes a difference
it's it helps with the with the
R. Sanchez.
Getting the legal support that
they need to do that planning
that the state keep the water
slowly and.
Representative Harper to to
district manager merry as
addiction.
As well.
I just like to ask I serve as
says here in Yemen not funding
from central for twenty six
years was there and we had two
hundred thirty four percent this
in and
Allentown yes and we have nine
nine pounds around so if we have
several membership and their own
commission I just but the state
water flows through this in the
past for the sake of Iraq.
And so we have.
Is so there's just so many
processes yes the that area.
But we as a commission.
State to see the need a
water everywhere else for those
so.
Does they got some
Representative every year.
This is but we need something to
show that we are proud of our
state and we're asking you to
please both yesterday so that we
can our children we did this for
you so you can carry on because
it is it is wrong or not is.
That's why we have to be prompt
and have two children.
Kind of you know appreciation
for our culture our historic
value of the estate.
Thank you very much.
Everybody else.
Share this bill needs to go to
tax system incorrectly referred.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and you
know stated the committee
already knows is that on the
auto out as far as license
plates.
Information of license plates
it's great the money goes to
good causes certain district
that I represent one of my
constituents.
Yes are you finally important we
need to bring the account as
Albuquerque
Austin more urban setting the
district is semi rural.
Thank you is that the one your
culture.
things by doctors.
District that I represent and it
always uses a psych test ASAP of
waters it's super important to
the community that I represent
and then I support the
legislative bills because I'd
like to see all the different by
place I grew up not.
Biking and having a prohibition
against some particulars so I
think this is a great way to
provide to the cost and to keep
your number nice need.
Thank you Representative one
currently recognized.
The person in your car.
All right Representative Brown
thank you madam chair thank you
for being here I.
I'm a little bit about license
plate does as well but some
years ago when I was serving on
transportation are carried at
build series of heritage license
plates and it covered madam
chair many different
areas that the other states are
known for and I think a second
use of them very important that
I think we have twelve ideas so
the series all together.
it didn't go anywhere and share
I guess it's just too much to
handle it so I came back of New
Mexico another session with
chili pepper license plate bill
idea that and we got it we got
it so I'm very pleased that that
turned out the way it did in the
the Colorado to the punch which
is very important to us because
we grow madam chair Marshall
Mexico Colorado.
So it was our title to have but
the reason I bring this all up
and chair and representative I
think we maybe do have too many
license plates but I think this
is one way people show their
pride in in the organization and
yet I don't think it'll raise a
lot of money perhaps but it's I
think it's part of our heritage
and that matters and so I will
support the bill the thank you
madam chair Max Representative
thank you madam chair furthering
this much of the presentation on
telehealth predisposed to
supporters and you were in.
We all know that New Mexico
which is a circular R. Lee very
both literally and figuratively
to the state through its culture
history etcetera I can't think
of a more worthy.
Efforts and to turn the
recognized license plate that
celebrates that takes pride in
that and by the way sure I live
on the sick and have all of my
life so thank you.
Just.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Keogh for bringing this bill
to us I agree the immense
heritage that our state yes so
heroes have throughout New
Mexico is an important part of
who we are as a society so I I
hundred percent agree with you
there Representative Harper
still some of my thunder and not
and this year.
For.
And this is like you and I we're
gonna talk about later madam
chair about the amendments in
that it was every other license
plate bills that we have passed
to this committee here since
many we have needed those both
baseline and repeal language in
it for us to be able to pass out
of committee so I asked you look
into it amending the bill in
that way we can bring it back
years in office the the other
and then of course
Representative Lundstrom correct
also the other thing which is
this is incorrectly referred it
should go to the tax committee
so while I'm dealing with the
speaker's office and probably
getting this reassigned if you
can work on getting that
amendment Jonathan we can if you
are a minimal role the bill
today and then bring it back
that language and then you can
see Madam absolutely fantastic
okay thank you so much.
Very.
Thank you Mr chair.
Next our last two house bill two
twenty three.
Sure.
This is.
Good morning the dynamic duo
Representative perfect for out
what is the pleasure of.
This today madam chair
I thank you for having dinner on
the screen.
You're you're with hospital two
forty three this is simply.
Appropriate money six hundred
dollars
for the price of corn flakes of
right instructions on three very
vital highways is a Mexico of
percent
eighty thousand eighty four
miles for those who are schools
the Texas Mexico state line are
Mexico.
A six mile stretch is also to
the.
St Lawrence and the New Mexico
thirty one which is just a.
how do we system.
He's using using that area so
We're we're trying to do madam
chair members of the committee
is.
Thank you know how crucial it is
always get addressed.
I'm gonna let Representative
night about three eighty it was
from because
home page gross well I only to
to to to the state funds for
what's happening
to.
Representative thank you madam
chair committee of.
We have brought.
Several bills before this
committee in the past on US
three eighty we've expanded to
include the other two hours
because these are the highways.
That are utilized by the oil and
gas industry.
And.
R. frankly some of the most
dangerous roads in New Mexico
and we want to continue to put
the spotlight on them with the
department of transportation.
We're trying to make sure that
they continue to receive of.
Some attention.
With respect appreciate.
The stretch from the state on
taxes to cross over the work for
you I.
Super
two there's a really three lane
highway.
With.
Alter alter ladies passing like
so for this stretch the passing
lanes heading.
Extracts the passing lane is.
The
the entire stretch so BA what's
classified as a super to highway
US thirty one and one twenty
eight our.
Two very small highways fact
because of the
tremendous increase in drilling
activity there now some of the
Senator traveled.
There are ways in the state of
and so.
The number.
The number of the the department
transportation came up with to
complete these projects of and
there's one we use so that's why
we're continuing to press this.
Sign language.
Probably
Will be.
As of this committee properties
of some scrutiny appropriations
for.
We need to keep casting allies
on this with the departure of
our transportation to keep these
as high priority.
Matters that for receive engine
soon because there are people
who are working.
Every day and putting their
lives in danger patient.
And madam chair members the
committee are and also just
point out that it's not just gas
the structure of.
For the traffic consists of kids
Quarters though we have a lot of
agriculture in southeast New
Mexico I think sometimes I think
I would guess that we forget to
County is one of the highest for
extraction in the state so we
have a lot of heavy traffic
because of that and then there's
just the general public.
I also have people who travel to
medical services in Texas to
oftentimes to these roses well
so I was and madam chair over it
surprised to get a report from
seven students.
School who remembers is still
CSAT thank you traffic reports
that they put together about the
dangers roadways we have in
southeastern New Mexico I I have
a copy of it I think you get a
sense House job forty hours and
this is four eight eight seven
hundred.
Study the maps together and what
they're trying to do is come up
with some ideas on how to make
our roads safer so it's not
something that's just an adult
issue is for and some of these
are probably drivers already
so that they're seeing it every
day.
And they wanted to bring this to
my attention so I can find it
session that we we have the
serious issues to deal with an
account chair and members I
think I think we all know.
Important this is to revenue for
the state of New Mexico I think
it's it's a good signal was
widely this is the number
checked we have an oral history
that was just recently updated
that shows very interesting
information I have printouts
border to give.
But for some reason we have a
little bit.
The shop that happen here for
which for hours and so.
I don't the past year but
basically what it showing is I
Mexico that are actually W.
producers for the state meeting
that they produce more than the
state gives back to this county
so the ones that produce more
income than they received are we
carry any County Los Alamos is
there.
San Juan every other county in
New Mexico consumes more in
terms of state revenue that is
in the state for this town where
to the in those counties.
It is a runaway planned for
early in any and that therefore
he look at the landscape.
R. so here they also.
Your stories rivers and charter
member of the new and then it
really gets down to the third
County that's Los Alamos it it's
it's good revenue.
It's like a two story building
here to the state Supreme Court
and other counties that produce
they're like these little
diseases.
And that.
It's kind of negative on the X.
axis storage shows how much they
consume so.
I have a number sorry I don't
think I need to share those.
We have to these three rows that
are identified as the madam
chair members.
Is more than just state revenues
that we normally would see and I
want to talk about the early
childhood Trust Fund forecast
this is probably.
Yes it is well and so just to
give you a quick members there
madam chair.
The fund was set up by the
legislature in twenty twenty
three hundred million dollars.
Today twenty twenty three.
Early childhood trust fund has
two five point three billion
dollars.
So yet investment of three
hundred million in two thousand
five two billion.
It's not because of the magic of
investing that has a little both
places because there are two.
feeders from the oil and gas
industry having worked revenue
that go into that I.
So we need to hear what's in the
best condition we can for our
office public safety that also
because this is what helps pay
for what we do in the state and
finally chair members the
forecast is that the early
childhood Trust Fund twenty
twenty seven just a few years
away.
Well the work ten million
dollars.
Because.
Thank you.
Okay this time
we're gonna go to the audience
is there anybody in support for.
Two twenty three sorry.
Okay let's start in the tie.
Madam chair committee members my
across the border with Mexico
growers are very expected to it
it's not just for the oil and
gas industry but if you've ever
driven down.
Any of these roads on this in a
semi your.
I want to go and when does it
become just a human safety
button and welfare issues.
There is some of the most
dangerous roads in America right
here in New Mexico.
This part of the state I have
driven those roads three o'clock
in the morning with our our
economy you're literally
swarming around potholes trying
not to hit somebody else's
trying not let's.
That means that you were to do
pass.
I'm in the back with the.
thanks madam chair
of Christian as a registered
lobbyist for chevron the chevron
safety is our top priority
support increased preparations
New Mexico part of transition
for of projects in New Mexico
for a reason the sports field
thank you.
That.
Madam chair New Mexico area
strategies the sixty and on
behalf of the cities of cross
Act Pasti Jalan any.
The economic development
corporation Lee County and
companies boxy plains all
American pipeline.
For the appreciate your
consideration of the bill and we
want this we want this continued
funding for the safety and the
district to address that not
only a COVID the residents there
but also archers from Texas
regions.
Sir
that morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Director of the department
transportation of for many of
the same reasons that
Representative Brown
Representative line for drugs to
date with these folks as well
those three roads New Mexico one
twenty eight to thirty one whose
three eighty our high priority
of not only there's one of ours
as well you see in many of the
transportation program provided.
just as our priority so madam
chair members need us.
Thank you.
Madam chair of committee members
at the end so lower the
associated contractors of New
Mexico where we stand in support
of this bill also any rules that
we have proven constructive of
the State Council stated Mexico
here to support legislation
thank you secretary.
We met in opposition.
We'll go to the committee.
I'm sorry I have one too.
The madam chair my name is Jim
R. C. in the executive director
of the associate contractors of
New Mexico representing the
contractors that build I was for
New Mexico.
We or in favor of anything that
we can do to appropriate new
funds or funds that are going to
help build a have waste next
week we're going to send out a
report could be a true report on
the condition of the state of
the state of our highways and
we're gonna see that we need
some big big help down at three
eighty thirty one at one twenty
eight with that we encourage the
committee to a endorsed this
bill so thank you madam chair.
Anyone else.
Okay committee members I believe
Representative Pettigrew first.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative wrong
in our for putting others
Work in the information you
provided is critical.
Senator and in committee.
Yeah right does that is one of
our highest risen locations in
the state of New Mexico just not
during one season of the year
this all year long three eighty
is a is a critical road for us
thirty one and one twenty eight
the same well.
I just want to speak in support
of the legislation.
This put up here and
Should we do appreciate for
thank.
Representative Cruz thank you
madam chair.
that's just.
On the one hand I apologize and
assure you you mentioned that
but what is the length of rules.
Affected by this improve.
It's a.
The miles for the US three
eighty seven.
New Mexico one is a fairly short
sighted move but it involves a
major interchanges of the road
to the railroad tracks and you
just two eighty five.
US or New Mexico was twenty
eight is twenty sixty miles from
the junction of thirty one to
the the town yeah so you're
talking about
Or almost two hundred miles of
roadway these three projects and
the design it's not these are
designed to be for like the US
eighty with the super to the
entire line.
Thirty one with the
interchangeable.
In the one twenty eight from.
Thirty one to get out.
Would require.
Not only we.
Why the and also for now because
that's where the problems are in
your you have all these trucks
that are needed to turn off the
road and so they need a line to
is as of the the drive through
drive line so thank you.
expanding those areas where
there the.
The firm office to.
Intersecting roads along the way
so I think the the major reason
maybe somebody from the
department transportation could
more fully sorry what what was
the whole it's more state
researchers say the thank you
madam chair I just want a
general idea of the of the line
that was involved on how many
counties will be impacted by any
significant disparities are five
townships.
All thirty three counties are
impacted by these roads because
Rep Patricio.
For all you have on thirty one
that sold eighty one twenty
eight is at the Lee County three
eighty is Shabbos and we.
Monitors Hospital dissipation
buying your carriers or respond.
Of the funding.
The the.
One of the roads within
municipalities and feedback with
the
city Rossell maybe of mile of
job maybe half a lot of thirty
one there's no municipalities
one twenty eight maybe a little
bit of job offers no other towns
in the.
three eighty.
That maybe a mile over also will
have maybe a mile from.
Close the only members of the
counties of these are state
roads and roads.
generally we don't look to the
local governments to assist the
payment of those actually.
Of rose those are handled by the
department of transportation
USCA probably part of this
federal funding.
Thank you madam chair this
questions for secretary
Schardin.
Secretary.
Are any of these sections of
road license to local
municipalities or two counties.
chair representative me are
are there are popping in
scrimmage or transferring to the
north twenty percent are not the
the main US roads and and state
of assets thank you Secretary
were there with only for us for
our funds for this project.
Mr chair representative so some
of the week we start the
appropriation is a possible
source of funding that is our
our phones I believe now that
could be applied there Madam
chair representative and members
of the committee so House
Appropriations Committee has had
a little discussion about how to
spend a hundred forty million
but nothing has been decided yet
so as far as I'm concerned that
money is available and if I may
madam chair representative just
let you know that the county has
been coordinating very closely
with Mexico department
transportation trying to get
some of the intersections
using county the county is using
the money to help prepare for
the future for the for the tools
seventies rose so there is
collaboration and the county is
spending money on this chair
representative thank you madam
chair
I have occasion to travel the
world early often like in our
family that live in the area for
two million rules one eight and
I have to the madam chair that
are it needs improvement if you
know granted we needed.
Along economic development lines
particularly in the COVID
described but for me personally
and for many folks that I know
that live in that area.
It's just regular vehicle
traffic that is.
Right off.
And so are our support this.
Thank you madam chair.
we have Representative Lundstrom
thank you madam chair and like
to just the Sanchez I.
Limited it does provide of time
heartburn for me that would be
looking at the appropriation
contingency fund.
For a lot of reasons so you to
explain to me why we're looking
at the probation contingency
fund and what impact that would
be to the fund.
If you will.
Madam chair representative will.
It was the idea that came out we
work on the drafting for this
deadlines sources funding is
always important for
expropriation bill
the money is there it is as I
said earlier has not indicated
yes although some people walk
out on to we just think that's a
have the National Forest what
and then there's also Madam
chair representative here's some
money and other fund categories
of state room five and that's
about is the figure I have on
that is two hundred ninety two
million dollars it has often
the committee.
Madam chair representative I
think the state road fund has
been committed it's money that
is is he is for match for
federal dollars is that correct
Mr Secretary.
Madam chair representative yes
the portion of the financial
fortune future projects of
course the funding is.
Madam chair I do have a lot of
heartburn with the way this is
drafted in because of the way
the appropriation contingency
fund works as part of the
reserve.
Understand is being identified
because it seems like it's money
that's that that is available
but it really isn't the way to
fund works is much like a
checking account work.
Want to get into all the details
about that madam chair but I I
know this is incredibly
important bill it desperately
needs to be done these projects
I I don't agree with the where
the money's coming from I think
it should be identified as
non recurring general fund as a
source to pay for these things
but I do believe that there it
is points to a much bigger issue
in the state hello.
This helps to justify the need
for P. three all these projects
with the right projects.
I think the other thing is is
that is also indicates to us the
need for transportation trust
fund.
to say have this early childhood
fund through I have a lot of
hard for me with that
Representative Brown knows that
is the LFC chair and HSC chair I
think that that needs to be.
Expanded in terms of
beneficiaries but there's no
better use than us setting up
transportation trust fund for
the same purpose and have grown
because there many big projects
like this throughout the state I
mean these are bigger that I
think could step and other
processes could handle.
So I not work with the chair on
that let's see if we can get
something like that I mean I'm
I'm gonna vote for this bill
today.
But I do have partnered with the
latest drafted you know what's
going to happen to HSC.
But I I still think it points to
a much bigger issue that we need
to work on as a transportation
committee.
We need our own dang Trust Fund
for goodness.
And we need to be getting
projects done we've got some big
projects in my neck of the woods
with I. forty.
Right now that hasn't been the
same problems you all with a
four we we have.
But I I I just wanted to point
that out we I think we know
what's going to happen J. of see
this bill.
But I wanna majorly advocate for
all of us to fund
transportation projects thank
you madam chair thank you very
much Representative next we have
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and the.
Your Lundstrom asked that the
questions that I had and I'd
like to echo her comments as
well so.
Thank you Representative Lara
Cadena thank you.
You madam chair Representative I
also is watching with a keen eye
to make sure recently after care
Lundstrom.
Very articulate some of the
underlying discrepancies here
actually but I also wanted to
echo my support.
I am a legislator that tends to
stay in the act not to turn off
and sometimes we see bills that
are about issuing support for
The quality center an important
conversation that our
constituents expect
us so I think that and that the
the.
Questions about the mechanisms
actually moved in money after
the end dollars more and career
is needed so I just wanted to
appreciate you all for bringing
this forward I also will vote in
support of this because I think
we need to continue saying these
things out loud to continue
coming up together over the long
run.
Investment and solutions Office
appreciate you.
The big impacted at I'm grateful
to have an audience some of my
folks and miss you I'm really
proud to represent the main
campus of New Mexico also
interned the federal accented
centers we have a process state
including in this project area I
know how much that means New
Mexico's economy and so many of
our families through Mexico's
legacy self appreciate you for
bringing this forward and look
forward to supporting
to the New Mexico all thank you.
The I have a couple of one
commented one question this
question Representative Brown is
there any money in the house
bill three amendment that we
just passed in for in for this
road west three eighty I believe
certain land and that right now.
Madam chair members of the
committee so
US highway three eighty what
happens in your professional
request that we're we are right
now is that of funding has been
with the need for three eight so
we present there are also more
chairs for thirty one has.
There is potential for you.
The section on funding for that
and we can help with that we
considered house bill two.
Thank you very much on the other
comment I have is I. two hundred
not road I work for at
stratospheric airship
manufacture and we do late night
prototype flights and I actually
found my driving off road at
three in the morning once I and
avoiding house it was just so it
was actually one of the more
terrifying experiences of my
life.
So I have been to your dad wrote
on that road I don't see the
need for it and I'm glad we had
this discussion I think that
will work with surely the
Lundstrom to actually get
something together in an
effective upon transportation
fund or something that will
have.
Durability so we can fund
projects such as this about
having to go back to the
appropriations process every
time with so little certainty
self thank you for reading the
bill I will be voting for it for
what it's worth
Susan by Here has a question of.
Madam not a question just
comment.
we're all aware that.
That part of the country and
what distributions for a budget
for used for education you know
what we just keep in mind that
interstate forty.
Is is is this property no and
the new we need to address your
issues but we need to keep in
mind interstate forty fifth in
line I'd live in grand New
Mexico I conduct reviews shipped
out shut down right now if you
put the log in the same line we
really really need to fill
efforts happening.
To all it works you guys needed
to note that we could madam
chair that this is part of the
country is the only contributor
to our fund initiatives.
Interstate forty of the four
door the United States admitted
to this office to really to
address both issues thank you.
Thank you Mr Lester.
Chair of the past.
Do you have anybody in
opposition.
Okay Representative like you
have yourselves a defense.
That they're expecting.
So.
Thanks.
Currently so.
Sure.
More
and less.
