Because we can't go back and
actually change those long term
power purchase agreements the
state of wild mean actually
implemented a similar tax
they're the only state that has
that tax what happened was
installed development for a
period of years there's one
project that has been built
since they installed this it was
very intentional when they
imposed it and what we don't
want to see is new mexico's make
the same mistake we have a
desire to build more here in the
state there was a report down by
moss adams in twenty twenty one
that shows how do mexico
benefits is actually by
increasing development and
construction projects because
that's where the financial
incentive actually comes from is
during construction as opposed
to taxing those for all those
reasons we would ask the
committee for do not pass their
mischairman.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is ricky said
when I work as the executive
director of that interest energy
alliance we represent roughly
fifty of the largest wind solar
storage go through and
transmission developers in the
west and we're here today in
opposition to this bill.
Renewable energy companies pay
taxes in new mexico today we're
subject to gross receipts tax
corporate income tax personal
income tax property taxes or in
the case of industrial revenue
bonds we pay direct payments to
local mudicipalities are happy
to do that we've already
invested as you've heard well
over ten billion dollars in the
state and are contributing to
the diversification of the
states economy and new taps on
renewal only generates for the
state if we keep bringing
projects to new mexico and the
electricity market is regional
renewable energy projects in new
mexico or and direct competition
with projects in colorado
arizona nevada you name it and
modifications to the cost of
electricity impact our ability
to win bids and build projects
here so we want more investment
from renewal in our state and
local budgets we need the bill
more projects and for that
reason we oppose this bill thank
you.
My name is james registered.
This is the national association
business members who are
independent power producers and
you only recall we just pass the
community solar program in this
state it's just getting.
Already several
you know delay the lot of
community solar this would be
one more
to this new and emerging
industry that we're all excited
about the call is.
Thank you others in opposition
casing known the room will go
online.
If you'd like to speak in
oppositions it's bill please
raise your hand for subway of
chelsea canada.
Mr chairman members of the
committee management canada and
i'm the director of public
policy at the new mexico chamber
of commerce in rex code chamber
of commerce is a non partisan
state white organization
representing every industry from
every region of new mexico the
state chamber
one fifty we believe this bill
would impact possibility to be
competitive by putting a more
on this form of electricity
electricity generation than
those states that we are trying
to compete with for renewable
energy
instead we prefer policy choices
that create tax incentives that
promote the development and use
of a cost competitive
energy sources in that a better
way to generate more revenue
renewables is developed more
renewable generation which
requires projects to be
competitively priced I did I
renoval energy projects are
already taxed
corporate income tax personal
income tax on payroll landless
payments are probably owners
among others will cost you know
both help attract new business
and system mexico this
sustainable and green energy
industry as one of the economic
development departments target
industry opportunity and growth
and we want to go to continue to
be a leader in and grow this
industry we respectfully ask
that you have closed you thank
you.
Thank you for that except we
have tom solomon.
Thank you mr my name is tom
solomon cook coordinator of the
climate focus
environmental organization
called three fifteen new mexico
and behalf of our six thousand
supporters in the state standard
opposition to this bill energy
to vote against it
this bill would impose a tax on
the clean energy resources that
and build as fast as possible in
order to stave off the worst
effects of the climate crisis
absolutely the rather thing to
do with this time cleaner normal
energy is also the cleaners are
the leases expensive sources of
new electricity generation that
you can build and it is a major
economic competitive advantage
for the seat who mexico blasters
we are with the bond installer
and win resources are making
those resources more expensive
just a grades or ability to
compete projects with other
states as you've heard and for
those reasons that many others
in addition to the fact that
wind energy and solar energy is
not severe from the state as it
is that they are renewable
resources putting those proposed
taxes in the
severance tax phone that is
it is quite a spreadsheet so we
oppose this but thank you.
Thank you they said we had
margaret.
Mr chair members of the
committee market
and I am in a strong opposition
as clearly a ploy to a renoval
energy production in the state
the last thing we should be
doing is putting up barriers to
our transition to a clean energy
economy please
know on hb one fifty thank you
thank you next up his career
robin bringer.
Along this return many members
of the committee my name is
carry robin brooker and i'm the
registered lobbyist for edf
renewables and missed energy
united we both seen an
opposition to this legislation
we would just add one more
comment to the things my
colleagues have already said no
mexico has always been an energy
forty c which we think is
something that mastercard should
be really proud of and we have
never let me to task on per make
a what generation for any pain
of electricity that we have
exported from our state and we
think to do some now on
renewable energy may set a
dangerous precedent as new
mexico it's really exploring i'm
emerging technologies and trying
to be a a leader in the nation
of new ways that we can generate
electricity not just for
ourselves at home but also for a
neighbor so we hope that the
committee will vote no one this
legislation and we appreciate
your time
thank you next up we have semi
cow.
I think the committee my name is
climate and a director with
conservation voters in mexico
and for all the reasons for
today we also urge your
opposition
thank you next up we have
neither individuals.
Good good afternoon and care and
committee members my name is
nana this I have been without
those new mexico i'm part of the
claim team for the senator for
seven policy
we do this bill and the step
backwards for economic
development in new mexico and
for that reason in other reasons
stated previously was strong
after the of this bill entered
opposition votes for this bill
after thank you for matched have
a great.
Thank you next up is johnny
earns.
Good afternoon members of the
committee my name is johnny erin
with concern citizens were
nuclear safety at thirty six
year old ngo here in santa fe
and for the reasons that have
already been stayed at ccn urges
your no vote
on that proposal
when fifty thank you.
Thank you next up his iphone
june.
Introduce yourself.
June
a.
Or
junior breaking up
and
still one
please vote
thank you june we can really
hear that but we understand
you're in opposition
to supposed france's
consolidates.
Hello my name is
a mobile and on the city council
from the town beater in the
ground in great county
we're not positioned to a bill
when fifty I asked for the
committee at her men and a
committee member to vote no
our town coming from a local
politics in a local area is that
we could afford more economic
development we don't need taxes
on our property we don't need to
end up paying more for our city
and are focused over here
developer were interested in
going more green and a having
the arms the real energy and we
really eat it be some of the we
can apply for and something that
is not going to be harder for us
to get and needed over here to
add more economic opportunities
for our
community members so I asked you
to do what I do not pass on this
thank you
thank you
and I don't see any other hands
so fell in our public comment
resent block is everything you
need to add before we get to the
committee yes thank you mister
chairman I neglected to add that
I send every member of the
committee and email this morning
with some useful links cause
i'll be talking about some some
interesting data that i've seen
in the state and so if you'd
like to follow a long should
have those links to that data I
will also just mention mr
chairman you know right now in
new mexico oil and gas they pay
all the taxes that have been
mentioned by multiple
commentators including g r t
they pay property taxes they pay
income taxes they they pay all
of those and more and one of the
links that you will see in your
inbox is a linked new excuse and
rev where it shows.
By county what taxes are paid by
the oil and gas industry and if
you look and chavers counties
about eighteen and a half
percent including our or
severance taxes in calfax county
eighteen point eight et county
twenty percent.
Harding county twenty point
eight percent mckinley county
twenty one point one percent
quay county eighteen point four
percent reared the county
nineteen point oh rowsevelt
seventeen point four percent
block
you don't need to read the list
sounds good out i'll let you
guys look at that but I just
want to make sure that
everyone's clear solar and wind
pays zero percent in all of
those taxes that I mentioned
earlier as well mister chairman
I just want to mention that many
of these large corporations
should be should be very
ameanable to be investing in the
state by investing in our long
term future which would also be
our economy economic future and
that's with oil and gas has been
doing for many decades and this
legislation you know in a
perfect world I would love a
zero percent excess tax on oil
and gas justice so learn window
getting but this is trying to
bring parity to the state and I
will just stand for questions
after that mister chairman thank
you so much they keep ripped out
of block or some scott.
Thank you miss chairman
representative.
The direct
production taxes
and gas
or servants
conservation
in emergency school
that emergency is in an effect
since
about a hundred years now plus
two.
But those amount in total to
about nine percent
which is in addition to
the great
payroll taxes.
Occur as a consequence of
all of the employment activity
and.
I have been religious enough to
know that
the renewable industry is very
shy well talking.
The.
In fact
they have frequently been before
the legislators looking for
a bit to grt
in the form of industrial
revenue
would it be to accurate to say
that a large percentage of the
power
generated from renewal
yes transported out of st.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you representative scott for
that question I have that data
for you according to the us
department of energy the eia
forty two percent.
The.
Of renewables stay in the state
as in state electricity net
generation mister chairman so
that would be correct a majority
is exported.
Okay
thank you for that answer and
mister chairman just a
representative
for the over.
Fifty eight percent
that goes out of state
or hiddy taxes pay on that
production correctly
thank you mister chairman
representative scott no they're
not in no taxes on the instant
eurostation
harder is there mister chairman
representative now.
Mr chairman representative block
given
it is the public police
this day to since
the performance
I would ask
and give an all of this upside
potential.
With respect to renewable
in given that they are
true in this
facilities have been in service
for quite some time now I guess
the question would be what would
we proposing to replace even a
porsche.
Of that revenue stream.
From the potroleum industry that
we are preparing to s.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you representative for
that answer this is actually
just one of the portions of
legislation I have been pretty
bringing forward to try to do
that to try to bring some more
equity in the market as well as
trying to replace some of that
last revenue that we've seen by
oil and gas and and we've heard
managed rhetoric today about oh
we're going to threaten to leave
the state if we don't get tax
free abilities in new mexico but
that's currently already
happening with oil and gas
producers in new mexico we just
such we such severances sold a
bunch of tracks in your area of
the state mr chairman and
representative and we would
probably see a lot more of that
as for the severance of the land
mister chairman representative
on these areas where there is a
lot of land and there is less to
say a wind farm you can't put
anything else on that that land
where the wind farming
chair so I would just make that
case as well and I would be
looking forward to finding any
other solution to to creating
more revenue in the state we
could even start talking about
legalizing online sports betting
for example mister chairman.
Chairman representative black
marijuana
there you go mister chair the
gentleman I mean
I apologize to chairman I will
stay on the bill
is there anything else on the
horizon.
Mr chairman and representative.
That would approach.
The potential of renewable
energy given that we have so
much wind and so much sunshine
is there anything else on the
horizon that would approach the
economic potential of those
resources
in the other that we did elect
to impose some modest taxes.
Thank you mister chairman and
representative so are we we're
speaking about the oil and gas
industry what would replace the
current last revenue it was that
what i'm understanding is
correct mister thank you mister
chair thank you representative
so even with this very modest
extremely modest and I would say
very charitable tax at three
point seven five percent
at the maximum in fy twenty
twenty eight according to the
fire it would create two hundred
and three million dollars right
now the budget way over ten
billion dollars and much of that
is oil and gas production so
mister chairman representative I
would contend that no there is
no
clear fix right now as for the
energy industry and new mexico I
sent you one of the links it's
to a retail report.
And they show on page five the
potential for solar and wind and
they say that there's sixty
eight thousand square miles of
total development ability for
solar interstate and then of
that forty nine thousand is
state trust land for wind there
would be twenty thousand five
hundred square miles and then on
state dress land that would be
eighteen thousand five hundred
square miles so if we're talking
about potential tax revenue I I
could see this potentially going
into the billion some day but
this would put pretty much be at
mister chairm.
So mister chairman
representative of block
unlimited potential if we just
have the courage to impose
taxation mr chairman
representative yes that's
correct thank you representative
for your answer thank you
thank you observed.
I think you mister chair and
represent him block appreciate
you bring in a serve forward
today it it is very similar to a
bill that I have brought a
couple of times I like that my
name better mine was a payment
payment lew of separates it
would have been a illness tax.
Mister chara I would not that it
was a pills too difficult to
swallow at that point
okay I was told you I wanted a
ton at some point mister.
Mister chairman represented
block
with with them.
Changing our are
are energy
we are in the process of
changing our energy source
sources but mister chairman and
representative when we have this
discussion
as was even presented today
there's discussion of
the economy portion of this.
Uh the the renewable energy
economy
and mister chair i'm not going
to go down the road that
that representative scott did in
his line of questioning where he
just talked about the tax base
and how it it really does not
match up to what we are getting
out of our extractive industries
but there is one extractive
industry I know very well
and that is in southern county
the the call mining industry
and mister chair as as we've
been talking about the
replacement.
Of this energy and the
replacement of jobs
I do agree with
advocates for for renewal by
energy
that
there are jobs that in
particular during construction
but mister chair and and
represent a block.
As far as as far as that goes
the only other
sustained source of income is
property tax
and miss chair representative
block but we did a couple of
years ago for one of the
renewable energy
wind
energy resources in new mexico
we allowed them to get out of
even paying property tax
with a much reduced what they
got was industrial revenue bonds
which was a much better deal
which in and actually harm the
state of new mexico's portion of
tax so the state lost tax during
that process
but those are the only two areas
mister chair and representative
block where where
that that's what he economy
portion of the sense in southern
county we were producing the
last couple of years when we
were doing
we initially we had out of sound
on generating station that plant
at one point was producing
eighteen hundred plus megawatts
of power back when it started
when it was four units it cut
down to two years and then two
units we had a
a deep decreasing number of
folks in the in the renewable
energy push to go away from call
power mister chair and even at
that point who were a down to
six hundred and fifty megawates
out of that power plant
the number of jobs that it took
to maintain these were the year
round
year after a year jobs two
maintain that production
was a little over a thousand
jobs
for six hundred and fifty or so
megawatts of power.
Um
we're really happy uh to
announce that there are some
solar companies interested in
sound on county now.
But for the five hundred
megawatts of power mister chair
and and represented block i'm
not sure if you're aware of
this.
But the four time number of
employees that it will take to
maintain that solar field is
five.
And mister chair and
representative block it was it
was presented here that there is
income tax being paid and
payroll tax being paid in these
other taxes being paid but I I
really want to make it clear
what that is that so one hundred
and sixty
to one ratio for jobs.
Missed chair
matt I thought you would left
mister chair I saw the door up
and I saw so okay I didn't see
mister chair sorry about that.
The reality mister chair and
representative block is this is
a construction industry
and there is
outside of construction there is
very little benefit to the state
long term without there being
another project.
And the take home pay and then
the other jobs in our
communities.
It be very detrimental for the
northwest in the southeast.
So I know there was mister
chairman and representative
blocked there was there was a
little bit of just back and
forth between you and and
representative scott that was on
something else but it is
something that we're going to
have to address
which is how are we going to
replace this industry
and mister chairman and
represent a block I would just
say since we are giving such
preference to the renewable
industry
do you believe
that the industry needs to pay
some sort of taxes for getting
such preferential treatment
thank you mister chairman and
think you represent it
I would say right now.
They're getting free rent in the
state they pay no taxes
whatsoever when it comes to any
kind of excise tax we see other
industries while in gas we
mentioned
it's it's a upwards of twenty
percent we see excess taxes for
canabas it's about thirty
percent
renewable is zero percent
mrperiod chair so anything would
be better than nothing.
So
miss chairman and representative
I I think the biggest
reason for my support is at some
point mister chair
that the industry is never going
to be able to replace oil and
gas if we do away with oil and
gas
so mister chairman and
representative block that's
going to mean we're gonna have
to come up with other industries
but in the meantime every one of
those industries including the
renewable energy renewable
energy industry is going to have
to shoulder some of the load and
so mister chair with th.
Thank you very much
for some small is the room or
something sierra.
Thank you mister chair
thank you
black one and a half.
If you know the
listing
of the top states
the interest attorney renewable
energy.
Thank you mister chairman think
you representative I i've looked
at those figures are you asking
per capita or are we asking
total net revenues mrperiod
chair representative
basically tall total production.
Thank you mister chairman and
representative I I would be
inclined that to give you a
specific answer to that but I
believe that that would probably
be california are washington
area maybe but I know that texas
as well has very large
solar
I don't know about wind but I
could get those figures for you
mister chairman representative
well thank you for that
you know.
Mr chairman of black gun.
California is at the top
internet total renewal energy
production bob especially wind
and solar
but down texas is way up there
I want to say maybe second or
third and mister chair are you
from there
with actions that occurred in a
recent legislative session in
texas regarding the issue
renewable energy
thank you mister chairman
representative could you please
point me to
specific legislation
okay mister chair
there was dozens
of
pieces of legislation introduced
in the texas legislature.
Predominantly by
consultant republicans
mister chair and the legislation
had to do with moratoriums
on renewable energy
development
it had to do with prohibitions
mister chair
really hopefully entered to the
element and
and there was always there is
also legislation that the
address the ministry
development
when you're going energy
um
development in texas.
And the chair.
Do you know the mean opposition
was in regards to legislation.
You give mister chairman
representative since it's not
regarding the bill I do not know
mister chair the main opposition
to these this legislation that
was being introduced by
the dumb new republican
conservative legislators
was not from liberal activists.
In fact ordered
of concern a branches.
The landed in the capital of the
legislative capital
of texas
and basically but a half
to a hundred dozens of its
isolation that that wanted to
kind of a
diminish if not curtail if not
prohibit your double energy
production the state and why was
that mister chair mainly because
these conservative ranchers and
ranters in general and texas
have established real lucrative
contracts in terms of when farms
may be solar
components as well and it's in
his benefiting
these conservative ranchers do
the point that they're willing
to kind of stand up to their own
legislators there were willing
to
that were on the verge of
proposing legislation that would
actually critical when you
energy production
so
so mister chair you know I think
that this is your renewable
energy development cuts both
ways mister chair when it comes
to the benefits of constituents
you know in these days that are
developing that industry to
where it's to where it benefits
you not home economic
strategy and all the support
strategy and not just limit it
to one particular philosophical
stretter you know or one
particular economic strategy and
I think it's a point for us to
understand your chair that
then in some states is like
texas
you know it's not really the
liberal activists
that are defending
the right of texans.
To develop an enlarged when
you're production
you know in this particular case
with the space legislative
session texas it was
conservative republican managers
that put the breaks on all these
extreme type of legislation to
the tell their type of
production so I just wonder
bring that to your attention
representative block thank you
mister change thank you return
about
thank you represent gracious and
breaker
thank you mister chair
and thank you representative
block
just if why I grew up with his
father
I just have to ask the same
question then I ask I seem to be
asking everybody um and i'm
having real consternations
because the state in my mind
does not do enough studies to
justify um you know our means to
an end
and so my question is and I and
I heard your remarks in your
comments in your your numbers
have you done any sort of study
that would
that that because I didn't see
anything in our packet that
shows that the state has not a
study
in you know the mister chair and
representative
and
for those of you who don't know
I sit on a board of directors of
a credit union and we're about a
five hundred million dollar
credit union.
And you know I always know that
when you move lost money here
you've got to make it up
somewhere and sometimes it's in
fees and other times that you
know so in the end
the state is sort of in that
same position of our budget and
I know that we're transitioning
right now but I just my first
question is have we done any
sort of study that justifies
this bill
thank you mister chairman thank
you represent it but I go I
precede the question you know
like like yourself i'm a
freshman so I haven't put any
bills forward for a study on
this but I have looked at
malmultiple studies across the
nation and of stanford had a
study regarding low income tax
incentives for solar and they
were not as effective over a
long period of time so there are
multiple studies out there
regarding multiple industries
but you know if if you'd like to
work with me on on the value of
a potential excess tax on solar
wind and all renewables I would
certainly be a minimal to the
idea mister chairman
representative thank you mr
mister chairman and think you
represented it block
actually believe that you know
as we transition we need to
start looking more at how we're
going to be making up up our
budgetary
restraints as we move forward
and I do think that it and i'm
not going to commit right here
but I just I just think that we
need to start really looking at
you know where our funding is
going to come from as oil and
gas revenues go down and how
we're going to be funding our
education system are health care
system or roads I mean I think
these are issues that we
probably at some point have to
commission a study to look at
our our revenues overall.
And what losses were going to
project into the future and how
we're going to make up for those
losses so that's my only comment
mr chair and thank you thank you
representative block for your
vision thank you mister chair.
Thank you represent rigo
yes thank you mr chair and
representative walked thank you
for being here
I
I am glad the representative
garcia brought up the state of
texas because the state of texas
is actually number one and
renewable energy production at I
believe.
As of july in two thousand
twenty two produced thirty three
point nine five millions of
megawhat hours
washington was number two with
twenty five point one and
california was number three with
nineteen point five two
do the US news and world report.
I would submit
that
be reason such a some of the
renewable development has
stopped in texas
is too far
one
and this would include a recent
I believe it was wind form in
the pan handle area that was
cancelled very recently
is because they're grid is maxed
out any generation of additional
when power is the stabilising
their grip
to
is that from two thousand six to
two thousand twenty nine the
total cost tax payers
was.
Is projected to be thirty six
billion dollars so not only with
would we have to study the
losses under the oil and gas
industry as it declines but also
the cost to our tax payers of
the subsidies and that is all I
have mist.
The key review of temporary
everything towns and they didn't
have those previous
thank you much chair.
Thank you representative locked
for your bill
I have a little different take
that i'd like to explore with
your bat first I would like to
kind of put in too.
Perspective
what you're asking for there was
so
your bill asked for round
numbers about two thousand
million.
Mister chairman by twenty twenty
eight yes
that is about.
The.
Five point seven percent
of just the new money that came
forth with from all in gas this
year and only about two percent
out of the overall impact
so what you're asking for is
very small
the second point mister chairman
representative i'd make.
Representative ray goes on me up
I mean twice last year I
presented bills
that would task
new mexico school.
With the task of
tell us where we go from here if
we're phasing out this industry
what what potential do we have
within the stated in the mexico
to replace it if we're not going
to
deplete the standard of living
of new mexicans with value
is it is it attacks on
renewables.
Is it
rare the man rules I mean just
what
and that was some merrily
dismasters not being something
that we are spent
which I think is.
Is
very yes and genuine to act.
The third thing is I would say
is that.
In the mexico
what we
must have
are jobs for our constituents
good jobs.
And although this and the street
does provide some charbs
the number of jobs
is
pretty small
we path
a couple of years ago you create
me if i'm wrong i'm sure you
will remember it
we passed an irabian bill that
allowed transmission line to
enjoy
the industrial every new bond
yet yes
it was a bill I did not support
and still don't support because
when you look at that project as
a whole
in you realize that those
technical
crashed man that usually come in
with those type of big projects
they come in and they leave.
I've built pipelines for
a
many years I did the exact same
thing I brought craft money and
we built a facility and then we
left in the amount of remaining
jobs to a community.
Is very small
and so I think as we are passing
out these.
Subsidies to these industry we
have to say
and i'm i'm i'm not i'm not
i'm not saying that I rb
shouldn't be used by the
industry because I mean my
goodness look at what intel did
him in alba kirky look what
happened down the united mexico
with their their
therefore soldier down there
industrial revenue bands are a
great tool.
That companies are rewarded with
those industrial revenue bands
when they create job.
And for someone
do not create jobs is not the
spirit of what that bill was
intended to do
chair and representative
are there states that currently
tax renewable
energy generation and if so who
are they and how much did they
what is the tax rate
thank you mister chairman thank
you representative great
question I was anticipating that
question so in wyoming for
example they have a four dollars
per kilo hour of plant capacity
in I would they have a
generation replacement tax on
most solar projects there are a
couple other states have similar
to those two mr chair
thank you for that so when we
talk about new mexico being a
friend here and break in new
ground and doing it on all these
things.
Yet would seem to me that we
should we should
be careful in the matter that we
do it so that what we attract
and the companies that come and
enjoy
the benefits of whether it's our
are wind or some whatever it is
they enjoy that we also enjoy
them being here and we do that
typically by what they pay in
so that are contest
constituents.
Don't have to pay as much
because what happens today
mister chairman and
representative
the for example the value of
this I r b.
Is.
Is really back stop by new
mexico taxpayers
the same people that are signing
on this is a really good idea
haven't figured out yet that
they're paying for it
and that's going to have to come
to the surface
I am a proponent
representative chair of every
available energy generation that
affords a reliable dispatchable
power that is economical to our
constituents because if you look
through
society or generation.
Those societies that have.
Done the best and have flushed
and their children have grown
and you know gone under the
bigger and better thanks is
because they had available
economical.
The.
So whatever ideas so.
And representative.
Is your proposal.
And I think this is important as
I quite frankly I think you can
start it
differently than I would have
it's not some match
to reduce tax on all and gas I
mean that's not what you're but
you proposing your but your
proposing is that another source
of the energy be taxed in some
equitable fashion correct
mr chairman representative
minority with towns and yes that
is what we're looking forward to
this I mean in a world that
would be perfect yeah we have no
taxes at all on anything right
but mister chairman
representative that's not the
world we live in and with your
previous question I I forgot to
add that i'm looking at an
american bar association study
and it says here in nebraska
there's a tax of three thousand
five hundred eighteen dollars
per mb of capacity and that's
applied to wind and solar
projects as well in miss again
they have a separate tax which
is mostly for the system storage
for those as well mister
chairman representative.
Right thank you for that I
I believe that we have done our
constituents a disservice and I
think the last
expert is the last person that
we had.
That was helping a
representative.
Explain the bill he went on to
say that he thought
or somewhat thing that the cost
of the eta going forward was
going to double her.
We have seen in recent years are
largest one of our largest
providers put a son notice that
our largest flagship city may
very well go through brown out.
So I think what you're trying to
do I think bringing I I think
bringing energy renoble energy
companies and in the mexico is a
good thing I really do I think
it's good for new mexico but I
think they have to be
responsible in they have to play
and pay in an equitable fashion
and if you want jobs for new
mexicans and you actually can
stitute the beat to have careers
where they stay here we have to
attract the kind o.
I I thank you for bringing your
bill forward I think it's
directionally what we need to do
not to penalize them but to
bring them up to part if they're
going to survive they have to
survive in a competitive market
and we can't not we cannot
supplant their costs going
forward because it is.
It's really not bearded
certainly not us thank you.
Thank you representative
represents
the user chair thing reps a box
terrorism blocked my first
question is what dialogue you
had with union county officials
with representatives about your
propo.
Thank you mister chairman
representative I have not
specifically spoken with folks
in the union county over a have
spoken to folks in other
counties that things chair thing
reps reason I ask he was brought
up and testimony and it seemed
actually fair during the comment
wait there's a proposed
northpath
transmission line that's in that
part of new mexico and it was
described and I think pretty
fairly so that we're we to
implement this legislation it
would make the construction of
that transmission.
Delayed if.
Any any concerns about that was
terrible so block
thank you mr chairman think he
represented so we're talking
about a transmission line not
the actual severance tax so it
would not directly apply to this
industry until they're producing
energy mister chair represented
mister chairman representative
absolutely and so why why build
the transmission line yes the
production primaril.
So so we really would lose they
would lose both pieces they
would lose the winter but the
transmission line they would
lose all those pieces miss chair
representative and in sort of
closer to your neck of the woods
lincoln county were seeing
massive amounts of investment
again that we heard about during
testimony we would be I fear
denying northern new mexico
northeast new mexico that same
opportunity that central and s.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you at representative mister
chairman er for that I I
understand the concern I have
not had specific meetings with
that group but I would say just
as with oil and gas and any
other industry there needs to
have that conversation at the
table about once you leave the
state once you're finished with
building your project what are
you for new mexico and right now
mister chairman representative
that would be zero percent tax
on any kind of severance or
excise tax on that prime project
so mrperiod german represented
that is where I would come from
with it and I would also say
these multi billion dollar
projects some of them in the
eleven billion dollar range if
we look at the fire it's a that
the maximum that every single
person in the entire state would
be pain would be two hundred and
eight two hundred three million
a year so I think that is just
peanuts compared to the value
that would be produced from
these large projects mister
chair representative they miss
chair thanks for representative
it was brought up in testimony
adding is very credible that
were we to pass this legislation
in northeast and mexico many
other parts of that long.
Investment that is.
Would go and so I would suggest.
At mrperiod chair representative
briefly I thought I heard you
say that once renewable energy.
That there is no other land uses
that I catch that right
mister chairman representative
when I was speaking with regard
to that was solar right where
there is a solar farm that land
there's nothing else you can put
on top of that land so it would
by definition not be there I
wouldn't say severed forever
mister chair representative just
as any land if you frack or
anything else there's still the
land there once you want to
leave that site so mister
chairman representative what I
would say is regarding that
solar yes when it could be
debatable I know that there are
some ranters in my neck of the
woods who've reached out to me
with problems with the cattle
and grazing and there are many
problems with that and concerns
regarding the chemicals used
with solar or i'm sorry with
wind turbines and they do have
many concerns regarding that so
I have not done studies
regarding that but I would
definitely be open to looking
into it mister chairman
representative they famous chair
thank you representative as it
relates to when towers which
it's my understanding correctly
if i'm wrong that as those are
undeaded land that the owner of
those that do the land gets
regular payments for those
towers and
going back up to northeast new
mexico again we're denying the
owners of deeded land the
opportunity utilize that land.
Mr chair representative with
regard to solar developments
aggregate
I wouldn't suggest there's more
research to do because aggroval
tax and other co locations and
co uses of land are in fact
quite common in our state in the
cross
the country in the world so I I
wouldn't I don't think that's
correct mister chair reps.
Miss chair representative going
back to sort of the different
jobs that come along are you
familiar with maceland's
community college thank you
mister chairman thank you
representative actually as the
late I am because they have
presented in multiple of my
interim committees and I I
definitely am mister
representative that's great to
hear mister
as I understand that there are
welcoming in new
instructors who are going to be
sort of regionally based here in
new mexico because of our wind
production because of the
promise of more transmission
more renewable energy that we're
going to become a regional have
for the instructors to teach
more new mexicans and in fact
our folks come to our state to
learn how to do this work how to
do the maintenance
do you fear if we decide why is
renewable energy production that
that.
Investment in maceland.
Mister chairman representative
thank you for that question and
first of all want to applied me
so lands in any higher
educational facility for
welcoming multiple diverse
energy sectors to the state
secondarily mister speaker I
would I would correct the record
and say that this is not
disincentivising these different
energy producers from coming to
the state it is merely saying as
a state we would like you to pay
your fair share when you are in
new mexico producing energy with
our wind and our solar mister
chairman representative okay
they must think you represent
the again I think the effects on
the ground
suggests to me that moving in
this direction following the st.
Not a draft but a precipitous
stock instead of halt in
production.
Now we're seeing in the mexico
associated jobs
down in beland as I understand
that mister chair representative
the manufacturer of when.
I deeply fear that we put o.
And want to move briefly mister
chair representative what
happens to the oil that we
produce in the m.
Thank you mister chairman think
he represented her can you be
more specific what happens are
you asking if it stays in the
state or leaves or what are we
asking mr
yeah yes what what happens after
it's produced the majority of
our oil would happen
thank you mister chairman think
you representative it's it's a
much different so I I would hate
to go apple's oranges on this
regarding that because a lot of
it mister chairman
representative it goes to a
refinery that mean may not be in
the state and it could
definitely come back to new
mexico mister chair
representative.
Mr chair representative the vast
majority of our oil
for which we greatly benefit
produced in new mexico it goes
significantly in the pipelines
in a gaze and that's a big part
as I have been proud to share
mister chair representative
telping keep free nations free
it's happened stopping
authoritarian.
Resources.
But it's exported out of state
was chairman of them I heard
that too in the testimony
against your bill we have always
been and will continue to be an
energy a.
Whether intended or not I heard
in the presentation really
trying to yet energy industry.
It's my understanding that we
see great coal location of
renewable energy generation in
southeast new mexico that in
fact many of our largest
e and p oil producers are
aggressively investing in
renewal way.
That the competition.
Briefly rap.
Is it would you take my
suggestion that early childhood
trust fund scheduled to be over
five billion dollars at the end
of the.
Thank you mister chairman
representative yes and if you'd
like me to comment on the price
of just going through okay our
financial situation was chair
representative we're in a strong
situation we're in a place where
we need to continue to diversify
and expand our economy with
renewable energy worse.
The manufacturing jarves the
educators.
Recent investment.
The ability for lando.
On their pots of land to pass
those down the futu.
The bill that you bring into us
today I fear would actually
threaten that it.
Thank you.
Thank you mister chair.
My question I don't actually
have any questions I believe
mister chair that representative
small captured uh the sort of
same vein of questions and
concerns that I have and I did
want to just
say that and mister chair
representative block I really
appreciate
the the thoughtfulness with
which you've brought this bill
philosophically
I don't think it's the right
approach I really appreciated
the physical impact reports
provided by the agencies I think
particularly the assessment from
energy minerals natural
resources have very
sound points
and so I just wanted to flag
that and then also say that I
think perhaps this is a another
philosophical issue
that I think a better way to
diversify the state's economy.
Is to promote opportunities that
are going to grow jobs rather
than potentially lose them and I
think that new mexico has an
excellent opportunity when it
comes to and the advanced energy
sector and clean tack and
working with our renewables as
well as our fossil field that so
thank you very much mister
chair.
Think he reps in dixon anything
further from the committee or
make a comment so I just want to
as listening to the debate
just want to observe that.
When we're looking at the impact
of oil and gas love that impact
or rented royalties not taxes so
that's really in apples to
orange's comparison
represent block you described it
as hard wind in our solar and
it's not you know it is a i'm
glad that we own or oil and
guess that's why we get realty
payments so
I don't think this is the time
for this kind of legislation
what's the pleasure
that
moved to table
motion table.
The second.
Victoria when you're ready to
take the.
Yes mr chairman.
Representative yes
representative dickson.
Thank you I will vote to table
however I tend to prefer when we
vote on the actual bill.
Representative.
Representative himberry nota
table.
Representative montoya know the
table
a president everyone.
Representative scott.
Representative small yes
representative townsend.
Madam chair yesterday.
Mr chairman
yes.
Six yes or no one so the bills
been tabled a fair and could
just city for just a moment
represent dickson so the vote on
the bill with the
due pass motion that were the
field.
And then we were a table in
motion so
but it is
I think clear for the general
public
and I would like to once can
think market consoles in randy
well very for the pizza it's
three clock I don't think we
were the made it without
