Yeah
representative henry
representative montoya
representative rubio here
representative scott
representative small
representative townsend
madam vice chairs and the namer.
Mr chairman making you
have a quote okay so we have a
two bills or a bill and the
memorial up today as I as always
i'm hopeful it won't take that
long we do have capcakes
cursy of a bare.
Birthday capital and she'll
probably be here on thursday we
have a
another memorial that that
relates to her company on
thursday any.
Yeah we'll hold on to that so
are there any other
announcements or questions or
anything from the committee
before we begin.
Okay I think your sir auto.
Yeah.
Okay.
With every year.
Thank you mr chairman thank you
committee for hereing this bill
today I have with me to my
experts secretaries of two of
our departments economic
development and tax and revenue
we also have represents
presentatives from emerged here
as well to help answer any
questions might come up with
this bill is the advance energy
equipment income tax credits
would create an income tax
credit for a manufacturing
that's happening in our state
around renewables and battery
storage energy i'm a pairs with
the ira the inflation reduction
act that was past a couple years
ago and that awful also offers a
tax credit for these businesses
building in that way i'm it it
pays a forty five acts that
essentially says that these
renewable and a long term energy
efforts will we're encouraging
that kind of development that
kind of manufacturing in our
state innovation and this would
increase that so this would
either be a taxpayer for twenty
percent of the manufacturing
facility it's being used or up
to twenty five million dollars
as we know a lot of these are
very large
investment serving made right
now we are in competition with
the rest the nation for driving
more economic development around
energy and across the board and
we we know that there is
incentives to prove them to move
into more clean and renewable
energy and battery storages
clutch as is critical especially
in that in the west where we
need to transfer cost longer
places about longer distances so
this would essentially help
drive us as it as a as a
mechanic I would argue on work
to build and where to build that
infrastructure out we've
invested in a number of ways i'm
happy to go into some of the
executive orders that assist in
that effort on but really this
part is what a lot of our
efforts and is very explicit
because of the the forty five x
in the definitions and there to
ensure that we're investing in
an industry that we're
interested in
can i'd love to hand it to
secretary roper he can can talk
about one of the investments
that we're looking at we're
hoping to attract towards.
If you're members of the
members of the committee.
When you look at the ira there's
two things that are really
happening here one is it is
truly driving reshoring an
ensuring activities to the
united states that have been
offer shores for thirty plus
years and it's in its driving
that.
And we are in competition
literally with all forty eight
other states that are in the
continuous united states this
particular piece of legislation
will put us in a position of
being above and beyond what
those other forty eight will all
have the forty five x and other
components.
Of the impletion reduction act
but what they won't have is this
ability here the forty five x
portion of the independent
inflation reduction act.
Allows for a production credit
so once the facility is built
and they are making these items
that are qualified under the
ira.
Then they get the federal tax
credit what this credit does it
provides an income tax credit
for the capital investment on
the front end of this when the
companies aren't making any
which is or anything it's on the
front end when they've invested
in this equipment so will help
cash flow and it will give us a
competitive advantage over our
neighbors as these as these
companies look
everybody's probably heard of
the maxion project that we've
landed in new mexico that is the
first ensuring although full
scale solar menu factoring in
the united states.
And they will not only assemble
the solar panels which is a
fairly common occurrence and but
they will be participating the
making of the follow they'll
take cells which is a not common
occurrence in the united states
in fact currently ninety nine
percent of the photo will take
so manufacturing happens in the
in the asia area across the
world.
But in addition to that we are
in a.
Night fight with the state of
new york for a supply chain to
that the civility to land
another company that would also
qualify under the inflation
reduction act.
That just gives an example of
the types of opportunities that
are here.
In their feeling far between
the won't happen very often.
And there's a finance number in
the ira it it expires completely
in twenty thirty three it starts
fazing out as early as twenty
twenty eight so we're in a
finance situation here to get on
the front end be a part of this
great.
Influx of capital into the
united states or that be a part
of it.
And what this will do was give
us a competitive advantage.
Thank you and if I can also my
expert for secretary short and
clark talk about this
certification process who would
be acquired for anybody
qualifying for this.
Thank you so much good morning
members of the committee mister
chair
just to kind of pick you back on
what secretary roper and our
sponsor mentioned already
this will have a somewhat unique
certification process
a two step process to ensure
that the expenditures that the
company is about to make on its
equipment will qualify for the
credit so at the front end the
company will come to the energy
minerals and natural resources
department at for
precertification and they will
basically look at the project
and whether the equipment that
is about to be purchased into
equipment facility is going to
qualify for the forty five x
federal credit if it passes
through that gate then they'll
go about equipping the facility
and on to production but why we
think this credit is so
important as a companion to
forty five x is that it's
offdashsetting some of the
capital investment equipment at
the front end of the project and
then the federal credit will
take place take effect later
once production begins
and with that was damper
questions.
Okay we will go to
the audience to the public is
anyone here would like to speak
in support of this bill
reason
yet is there anyone opposition
okay let's do a sport if you
couldn't live in your comments
to ninety seconds
here you want
you supposedly the rim is make
if you just stand up
good morning good morning mister
chairman members of the
committee with this year a club
yoga on the chapter representing
our thirty five thousand members
and supporters in new mexico
i'll be super super quick we
support this bill we believe the
tax credit is an attempt to
support the manufacturing side
of claim and of the cleaner
energy sector and it's a state
tax credit that would build on
the federal credit which applies
to windsolar energy battery
inverters and applicable
critical materials and just as
you yes thank you thank you
others in sport
yes
thank you mister chairman good
morning on january bullington
are speaking on behalf of
greater chamber of commerce
which supports this legislation
this as the potential to support
a lot of communities cross our
state they're looking for good
high pancling manufacturing jobs
including the city of santa fe
which I also represent this is a
tax credit that's going to help
create the right conditions for
manufacturers a renewable energy
equipment to start or move here
and recently albuquerque
celebrated
the location of maxi on to that
city and that was quite a big
faster land and a tax credit
program like this will show
other global manufacturers of
maxies caliber that new mexico's
the place to be if you want to
if you want to bring cutting
technology and manufacturer
renewal energy equipment thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is chose
canada and i'm the director of
public.
Yeah.
As you heard historic federal
investment in infrastructure and
our energy future means new
mexico cannot wait and we
believe this proposal will hold
leverage historic investments
under the I r a our transition
to decorativation is a long road
and will require constant
innovation and utilizing all
hands on deck to get us there
you heard the competition is
stiff but my good new mexico is
already taken steps forward to
lead let's continue with that
moment we agree with the
economic development department
we believe this is another tool
that will build up the greeks
energy and opportunities ahead
for new mexico while spring the
economy and we need to more
investment and jobs thank you.
Thank you anyone else in sport
is there anyone online who would
like to speak in sport if you
would like to speak please raise
your.
Casing known this anyone in the
opposition in the room.
Is there anyone online in the
opposite.
Resist rato do you have anything
it like to add before we go to
the committee no think you we
stand for questions thank you
mister members of the committee
there was a hemory.
Thank you mister chair
representative through the
secretary roper and i'm sorry I
missed
i'm stephanie sharden clark and
the secretary of the taxation
and revenue department okay
great thank you.
I actually really like this bill
I think it's I think it's really
good I think time into forty
five x.
Is great
because as I understand it forty
five x also has a provision for
the production of critical
minerals as that correct thank
you mister chair thank you
representative yes that's
correct thank you for adding
that yeah but thank you thank
you miss mister chair
representative and
the reason I like this I think
it it could be very good for
some of our oil and gas
producers who are looking at
ways to clean up their produced
water and our produced water in
the premium base in contains
critical menorals like little
nickel manganese magnesium and
and so I think acted really
helped him and and spur them to
t do that and helped him clean
up the produced water my big
concern with this bill though is
there's not an agriculture cap
and so we have a lot of time or
you know we've got ten years of
this with no aggregate cap and
it's very hard to predict the
future tax liability on this
could would would you care to
address that please.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative hembry.
A i'd like to address it in a
couple of weeks.
First of all these projects are
going to be few and far between.
I would be an excited excited
cabinet sector of economic
development if we were to land
one for the next ten years.
Um.
That would be phenomenal so I I
do believe that just because the
nature of the bees and the size
and the nature of these projects
that there is a finite number
that it's not just some open
ended.
Number that will be uncapped.
Secondly I I would argue that
were it not for.
The ira and their supplemental
tax in new mexico.
We'd have never that income.
That millions of dollars of
income that were.
Proposing to get from these
projects through either g r t p
IT or city.
Wouldn't be here.
So the net loss to the state of
new mexico is actually a gain
that we will get we will
actually have a net gain by
implementing this tax.
Thank you secretary roper thank
you mister chair that's at all.
Thank you reps and himbury
representative
thank you mister chair
and good morning representative
and a cabinet secretaries
so just i'm trying to get this
clear in my mind but say company
decides to locate an albuquerque
and they got a
an irb or they receive a is this
an addition to that
and I mean are this is just for
the equipment it's not for the
building and the
just so I can be clear about
what
mister chair and representative
rego thank you for that question
yes it's it's possible that a
company could have an irb issued
by a city or county on their
behalf which would abate
property tax related to the
facility for a period of time
and could offset the cost of the
equipment but in that case the
equipment would have to be owned
at least temporarily by the city
rather than the taxpayer and to
kind of go back to secretary
roberts question response on the
last when yet that we I agree
these projects are gonna be very
few and far between and we have
to keep in mind that our
incentive here is on the one
time cost of equipment not the
recurring cost of production so
that between those two reasons
getting back to representative
hembries question that was why
we felt comfortable moving
forward without an agriculture
cap
thank you mister chair that does
that does clarify a lot in them
so eventually
the equipment is is owned by
that company and that so this is
a credit to keep the that that
but they become the owners
mister chair
mister chair and representative
break or kind of talking about a
hypothetical here but in the
case of an irb the tax.
Really if that goes to the
private developer in an irvs
because for a period of time the
city air county owns the
facility in its equipment and
least is it too the company and
so in that case its tax free
because it's owned by a
government energy in this case
to be eligible for this credit
the taxpayer has to incur the
expenses of the equipment and so
it they may or may not overlap
but not necessarily he wouldn't
necessarily be able to stack
them okay and not and that was a
stranger
members the committee represent
berego i'd like to add to that
that the irb exemption is on
property tax only done advalored
tax
and it does allow for the
exemption of grocery seats tax
or compensating tax on the
purchase of equipment this
credit is an income tax credit
that will be holy and totally
based on the capital investment
on that equipment and the cap on
the capital investment of that
equipment and so yes they could
work in tandem
but it wouldn't really be a
double deap it would be too
different tax tax areas that
were being president
and that's what really I was
trying to get out is thank you
mr chair and and
mr cabinet secretary i'm sorry I
don't know I don't remember your
name but
it you know i'm just trying to
be clear in my mind as to what
the investments are in where
they actually sit as the company
develops and move forward so
thank.
The.
Thank you reps brigo ribs and
townson.
Thank you.
Something has been said
and I want to make sure because
there's a lot of water
initiatives after today
from both both sides with
processes
they removal of.
Certain minerals out of a water
stream yet being produced water
would it in european meter
requirements of this
bill
mr chair
members of the committee
representative towns and a
strict reading of forty five x
is what we are hanging our head
on as far as the qualifying
factor for this credit under the
inflation reduction act
specifically does talk about
precious minerals needed for the
process of renewable energy so
such things as specifically
later
which is the the most sought
after precious mineral in the in
the renoval area for battery
battery storage yes so
regardless of where that little
more produced or obtained it
would qualify under forty five
excess therefore the equipment
used to manufacturer or produce
that material what in fact
qualify for this credit thank
you mister chairman sector
o reply
to you.
As leave that as it is I think
that
that's what I wanted to cover I
appreciate it thank you I think
that may help a couple of
initiatives.
He represent towns and
represents
effective representative sector
roper could you describe for the
panel the history of new mexico
support activities for
the solar industry the solar
panel manufacturing.
Mister chair members of the
commanding representative scott.
From the solar panel industry is
like any other many factoring
component in new mexico
so our support would would be on
the lines of.
The manufacturing facility would
qualify for the judge training
it's any program
the facility would qualify for
the local economic development
act of facility would qualify
for irves if they were
determined to be
issued locally
if in fact it is an irb than the
company would qualify for the
manufacturer's investment tax
credit
which is in statute with the
state in the mexico the company
would be
eligible for the highways jobs
tax creditive in the back the
jobs that they created or nexus
a forty thousand dollars in a
rural community sixty thousand
dollars in an urban area they
would also qualify for the rural
jobs tax credit if they were in
a rural community
for for those so all of those
installings are in statute and
in place in new mexico.
For economic base companies
which manufacturing is the lead
on their so whether it be a
widget manufacturer a pipe
manufacturer or a solar
manufacturer they would all they
would all fall under the same
category
as far as any specific credits
for solar
there are currently not on the
books
chairman secretary I seem to
recall.
I can't turn.
New mexico supported a fairly
spectacular failure in the solar
industry and I guess my question
is why is this going to be dear
for.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative scott
i'm i'm quite sure you were
referring to shot solar er which
was a german solar manufacturer
that located in albert turkey
in what is now method else all.
That the facility.
Didn't make it as china and asia
overtook the solar industry.
And greatly reduced the cost
which is why for the last
fifteen to twenty years
virtually all activity is
happened on the asian continent
in that industry
and that that's plain and simple
I mean they they ran him out of
business on cost mostly over the
cost of labor.
What the inflation reduction act
as as done that's a federal
initiative.
Holy and solely to resure and
unsure not just solar but all of
those foreign activities that
left the united states created
supply chain and security issues
in the united states
over costs of labor the
inflation reduction act.
Provides the incentives not only
on the capital side but on the
production side which is what
we're hanging our are had on on
the forty five x it's providing
a production tax credit through
onshore and reassure that
technology we're trying to do
here is simply to give you
mexico a leg up over the forty
seven other states we're
competing with and if I may
continue on that i'm gonna have
to order the secret to talk
about the claw back pieces one
thing I want to add though is
that with this with the battery
storage met mister chair and a
representative on that will
assist in moving the energy that
we're producing in from a solar
or wind that allows us to move
that and make that to market
instead but i'm happy to give it
to you
thank you message here in a
present of scott to your
question if we were to invest in
a company that then failed I
want to point out something that
hasn't been discussed yet and
committed that bill contains a
clawback provision where if a
company receives this credit
from the state but then ceases
operations for a hundred and
eighty consecutive days within
two years so basically they if
they shut down within two years
they'll that credit back to the
state
miss chairman madam sector
you're ahead of me that was my
very next question wonderful.
This chairman.
Secretaries do you all think
that the.
The you'll apparently believe
that the ira whatever tariffs
are in place I believe I heard
you say ninety nine percent of
this production is off sure and
to all of these tax breaks and
incentives will make enough
difference
to give these folks
manufacturing here.
A.
Realistic chances.
Mister chair members of the
committee represents cut
I would answer an unequivocal
yes we're already seen the
activity the the activity is
happening these are large
projects so it takes time form
to happen but the inflation
reduction act.
Is the largest single.
Federal capital investment into
infastructure since a guy need
misinhour was president and we
built the understand highway
system and it will have that
kind of impact.
To the united states over the
next decade.
Mr chairman missed secretary.
So I believe in the fire that
there was.
A maxians investment was
approaching a billion dollars is
the twenty five million the
maximum any one.
Company is eligible for under
this program.
Mr chair members of the
committee representatives got
yes it's twenty five million.
In a project and.
Oh correct you maxions
investment will near two.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you for your actually
thank you reserve scott reserve
thank you mister chairman and
now representative sorrow and
secretary share and clear good
heavier today
based on
the answer to
representative towns since
question earlier
about the
equipment for produced water if
there's extraction of minerals
little concerned about they're
not being an aggregate cap
with.
With knowledge that
big oil who was already
producing water for other
purposes
you know or producing the water
in doing it for other purposes
is there a concern at all that
this tax credit could go to them
without there being a cap it
seems like
there there could be a lot more
folks who apply for this tax
credit.
Mrperiod chair members of the
committee represented mentoria.
This credit would not be just
for cleaning up water
it wouldn't be the only way that
this credit would apply
to representative towns and
question to produce water and
and representative hembry's
question is if that process were
specific to reminding the
precious medical the qualify and
forty five
that's the only way it would so
and i'll go back to him
secretary short and park in
myself at both
we believe that there's
a few and far between these
projects so were coughed rolling
the fact that there's not an
agriculture cap because they're
just not going to be that many
other
mister chair and representative
I believe I was looking for my
fire but I believe the fire even
has the estimate around closer
to fifteen million and then I
believe twenty five million
later so again the evening
estimates from the FIR under
under from the lfc understanding
the market etc still believes
it'll be something that's
reasonable amount as a great
short and clerk on anything.
Mister chair and representative
my toy the only thing I think
i'll add is that it's a twenty
five million dollar cap per
taxpayer
or the lesser of twenty percent
of the equipment to so it could
if there are oil and gas
producers in the state that
somehow I figure out to.
Do a process to produced water
that yields an advanced energy
product under forty five x it
could be
I think it's I think it's
probably not what's going to
happen but if it was it wouldn't
necessarily be that they can run
up all the way to twenty five
million it might be twenty five
percent of just the or twenty
percent of the equipment to
produce that so thanks for that
answer mister chair I guess.
From my standpoint i'm don't I
wouldn't underestimate the
ability of industry to look at a
potential tax credit and figure
out how to then turn their
process into exactly what you're
talking about extraction
purposes
and they would be
essentially be doing.
Two things at once but claiming
that credit so that's my concern
is I think there is a potential.
That industry is being
underestimated here just a bit
thank you mister chair.
Thank you groups and went to a
representative rigo for a second
time.
Thank you mister chair for
allowing me to ask a follow up
question
and mister roperiod I apologize
I didn't they didn't know your
name is first time i've seen you
so
and I and I happened to be under
city council representative and
and mister chair when shot solar
came and left
so and we did provide incentives
for that
and i'm thinking about you
mentioned that there were
clawback I think the
taxation cabinet secretary
mentioned that
in that panel I mean is there
any kind of penalty for or
interest that we would
include and that claw back
because they are using state
money to
me as an incentive so in the
like the development agreement
or whatever agreement
how are that work exactly thank
you mr chair think you
representative I believe we're
checking with undered tenders
and kind of the the details
there secretary question thank
you mister chair and
representative just conferring
with our art policy director
the bill is clear if if a
clawback occurred the bill is
clear what day the credit is due
back from the taxpayer I think
the tax administration act to it
allow us to impose penalty if it
weren't paid back by that day
okay thank you I just want to
make sure that that's on the
record mister chair and they get
important you know because we
are putting up in a sense
putting up funding for them to
come and buy the equipment and
so on
but if there's no penalty
involved and it's easy to come
and go so I just wanted to have
that on th.
Thank you
anyone else in the came before.
Rips of serrato in sectories so
I had a few questions about the
structure of the tax credit so
first off on page two
we've heard it's the tone credit
per taxpayer.
But it's actually not one credit
per tax period one credit per
facility and then if you look at
the definition of facility it's.
Facility means that facility the
employees personnel.
With menu factoring equipment
not previously existing at the
facility.
So.
Two concerns one would be that.
A.
Manufacturer could simply build
multiple facilities.
The.
Building a facility right thanks
for her building beers facility
right next to our building you
know they could take it separate
them that way or under that
language.
Manufacturing equipment that
previously
existing at the facility.
Could they apply for one of
these every time they bought new
equipme.
Mister chair members of the
committee and an answer
to your first question
the intentions per project.
Which the secretary of tax and
myself have also taken that that
to me for taxpayer so.
To your point I I think an
amendment on the definition
would be prodemed so we can be
clear because that's definitely
and our are intent would be per
project
into your second question.
The the idea that the reason
behind
not previously in that facility
we don't want to preclude.
For example an existing facility
such as and the one in belarus
were coastal wind towers went
into.
That was previously a plastic
manufacturer to be not able to
take advantage of this credit
because they're going into an
existing structure and putting
an equipment in this qualified
for forty five x production
again that.
That that is the intention and
that's the reasoning behind it
if we need further definition
to say new new processes not
read too lane I think that would
be a friendly amendment.
The.
Right.
Mr mister chairman committee you
know again because these are the
folks that are implementing it I
I rely on hold that they see
they view this happening I would
just also mention that as we all
know the tax packages moving
forward at the same time and so
we don't we are just in sharing
that that would be a friendly
moment to make if possible but I
prefer not to delay the bill too
much only so that we could make
sure that this is in
consideration for the tax
committee as well but I would be
open to something like that
so so I appreciate that I have
some other questions.
That's probably more substantive
amendment that want make on the
fly
I personally willing to move
this forward with.
But I have some of the questions
that might also warn some.
Representatives rato in sectors
on peace err three line sixteen
text credit may be sold exchange
or otherwise transferred.
If you know at the twenty five
million dollar tax credit is not
a small tax credit card be
parceled out can you sell it in.
A million dollar increments or
five million dollars.
Mister chair i'm looking at the
specific language in this bill
because that does very sometimes
I I don't believe that the
transfer of this credit will
need to be in one bulk amount it
could be in parcels.
And then the department just
gets notified of that so that we
can track it.
So.
Resisterator and sixty sharing
clerk I would suggest
specifying that and I would
suggest a minimum.
Yeah so it's not you know twenty
thousand fifty thousand so it
doesn't multiply the tax
credits.
So like the minimum you know I I
don't know what appropriate
minimum would be I would think a
tax rate potentially that big
the member.
Um.
Resist rough to sector shirt and
clerk so the I found the the
analysis from from tier de was
was quite helpful I I think
there is some good issues
one issue on.
Page four section eight and this
is.
Obviously all this stuff gets
repeated in the corporate tax
credit just focusing o.
The question of this is
transferable.
Company gets a big tax credit
they transfer it.
And someone else claims their
tax credit and then the company
sees his operations.
So who do you claw who is the
taxpayer for the clawback
purposes.
I think mister chair I I think
this would be the first credit
that we've had where it's
transferable and with a clawback
the clawback is pretty rare in
the tax code
so we can look into that
and try to make sure that it's
clear and lie appreciate.
Go ahead
thank you mister chair and
members of the committee good
morning my name is mark shaken
and tax policy director takes
and rub I just wanted to point
the language on the top of the
page five and it does state that
the taxpayer shall pay to the
department the tax liability so
it if the taxpayer transfers the
credit to another they are still
on the hook for the tall back so
I don't know whether that might
affect the desirability of
transferring the tax credit but
according to the current
language of the bill the
taxpayer does retain the
liability for the clawback even
if they transfer the tax credit
to a different person so there's
a strong to
an expert I wouldn't read it
that way I think we use tax fair
and both.
So the taxpayer gets the tax
credit and then the taxpayer
claims to tax credit those are
two different taxpayers.
Under the scenari.
The.
Thank you for that comment mr
chairman will obviously
consultant talk about tightening
up the language okay
mister chairman committee I
wanted also turned it over to
secretary roper we're just
confirming about the
transferability and why that may
be beneficial and we don't
always do transferability and
tax good as you know better than
we time I i'm fine with that
okay okay thank you I understand
transferability and it's not
refundable it's transferred also
that's.
The
reserve strategy I keep pointing
to see madame chair and
residential to
the
the clawback is trigger
triggered if you're
you cease production for one
hundred and eighty consecutive
days and there's a two year
period that that were the so
basically you guys stop
production for half a year in
the next two years so if you
produce for a year and a half
then you're in the clear.
It's not along clawback period
and I guess my other concern is
hundred and eighty consecutive
days.
Say you cease production but
you've got this twenty five
million dollars test rate in
your pocket seems to me like
you'd be pretty easy to go into
the plant turn on the lights
fire up the equipment.
I I mean what
what can you interrupt at a
hundred and eighty day period
pretty easily and avoid this
clawback.
Mr chair i'll take a start at
that and then I I think
secretary roper might want to
add but
if you're not producing the
widgets whatever whatever the
the component sorry that you
produced to qualify for a
section forty five x then you're
not producing and so if you're
just coming in and turning on
the lights and off but you're
not producing anything then
you're not in production and I
also just want to clarify I
think you probably saw that it
also applies to a successor in
business so the taxpayer who
receives the credit card just
transfer the business maybe even
in name only to success here in
business the successor in
business also needs to remain
in production.
The reps rather than sector
sharing clerk I I guess in
production is.
Relative like you produce you
know a couple panels yeah I just
am concerned about that language
flagging that for
mister I I was thinking that
secretary roper would have more
on this than I would but
I don't know why it would ever
be in the interest of a taxpayer
to make the investment in the
facility the equipment
everything that goes along with
that and and be able to produce
but not produce that's just my
personal feeling why i'm not
concerned about that but maybe
secretary robert can had so so
here's here's my concern we we
talked about the shot I out
there much about that but.
Company is not making it for
whatever reason.
The incentive here would be to
avoid.
The club.
So it's it's you they would stop
production for other external
reasons.
But they would want to protect
that.
Tax.
History chair members of the
committee.
There there's n.
There's no reason that that
they would produce if they're
not producing a site you're not
going to turn on your combined
unless there's something to go
into the field that
take cut it but
there is simply turning on the
lights.
Is it is it going to
stop this mechanism there are
going to have to physically
produce employee people and run
a manufacturing facility in
order to stop the hundred and
eighty days
I mean
it's just it it's just not going
to happen III understand you're
concerned but with that type of
investment
you're you're just not going to
come in and and do a little bit
it's just not going mister chair
if I may also they would still
be incurring costs for owning
that property and without any
sort of production regardless of
the tax that have they'd still
they they they were very quickly
run into serious bankruptcy
situations mister chairman
committee if they were not
producing enough to create a
revenue to offset those cars so
they they either they are
effectively closing down would
be the one reason why this would
be happening or
they'd still be in crime cost of
eat to effectively shut down
eventually because they have to
produc.
Okay
I won't believe anything more
would consider taking out the
word consecuti.
Represents right to six to
sharing clark the taxation
revenue department recommended a
reporting requirement.
Which seems like a good idea to
me.
Including reporting if they shut
down you weren't necessarily
but the interdetride analysis
included a sample from another
statute.
Yes mister chair when we sent
this out for a bill review
within the whole department I I
believe it was mainly the audit
staff that said our work on
auditing this credit will be
much easier if the taxpayers who
claim the credit have to submit
like an annual report to us so
that we don't have to manually
go out and seek that information
from them
that would be something that we
could put into an amendment as
well
so the so they'll be worth
looking at and then the final.
So a technical issue raised by.
Your agency is
there's a definitely shame
qualified expenditure which
means expenditure made before
january honor after january
first point twenty five but this
the text of the bill as the
dissolve requirement that they
get precertified.
So it's not so that definition
doesn't really capture.
The language in the rest the
bill.
So it's not a qualified
expenditure isn't any
expenditure made after january
first twenty twenty five it has
to be made after january first
twenty twenty five in have been
free surface
and mister chair and that I
don't know if that's so much a
technical issue even though it's
it's probably under that section
it's just sort of pointing out
that just because an expenditure
is made after that date it also
needs to go through the
precertification sort of gate
keeping processor I don't think
an amendment is necessary relat.
So those are my questions are
all technical i'm i'm fine with
the program
I do think you should be looking
at some amendments or a
committee sub for.
Thank you mister chair and the
committee I yeah I appreciate
that input and I did make notes
on that and so i'm happy to also
follow up with you as well to
ensure that the concern that you
brought up are addressed in
that.
Represent brigo mister chair
like to make a recommendation
for a due pass based on your
comments
so we have a department's motion
and second
any further discussion.
Um.
Just for the help of it any
objection.
The.
Okay let's stick there but.
Chairman
representative yes
representative dick then
representative garcia
representative himbry
no and i'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative montoya no and
i'd like to explain my vote
representative rubia yes.
The.
Representative scott.
Everything I have small.
The presentative thompson.
Mr chairman
okay so.
Representative dickson is
temporarily out of the room.
But I do not leave her presents
would change the outcome of this
or we're just gonna go then
finish up the v.
So you've do personal motion
five to four
resent towns and has already
explained his vote reset henry
to explain
thank you mister chair same I
think with a cap I would be
I I
would
be much more in favor of this I
as I said I liked this but i'd
really like to see a cap thank
you in so you've you passed
motion you have some work to do
I certainly think it'd be worth
considering that as you move
forward.
I apologize in my thank you
mister chair I know you don't
like redundancy but
the exact same reason for my no
vote was no ca.
Thank you committee we we get
appreciate the conversation
thank you.
Okay next that we have house
memorial thirty four citizens
science in state agencies.
We never already thank you
mister chairman members of the
committee i'm really excited to
be here today to present house
memorial thirty four along with
my friends the wild friends this
memorial will
ask for an establishment of a
working group that looks at how
we can expand the use of citizen
science especially with our
young people to help inform
agencies are this is
particularly important for
you know for understanding bird
populations or water monitoring
and I want to give you an
example before I turn to my to
my experts I run a non profit in
towers code telstra trust we own
a twenty acre up farm which also
has a river and a seven acre
wetland we work very closely
with young people at fister
grade high school and most of
the area schools to do citizen
science they do water monitoring
they do other ecological
monitoring like bird counts and
soil testing that is citizen
science some of that data is you
put into
various databases and websites
where you know where folks can
you look at our populations and
really understand what's
happening with equal eye and and
that's really important for us
we we also work with up with
agencies to collect that data
but this the input of the young
people is establishes a baseline
in that's really really
important so I want it that's
just an example of what citizen
science can be and what it does
and we rely on these young
people so today with me I have a
three people three young people
from a various schools and I
will introduce them a julian
rodriguez from the academy of
technology and the classics
ashley morphine sound of all
academy of bilingual education
and you go
you go to rest.
It's actually written right here
that thank you for that from the
academy of technology and the
classics and i'd like to turn to
them to continue the
introduction of this bill.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning and thank
you for the opportunity to speak
on behalf of house moral thirty
four my name is really round to
guess i'm a senior at the
academy for technology and
classics here in santa fe and
today I represent wild friends
who helped drop this memorial
house more first thirty four
first ask for a working group
amongst the agencies like new
mexico department and came fish
the state land office and the
state parks vision as well as
the trusted organization such as
mexico natural heritage and this
morning also asked to create a
pilot project focus on modern
birds for bird species across
state in the mexico and this
working group would be
responsible for effectively
determining how to use this and
science across the state
insistence to find his house
agencies use volunteers from the
public to collect data without
using state resources and it is
essential because the agencies
are often understaffed and need
more resources to effectively
collect the data required to
engage in the scientific process
mexico as a state is built upon
science so the sport house moral
thirty four sport new mexico
it's passed and its future thank
you.
This memorial will come at no
cost a state agencies will use
existing resources as confirmed
by the fiscal impact
this memorial is important it to
me because it can give me more
learning opportunities in the
future this pilot projects will
give me the opportunity to be
able to see many different types
of birds that I may not be able
to see.
I let project is important to me
because birth statistics have
significantly dropped in numbers
over the years birds are a vital
part of lemexical ecosystems and
citizen science is the way we
can start solving this problem
thank you
mr chairman members of the
committee my name is
i'm also senior at the academy
for technology in the classics
so citizen science is applicable
in many different ways whether
it be classiful of students
taking a field trip to estate
park or are simply retirees
burding in their free time.
For students especially younger
ones something like this could
be vital for fostering work love
and cancer the natural world
I remember in the first grade my
class took a field trip to the
autobone center in which we were
giving a scavenger hunt
assignment and we search for
different birds plans seeds etc
this helped me to appreciate and
understand the various
intricacies and more my new
aspects of the natural world
around us and understand how it
all works together
since then i've had a great
appreciate appreciation for
nature
and so many people have a great
urge to give back to the world
but especially the natural
aspects but have no idea what it
exactly it is they can do to
help
and I myself as a child have
felt you know somewhat hopeless
in hearing about the changes in
the environment and loss of
animal habitats but it's things
like this memorial and other
small things that all group
together to make it better
and as we are now new mexico's
love by many across the country
for its natural beauty and
remarkable landscapes and so
citizen times can not only help
the environment and bring you
that doors but it can contribute
to our economy which can be seen
by the fact that the state of
new mexico received two point
three billion dollars and direct
taxpayer spending in the year
twenty twenty two
I hope you can find it within
yourselves to not only support
this memorial but also in doing
so support new mexico in its
future
thank you for your consideration
and thank you to our legislative
sponsor representative of this
thank you mister chairwood that
we stand for questi.
Okay we'll go to the are the one
who would like to speak in
support of the spell.
So it worked fairly well as them
or which is a well have you come
up to the middle if you could
stick the microphone in the
middle
of the circle of the chapter
again representing our thirty
five thousand supporters we just
want to support this program we
believe it's really great and
yes thank you.
But there were else like to come
up and touch.
Okay not seen anyone we do have
at least one on
why we're doing support coming
up rumoral.
Good morning mister chair
committee members can be a
little more at the new existing
land office blend off the stands
memorial the opportunity for
students to participate in
science and data collection can
lead to good management of state
trustline and promotes interest
and stem crears the new mexican
thank you.
Thank you that was committed
remarried with the same land
office which is one of the.
Is there anyone who would like
to speak in opposition.
Anyone online in opposition
please raise your hand.
Okay so the thing donald in the
public comment portion of our
hearing members of the
committee.
Resume towns.
Thank you mr chairman thank you.
Representative of tests
and your expert witnesses did a
phenomenal job this morning.
Is there a
do you have a schedule of what
you want to do I mean
necessarily or where you want to
do it is there do you have an
idea of what what you're
thinking about doing going
forward
this pilot project monitoring
but mister chair members of
committee as part of projects
would be beginning in spring
with many groups going out to
state lands to conduct birth
surveys but it's up to the
working group to determine how
to in the future uses and
science and conduct a different
projects thank you so
much to chairman and
a steamed group do you have an
idea of
those projects I mean where
they're going to happen I mean
it
are you guys going to try to set
the path or you just gonna wait
for the group to help you do
that i'm trying to figure out
what you think you want to do.
Well our organization
you're charmed members of
committee
organization wild friends plans
on setting up various field
trips across different different
schools across the states to go
to state lands and conduct bird
surveys essentially
mister chair represent hands
that I i'll add to that you know
I think the working group is
really going to come together to
determine where and when so
these the agencies that are part
of the working group emerge
state land office.
And fish will be working
together to establish guidelines
and what they want to
what they want to study in
consultation with this.
And care and representative or
test how will these fill trips
be funded.
Mister chair and representative
towns and wild friends which
does receive an appropriation
every year from the state
legislature I think it's a
hundred sixty five.
And they also get generous
support from
the best pn exemable.
Well
representative.
You did a really good job today
I will be interested to watch
you forward and
make a positive influence in the
community that you live in
thank.
Thank you resent towns and ribs
in monte
thank you mister chair and thank
you represent or test bring this
forward and you presenters at a
terrific job
I went present when the
presentation started I quickly
googled citizen research to.
To see what that meant and
depending where you go it's kind
of a wide.
A wide gap
under a couple of the
definitions just as data
collection for researchers which
is mostly what I heard you
discussed today
however there were other places
where it was
defined as research which is
really can abroad
and so as I was reading through
this I did see in here
one of the first or as
statements is you know members
of public volunteer to help
conduct scientific research
and I do like this I I think at
a participating in in data
collection and that type of
thing
I I like where this is going on
can't say
not support it but I do I would
like to it would be nice if that
was tined up a little bit to be
data collection cause i'm not
sure beyond that what what that
could be just because research
itself is just sets abroad
term but data collection cause
at one of I saw works tied in
and one of the definitions that
it was citizens who participate
in data data collection to help
professional researchers where
poor funds may not exist to be
able to collect the data and it
does appear that's that is
almost exactly what this is
trying to be so I like this I
wish that where our statement
was a little bit tighter in or
it were a definition in here
somewhere but I do like this I
think I love the idea that it's
going to get to.
Kids while they're still in
school who are interested in
this filled a taste cause I
don't I don't know that there's
anything like this available for
them now so it just more of a
comment and anything thank you
mister cha.
Thank you material
thank you very much mister chair
thank you representative and
thank you to your experts mister
chair representative of experts
could we envision coming from
this task force
sort of internships perhaps
apprenticeships summer jobs with
the agencies for some of the
young folks both here at the
stand isn't also in the program
mister chair representative
small and I think that would be
pretty remarkable if that did
happen and I want to make a
comment about you know research
and data collection data
collection you know really is an
essential part of research I
think what these young people
will be learning you from
experts you know is is
incredible it really important
you know we I work with
scientists on my property and
they rely on data collection and
you know people doing research
on their topic you know whether
it's you know that reviews or
what have you and these young
people are engaging in that
direct research and supporting
that the scientists it's hard to
know if you want to do a study
on bird population you know you
need to be out there at four in
the morning and and again late
in the evening to do that those
bird counts and that's where
citizen science comes in to play
and were young people and and
older people as well cannot can
make a difference so my hope is
that you know we we can really
you know think about programs
that are funded by the state
that you know go to like you
units are used conservation
court is actually one of them
where we were we do a lot of
that work so I could see that
happening excellent thank you
mister chair thank you represent
thank you experts.
That's great to hear because
this legislature has robustly
funded the summer internship
program and actually increased
that component in mister chair
representative although we've
invested in our natural resource
agencies
the sort of the needs outstrip
the capacity after times mister
chair representative
and experts another question
going looking at a little bit
with sort of the nexus with
research and data will there be
perhaps an opportunity for
questions developed from some of
the you the folks who were here
in the room the wild friends
program
will there be open space for
them to develop questions as
they're out in the field that
help inform
maybe questions that that folks
in the agencies would like to
ask but haven't had the time to
follow
will that be part of this
process this
task force
and that would be mister
chairman members that would be
something that the working group
has determined how best they
want to approach receiving
questions from the public as
well thank you thank you mister
chair thank you thank you also
for the correction sort of the
working group that appreciate
that clarification mister chair
representative I think for
the work that's gone into this
having the state land office
speaking support of it I think
it's great and want to
compliment you offer the outrage
to the stake holders that are
part of this
working group and for those
reasons.
Thank you
scott.
Thank you mister chairman
representative great
presentation just.
Fantastic
couple questions
organization.
Or group will be responsible for
vetting training and
supervising.
These data collectors.
The.
Mr chair and members of the
committee representative scott
partially that's up to the
working group to decide but also
a wild friends should have
somewhat of a role in that
decision.
The.
Okay and.
Same question with respect to.
The management of the data bases
that develop as a consequence of
this research.
Mister chair and representative
scott that's the image by the
data would go to the state
agencies who are asking for that
data so the state land office
they practivision when they
receive a data they are asking
for its up to them to manage it.
Okay and then.
Last question
mister chairman representative.
Do you vision.
Decisions will be forthcoming
from the
efforts that
are going to be provided as a
consequence of.
This program I guess.
For example
countend three towed sandoonl.
In an area where they are
considered.
Possibly endangered.
Would there be.
Would there be decisions
forthcoming.
Based on that research.
Mister chair representative
scott that's a great question I
haven't been around and this
committee in discussion about
the three towed sand lizard but
I understand that there has been
a lot of discussion about that
it's really up to the agencies
to determine how they're going
to do you know any decision
making on this effort by
the wild friends to support
citizens science to support the
data collection is is just that
it's supporting the data
collection I think it's up to
the various agencies to
determine how they're going to
use the did it they collect from
scientists from citizen from
citizens groups you know from
little reviews and research to
make the determination based on
the best signs available.
The.
Mister chairman representative
science I non scientists
developing material
recommendations don't give me
parts because some of these
recommendations could have
million.
Billion.
Dollar consequences.
Would you like to respond mister
chair representatives got yes I
I would like to respond.
Many sciences use data
collection and of right away
state the
the collectation of variety of
ways they pay students to gather
that data they engage citizen
scientists to gather that data
in that data is feded
you know put sort of put through
the wringer as stay developed
conclusions based on that data
so
I understand mister chair
represent scott your your
concern but this is really about
the data collection that already
happens in a variety of ways
supporting it supporting the
agencies where there is a gap
and data
thank you very much.
Thank you very much
thank you mister chair
and I just
invite a representative of scott
to visit my home sometime cause
I have a number of lizards in my
backyard and I don't know if
there are three told or not so
in the summer you're welcome to
come
representative or test I am
really really delighted by this
memorial I really do it as it as
a opportunity and these young
people that are presenting are
so post and just professional at
such a young age it's really a
delight to see that
I see this as a real mentoring
opportunity for these young
people
to start looking at the path to
their futures and their careers
I have had the opportunity
mister chair as counselor and
and as a city planner to have a
lot of young people in turn with
me
and have gone on to the
university
and gain their their educations
there there bachelors and their
masters and so it it really
delights me to see this I think
that this down or can be very
effective in you know looking at
things from a different
perspective especially when we
are talking about use
and I really applied to
representative or tests for
bringing this forward I was a
little mister chair
struck by the fact that we were
looking at a memorial in this
committee cause how don't
remember ever
looking at a memorial before or
reviewing a memorial so
I thought it just went to the
and i'm not fully veterans yet
in.
Are procedures but I thought it
just went to the floor so a
representative were tells I
commend you for for bringing
this forward and I really am
delighted to see all of these
young people here today and and
just the way that they presented
themselves I mean already you
can see a pathway to leadership
and without mister chair I just
wanted to also introduce two
young ladies that I have in the
audience today that are
shadowing me ariel casal would
you please stand and sandy what
is
who are my shadows today and
they are from and last sea which
is sponsored by the hispano
round table and i'm really
excited to have them mentioned
following me today and just seen
how we can operate the state
level so thank you
representative or terrorism
thank you to the young people
that are here today
thank you representative
represent himbury
thank you mister chair and thank
you representative or tears and
your I
just want to add my compliments
to you the young people down
there
that is not a comfortable seat
to be
and you know when I was in fifth
and sixth grade I really wanted
to be enough archaeologist and I
went on a couple summer digs and
did that over the last three
weeks I really wish I had stayed
on that
but
I I just had kind of a couple
questions or if i'm too close
about how this partnership
between the agencies and wild
friends came together did did
wild friends approach the
agencies or did the agencies
approach while.
And mister chair representative
hengry i'd like to introduce the
director of wild friends sue
georgia perhaps with your
permission she can give
the history of th.
Thank you mister chair and
members of the committee and
representative humbry yes i'm
sue george i'm the director of
the wildfriend's program where
based at that UNM school of la
been around for over thirty
years and every year the wild
friends do what they're doing
this year which is they start
out by voting on a topic of
conservation interest
and then all the participating
schools work together to learn
about that topic and help to
draft lead to slation to address
that topic so this year one of
the topics that the students
voted on was citizen science
and especially with the bird
pilot project we well transfer
students try every year to
ensure that what they work on
has real world impact so that
this is this is an actual hands
on learning process for them but
that also gives back to the
community
thank you thank you for that
mister chair representative or
test so it sounds like wild
friends came up with the idea
approach the agency and and came
out and
basically did this all on their
own and then just got agency
support sort of it was yeah
thank you representative mister
teren members of the committee
and representative we always
ensure that there's agency
support before moving forward so
that we're always kind of
talking with agencies before
assession about what is needed
what would be helpful again
we're trying to do something
with real on the ground impact
so it and it was clear from the
get go that there was
enthusiastic support from the
state land office er game and
fish and state parks for this
type of project so
we were there to support great
thank you mr chair
representative or test III think
this is
something really neat I would
like to see more.
Youth organizations looking at
something like this you know or
each organizations
you know ffe programs things
like that
I i'd like to see them looking
at things like this and and
doing something similar I think
the more
youth we have in programs like
this the better off we're going
to be in the future so thank you
very much thank you mister
chair.
Embry
reservatives I just had one
question
page photo line seven
visit the agencies you're
sending the memorial to
what is natural heritage.
Think thank you mister terror
and members of the committee
natural heritage new mexico is a
data collection empty based at
the university of new mexico
that's there are similar
entities across the country at
different universities there
they're not necessarily named in
the memorial as a
distinct member of the committee
but the working group will want
to consult with.
Thank you very much I know that.
I was pleasure to the commit.
The emotion from represent ribo
and the second from
representative break I believe
is there any opposition to the
motion.
The.
So seeing then you have a
unanimous too plus thank you
very much
thank you thank you mister chair
I think it's probably also
important to know that
representative or test finally
brought up at the energy
committee that we voted all in
the affirmative.
So close thank you mister chair
so that concludes our business
for the day we will meet on
thursday it's conceivable we
would meet on saturday we'll see
what happens and I would also
like to wish you me barbie happy
birthday and thank you for the
