Four twenty nine Candice's
confidential action on every
happy to talk about why I'd like
to to do pre introduced I'm
sorry.
You madam chair I knew actually
signed on to house bill four
twenty nine I didn't understand
this effort when it was first in
front of us
which I now understand all what
we legalize recreational
cannabis we inadvertently
removed cannabis from the list
of items that were abandoned
which are prohibited from going
into prisons and jails because
cannabis fell under a controlled
substance we now have to
explicitly with in the items
that are explicitly contraband
on in order to exempt and so
this was as we you know
basically learn at for the
inadvertence these were with
what was listed as a controlled
substance versus count as this
is one of them this is really
just a technical fix to get in
line with what is already
disallowed from present to
include cannabis so with that
madam chair I co sponsors.
Representative Lara and just
leave to answer me thanks for
there are just my understanding
I like it to be reconsidered
madam chair okay thank you
Did you want to say anything
further Representative madam
madam chair and and
Representative thank you for
that.
And madam chair and and
committee members.
I just want to give you a short
example of what contraband some
of the comp things on contraband
it's it's
a deadly weapon
alcohol.
The recording electronic
communications.
The device.
It's just different things that
that we can have in the jails to
keep order in the jail it has
nothing to do with the with our.
cannabis being legal or anything
like that is just to keep order
in the jails and it's a real
simple fix to the technical or
madam chair and.
Committee members if we if we
have any questions be glad to
answer any questions.
I
that that.
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair just looking through
this
I was wondering if tobacco was
included in contraband.
At the yes madam chair and
representative chair and
representative all forums
chewing and smoking any of them
are are.
We we haven't madam chair we
have an expert on on the webcast
if if need to order.
I'm I'm not real sure on that I
think some forms are in in maybe
some I would imagine all forms
are thank you Mr madam chair
madam chair the students tobacco
committee and we're always
trying get that have not people
not get addicted to tobacco
products so I was just at a
point in which Representative
Senator Sedillo Lopez as well.
I thank you for the effort yes
please who is your expert.
His name is mark diagnose
jailer.
Thank you.
Raise your hand Mr guy it goes.
That madam chair we did John
there was not to come up there.
Madam chair of members and
Representative sponsoring the
bill more thank you Sir can you
hear me loud and clear.
Okay we're not going to work for
the past twelve years in state
of New Mexico and have also
background and all around us
Texas in Arizona and I I
appreciate you hearing bill here
but we do deem on tobacco was
being contraband in disability
and to expand on that any
dangers drugs or chronic drug
marijuana intoxicating liquor of
any kind of deadly weapons
interest instruments explosives
or any other article if use
possess would endanger the
preservation order of the the
facility so we do a clear
include the marijuana in there
as well so I would stand for any
questions if you wanted
expanding of.
You need to be on that.
Chair
so you did say tobacco is
considered contraband in all of
its forms.
Madam chair yes thank you that's
all I have been.
Thank you are there any other
questions from the committee.
Okay
I just have one question and.
Part of the
distance to including cannabis
wasn't that we think it should
be counted as a cop demand that
also the penalty of three years
and up to five thousand dollars
I believe it is
That doesn't seem to be in your
bill anything close to that.
Madam is it there's just to hear
you say there's no penalty in
the bill I have I don't well.
And your bill where does it
state with the county gets it
does it I think it is and I'm
sure if I may that's existing
long we're not changing any of
that okay so we just we're all
we're doing is been conscious
Cannabis as a continent it is
regular page two top of page
two.
You madam chair
I'd like to comment on something
the expert witness that is he
said that they consider
marijuana contraband but but
what the problem is that it was
taken off the cop contraband
list.
So there was some smuggling that
happen to jail their imports
under in the district attorney
could not prosecute because it
wasn't on the contraband.
So the legal part of it has to
be fixed.
I see yes I am and I think we
agree with that it was just the
penalty which gave.
I don't see the penalty be
entered I guess four degree
felony.
Would you be our.
I did a friendly amendment to
change that from a fourth degree
felony to a lower penalty.
Madam chair we we haven't
discussed it with anybody or any
of the dust or any of the people
to take care of the legal part
of it so I'd be hesitant to do
that madam chair.
If I may madam chair I think it
gets more going to be the
situation where we obviously
some is walking into a jail
they're going into their pockets
and they're not going to be
taking marijuana into jail
because that's legal work we're
looking at the situation madam
chair where you're having female
smuggling large amounts of more
wanted to all the jailers and
it's and distributed and then
there's fighting and there's all
kinds of chaos in the jail
because there's more of a
distribution problem and so it
has been four degree felony for
as long as I can remember so we
I don't believe education
changing the penalty at this
time just making sure we can
still prosecute under that
statute okay that's fair will
just consider that maybe another
time yes ma'am sure thank you.
Thank you
with that I'm sure would like to
do that okay.
You have to pass.
One
nine thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Okay Representative read will go
ahead read I'm sorry go ahead
and do your house bill eight
fifty seven.
She.
Every right thank you madam
chair I like to first introduce
them to my experts I have Chris
to do tears too is our head
nurse in Clovis for Clovis
schools and and that the Baker
who is the assistant principal
for one of our junior high
second junior high out of Clovis
schools I'm in madam chair bill
house bill one fifty seven is
basically at its the repackaging
Law that we're trying to put in
place to help with what we're
finding in schools and it in
this diagram in front of you
kind of it illustrates what the
different schools are finding
and we can be reached out
actually because I think there
were some front of you and to
previous committees we reach out
to different schools at this is
cannabis that's that found in
schools all across the state
there isn't any district that's
not really seen this and so
what's happening is is we're
having these products become
very enticing to children
because as you can see they look
just like something a child
would eat and the child doesn't
notice for example the fruity
pebbles this has a Z. on the end
of it and so when these drugs
are being found in the schools
it's than requiring the nurses
and the staff to to deal with
this and these kids are having
to go to the hospital very high
concentrated amounts and so
we're trying to do with this is
basically make an opaque
packaging so that it's not kid
friendly
you know even with your brownies
any rice crispy treats and your
dummies in your stalkers it's
just something the kid will want
to grab and so we're trying to
do is make it into an opaque
packaging to where you if a
parent leaves it out that's one
thing there's always an Avenue
to to prosecute them for child
abuse but also requires warning
labels we did an effective date
of August first twenty twenty
three his as I talk to a
different distributors in the
area that I live in.
They said it would not be called
it would be not costly to change
the packaging is just a matter
of some they need about three
months to get the packaging
changed over
and so with that I'll defer to
my experts if they have anything
they want to add on.
Representative.
Good afternoon madam chair and
representative my name is
Stephanie Baker I'm consistent
principle for you have a middle
school.
Thank you for allowing me to
speak.
My position on house bill one
fifty seven is that still
straight over the story of a
sixth grade student.
I only know this young girl by
face and she never been to my
office before.
She presented herself to the
office one day complaining of
stomach pain our school nurse
with at lunch so I assessed.
She had no fever or any other
physical signs of being sick.
She has to call home and waited
in our career for her parents to
figure out.
While waiting she vomited once I
helped cleaner up and she later
had down on the table.
About fifteen minutes later she
was picked up nothing out of the
ordinary I went back to
supervising lunch duty when I
received a frantic call from the
parent talking whether child
couldn't stay weak I was
continuing to throw up.
I suggested they seek medical
attention.
Two hours later I received an
update that that students have
ingested Benny worms from a
friend she thought were normal
but in fact they were laced with
THC.
She had to be hospitalized and
treated for an overdose.
And then the rest of the school
day peeling an onion
investigating the worms who else
may have ingested them and where
they came from.
I was hypersensitive to students
who are acting call assuming
they may have per took of the
work.
But having had no formal
training on identifying students
under the influence that was an
insurmountable task.
Instructional priorities and the
educational needs of our five
hundred and other five hundred
and forty five other students
for non existent that day.
Unfortunately the situations are
becoming more prevalent children
do not have the foresight to
examine what they're eating they
share food with peers and it's
impossible to know work from
work at St.
Schools that do not have
capacity to examine every
package brought to campus.
I found a back with what looked
like to read spread across
closer inspection noticed it
contains six hundred milligrams
of THC as students either
knowingly or unknowingly consume
to multiple servers.
One of students found in
possession of THC or any other
substantive we notify police
pulling them away from bigger
situation in a way to meet with
parents and then prepare for and
conduct drug hearings or
schools.
All of this takes upwards of
five hours of work five hours I
should be in classrooms coaching
and mentoring teachers being an
educational and instructional
leader.
Madam chair representative I
stand for you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chair.
not very long because we want to
okay I'm again my name is
crystal tears and the director
of health related services for
Clovis schools I've been a nurse
for ten years for the school
setting and I can tell you the
last four years it's changed our
focus has become what drug
assessments and they're just
increasing as the days go by so
what I do want to point out is
that creek county DWI task force
has created this visual display
for you so you can see how hard
it is to distinguish the
difference even as of educated
professionals it it's it's
imposed impossible at times
these products are of high
potency of THC the recommended
dosage dosages from experts are
one to two point five milligrams
that would be a therapeutic
level these are six hundred to
one students are ingesting these
at six hundred they are due to
overdosing in experiencing
symptoms like miss Baker said
where they cannot walk they
can't talk they can.
Understand what's happening to
their bodies especially if they
don't consume it intentionally.
The warning labels are
inconspicuous in comparison to
the.
They're colorful doubly I agree
welcoming to students and their
enticing and as you all become
familiar with brands that you
trust I think that our students
to this thing before they can
read the identify these symbols
that everybody is our favorite
candy bar I think that it's safe
to say you would grab it and do
it without looking twice for
Billy Graham and and that's what
we're asking for here today is
catching to change just for
these kids and staff to identify
these products from for.
Madam chair representative I
stand for questions thank you
thank you will go to the
audience and we're going to have
to
You can raise your hand but
we're only going to have five
people online in the eye from
the audience and then on to.
And on both sides so that you
can raise your hand and not
necessarily have to speak
so
Those who are in opposition to
this bill.
Your hand okay those in support.
Okay.
So those in support if you'd
like to come up to the
microphone and.
It.
Please.
Can you hear me madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Kerry robin
burner on the registered
lobbyists for public charter
schools of New Mexico we think
this bill makes a ton of sense
it will help our school
administrators make sure that
they're able to keep our
students safe for in schools and
we really feel like it's going
to make sure that our students
are enticed to be engaging in
these cannabis projects products
when they really shouldn't be
it's been a huge problem not
just in the traditional schools
but also in our charter schools
that we think that the bill
makes sense we hope it passes
thanks so much.
Anyone else.
Hello my name's Elizabeth west
I'm seventy eight years old and
I remember when I was given some
brownies without being told
years ago
And they were laced with
marijuana and I I really felt a
strong reaction I didn't really
know what was happening I'm much
smarter now I have certainly.
Tried marijuana and.
So I know about it but I'm also
a little addicted to Hershey's
almond bars and I don't take a
second look when I'm sorry at
Walgreens or someplace I I grab
one and eat it and think about
great thoughts.
I wonder if somebody who's not
able to read the way I am
currently am and is has the same
kind of issue with Yummy that
looks great would stop and think
without.
The help from what this bill is
offering I'm totally in support
of this and our it will help me
to.
Anyone else in support okay is
there anyone on to yes how many
well okay you for.
A good afternoon madam chair can
everybody hear me yes we can't
go ahead yeah one minute from on
the constituent of the state of
New Mexico and I'm really
appalled and disturbed that what
I'm hearing actually I logged in
for another of bill that's going
to be heard later on on the
agenda hi this is
The the starting this marketing
impacting to kids is obviously
does not only destructive to
their health but to their
learning style I'm in full
support of and I urge everybody
to support this bill as well
thank you.
Okay
This bill.
One minute.
You madam chair committee
members my name's.
Senior director of operations
for closed schools supported do
pass of this bill to provide
parents and school leaders of
tool to help address the
marketing of THC edibles to
under age children thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
Okay thank you I would like to
say thank you for the committee
would lessen the state it only
dresses and most madam chair and
nothing else and it it's just
it's a civil penalty of for the
and the person distributing it's
it's basically up to a five ten
thousand dollar fine they can
also do you plan of correction
and they can oppose any other
sanction they want to spend
their licensors of criminal
penalties to it it's a civil
penalty.
Thank you.
I have Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair home thank
you Representative I can't
agree anymore that there is such
a need to keep in that ensure
that our program on here in the
state is
robustly ensuring that children
do not get access to cannabis
where they are not new medical
program the I just want to.
make clear however that when we
legalize cannabis this is
actually current law so we
actually have a really stringent
marketing and advertising laws
that's already on the books and
rules that are promulgated from
the cannabis control division
that prohibits any semblance of
advertising or marketing that's
presented to us today so what
we're seeing in front of us for
committee members this is
illegal this would not be
allowed and so would not have
ever been verified by the
cannabis control division it
would never been issued a
license and should never be
allowed in stores today in New
Mexico and yes it is that would
certainly be a regulatory
violation they should be fined
and penalized for having any
sense of advertising or
marketing that looks anything
like that so in our rules today
and I just answer staff to get a
To get a copy of this Madam
chair representative it
prohibits anything using or
candy or candies any sense of
cartoonish or language that
looks anything like that
colorful or would entice
children to
want to in it at all be
Interested in the product
you know we've been looking at
some of these and including the
ones that I've seen in the
process would have never been
allowed under the cannabis
control division program today
I'm so we're trying to get a
copy of the rules that are
currently promulgated
while I agree with the effort to
crack down on all of this I just
have to make clear that this was
already prohibited from what we
currently have in law and I
would just I know this is in a
separate area of law offices and
Twenty six dash two C. dash
seventeen but the advertising
and marketing portion of law on
explicitly prohibits all of this
is in
The six dash two C. dash twenty
advertising and marketing
restrictions and it talks about
no advertising on the radio on
TV on broadcast media
person is twenty one years of
age or over basically are the
only folks that get advertised
all of the explicit need to
basically wraparound that and
then the rules prop up all these
things that we're seeing today
that are not allowed so we'd
love to have a reporting
mechanism for types of things
like this and perhaps we can
work with the Sanchez on on how
to crack down on anything that
is illegal that is entering the
market place
but currently with the program
that we have and what we're
trying to do I think already
does that and I don't want to
step on toes for the cannabis
control division who's really
working really hard to make sure
that they not just rules and and
statute but rules that they're
propagating every single day to
ensure that this type of stuff
is completely off the market and
so I I think we can do that by
rule if there's anything any
loopholes that we may
foresee in the case that there
is a worry that that we missed
something
but I just want to make clear
that this is absolutely not
allowed thank you madam chair.
You have Representative Lord.
Working thank you madam chair
and representative so the things
I learned in this committee so
amazing I looked up some of the
stuff and how there's a place in
Canada right now I could order
without even do my ID totally
amazing neck disorder right now
forget which one it was but
The fruit loops one that's when
I get right now to set my mail
it's for punitive five hundred
milligrams of THC.
Is in the fruit loops one so how
much pot to take for someone to
get stones our campus in the
like thirty milligrams or
something I would defer to the
nurse Madam chair representative
experts are starting out and
start up from one to two point
five milligrams so if you became
a medical bills they could
increase by time but if you if
that was your first encounter
with drugs five hundred
milligrams of definitely the
number right there madam chair
representative of its five
hundred milligrams it looks
exactly like a little bag of
fruit loops and as a teacher
from a distance you would be
able to tell the difference the
other one that I looked up to
was
The gummy worms.
Six hundred milligrams one back
again from a distance you would
be able to tell what that is.
So are we currently madam chair
and representative inspecting
all pot stores are we expecting
them to make sure that they're
not selling these items are is
our inspectors going in there
just like we do when we regulate
of fire arms ATF could go in
there to check like when you
work at a gunsmith able to thank
them anytime they want check are
we doing that with that cannabis
pot stores where we want to call
the madam chair representative I
actually went into a lot of
cannabis stores researching this
prior to and I think there is
some regulation where they go in
there but one thing and and to
enter to also address
Representative Romero's issues I
mean they're working any bars
there that look like regular
candy bars I've toured that and
was the pay goes distributor and
they're wrapping suckers like
suckers and that's what it's
it's looking like can you take
it's a sector that I think you
would maybe need.
looks off of the Senate all to
get high on and it's just
wrapped in clear cellophane
there were brownies and rice
crispy treats wrapped in clear
cellophane just one little
square of a candy bar to one was
for sixty milligrams and when I
talk to the dispensary owners
they expressed to me that in
these larger areas they have
seen the lemon drops all the
different things that maybe
our it packaged like this
rigorous maybes black market
stuff a lot of it Representative
and madam chair the point of
this statute is well yes there
there are some there's some
things in line to help this will
make it peak you cannot see in
it and last year you know I I
you can put it behind the
counter so what that way it goes
in opaque packaging to where a
child is just not going to be
wanting to grab it and so I
think we're gonna know very
quick you know who's violating
the law and who isn't but I
think they're Sam to answer
question madam chair
representative there some
regulation but I don't think
it's like what you think even
the guppies are lake the
packaging is great great great
you know it's it's it's enticing
to children they're not gonna
know that even if there
something legally bought and I
it needs to be stripped it down
for sure and I agree with that
chair representative but learn
from somebody who accidentally
bought a soda that's infused and
it has like six hundred
milligrams and they did pay
attention about how much it had
and that really took the
settlement statement the whole
thing six hundred milligrams so
yeah I think as part of us being
responsible chair representative
I think this falls on the
responsibility of we're selling
something that impairs people
and I was looking in here than
twenty twenty more than seventy
percent of the calls related to
marijuana edibles to the poison
center involved children under
five we can't we can't have we
can't have the stuff in the
schools and to me this just
cements its like you guys cannot
do this this is something you
council cannot do you cannot do
anything that's enticing I have
a heart of time which is the
edibles that look like little
gummy bears because the.
Even if you're responsible adult
and somehow that.
You for not for down or
something child gets a hold of
it the all that stuff is not
okay with me you know it's it's
it's just comes down to
responsibility the fact that
this gives a clear and distinct
direction for that one this is
that if you're going to do this
this is some of the side effects
they need responsible I think we
need to accept this hate this is
like twenty servings in here
don't need the whole chocolate
bar you know I kind of feel like
that's where we need to go I
mean that warning on cigarette
to with.
Thank you Representative I was
still I was still talking as if
we don't know.
This is when.
You know we have a clear
warnings about cigarette we get
everything I buy in the whole
world says California says is a
cancer thing you know so I feel
like this is the right step for
being responsible.
Legalized in California so that
thank Representative.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair so I
wonder if in because when we do
things we frequently hear the
things we did wrong afterwards
one of my thoughts is what if
state dept store already has
product that does it so well
they not be able to sell what
they have to re packaging what
will happen when this Bob was
into effect
With what they got in stock
madam chair and representative
the dispensaries and and if you
don't answer happen hasn't been
any dispensaries like opposing
this bill I because I've talked
to and they're like we don't
want kids to get sick so they
just need about a three to four
month period Madam chair
representative to change the
packaging so they they would be
legal until the packaging was
now you know having to be opaque
or or whatever was required and
they said it wouldn't cost
anything more and it would
bother them one bit because they
they have seen this in different
stores across the state whether
people want to believe it or not
I I was able to get in to kind
of you know be someone honest
with me about it
but they don't want kids to get
sick that there simply liable
for it and so they're still
selling their products and it
doesn't change anything but just
protect our kids madam chair
what I was asking is if let's
say they have up they bought a
six month supply and this
becomes ineffective and so they
have products sitting on the
shelf and all packaging well
does this bill require them to
re package what's already been
sold I think that madam chair
that and Representative that's
why we pushed it to August I
tend to believe I'm I'm just
saying this because I've talked
a lot of that doesn't stay in
the shop that long but if it
does I'm yeah I probably they
would need to get rid of it
okay.
Are we packing three package
okay all right thank you and
then it's my understanding
although I'm not a lawyer and I
don't have a look at that in New
Mexico you can can't find a
product that has more than two
feet two hundred milligrams with
the card one hundred milligrams
without a card.
So the six hundred milligrams
things I don't think our and if
anybody in here Google knows.
I I just I just wonder about
that if they were there that's
what I've been told and chair
representative I'd yeah I had
don't know that I just haven't
focused on that part okay all
right thank you madam chair on
that point if the.
It.
Anyway that's but it's kind of
this product will not exceed ten
milligrams total THC per serving
or a hundred milligrams of a
total THC per container you can
actually have a container worth
more or a single product with
more than ten milligrams.
Container with.
Yeah no one serving more worth
more than ten.
Thank that support
Recreational as opposed to.
This is a no Madam chair
representative yet of all
cannabis for commercial sale
shall not exceed ten thank you.
At the rate Representative can
help review hello.
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so currently with
these rules that are in place
what are the penalties for
violating these madam chair.
Madam chair representative my
understanding is that it would
be a violation of and what I was
told was twenty six I think it's
to see eight which they could be
fined up to ten thousand dollars
they could put a plan of
correction in place they could
pose impose any other sanctions
that they feel is appropriate
they can suspend their license
it's also full penalties madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so then what is
your bill to difference to.
Well madam chair and
representative it doesn't
address this the penalties and
anyway it addresses actual
packaging in the main thing is
is to make it paid not to mimic
a brand that would have a design
or logo that something a child
would like nineties cartoons or
those types of labels on them so
that's we focus more on opaque
packaging with this bill we
can't see what's in there for
child safety.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so that I see
here your presentation here it's
very colorful.
You guys get all these products
madam chair.
I'll defer to that expert
positions at the creek county
DWI task force created this the
had of found some from out of
state that have come into our
state and that was the limited
information that I have seen
would have been on our campuses
and teachers from other came
across New Mexico and they're
identical to the serial brands
that cereal bars.
Give me a group offered the
speaker plus.
And and madam chair
representative we're seeing it
in every school and we actually
did send an email out after the
last committee I think we have
some questions this is just a
Clovis thing and we received
responses from every
jurisdiction that there have
been a major problem with this
and madam chair and and
Representative we've also have
that other bill going and the
safety how bill for the schools
in order to help determine and
and learn when they're seeing a
child under the influence and
what steps to take so that is
kind of a component of this to
protect our kids.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think it's
important.
Your bill's up put into law that
this is absolutely unacceptable
I think just the rule is not so
I appreciate chair thank you.
Before we go to anyone at the
anyone else I just like to ask
could this language at the site
which changes are as you're
proposing in the bill
F. actually be done with the
straighter.
As suggested by the cannabis
control division.
Rather than passing new
legislation.
madam chair requirements are I I
guess it's it's possible
We just felt that it was time
all the complaints that we were
getting across the state that we
needed to put it into statute
and make it because clearly
what's in place now isn't
necessarily working.
It is I just I'm worried that I
passing this bill you're going
to have to go back to that
Statutes that are already in
place and redo all of those to
Matt which you are doing instead
of being able to just
You know I think just include
more of like using.
That might be a better way to go
Madam I don't think that it's it
really is adjusting too much
truthfully it's just taking the
entices of nest out of it to
protect our kids and I I guess
Madam chair representative so I
I don't see
it might be more difficult for
the distributors or the
packaging people to go back and
do this is not going to cost and
many more we might have to get
it clear what they can and
cannot do but I guess is is that
we're that to protect our kids
and madam chair I I think just I
believe it is Representative yes
we definitely want to protect
our kids we already do that you
can see and all of this
rulemaking from the CCD
but for them to have to go and
change a lot of this is that you
know we already have people
following in manufacturing these
rules
and then to just as at two
different things like the.
All the other states and private
to New Mexico I think be a
better solution
but what is the will of the
committee.
Madam chairman to table.
We have to move to table.
At the second.
Ms to table
and to get these cable.
Representative walked no to
table and I would like to
explain my first Representative
Lord no to table.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thomson no.
I.
Yes to table.
Chair for our yes to table.
Thompson.
Yes.
Trujillo now.
Chair for now.
I move forward K. with a tie
vote in a do passed it is table.
Is that right.
I got.
Thank Nico right these.
Thank you.
Other
organizations so on the property
I DO I would absolutely
recommend talking to the CCD
about packaging limitations we
can probably get rules every day
they can propose that to let the
industry know where they're
going what they're suggesting
will to look at some of the best
practice perhaps other states or
look at what you're Bill
proposes to actually make it
into a little bit thanks.
and so they're watching these
ideas and what's hitting.
Mostly every single day and I
would just recommend working
with them on on any fix is
necessary thank you thank you
Representative.
Yes years and bills.
The for the lead COVID motion on
this bill.
At.
Yes Representative.
Sure.
Yeah it's I do believe us on the
gap.
actually I did not gavel because
I didn't know that there was at.
It's just in limbo
Like to.
Please madam chair.
We have a motion for.
Thousand new recommendations.
All.
What yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thomson yes.
By video no.
Chair for that.
I honesty passage of
recommendations.
Each.
Okay next we'll hear Senate bill
sixty eight just as sixty four
I'm sorry.
No license for juveniles.
K..
Two to one eighty for S..
I just wanted to call thank you.
Chair chair we have
to chair.
First.
It's just get.
In appropriations.
Thank you.
Thank.
Thank.
The.
Madam chair.
You see this bill this is the
third time we've tried.
And.
The first time I believe it was
on the floor and never got a
hearing on the floor and the
second time it kind of I believe
in the last committee we just
ran out of time but we did run
into headwinds with the the
district attorney's association
and so what we did in the
interim is we made really I
think strides in trying to
address their concerns now this
bill does two important things
advanced life without parole has
a sentencing option for children
and it creates early parole
opportunities after fifteen
twenty or twenty five years for
those serving long jail
sentences if parole is denied
hearing happens every five years
unless mandate to happen every
earlier why other provisions of
law.
And very importantly the bill is
it retroactive meaning that
those who are serving these long
sentences will have a chance to
have a parole hearing in fifteen
twenty or twenty five years into
their sentence we have here I'm
very happy that we have of
amazing co sponsors we have
Representative Gail Chasey and
we have senator bill o'neill who
actually started the whole
thing.
And then we have a an expert who
is really worked so hard and
diligently on this bill we have
And like it did only Wilson and
was able to generally only
Wilson.
and so with that I'd like to
turn it over to my co sponsors.
Thank you very much mentoring
committee members.
We made it through all the
committees in the house last
time and just didn't presented
on the floor by choice there was
just a practice agreement and we
thought maybe we could address
the the issues which I think we
have so successfully I want to
say that this is not a get out
of jail free card a parole
hearing is a parole hearing the
parole board decides so it
doesn't mean just because you
get a hearing that you're out so
let's just be clear about that
the juvenile serving
questions or former juvenile
because at the time at age
thirty seventeen and fifteen
years later no longer juvenile
is not entitled to release it's
just that the juvenile would be
entitled to a hearing and
I think that's enough for now.
Into the weeds were later if you
wish.
Senator Senator.
Thank you madam chair and
committee you know this bill is
so different from what I
introduce seems like a long time
ago and I think you know I'm
just really impressed with the
Sanchez willingness to work with
victims in the dust not to you
know there's some degree working
certain fox I mean it totally
understand never gonna be able
to support this bill but I took
a lot of satisfaction in the
Senate vote not to pay any
attention or respect but I mean
the on the floor last year was
twenty three to twenty five to
thirteen this year's thirty two
to eight and up a lot of that
came from a an amendment that
Senator Pirtle made and house to
determine Senate Judiciary kind
of in respect to the victims and
I just this is to me what bill
like this is emotional totally
get that I used to work with
victims of the juvenile when I
was with the juvenile parole
board some extremely sensitive
to their concerns just like
we're not trying to re
traumatize folks you know it's
just that were policymakers and
and I just feel strongly that
this is a policy issue and
having said that I just can't
say enough about the this boxers
willingness to work across the
aisle and so forth thank you.
And.
Senators and Representative you
have a.
Committee your bills.
That.
Nope no mention she was just
would explain what was done.
I see this is practices right
okay we've got to address that I
don't know why.
Okay okay with that thank you.
All right.
with that.
Do you is there anything else.
We can do this sure.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'll be really brief
I'm I do just want to explain
the changes that we made to the
spells so that everybody has an
understanding of what was what
was what was done after the long
conversations and and
considerations with diverse
stakeholders and so the spirit
of the bill remains the same
you're ending life without
parole as a sentencing option
for children and under the
previous version of the bill the
timing that was set to for
parole eligibility which again
is just an opportunity was
fifteen years for everyone and
now and rare and extreme cases
parole eligibility will be set
at twenty or twenty five years
into an adult sentence for first
degree murder other than felony
murder that's the timing that
it'll be twenty years and then
for two or more convictions we
set that timing at twenty five
and again this is these are
changes just to reflect an
effort to account for hating
consequences in extreme cases
real quick the
our New Mexico Supreme Court
yesterday released a unanimous
decision in a case also
involving a child sentenced as
an adult in the decision our
court reaffirms that children
even children who are involved
in very serious harm are capable
of tremendous change and
rehabilitation and must be
treated differently than adults
in in our criminal justice
system and remarking on the
decision to sanction a child as
an adult report that we are hard
pressed to conceive of a
decision that cuts closer to the
core of society's interests than
to elect to give up on one of
its children.
so we're here to ask New Mexico
not to give up.
Thank you madam chair and I just
want to add that the court has
been asking the legislature to
do something about this for at
least fifteen to twenty years
but with that we.
Yes it's yes so since two
thousand nine lay co sponsor
says so with that we're we are
ready to stand for questions
and.
Okay we'll go to the audience.
We have we'll have to limited to
one per person and no more than
five people so if you have
someone you can
If you are in opposition to this
bill please raise your hand.
I see none is there anyone on
to.
Yeah in opposition.
Right well part.
I have read that you have one
minute.
But I had read that.
Okay is there anyone else okay
so we'll go to the audience now
those in support.
If you okay so maybe will
expand it to ten people if you
can
just one minute and you know
that everyone has to speak if
you don't want to.
And try not to repeat.
Hello my name is Regina Griego
our family suffered a
devastating strategy tragedy ten
years ago and my nephew ended up
in prison life plus seven years
and I don't think we should
throw him away and he deserves a
chance for parole in fifteen
years he's doing the best he can
they sent him off to North
Carolina and he's and Hispanic
and native person it's got
thirty percent native blood and
it's very tough on him but he's
doing his best and I don't think
you should throw them away thank
you.
Afternoon chair members.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is ISIS Campos
I am here eighteen years old and
I am here in strong support of
SB sixty four I believe that in
my come unity no young person is
exempt from being criminalized
we are very heavily criminalized
and I believe that people grow
and evolve.
And for those reasons I ask that
people.
I say that people deserve of
right to have parole board look
at their K. so if you could
please vote yes on SB sixty
four.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is
Elizabeth the con I am eighteen
years old and I support SB six
four.
It is sad to think that I could
ever make one simple mistake and
end up incarcerated for life
without the possibility of
parole I believe that people
deserve a second chance people
change.
So please vote yes on SB sixty
four.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Yvonne
put us on the director of
students for policy changes but
I'm also a student a senior in
high school I am in strong
support of SB sixty four for the
fact that when someone turns
eighteen their cognitive
capacities not all the sudden
switch it is a process that is
ongoing and as we have mentioned
since the carceral system so
much targets black and brown
people in the United States
generally speaking we need to
have built in safeguards to
ensure that this hard isn't
continued perpetuated and
profited off of by the prison
system students are policy
change that strong's and stands
in strong support of this
legislation we ask for do pass
recommendation by the committee
thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
like compose with gold futures
we stand strong support is B.
sixty four and as you just are
you are very heavily impacted by
the spill they really care when
we brought up Senator criminal
legal reform bills this was the
one that they gravitated to the
most and they wanted to show up
today and show their faces and
let you know that this is what
we're talking about when we're
talking about this very
important please vote yes on SB
sixty four thank you.
Good morning madam chair or
afternoon now at good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name's terra mark
Intel and the deputy director
for the children youth and
families department and I
oversee our secure juvenile
facilities
our department stands in support
of this bill we understand and
want to acknowledge that it is a
difficult bill and very
emotionally charged but we also
believe that children are
different from their from adults
both in there developmental
State and it as well as their
ability to reform and engage in
treatment and rehabilitation.
I just want to emphasize that
again this bill doesn't
guarantee released but it offers
an opportunity for review an
opportunity to show that they
can change thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Deborah
Baca I'm an educator and a
social worker my educational
background and I never gave up
on my students I've always
worked my entire career with you
and I know that you learn and
they grow we never should give
up on them and I want to urge
you to pass this thank you.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is brand
potter and the mother and the
lost you at the UNM School of
law
I just feel like this is a great
step in the right direction
towards getting rid of systemic
racism at addressing systemic
racism we know that black people
are arrested at six times the
amount of white people in this
country and
Solving just addressing justice
can only be done we don't create
more injustices like
incarcerating children for life
thank you please vote yes.
Good afternoon I just want to
stand in support of Senate bill
sixty four I am directly
impacted family member of
somebody who's serving an
extreme youth sentence and I've
been coming to the wrong house
now this is my third year here
and I just I just want to you
know take a second to mention
you know the huge changes that
have
been made to this bill we've
gone from an initially ten years
for review three years ago to
last year fifteen and now we've
increased some of the penalties
to twenty and twenty five years
so I think that.
As a family member
You know and and all the people
who are working to support the
bill and get this past we've
worked really hard to try to
come up with some middle ground
and tribal peoples voices be
heard including the victims
because we know that that's
important
but I also have a family member
who has been in prison for the
last twenty nine years and I
think he deserves a chance to
come home as well so I ask that
you support Senate bill sixty
four thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon I'm Cherry
representatives my name is Frank
you too long and I was in
incarcerated youth I was
incarcerated from thirteen to
eighteen years old.
I believe that when.
We sentence are you the program
lead and hold them accountable
for the crimes that they commit
By not throwing them away and
sentencing them.
To life in prison for a crime
committed as a kid they are able
to return back to society it may
change I was lucky.
That I was able to receive
services while I was
incarcerated I was also pregnant
most incarcerated thank you for.
I was able to receive services
and able to come back home to my
community into my son.
And the in the social worker for
the past sixteen years right get
back to my community.
And so I ask that you support SB
sixty four.
Because all children are more
than the worst thing that
they've ever done.
Children do foolish things.
But I don't think that we should
for children away because of
that I believe in second chances
for children the support SB
sixty four.
Okay we'll go to see you now and
we're only have time for five
people on scene.
Both of you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Allison
Hotmail and the politics
attorney with the law offices of
the public defender I
represented many juveniles
sentenced to life in prison I'm
here to express public defender
support of Senate bill sixty
four this bill would bring New
Mexico in line with current
bring science and psychology
which recognize that you are
different from adults and
importantly including decision
making impulsivity and response
to peer pressure the bill does
not allow for automatic lease
but instead to the opportunity
for review it's time for New
Mexico to an app Mr far thank
you.
Thank you next.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Katherine
months where and I'm with NM can
an organization that partners
with young people impacted by
foster care and juvenile justice
to improve their transition to
adulthood we support Senate bill
sixty four for all other reasons
already stated no need to repeat
it and we ask that you support
this bill thank you.
Thank you next.
Learn chamber.
Madam chairman.
Members of the Irish Shamrock
pediatrician.
Representing the.
Mexico pediatric society the
state chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics we
strongly support
This
is.
Because I emailed you a copy
because it appears to have
published in The New Mexicans on
Sunday the nineteenth.
Eight twenty twenty the American
academy of pediatrics pharmacy
is collaborative health care for
juvenile.
Makes many recommendations the
main to recommendation was to
was to abolish thanks Susan very
primitive.
Appropriate practices such is
life without parole for
juveniles pediatricians in New
Mexico strongly support.
The sixty four in FY I do yes
thank you.
Thank you X..
Okay.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Monique
archer back and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee we
stand in strong support of SB
sixty four because we believe it
is a step forward towards
remedying the fact that the
school to prison pipeline has
had on the black community.
According to Amnesty
International Human Rights Watch
there's no evidence that the use
of life sentence without parole
deters crime or is otherwise
helpful in reducing.
Juvenile crime rates nationwide
black youths receive life
without parole sentences at a
rate estimated to be ten times
greater than that of what you it
is time for New Mexico to take
positive steps I acting policies
that seek to redeem children as
senator we them in prison for
the rest of their lives happy
black history month and thank
you for your time.
Thank you and our last person on
to work for.
Go ahead Mister speaker.
And madam chair members of the
committee this is current record
director of Lujan abstinence to
New Mexico with your net sales
representative position of New
Mexico sure just member
denominations the conference for
church include mainline
Protestant denominations in the
three Catholic diocese of the
state both organizations are
with the support SB sixty four
okay received a letter submitted
to the committee that covers our
reasons for sport bill and
they've had enough view it but
we believe that the response to
violent crimes restorative
justice justice that seeks to
address her to each person whose
life has been touched by violent
crime as it relates to child
offender my sentences without
possibility of parole do not
represent such justice and can
deny defender about them to
conversion and restoration when
a child under cause harm they
must be held accountable but we
believe that accountability must
not take away the opportunity to
move forward to transform lives
based on genuine rehabilitation
and hope for the future we
believe in great second chance
as you choose to do so as well
three support SB sixty four
thanks for the opportunity to
speak to this afternoon thank
you can you tell us how many
more are on to support.
Just one of the nine ten ten or
okay so there's plenty of
support we just don't have time
to hear them all that thank you
for letting us know that you
support if you want to
Okay is there anything else
you'd like to add Senator
Representative.
No madam chair it's just very
important that we give the
children who are in prison right
now hope thank you thank you go
to the committee now and
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative have a question
number one this would through
last time and learn something
that a life sentence not life
it's thirty years is that
correct chair representative yes
ma'am sure that's correct I
wanted to make sure their
bantustans it's not like they're
not looking like it's thirty
years okay so what we're talking
about here with their youthful
offenders.
Is.
They can get a parole hearing
after twenty five years now is
that we're doing with this Madam
chair representative.
Well some of.
Thank you
Twenty five years is for people
who have competed committed
multiple murders but while they
were used.
Okay so madam chair and then
it's twenty years if the
conviction is for either first
degree willful and deliberate
murder or first degree depraved
murder and then fifteen years at
that so there's different levels
of that we're looking at yes
Madam that's correct.
So.
We're looking at we're going
from thirty to twenty five okay
so can you explain to me so
first agreement murders
intentional that correct that's
the definition you're
intentionally killing somebody.
Yes chair okay so we want to
give those people who
intentionally Center sorry we
want to get those people madam
chair we tend to kill people we
want to give them last time is
that how this is breaking down.
No madam chair twenty five years
is reserve for people who commit
multiple murders.
Okay so madam chair and
representative of somebody who
Somebody who willfully kids.
Two or more people than we do
intentionally twenty.
Yes ma'am sure that's the twenty
five year.
So I just try to get districts
right now it's thirty one to
twenty five intentionally kills
multiple people what what is
depraved mind murder Madam chair
representative.
I wasn't sure with that
terminology men's I'm gonna turn
this over to the to the expert
I've never practiced criminal
law.
So
madam chair and Representative
Lord
depraved mind murder is
A killing that occurs during
An act which is greatly
dangerous to another's life
And so that the standards it's
recklessness mentors and could
you give me an example of what a
depraved mind murder would be.
So for example
I I think we often see in New
Mexico and somebody is convicted
of killing involved in the
shooting from a motor vehicle or
a shooting where you didn't
intend to get in necessarily
have a target that someone was
killed that's a reckless okay I
think I understand in the
division two okay so somebody
murders multiple people
they're looking at now twenty
five we've got the twenty and
fifteen is.
The convictions related to
another qualifying provision law
what would that be for an
example of that be.
Madam chair Representative what
could you repeat the provision
that you're asking about yes or
chair representative just give
me an example of the fifteen
years who would be eligible for
parole in fifteen years
understood madam chair and
Representative Lord I thank you
for the question and answer it's
a good one I would like to just
since we're talking about the
tier system and I I I hear your
question you're talking about
reduce time and that that is not
what this bill does I'm so
sentence remains intact but
somebody is eligible for for for
consideration for released at an
earlier time that we that person
will remain on parole for the
duration of their sentence so
the sentence the underlying
sentence does not change
fifteen years up it would be for
everybody who's serving a
sentence other than those that
that we just talked about that
are in the twenty and twenty
five your tier so that is
That that is includes first
degree murder if it's felony
murder which is
killing that occurs in the
commission of a felony often
times you know in across the
country we see more than twenty
five percent of those who
juveniles who are sentenced to
life without parole R. sentence
for felony murder meeting they
may not have even been present
for killing and they did not
intend to kill but but but
because of because of the
circumstances of this they're
convicted of felony murder and
and a whole host of other crimes
including non homicide crimes so
what I will say in in
negotiating these changes
because we were eligible for
because we were able to to to
address the concerns that the
District Attorney Association of
district attorneys have around
the most extreme cases the cases
that they were talking about now
we're there is willful and an
intent to kill or at least
recklessness to to the state to
do of human life in in the
commission of a crime
We were able to to to to do that
without disturbing fifteen years
for most people because the
reality is that in most youth
involved violence it's not
premeditated right now we're
talking about adolescents who
are involved in recklessness and
and and and have an
difficulty evaluating risks and
rewards and struggle with
endorsed by all of the things
about adolescent brain science
that we know
that that are so important for
why we provide an opportunity
for for parole and and we were
able to create this tier system
and reserves fifteen years for
the vast majority of people so
they're seventy five people who
were impacted by this bill and
and eleven cases that fit into
this tier systems.
Okay Madam chair representative
so when you go to prison most
people are eligible for good
behavior right you do one day
you might get another day so
somebody was sent to twenty five
years which we're going to not
call life
that would still be.
What they would still be
eligible for parole tactically
in half the time is that correct
for the good behavior how this
could be a factor in that madam
chair and Representative Lord
this bill does not disturb that
time and and those who are
serving a life sentence are not
eligible for for a good time
under existing law.
The Madam chair representative
so let me ask you a question so
I'm looking at we're gonna take.
What's called life because life
is thirty years you're eligible
for Prosser take thirty five to
twenty five to twenty so let me
look at example of what I think
would be twenty there was a
thirteen year old boy Eric Smith
he rented two four year old boy
was in charge of the lord the
kid into a wooded area strangled
him drop to large rocks in his
head and sodomized him would he
be eligible for the twenty years
is that would be looking for
something like that since this
is the one murder.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord I I'm not familiar with
this case I do know that in New
Mexico a thirteen year old boy
would not be eligible for an
adult sentence and all at all
and would not fall under the
spell.
In terms of what age does fall
under.
The last fourteen madam chair
Representative Lord the the J.
H. starts at fourteen to the age
of seventeen impacts Madam chair
representative let's say a
fourteen year old lord a young
child into the woods and beat
them to death and rape their
dead body would they be eligible
for this twenty years then if we
were to pass this chairman
Senator.
And madam chair Representative
Lord
it.
It will depend on the sentence
that they received if the
sentence is longer than twenty
years didn't it would be that
would fall under the provisions
of this law of the parole board
will consider at the severity of
and the circumstances of of an
offense and maybe they do that
and they do that very well.
Chair representative my promise
all this at the the mainly these
to drop that down to twenty five
and twenty we're not talking
about somebody who chanted do
we're looking at somebody would
potentially murdered another
person possibly right another
child immerse them and beat them
to death so I find it
problematic that we want to give
them at I. either is there
exemptions on this I mean are
pedophiles anybody does
pedophile year sodomized as
another two million necrophilia
the exempted from any of this
Forces everybody's on included.
Madam chair representative to
repeat it really depends on the
sentence and the conviction.
Representative with being
exemptions for something
sodomized added body for that
community news press like raping
a child before they were to look
they still be eligible for this
are there any exceptions at all
to this bill.
Again it would depend on the on
the sentence that they received.
Okay so there's what I'm getting
chair representative wifi
problematic is that.
These are some of the worst the
worst people we're doing
horrific crimes and I don't see
any exemptions for anybody like
okay a child like this who has
got some mental issues economic
who is a fourteen year old who
is forcibly murdered another
child they should be exempt from
any of this so I will not be
supporting this bill thank you
madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and representative I
appreciate you for being here
today so my question is
regarding how many people
currently are serving life
sentences in New Mexico when
they were charged as minors
Madam chair representative
senator.
Madam chair representative block
the bill affects seventy five
people so they're seventy five
people who would fall under the
provisions of this law but not
all of those are serving life
sentences there's about thirty
people who were serving a life
sentence
and under under this bill that
that would be impacted as well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Representative expert I
believe on your FIR this's from
CYFD that there is no one
serving a sentence of the
youthful offender without
possibility of parole currently
is that correct managers and
Representative experts Madam
chair representative block that
is correct so there is no one in
the state of New Mexico who is
serving a life without the
possibility of parole sentence
the.
Bill does a really important
thing it says we're never going
to allow that to happen takes
life without parole as a
sentencing option off of the
table for somebody was under the
age of eighteen but you are
correct that there's nobody
serving a life without the
possibility of parole
sentence for a crime committed
as a child and of.
As Representative Lord was
explaining a life sentence under
New Mexico law you become
eligible for parole after thirty
years and not parole is not a
guarantee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Senator experts
so I'm guessing because your
bill it I believe the title of
your bill is no life without
parole.
That's literally the title the
bill so if there's no one
impacted currently that I have
would believe there would be no
point of this bill madam chair
Senator Representative.
If I if I may just interject
just for context.
That's seventy five out of five
thousand current currently
incarcerated inmates in the
adult system you have to keep in
mind the practice of stacked
sentences is really what what
how this affects folks so
they're not yes Sir they're not
censored I for the property
sense for like eighty years you
know because of the staff
sentences phenomenon so that's
what in New Mexico that's kind
of a big part of this this bill
so it is a very real concern for
services for a certain juvenile
has been sentenced you know in
that fashion so and then also I
just wanted since academic yeah
I I hear you Representative Lord
these are horrible crimes for
about but you know as one who
used to be involved with the
propoxyphene years I was
executive director of the
juvenile property the parole
board number one make sure that
victims are hurt in any release
hearing and they're also they're
human being so that if that if
it's a hideous crime like you're
saying that factors in it's not
again it's not this automatic
release so it so gradations of
Terrible I mean horrible
behavior isn't discount factored
in by very real body of
conscientious folks called the
adult parole board whose there's
main concern is public safety
and believe me they listen to
the victims so and so anyway
keep that this that system
clarify thank you.
Thank you and I just want to add
I was hoping that that madam
chair that the Supreme Court
would find that it is
unconstitutional.
In all cases to
To assign the sentence of life
without the possibility of
parole to juvenile and they have
not done that so it remains a
possibility even though nobody
in New Mexico is serving and
that's another point of the
bill.
Enter the.
So.
State Supreme Court disagreed
right to me what they last week.
Representative.
Madam chair representative block
Yes I I will so in this was just
yesterday and unanimous decision
it it doesn't directly affect
this bill because it was related
to amend ability hearings which
is the mechanism used to decide
whether a child will receive an
adult sentence or remain in the
juvenile under the jurisdiction
of the juvenile court but they
decided that an amended bility
hearing that that procedure
right that distorting mechanism
that we use is of such great
importance both to society to
the child to the child's family
that that it's not we've all
it's not something that that the
child can waive.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you.
For Senators representative so.
You know I've been researching
about this bill current law so
according to the US for cases
Graham our order two thousand
ten.
I'm just sitting here that a
polished life without parole for
all youth under eighteen
convicted non homicidal.
So madam chair Senator
Representative could you tell me
this this complex at all with
that report case of this maybe
a compliment compliment.
Madam chair representative plot
this bill does not conflict with
those cases and you're you're
you're right to bring it up
because this bill is exactly in
the spirit of of Graham and
Roper and Miller and Montgomery
all of the Supreme Court cases
that over the last ten fifteen
years our our Supreme Court at
the US Supreme Court has said
That
life without the possibility of
parole isn't it inappropriate
sanction for Children because of
what we know about their ability
to change and and and transform
that that a sentence of life
without the possibility of
parole which is understood as
death by incarceration
that that that is an
inappropriate mechanism to to to
sentence a child.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for Representative so I guess it
just goes right back to my other
point why we have this bill K.
law already no one currently
serving without possibility of
parole.
Why is.
Representative chair Senators
Representative experts.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative black I will be
quick and it looks like Senator
would like to respond to you as
well
the bill does two really
important things that I think
we're maybe conflating them as
of the bill one ends life
without parole as a sentencing
option for children and that is
not something that the U. S.
Supreme Court has done so we we
may wish that it would have that
the Supreme Court has said that
it needs to be rare but it's
still it's still constitutional
and and in rare circumstances
where circumstances to sentence
a child to life without the
possibility of parole I'm and we
want to say as a state and as a
community that it is not
and this is something that
twenty six states and DC
Illinois and Republican led
efforts just banned life without
parole as a sentencing option
just a few weeks ago but but
that's the first part of the
bills that and that's that's
where the name comes from and
and and I think where the
confusion comes from but the but
the second part of what the bill
does is it addresses long life
and other long sentences not
life without parole because as
you said no one is serving a
life without parole sentence for
a crime committed as a child the
life in long sentences the staff
sentences that Senator on you
was talking about I have clients
reserving a hundred and forty
two years eighty years life
sentences at as well
and it and it says we want to
make sure that people have
developmentally meaningful
timing for parole eligibility at
either fifteen twenty or twenty
five years into their sentence.
I'm sure that we tend to that.
Thank.
So you.
Forty two years eighteen years
what kinds of questions.
Crimes.
Where does that leave.
Such a long sentence Madam chair
Senators Representative acts.
Madam chair representative
blocked I'm I'm not sure that
there is it a good way to answer
that we're talking about seventy
five different cases seventy
five different circumstances and
I don't know that it would
benefit the body to to talk
about hypotheticals or specific
cases but there is a wide range
someone so you can you can look
in
our children's code a youthful
offenders somebody who's
eligible for an adult sentence
or serious youthful offender
there are enumerated crimes that
that allows someone to be
eligible for it Senator I I
think this is very relevant to
this because if we're talking
about specific people will be
affected by this loss I think
it's also good to talk about
those people would be so madam
chair Senator Representative up
to seventy five people that
we're talking about this which
is.
Population state of New Mexico.
Which is also the reason why I
think this necessary Madam chair
representative what kind of
person.
At the state match sheeter but
stays out of their school kids.
Sixteen it's actors ager what
kind of sense with it getting.
When you talk madam chair about
the kind of people.
What this bill focuses on is on
people who served.
Fifteen years twenty years or
twenty five years of this
sentence and they have been
regained to rehabilitated I have
met extraordinary individuals
that never gave up hope and are
still looking for help to get
out the kind of people we're
looking at our chill are people
who made big mistakes while they
were children and now have
reformed and transformed like we
expect that they would we are
all different people from when
we were fifteen years old and a
fifteen year old is very
different from the thirty year
old and that's what this bill is
all about.
Sanders Representative.
So.
Going back to this.
K. next year.
If they got is the sixty years.
Madam chair Senator.
With maybe eligible for
potential twenty five years if
you don't.
Yes Madam.
Thank thank you so we would be
leading out potential.
Mass shooters Senator schools if
they pass it will board hearing
centers Representative they
would have an they would have a
hearing at that time.
So they would have the
possibility of getting out but
has the bill points out if you
look at the bill there are many
factors that the parole board
our direct is directed to up to
consider and those factors.
Looking for the bill.
Legislative New Mexico I'm
looking.
Thank you on page.
On page three of the bill it
talks about the perceived the
procedure the interview the in
may they consider all pertinent
information considering if it
made and on page four the
circumstances of the offense
mitigating and aggravating
circumstances whether deadly
weapon was used in the
commission of the offense
whether the inmate is a habitual
offender the reports filed under
section thirty one dash twenty
one dash nine and the reports of
such physical and mental
examinations have been made
while in an institution thirty
one dash twenty one dash nine is
about
Their conduct within the with
within the institution and they
must make a finding that or
parole is in the best interest
of society and the inmate and
they must make a finding that
the inmate is able and willing
to fulfill the obligations of a
law abiding citizen the
proboards takes these takes
these criteria very seriously
and they must make these
findings in order for an
individual to be granted parole.
It's.
No I just think this is just
language so big and current
statutes editor's group's
representative.
But I just don't even get
matching or not the reason at
all given the twenty five years
even in fifty years.
So I I don't think I can.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Sorry did you want to do we
don't thank you madam chair so I
was a little bit caught off
guard with them somebody said on
the panel said these kids are
mentally ill I I that hurts my
no not you in the comments
appear and and that hurts my
heart that we do not throw
people who have mental illness
in present I mean that's just a
wrong thing and I'm wondering
about you know I mean the all
these are horrible kids excerpts
are they're not horrible kids
they probably are a product of
their environment and that that
trauma that they've had
throughout their lives and so I
mean I'm not saying they're not
responsible but we need to look
at the bigger problems of
society that cause kids to have
I mean New Mexico eight this is
the country in adverse childhood
experiences we all know that we
need to stop throwing them in
the trash when they get to that
point and start intervening
before they get the aces so
thank you for for bringing this
just awhile ago I had a hard
time with that because of a
personal connection to someone
who was and was badly was left
for dead by you but I don't that
I've worked with kids my entire
career thirty plus years and
that they make mistakes all the
time and they're not always the
best judgment and I don't think
they need we need to throw them
away they could be very part of
productive and helpful members
members of legislation you madam
chair.
Thank you we'll.
And yes.
Table.
Take a note on the table.
Motion is seconded.
Representative what yes the
table.
Representative yes the table.
Representative.
No.
Representative Thomson no.
I Trujillo noted tables.
Chair for nope to table sure you
have a.
Table ocean did not pass was
that after I'd like to make a
substitute motion of a do pass I
was sick Hey deeply sacral.
Distortion.
Is it
Senate bill sixty four.
As amended I'd like to do pass
on Senate bill sixty four as
amended this.
Thank you.
Representative law no.
Course.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Question yes.
Yes check.
Forty two okay you have it
passed on a vote to.
Madam thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
House bill eighty four.
Sure.
Senate Bill sorry.
For the week.
K..
Thank.
I'm good.
Hello.
reminiscing.
Thank you Mr.
Yes.
The I'm sure yes yeah.
Yes I.
Okay.
Thank you thank you madam chair
yes so the bill before you Hey
it's a parole reform bill out
about that but it's a little
different it has to do with the
adults the dot system so this
bill revises the system
governing violations of
probation or parole right here
is an issue that we addressed in
this bill.
All right as of now.
There are of the fifty three
hundred people in prison nine
hundred and eight of them are
incarcerated for parole
violations not new felonies not
robbing a bank.
You know serious problem in the
new felonies not that's
seventeen percent to seventy
percent of our state prison
population is there for parole
violations for example you know
one third of prison emissions in
two thousand twenty two or
parole revocations right so it
only cost twenty million dollars
a year to the taxpayer that you
know big picture this technology
is that people on parole our
oftentimes I just know this
first hand when I used to work
in this area you know they're
trying to recreate their life on
the positive way they're trying
to stay up there drugs or
they're out for whatever the
issue is it sounds a lot of time
I mean almost always in my
experience it's an addiction
issue can we acknowledge the
criminal behavior is so tied
into addiction right so so what
this bill does rather than like
sending somebody back because of
there for thirty year and no
this is like acknowledging it's
an addiction issue it's not
being soft on them cuddling in
no there are different
gradations of of a parole
violation and so I I believe
this bill a very smart way
delineates those those levels of
violating a pro role contract
and so we're we're modeling a
bit after there's an a new law
and Louisiana some of these
other states are moving in this
direction if I I can't help
invoking the state as much as I
hate to say this is this is this
is not being soft on crime this
is being smart on crime smart
you know so so with that I think
I've said enough perhaps
Senator my just the standard
newly minted Senator can talk a
little about his read on this
bill thank.
Thank you very much chair thank
you members so just to refresh
our memories of this came to
light in the LFC report in
October of two thousand
seventeen so we're pushing six
years of that report which
revealed what many of us already
know already with time rather
that there was way too many
probation violations ending up
in incarceration that that did
not emphasize public safety and
and maybe in fact sacrifice
public safety it was a massive
of Bill in two thousand nineteen
House Bill five sixty four which
was written which was up.
Was the sponsor was leader
Chasey and myself all right bye
call rentals of the
The council of state governments
justices to out of San Antonio
Texas it had so much of that
maybe too much it was it was
cutting edge type stuff dealing
with the risk of needs
assessments meritorious
deductions medical geriatric
payroll data collection a
presentence report requirements
all kinds of stuff so it was
vetoed by the governor we came
back in twenty twenty to try to
do something that everyone could
agree on what got caught up in
the thirty day session comment
here we are three years later so
we want to the product over to
our expert miss Kim Chavez Cook
Laurie extraordinaire
lawyer extraordinaire who did
tremendous amounts of work
bringing people to the table and
getting taxes best ideas the
crux of the bill madam chair is
is the definition of technical
violations which is on the top
of page three but also is is
more clearly written.
it was modified on the Senate
floor it's more clearly written
in a proposed amendment before
you today if we could talk about
them at some point but this
javascript.
Thank you madam chair members
and yeah I can hold the
microphone if you can't hear me
that I'm I'm pretty good at
projecting well.
One of my okay.
Webcast.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
Kim Chavez Cook I am with the
law offices of the public
defender and sort of dove
tailing off of where Senator
Maestas left off the after that
twenty twenty bill didn't pan
out there was actually a request
of the sentencing commission to
look at the issue up from that
that bill and find where that
was stakeholder consensus and
the the one narrow issue that
rose to the very cream of the
crop of the issues that everyone
seemed to agree on was
addressing technical violations
and essentially adopting a
statewide steps program quote
unquote steps program that's
what they're called in a couple
of local jurisdictions that have
them Albuquerque has one Santa
Fe has one where they people
have to sign up to be in the
program and if they do then they
get these automatic graduated
sanctions of starting with non
incarceration for first
technical second third moving up
towards more punitive sanctions
and so the this bill is trying
to do what was that consensus
among stakeholders this is not a
sentencing commission bill I
don't want to be coated
inaccurately saying that it is
but that was the issue that
everyone thought could be
addressed with with pretty
strong support so that's what
this bill is narrowly focused on
doing and while there were many
other issues that that certainly
we could return to some day in
the former bill that that go
also could stand some attention
this it has such a it's a it's a
small but mighty bill it is a
small thing that can have a
really big impact because as
senator o'neill mentioned at a
very large percentage of people
in prison are there not on new
crimes but on technical
violations of their supervised
release.
And with that we stand for
questions.
To go to the doctor.
Purposes yes we what I was just
waiting for I I.
The staff.
You
I move the for the amendment.
I move that we discussed the
main secondary at the pass out
the amendment.
You all have a copy of this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members on the Senate floor
Senator Pirtle added an
amendment which was friendly
dealing with no contact with
victims and witnesses the
wording was a little quirky so
we we are correct to that
language and essentially a
technical violation
A does not mean when the
probation or parole is a threat
to themselves a threat to others
has violated no contact orders
of the court or as a or is it
alleged to have committed a new
crime.
So we were asking is committed
to to strike the Senate floor
amendment and and at this much
better language which captures
the essence of Senator Pirtle
concerns.
The second okay at a junctions.
Sure okay you have an amended
bill and if you like to see more
about we're good okay right will
go to the audience those are in
opposition to this bill.
Okay.
Would you like to speak okay if
you come to the Mike.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Melanie
Martinez I'm the director of
adult probation parole and
unfortunately I can't support
the bill the way it's currently
written for a couple reasons it
doesn't designate or exclude sex
offenders of violent offenders
we currently have individuals
who are participating in drug
court to McCourt Veterans court
that fall under different
criteria so they fall under a
different contract as we do
individuals who are sex offender
supervision intensive
supervision as well as community
corrections supervision
I respect the intent or what the
bill is trying to accomplish as
far as reducing recidivism
however we should probably look
at the definition that New
Mexico uses to reduce reserves
are to identify recidivism
and maybe start there I think
that would be a good start we're
always compared to Virginia and
I would love to use their
definition of recidivism right
now New Mexico is one of the few
states that uses our defines
recidivism is all returns.
Or other states don't use that
definition for recidivism so I
respect the Senator
senators and and you know I I
hope that we can move forward
and and work on the bill in the
future thank you thank you is
there anyone on to opposition.
Despite okay.
Strokes.
Did you hear me yes we can.
thank you this is committee
wrote in the letter district
attorney in in to compare your
quite welcome Harding County
I've been elected for twelve
years and with practicing
criminal defense and and
prosecution for the last twenty.
This bill is a danger in my
opinion.
In.
People that are really involved
in the criminal justice system
should know better.
It like the.
The representative said what
introducing the bill if there's
there is a connection between
between crime and addiction.
But what happens whenever we as
the a.
And judge of the violent crime
in particular
methamphetamine at S. to tend to
be paranoid your available by.
make decisions that they
wouldn't make sure they're not
dependent.
In a deployed across New Mexico
we take that in consideration in
oftentimes put somebody on
probation people the chance
to build yes your your time is
that.
I will the opposition because
that has nothing it takes away
all the power of the courts in
the DA's office to help people
and provide leniency in control
provision and it seems that is
taking that all away by clearing
something technical as a
violation in doing away with all
the according to the court to to
do their jobs so you really
should take a look at this I
think the boys my position.
Thank you.
Okay there's no one else okay
and those in support.
Okay we'll take ten people might
be everyone one minute please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
called defense lawyers
association we want to thank the
sponsors and the expert for
their dedication to this
important topic over the years
we support this bill because we
believe it strikes the perfect
balance between public safety
and recognizing that probation
and parole are difficult
transitional programs for
individuals to complete the
structure created in this bill
is one that can reduce
recidivism and our for more
criminal legal system in a way
that supports true individual
rehabilitation we are just part.
Thank you.
X..
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is
Elizabeth the current I'm
eighteen years old and I support
just be eighty four.
Who are struggling to meet the
probation and parole
requirements should get help and
resources not jail please wait
yes on as P. eighty four.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is not
that it gone I am sixteen years
old and I am here in support of
SB eighty four I think that
probation officers should be
focused on helping people get
off the system and not keep in
jail because they miss an
appointment or failed a drug
test please vote yes on SB
eighty four.
Thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is Lucy
let them pose with gold futures
again we work with a lot of
women who have four million
currently incarcerated this bill
was discussed they talked about
the challenges that they have
days the probation and parole as
a phase up their symptoms where
they should be have helped to
get reintegrated into society
and instead of they have a hard
time trusting their probation
officers talking about the real
challenges and issues that
they're facing with their
addictions are with their making
it to their appointments because
they know that they're just
going to get penalized for those
reasons we ask that you please
support just be eighty four
thank you.
It's all.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Bianca could tear us I'm the
registered lobbyists for the
justice action network and right
now they're at least forty
states authorize graduated
responses to supervision
violations in statute comments
sanctions include community
service GPS monitoring drug and
alcohol testing in extended
supervision terms among others
in addition many states have
limited incarcerated
incarceration for violations the
research says it's no more
effective the noncustodial
sanctions are reducing
recidivism may actually increase
criminal behavior and this is
what this legislation aims to do
I want to think that senators
are bringing this board as we
previously worked at this with
center Maestas so I do have to
support Senate bill eighty four
thank you.
Thank you.
Hi again madam chair members of
the committee my name Stan I
will sentiment that you see
you've New Mexico if we're I
thank god for that just like to
mention that there is a and M.
space report card that you all
should have received that gives
more information about this bill
and its mechanics and as you
heard from the sponsors of this
bill and from the expert what
what this bill is trying to
address is that an extraordinary
amount of law enforcement and
public safety resources are
currently diverted towards
imprisoning people not for New
Hope contract new crimes not for
charm or things that we we
traditionally consider public
safety problems but because they
forgot to call their PO because
they used drops.
What if instead of punishing
people for struggling when they
come home from prison we invest
we truly invest in their success
it it doesn't take much
creativity to think of a million
different ways we could use
those precious state resources
Tate to invest in success
instead of punishing people when
they come home and I hope that
this body does just that.
Thank you.
Okay and we have anyone on to in
support.
Okay
Like to.
In the you know I can't Services
backed two years ago questions
that wages have all of those
factors used for all back in the
nineties and then similarly of
the eight roads is really
somebody that activated respect
as well I just feel like we're
just taking a different read on
the same information maybe maybe
Judy that this gives people
choices you know the the
nationals in this very difficult
work will you give them choices
and gives them you know it's not
just that this that whatever
that the tech world violation is
the the technologies that is the
to different degrees so to me
this is yes really again it's
just being March.
The problem of folks are trying
to stay in the and the other
trying all you have really tried
and it should be sent back to
prison I mean if you are
comfortable with one third of
all present in addition to the
two thousand twenty two big for
technical for all violations.
That is how many years each
person has to survive there time
is built in for you I mean it
doesn't but but if you're like
really looking at this issue and
I really think this is a very
long overdue and and somehow
we're going back.
Thank you we'll go to the
committee.
Representative Rubio.
Chair and thank you Senators and
I'm quite creative.
The lower chamber.
no thank you and welcome back
Senator I just had one question
and I'm I I mean I certainly
appreciate this legislation I
mean I I I mean from the time
that I've been serving in the
legislature I know how hard you
all have been working to get
this this effort all and so my
only question is because I think
from just the emails that I
received at some of the comments
that have been made today.
It seems like there's a lot of
focus on on something like big.
Potential crimes or something
that people have committed but I
guess I just want some
clarification on what it
technical
violation is because I I feel
like I'm hearing some mixed
ideas about what that is and so
I just want to get some clarity
on that.
Want to.
Thank you madam chair up members
and of course I have the Sanchez
has anything to add but the the
simple answer is that that the
focus is on whether the conduct
at issue which is a violation of
some condition of probation or
another presents a threat to
anyone violates a no contact
order order is a new crime there
are a lot of scenarios that have
been raised in the on the Senate
siding Committee discussions
asking what about this and what
about that almost all of them
are new crimes and so they would
by definition be a standard
violation where there is any
gray area the reason we adopted
at Louisiana's definition
language around presents a
threat to someone is because
that is written in a way that
allows the individual judge
overlooking the case or in a
parole case the parole board to
assess the individual
circumstances around that
violation and say well maybe
violating condition number
thirty two would not be a
standard violation for this
person but the way you did it or
because of who you are and what
your crime history is and all
that it does constitute a
standard violation for you so it
allows for that individualized
assessment that's why we didn't
want to like make a list and
wanted to leave that flexibility
in the statute.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and centers and I thank you for
that I I know that there was
somebody that mentioned
something about even just the
the trust that a person may not
have between the relationship
they have with their parole
officer
I mean I think that's a really
big important pieces well is
that
When people get released from
being incarcerated.
I mean they're already having to
adjust in a number of different
ways and
and so I think that's the piece
that I appreciate about this
legislation is that it allows
for
just something small that isn't
going to lead to something big
ad in terms of that going back
to prison and just continuing
perpetuating this this entire
cycle and so I definitely
support this legislation and and
and that's all enter.
Thank you Representative long
thank you madam chair thank you
senators that could see here in
this community so I was you
questions about this bill first
of all I'm reading how it
changes so currently the first
violation what is the current
penalty versus what this bill
with actors.
Thank you madam chair
representative block now it's up
up to the remainder of the
sentence
and so.
So as you all know that you know
parole is when you get out of
prison you have one or two years
parole concurrent with
probation probation is the
remainder of your sentence or
for first timers you've got
suspended or deferred sentence
upon conviction you got put on
probation when you violate the
terms of probation you face up.
Anywhere from
From a tiny passionate to the
remainder of the of the sentence
and so what this bill does is
just differentiate between
essentially breaking the law or
breaking the rules when you when
you meet with your probation
officer you sign a contract
numerous things of the do's and
don'ts
a great many of those things of
not the vast majority are are
the rules being late to an
appointment missing a counseling
session or the big one is
testing positive for.
For for a prohibited drugs and
so what this does is in my
opinion gets more tools in the
tool box for the probation and
parole officer
particularly with parole you're
you're basically facing the
remainder of parole it's more
more apt to do that this one
gives the parole officer
the ability to throw you in jail
for three days five days seven
days thirty days up to ninety
days that that doesn't exist
currently.
Madam chair Senators experts so.
Let's go with the what you just
said tested positive for
contraband substance that is.
The
current.
If I was a little.
And I did this and I I took
drugs and tested positive.
What would happen the state
madam chair.
I'll turn over the experimental
give a second Senators.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so for its
different for parole and
probation so you asked about
parole start there but I'll also
answer provision if you don't
mind because I think it's
important keeping both in mind
so for parole under the current
regulations in place under the
current administration there is
a system in place similar to
this with that approach is this
graduate graduated sanctions but
it's at the PO's discretion
there it's not mandatory and so
for some folks they will
probably get a you know a have a
talking to by their PO and say
next time though I'm gonna take
you before the board maybe
that's what happens none of this
is in statute so I'm staying in
a sort of loosey goosey way the
but once they get to X. number
of technicals and they go before
the parole board for potential
full revocation and the maximum
possible section they can get on
the appropriations side if
you're not in a jurisdiction
that has a local steps program
and or you are in you didn't
sign up for it on your very
first dirty UA you can get your
entire balance of your suspended
sentence imposed which can be
five years ten years fifteen
years it's just depends on your
underlying case you could get
the entire balance imposed on
that first technical violation
chair if I may I just had a
question on your answer to show
maximum possible what would that
be.
Thank you madam madam chair the
I believe it for Turrell as it
does the senators that the
balance of parole which for if
you have a two year parole
sentence could be the full two
years so it's a maximum of two
years in that scenario although
I will say and I again this is
something that happened sort of
in a black box of the parole
board there's no attorneys
present and things like that so
if the director has more
accurate information I invite
her to correct me but the
The.
It well so it a.
I'm trying to think of how I was
going to answer that and the
thought completely just get my
mind but it does it happens it
is not codified as I don't
believe the balance of the
parole sentence and I know what
this is what I was going to say
the LFC FIR and the sentencing
commission numbers show that
people serving violations for
operation have an average term
of over a year it's like four
hundred and something days it's
in the FIR if you'd like to
check
if I'm able to thank you thank
you thank you madam chair
representative from my if I may
answer that question as well.
Today many people don't test
positive.
For because they don't show up.
So for example if somebody
relapses up they have a meeting
with their probation officer the
following day or that Monday
morning they don't show up.
And so they instead of bouncing
back from that relapse which is
which is what is the key point
of a overcoming addiction
they're on the wrong their on
the go they maybe quit their job
because they want to be found
they get arrested two three
months down the road they get
you know it's just a mess in if
this bill were to become law.
They would have a much more
honest better relationship with
their probation officer because
they could show up that Monday
if they are on parole they get
you know three days jail are I
DG or whatnot and and that's
alright that's their first
sanction in the in the in the
stream of sanctions after for
technical violations of their.
Essentially this statutory
scheme goes away and that and
that probation officer has full
discretion but but it's just a
more honest response to a
reality of of up of that aspect
of public safety thank you and
thank you for the question
Representative you know again
each situation is different like
everybody is different within
their parole plan and by the way
you know with parole there's
sure it's you know don't use
substances get a job there's
like usually with any parole
planners Senator conditions of
parole so again for me I just
feel like we're giving we're
allowing for of for.
Individual situations that again
for me it just seems that to
help with the folks to do this
this is such hard work you know
and I had such a positive
experience with parole officers
when I was will come basically
running Dismas House in the
nineties and you know we're on
the same page we don't you know
we don't want to send a person
back necessarily but this one
this gives folks their hands are
tied in my opinion now that I
know of many many parole
officers are great to give you
great in my eyes and a dollar
allow you know Google dirty
years etcetera but this to me
this is clarifies things and and
again it's just being smart and
a very difficult area of of you
know an issue that we have as a
as a you know community here in
New Mexico so thanks.
Senator.
I'm reading devices for the
first second violate these
rules.
A face mask.
Five days content thanks so
madam chair representative or
senators rather.
Currently would they be going
back to jail instead of non
detention Representative.
Madam chair representative
locked on parole that be going
back to jail there's a three
five seven ten day sanction
step if they are on probation
the technical violations scheme
is three days of community
service restrictive curfew which
you know house arrest
of behavioral health treatment
or other non detention sanctions
so the sanctions in the parole
side are
R. three five seven days of of
the sanctions on the parole side
of their of their jail.
Okay.
So that's what these guys are
these guidelines released
mandate bill with this ticket
right especially from the
officers.
Thank you madam chair
representative block these would
be statutory guidelines for the
department
but but that we use words of of
shall not impose a sanction of
more than three days so anywhere
from zero to twenty four hours
to be service anywhere of zero
to three days of you know
restrictive curfew or whatnot so
these would be the guidelines
that would be statewide and if I
may with all due respect to the
Department I think some of the
bills in the past were too big
of a leap of this I believe is
is consistent with institutional
change that needs to happen and
the training can be done between
now and and July.
It's it's this is the the vast
majority probation departments
nationwide have these graduated
steps so there's I think this is
doable for the department.
I can you know it's important
that there be consequences for
testing thirty three times but
you know this the way it is now
the consequence is like okay
good do the rest of your sense
in the state pen rather than in
the county jail you know that's
where they would go it's an
interim thing and actually the
the counties will be reimbursed
by the state for the time but
it's basically it's just
allowing some some very
important consequences for this
behavior and so I don't believe
we currently have that which is
a big reason why this bill is in
front of you thank you thank you
madam chair
so on that point regarding.
The counties now having to be
reimbursed what kind of
administrative costs burden will
be to bring on the madness
palletized or having to jail
Senator Madam chair Senators.
Thank you madam chair and
representative so the the
reimbursement system is already
current law this bill doesn't
change anything about that
bureaucratic process so it's the
same process these now and jails
are constantly holding people
for these types of situations
now so nothing about that would
change and in fact because one
of the provisions of this is to
reduce the incarceration for
technical violations the total
incarceration and the
incarceration pending education
the overall amount of
reimbursement would be less than
it is now and.
That significantly I would say.
Madam chair Senators thank the
answer but I'm seeing on the FY
are.
The cost to counties.
Thousand dollars this is here.
You dress that you're madam
chair members I have I've spoken
to the association counties and
to a local jail warden about
this issue and I think some of
the confusion was that they were
not factoring in the offset for
the reduction in incarceration
that happens what pending
hearing right now when people
are being accused of a probation
violation they get arrested and
held in jail for thirty days
sixty days ninety days waiting
for their hearing we're taking
that piece out because knowing
that the potential sanction for
technical violations no jail we
we took out that that time in
jail so the total amount of
housing that the jail is going
to be doing for these violators
is going to go significantly
down so I I can't give you a
number for that but I believe
that is why the FIR says that is
maybe not accounted for the
reduction.
The experts so you know I just
think that that additional
concerns still says on the FIR
and other people looking at one
or two two words but I will want
to make sure that the department
is also included on that so you
know I I understand the concerns
from direct director Martinez.
Individuals and so would you be
open to amendments taking out
certain violent offenders had a
files right this markers in this
madam chair is.
Thank you madam chair
representative block I think we
have this dialogue couple years
back on the.
On the house floor but the
answer would be that would be
unfriendly amendment
This emphasizes the violation in
real time rather than the crime
that was committed you know
prior to and so the point is to
lower incarceration I'm sorry
lower of recidivism for all
strands of criminal defendants
it's up we lower recidivism not
but all due respect not by
changing the definition but
lowering recidivism and and
stopping the hundreds of people
that are going back to prison
for not committing new crimes
that's in our interest that's in
the interest of public safety
and also thank you
Representative for the question
you know again just because I've
been involved with parole that I
just know how this works there's
a parole board that they have to
live with the decision of
release so with whatever bad
actor you're talking about they
have decided to release that
person under very strict
conditions so again it's it's a
partnership the way this all
works is the program for the
PO's in this field you know
other than justice the judges
Sarah so you know it's just I
would have a hard time carving
out exceptions because I
personally and and not everybody
can be on a parole board for
three years like I was
you know I have faith in the
judgment of the probe ordered is
not an that an easy do you know
whether we're talking about the
use that we were talking about
earlier or these adults you know
they they lose sleep over this
and then they do good work so
thank you.
Senator so you know I.
I think what's there already let
out Madam chair representative
they've already made that
decision this would actually
make it easier for that person
to violate because they knew
that they that nothing
consequences are going to be a
lot less Madam excuse is going
back to the state then they
could go to jail or they could
you know clean up trash on the.
And madam chair singers my
concern is let's just say
there's a someone who was
convicted of being a pet a file
and doing lord knows what if
that person is let out and they
re offend or in any way you know
maybe they just.
To address or something chair
Senators I think that dangerous
person they were already let up
and board but now these are
lower sanctions upon that
individual so that's my concern.
Your responses.
Thank you madam chair
Representative lot know we I
think we all share those
concerns and that is that what
you described would take it out
of the definition of technical
violations and that's the
amendment that you just this
past moments ago
that they would be a threat to
self or others and so I don't
have the language in front of me
but I'm what if the PO.
Help that that the
appropriations are the probably
was slipping in that direction
they could immediately section
them with a standard violation
and face the consequences of
that tier.
Okay thank you madam.
I was wondering if we could we
ask director to see what what
what's on the amendment because
she's the one listed in practice
do it without being
able the provision that.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and I
appreciate your question it
doesn't address everything
though and and couple things I'd
like to point out is the returns
that that Senator o'neill
mentioned those returns majority
of those returns art funders and
sex offenders who violate those
contracts the other piece to it
is that if Skylanders we pick up
aren't someone who misses an
appointment our policy currently
controls criteria and we have to
to make sure we follow follow
the the policy in order to
declare those ponders
we had one two weeks ago and
it's kind of that was arrested
with two hundred fifty thousand
fennel pills we had one in the
fall that was arrested with over
million federal appeals in that
position and these are in your
communities we we definitely
work with individuals who are
working a program we we involve
their behavior health therapist
for any type of violation or
sanction that we impose
but this is very limited we we
implemented a an assessment tool
scientific based in two thousand
seventeen so when someone
violates we reassess them and
it's it's evidence based it's
not opinion based it's not like
I like you I don't like you
there's the science behind it so
we implemented that and I think
we have all our traditional
partners on board
to actually believe the science
just the science and this bill
kind of takes us back in two
thousand seventeen it probably
would have been a good a good
bill but I think we're past that
we're moving forward moving
beyond it
so I think I hope that answers
your question thank you madam
chair thank you senators and
yeah that the defense my
question I still the same
concerns a direct Martinez has.
I appreciate the answers thank.
Okay Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you but my
question.
Senator Senator start Senators
are not representative projects
for that I don't question on
this okay so looks a probation
violation
or third to Max of seven days
and incarceration is there
hearing for that she just
automatically get the seven day.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Lord today that
would have to be a hearing under
this building that was swift and
certain justice with the
Russians seventies okay so as
mentioned for the parole officer
the provision of second can has
the legal authority to put them
in jail for seven days okay.
Madam chair representative okay
so would be.
So it would be they would have
something trying to think of I
don't know what I don't know we
you look at what probation or
parole violations are for now
but I'm trying to figure out.
And to consider what discretion
to you I get that they can
automatically put them in the
next you choose like somebody
you know does a bad P. tested
they don't wanna commits are for
the year yes I get that but
What if.
How to how to pay how do we know
that they were.
I'm just Lee accused or their
what they don't have a chance to
say Hey wait this is totally
wrong verses of what happened I
guess that's my question for you
get with that chair Senators.
Thank you madam chair
representative so if the a per
probationer wanted to challenge
it they can they can ask for a
hearing so they they would be
entitled to due process on that
if they wanted to challenge it
the idea behind in the way all
the technical violations
programs that are are currently
plays in the local court systems
that are not in statute
statewide there is it that's how
it's set up is basically like
you agree to just accept your
your punishment basically you're
switching certain you're certain
swift and certain justice but if
you think there's actually a
factual issue there we like no
there's no way that could have
come back positive I know I'm
clean and you want to challenge
and you want to hearing you can
demand hearing okay so chair
Senators would that be before
they get the seven days is we we
came off I I don't I want to
hearing on that madam chair and
representative they can do
before the hearing before that
and imposition of the site
section.
You mentioned.
Thank you.
Second.
Up to.
There is second second okay.
I did not know.
Yes Representative Thomson.
Okay.
These are.
Representative walking.
Representative Lord.
Representative Romero yes.
Of time some yes I Trujillo yes.
Ferrari yes I'm sure you have a
vote of forty two.
You have it has forty two years.
Very good thank you very much
madam chair if I if I may I up
served on this committee for six
years I love this committee and
the former representative from
district fifty one also chaired
this committee and we got some
really progressive
appropriations bills out in that
term as well thank.
I'm sorry in the past have a due
pass as amended.
Members.
The committee.
Is that.
Okay it was a do pass on house
bill eighty four.
Do not pass on we have to do
that it was though I'm going to
be accepted to Senate committee
substitute as amended for sure.
For.
Hello.
That's true.
Seventy.
Just read into that
At all the last bill was Senate
Judiciary Committee steps to
percent help with public affairs
committee substitute as amended
for Senate Bill B. R..
Hopefully that's right.
That was my most we have to read
a book.
Thank you
yes we're waiting on
Representative cover here but if
you would like to go ahead and
present Senator Steinborn.
You should and will let you know
this is thanks for
the.
Textor you either okay
she's coming to be with you on
this bill house bill four thirty
two.
Waste reduction.
Mr chair yes.
Eight eight eight great to be
with the state senator Jeff
Steinborn joined today by my
experts say are Pierpont is
executive director of the long
established New Mexico recycling
coalition.
And we're here to talk to you
today about plastic waste
reduction act.
This is a bill colleagues that
is designed to.
Take a little bit of a bite out
of all the plastic waste that
we're putting in our environment
each year which is we're
learning from science and from
data quickly becoming one of the
major environmental pollutants
that humans are producing in our
planet from single use plastics.
This bill madam chair calling
so.
Will prohibit retail providers
retail stores and food
establishments food providers as
we come in the bill include food
truck to from issuing from
giving out their product in a
single use plastic that which is
plastic bag not intended for re
use.
Instead requires that they
either a consumer bring in their
own back to our retail provider
not to restaurant.
For that they provide in the
paperback it propose consumer
cut of product content or
respect or a box or a
Re usable plastic back.
And there are a list of
exceptions in the bill
for commonsense circumstances
ranging from your doctor to.
The newspapers that need to be
protected from the right and
I'll tell you madam chair
colleagues there's about ten
states must Minnesota done this
Colorado's just law went into
effect on many of the states go
beyond what we're proposing to
you today many of those laws
include bans on single use
plastic straws containers these
plastic containers many of them
include fees this is a really
simple built a simplified
version of the bill we look at
all those bills and I think this
is the best version of all them
for us
In that it just deals with
plastic bags and up.
A lot of common sense exceptions
we work with the restaurant
providers on on an item in there
that says if the food takeout
item includes a high liquid
content that can also be in the
backseat of two prospects you
know still in your car.
And finally I'll just close by
saying this is estimated Madam
believe it or not the average
person uses over three hundred
plastic bags a year.
Which is incredible in less than
five percent of them get
recycled and they are providing
a huge and and and they never
really break down turning into
what are called microplastics
are showing up the most pristine
places on the planet rivers
offers wildlife and
It's a it's a real problem and
of course there was the one of
most litter item on roadways so
this bill it's costing
communities millions of dollars
have to be litter pick up with
plastic bags we're hearing from
the town of Albuquerque that
they spent over four million
dollars alone in the town of
Albuquerque having to deal with
these so this bill aside from
keeping plastic out of our
revenue reducing the amount by
school really helped clean up
the mess.
So that madam chair I will stop
talking and listen act want to
say something in the state for
questions.
I can see CENIC quickly and
interests of time madam chair
members of the committee as
Senator Steinborn mention I'd
that Serra Karia pod with the
New Mexico recycling coalition
and you may wonder why the
recycling coalition is
interested in these it's for
many reasons at the top of the
waste management hierarchy
begins with source reduction
this is an effort to reduce this
nuisance material at its source
but also in our recycling
streams these are considered a
contaminant contaminants are
costly and these are considered
tamers they get caught in the
gears and the equipment and they
cost about three point eight
million for the material
recovery facility the processor
in Albuquerque in lost time in
contamination in transportation
to bury this nuisance material
each year SO three point eight
million dollars it's a nuisance
to the recycling programs and
not just our urban communities
but also our our rural
communities and these bags
cannot be recycled anywhere in
the state of New Mexico in our
municipal recycling programs.
I am here for questions if you
have any thank you madam chair
thank you we'll go to the.
And in the one in opposition to
this.
Okay anyone wants to.
Session.
Three three people in opposition
okay
you go ahead and listen to them
table.
Yep one minute.
Terry.
Okay.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Terry
collide CL greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce.
Plastic grocery bags they are
very interested in Albuquerque
and was therefore eliminating
them extremely unpopular with
consumers as alternatives are
both expensive and inconvenient
the same is true for merchants
must pass higher costs on to
their customers there were some
fact the paperbacks can also be
jobs longer work hard road Sen
Benny plastic doesn't mean
unnecessary reduction in litter
moreover rising statewide grant
really runs roughshod over our
local governments who are in a
better position to gauge the
needs and desires of their
communities with respect to the
sponsor we urge you to vote no
on the three point forty two
thank you so much.
Thank you that.
But if you have one minute.
Yes good afternoon thank you for
letting me speak I'll say the
same thing as what the last
person said it this will be very
unpopular and and they'll be
with for those that can afford
it they'll just go online and
make a lot more orders on Amazon
and other places like that you
have actually a lot more ways to
cut into the stream
I know I know that I'll just go
and buy plastic bags online I
was taken to the to the stores
to buy my staff the this was
maybe committees me a little bit
but you know this watching her
to pour a lot more than me so
I'd say vote no on this this is
another nanny state loft.
Thank you next.
Go ahead you have one minute.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name's Paul guessing I
represent New Mexico's free
market think tank the Rio Grande
foundation I oppose this bill
for starters chairman single use
is a misnomer when it comes to
plastic bags the Canadian
government agency found a
plastic bag of the seventy seven
point seven percent reviews
right a small trash can liners
personally I use my plastic
grocery bags to keep the Rio
Grande clean by using to pick up
waste I also packed an extra bag
or two on my walks in order to
pick up additional trash on my
trip I totally understand that
litter is a problem in our state
unfortunately that is less than
policy issued in education
behavioral issue there's no
reason to attack plastic bags
the more the other items which
could always wind up as litter
in the wrong hands thank you for
your time I urge you to oppose
this legislation appreciate it.
Thank you that was it.
One more.
I'm in favor of this bill
I'm an owner of a tech company
here at the Sandia science and
technology park in southeast
Albuquerque and the appearance
and cleanliness of our area it
is important to our company and
others when customers or
recruits visit often from out of
town.
Their opinion of us is obviously
influenced by what they see
around us.
And the morale of our employees
is definitely affected by what
they see driving to and from
work every day.
Among all the litter items
plastic bags are the most
visible.
And embarrassing.
Especially when the flopping
around high in the trees.
And and also embarrassing is the
fact that Albuquerque city
council repealed the previous
back then that we had.
The state was only the step in
the state for the image and
morale of its businesses plastic
bags are not necessary thank you
your text at.
Okay anyone else on
in opposition okay those in
support.
Okay if you'll design at.
Check check thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is JD Bullington and I'm
a registered lobbyist for the
City of Santa Fe in the City of
Santa Fe we actually have a
successful back banned plastic
bag ban in place and I I would
never speak for Representative
Romero but she lives in the city
like I do and it's part of our
fabric here and we're doing
quite well with it the only area
that it doesn't apply is
restaurants but I've been
following this legislation I'm
not heard from many restaurants
owners restaurant owners we've
not seen The New Mexico
restaurant association step up
on this so in Santa Fe the band
has worked well.
And we like it I would add
though that it is hard to see
the enormous costs that this
imposes on our recycling centers
they have to stop their
facilities two or three times a
day to untangle that equipment
and it adds significantly to the
operational costs so.
City of Santa Fe is glad to see
this come forward and supports
this legislation thank you.
X..
Hi chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to testify I'm
Alyssa can you guys are proud
resident of Santa Fe I know this
has been working in Los crucis
too but I'm coming to you as a
former state representative in
Oregon where I co sponsored
house bill two five oh nine
which passed with bipartisan
support in twenty nineteen this
is a very similar bill for been
able to single use plastic bags
in retail as well as restaurants
and it has been very successful
it went into effect January
first twenty twenty I so it's
been going for three years I
sent you several links by email
again my last name is Kenny got
our hope you have a chance to
look at it one is an FAQ from
the department of environmental
quality that talks a lot about
how this band works it covers
such questions as why did Oregon
adopt a back then what does this
mean for consumers what do
businesses need to know how will
this be enforced are there any
exceptions provided.
Do businesses need to keep track
of fees collected where is the
fee co would local governments
need to know what types of bags
require fees also some studies
about the health the relative
health of paper over plastic
thank you.
Hello my name's Elizabeth Weston
I'm not that important I'm just
a person I live in Santa Fe
County I actually live most the
time in town but I get along
really well with my ex husband
he lives outside the town so I
get out there pretty often I
make great this gets and I'm
welcome there what I love to the
day after this incredible series
of of wind storms that we've had
somebody told me sixty five
miles an hour eighty five miles
an hour I thought well I'm going
to see a lot more plastic I saw
plenty of plastic and the risks
it was so disgusting that I
decided to pull my car over out
there on the highway highway
fourteen and pick up some of the
stuff my question for you all is
by the way I'm in favor of this
you know but my question is
there's a difference between
plastics and I really got to
experience it around the barbed
wire fencing around my ex
husband's property there was it
was wrapped around it was hard
to get rid of it was almost
slimy and I got to thinking is
this the crap that goes pardon
my French is this the stuff that
goes into the anyway I'm in
favor of this.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee today I will speak
in my role as a member of the
water protection advisory board
that gives advice on water
quality to the Albuquerque
Bernalillo water authority I
feel to say my name Camilla I
amend the nice to see you all
and when the Albuquerque city
council was considering the
repeal of our back down we work
carefully with the storm train
community we talked to the folks
who maintain the cleanup systems
that serve our water system and
they clarified to us that there
is huge expense involved with
having to go and service the
drains clear them of plastic
address plastics within our
water treatment system and so I
just want people to be really
clear that there is a cost to
our water utilities when it
comes to managing bags I'd also
just like to flag that as the
mother of a six and ten year old
who participated in getting our
bag ban implemented that this is
something kids care about and I
think it sets a good example for
them please phone paper thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for south central
solid waste authority authority
we pick up trash hollow and
recycle from the north part of
white sands to the Texas border
we've invested a lot of revenue
into our recycling center and as
Mr Billington stated single use
plastic bags are a big problem
for us as we try to move forward
in promoting recycling in the
state thank you.
Good afternoon members of the
committee my name is Amy Simpson
and I'm speaking on behalf of
myself as a citizen and resident
of Las Cruces New Mexico where
we proudly passed a plastic bags
ban single use back then I don't
know about a year ago or so and
I can say as a residence that
has been visibly successful we
recently did a neighborhood
cleanup in Alameda depot
neighborhood where where I live
and the only plastic bags that
we found were a tangled in trees
and they're still one tangled
like thirty foot high in a tree
so I'm just on the litter issue
alone that is it is visibly
impressive in an immediate thing
that you can do to help our
communities.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair members the committee I'm
Douglas medical check on I'm a
registered lobbyist for
conservation voters New Mexico
we support this bill the plastic
that is the subject of this bill
gets into the environment and it
stays there and it doesn't
degrade and it's a continuing
source of pollution please vote
for do pass recommendation for
this build thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I want to thank
the senator for bringing this
forward my name is Bethany
Jerrell I'm speaking as an
individual I live in Alamogordo
and we don't have a back down
there and so we had huge wins
this last week I had five or six
back stuck in the tree in my
front yard
those bags are biodegradable we
know that I have family in Los
crucis and in Albuquerque and
Austin where there have been are
are bad bands and it's really
work to help clean up the
community and to help our
environment.
State last longer so I urge you
to support this thank you.
Good evening chair members of
the committee Steve see on his
hand as a concerned citizen and
on behalf of all my friends and
colleagues from going on a who
deeply care for our millions of
we strongly support this
legislation am going on a little
plastic bags litter our desert
and our river it just creates a
deep sadness this is a message
that we don't care that we're
not doing nothing about it.
And and sometimes I think what's
wrong with paper checks why
plastic why not pay for those
things we know we can recycle
those.
I think that ultimately this
bill is going to do something to
touch the future and that is to
clean up the lands that New
Mexicans and our kids deserve so
we think the sponsor for
bringing forth this bill and we
ask that you vote in favor thank
you.
Yes you're right.
Yes.
Thank you my name Mr mackenzie I
am the co coordinator three
fifty New Mexico environmental
group based in Albuquerque we
stand in support of this bill
more on a number of the reason
is that already been stated.
Plastic there are are brought
viable substitutes and classic
doesn't degrade in the
environment and it as in all
kinds of external costs to our
governmental agencies and water
control authorities and so we
stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you next.
Twenty eight.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee I'm Stephanie
levy with beyond plastic Santa
Fe.
According to world counts on a
hundred and sixty thousand
single use plastic bags are used
per second worldwide in the
minute that I have to speak nine
million six hundred thousand
bags will be used and within an
hour these bags could circle the
planet seven times single use
plastic bags are used an average
of twelve minutes.
In twenty twenty one the
legislators and this extra
session allocated ten million
dollars a pandemic relief money
to the cleanup New Mexico
roadside beautification program
on top of the three million
dollars the DOT was uses
annually to clean up roadsides
Senator all this taxpayer money
doesn't seem to put a dent in
the problem we need this bill to
reduce plastic pollution thank
you.
Thank you lord.
Your members of the committee my
name is Laurie honor I am the co
founder of the plastic action
team of New Mexico and chief of
the zero waste team of the Rio
Grande grants to your central
through.
I have witnessed first time what
many of the speakers and talk
about the cost of to recycling
facilities.
Plastic that I in the early
going through their tour or seen
how of workers here.
Whole year and all of these
plastic bags off the conveyor
belts and throw them out hi
thousands of thanks hi also
thousands of bags to be sent to
the landfill and these are the
only thing that that there there
there's tons of other backs that
are blowing around in the wind
getting caught on trees and
fences following on highways I
had a friend that hello into
revenge you if you can finish
your thought please.
Okay
it's very important it's so much
easier to swap out single use
plastic bags for recyclable or
re usable one care stores
Representative and our time your
time is up thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Tammy people
Corman Albuquerque city
councilor and I am here to urge
you to support this bill on
behalf of the vast majority of
my constituents who want to see
a prohibition on single use
plastics you want this couple
folks said that the City of
Albuquerque's prohibition was a
failure and that is just not
true within two weeks of that
sale of that
pilot program taking State I
started to see changes in our
community we solemn less plastic
bags flying around less plastic
bags blocking the sewer lines
and sewer drains and it was a
much better place and so it was
it was a wrong thing to risk
rescind that legislation and the
people of Albuquerque would
really like to see this
legislation before we think the
sponsor for his strong support
of making New Mexico better and
we ask you to vote yesterday.
Thank you Tammy well we have one
more people.
Good afternoon everyone hear me
yes we can hear you.
Yes insurance committee on
mining is a phone around and
situated in New Mexico and I
reside in the town of Las Vegas
Mexico
the police here for single use
bags proces you wouldn't believe
that bill testers will pass the
package.
They will put mill party payers
ready designed to be carried out
and in that.
Pertinently yes you read people
should reuse
but unfortunately here in this
particular community people do
not most people are the bad way
or the.
So and you know like there's
been reasons paperback although
there are some tracks the to
compose and they are you know
plastic pollution to our lakes
and water not just on the planet
in our specific state is also
atrocious so I have a yes
please.
Thank you.
That is all for folks on zoom
but thank you for for calling in
and listening will go back to
Senator if you wanna have thank
you madam chair thank you for
allowing all the public comment
from folks in the state I just
want to add Representative
Roybal Google yet up and
Representative bodyguards
bouncers this legislation other
committee right now they would
be with me so with that happy to
stand for questions great thank
you senator first we have
Representative role metal.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative or senator for
bringing this forward I just
have a couple comments and
support
this is near and dear to my
heart simple actually the first.
But I came back from college and
adventures came back to Santa Fe
my home in my court to join the
Santa Fe commission on
sustainability it was my first
public service post and this was
our
the effort to try to figure out
what could we do to help get
folks focused on this initiative
in in being able to to to
understand the ramifications of
choices made every single day
and so I really appreciate
appreciate this legislation
because it actually focuses on
top habits and behaviors and
behavior changes and now we have
dated about.
Now well what was really early
back in twenty fifteen
In Santa Fe and across the
country and now and seeing this
as a state I think it's a great
effort to to really move forward
and it was really something that
pushed me into we can do more we
can do more we can do more and
here we are so I really
appreciate you're after and I
just wanted to share that and
thank you all of the folks in
the audience for for their
advocacy and
Creating that little spark means
a lot thank you madam chair
thank you Representative next we
have Representative Lord.
Okay.
But thank you madam chair thank
you Senator.
Keep on getting Representative I
was a representative of the ones
that they get pharmacists
Senator okay so you need to know
how much waste is currently
caused by these single use
plastic bags hi.
Satcher's.
Madam chair representative if
you're talking about of the
total waste stream I don't have
that answer for talking about in
terms of volume of the backs of
Celtic can tell you according to
data done by the City of
Albuquerque nas and others the
average person uses over three
hundred plastic single use
plastic bags a year so you can
do the math on two million New
Mexicans how the staggering
quantity of plastic bags by
weight these bags don't
necessarily way a lot but when
you look at the collective
impact of all that plastic it
definitely adds up.
Okay thank you madam chair
Senators so we don't have a
percentage of total waste trying
sect.
Madam chair members of the
committee the US EPA has waste
characterization studies and
they estimate that all Americans
municipal solid waste is about
twelve percent plastic it's all
types of plastics you madam
chair thank you Senator and
experts agree with you.
The statistics right now from
the EPA's twenty twelve.
Twenty fourteen actually finding
and is that.
Zacks plastic bags and sacks
risk zero point zero percent of
total weights figure paperbacks
madam chair Senator will be zero
point four percent.
But if we look at beer and soft
drink bottles two point two
percent of the way so madam
chair Senator.
I was going after these beer and
soft drink bottles that is very
small portion of what the waste
is total madam chair sure madam
chair Representative plastic has
its own unique characteristics
that have become a nuisance to
our environment that we're
addressing this is a solution
that states are availing
themselves of the deal with
plastics as our communities you
know I'm all for recycling glass
and other materials they're
challenging items to be sure the
markets recycling Lasser are
challenging you know how do you
you know how do you ban those
kinds of drugs and then replace
it with something else you have
those logistics of mechanics of
dealing with this particular
environmental pollutants are
pretty straightforward I mean
you know you can replace it with
something that is readily
available and is biodegradable
that's that's what that's the
other consideration is your
replacing it with what what is
the environment costs that you
brought up the way to Papen
implied you get paper does way
more than plastic but the
benefit of it is that it bio
degrades soon as a month short
as a month and so chairman of
our mental standpoint it is a
much more desirable outcome to
be replacing it with something
that biodegrade even though ways
more additionally the plastic
that's going to be there for
potentially hundreds of years
the other thing is I just want
to point out this legislation is
that we require the paper back
to use include forty percent
post consumer content paper so
it's it's a product that's
sorted recycled and you're also
supporting markets for recycling
and I would say we have a
company here in New Mexico
employs hundreds of people doing
exactly that so this particular
policy solution actually
creating New Mexico jobs thank
you madam chair thank you
senator so.
Your solution would be
paperbacks that correct answers
and Madam chair representative
that's one solution allowed in
this page paper but there is not
the only solution that retail
outlets can use okay thank you
madam chair so all you know on
the paper back point out of
Jersey I know a lot of people
that are not as.
D. as a plastic bag and.
At least when I'm when I'm in
town I went to trader Joe's a
couple days.
And I got it back and the double
bags this to that Madam chair
representative that's worth.
And then in the parking lot what
do you make of our it's on the
ground.
Picked up and snow and take it
back to my car so madam chair.
I don't I don't see how this is
the solution yes these
paperbacks are not as durable
characters do you have any spots
that thank you madam chair
Representative I recommend you
get yourself with yet durable re
reusable cloth bag the promise
you it'll be started in that
paper back and probably last.
Content on your.
Yeah noted bags for life.
Also on the paperback thank you
know we're talking about the
environment.
And I'm seeing the study from
the Columbia University
climates.
And they say that these
paperbacks are forty percent
more energy to make not to
mention the harvesting of the
trees the use of noxious
chemicals introduction so madam
chair Senator do you think that
this would actually hurt the
environment more than health
care and chair representative
there are environmental costs up
front to be sure producing paper
back to differences this stuff
number one when you're using a
post consumer back you're using
less less virgin trees number
two it is a renewable replenish
for resource you can grow more
trees there's an industry there
and number three in the the long
term the cost you also use a lot
of materials you also contribute
to climate change quite a bit
the production plastic so it is
a trade off of environmental
impacts is a fair way to assess
the situation but reducing the
long term costs of plastics in
our environment make that a more
environmentally friendly outcome
I think in all the research
we've seen an you know what
they're merging sites were
saying with plastics not to
mention the cost to society of
having to do with our clinical
that to that service madam chair
members of the committee I'm not
sure the data report but the
American forestry products
association the industry the
represents true growers Papen
they have worked really hard to
to reduce their water use and
their greenhouse gas emissions
the twenty twenty reports show
that their greenhouse gas
emissions are twenty percent
less than they were in two
thousand five their water uses
ten percent less than it was in
two thousand five and so the the
forestry products association is
working really hard to make
their products more sustainable
and we're talking about ones
that are not even just coming
right straight from trees are
coming from forty percent post
consumer recycled.
You madam chair thank you
experts so you know I get that
but it also regardless of how
much we may reduce that carbon
footprint or whatever we'd like
to call that we're still using
more water with these paperbacks
you know The Washington Post
they wrote that.
At the legislative process is
responsible for fifty percent
more water pollution and seventy
percent market share police
prospect.
So I would look at that madam
chair C. revival ten year so
talking about.
These bags not.
or CD's rather.
At least in my household another
any of the New Mexico by USM is
trash lines nine.
And I do respect once twice
three times four times some
managers and riding the
characterization of these single
use bags is it accurate do you
guys agree with that madam chair
Senator
unfortunately them chair
representative they end up being
single use most of the time in
terms of data and the litter
right up them I they can
certainly be reviews a couple
times I agree with that of
course this a commonly accepted
definition of these bags that we
use that I think most of the
time where the data they are we
doing to being single use for
seconds at best so having said
that there are other factors
that are going to be out there
like Baxter vegetables or things
like that they're still out
there not being banned in this
law and if you use those kinds
of acts including some that are
biodegradable you know those
hopefully will become a suitable
replacement for folks the new
single use packs
a on which I would just say at
that representative you know we
all need to be conscious this is
an anti pollution built this is
an environmental bill and if you
use a plastic backs would pass
you choose them she's good to
reduce reduce your plastic so
whatever using it for doesn't
make it environmentally friendly
but I understand it's
convenient.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and I I agree with that
I think that we need to look at
data.
What was happening so I looking
at polls here as you go pull
from the U. K. twenty fifteen I
found that ninety six percent of
people surveyed they reuse the
bags from shopping.
So there we go there's a
recycling questions reprieves
and then a similar point Mexico
that was just recently take
found that ninety nine percent
of the service.
So that people respect and so.
I can't reuse of paperback from
trader Joe's or I trashed and
wanted to the broking.
Working lot but I would just
look at the data there and
there's also receipts the state
also six statistics so we're
looking at statistics and
science based approaches I think
that's something we need to look
at.
Furthermore madam chair Senator
so.
When I read the tax for those
bonds.
After.
I'm not sure I understand your
question answers and so we are
biodegradable bags the solution.
To the problem that we're facing
with Madam chair of them chair
representative let's I grateful
backed really are not used as
tax with handles and on their
use is like festival backs and
those are not included in this
but.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Sounds good.
So.
Lots to like we talked about.
That chair Senator
Representative I just wanted to
a time but check we have to be
on the floor and a half an hour
and I think at this point moving
towards toolbox which I'm fully
in support of their invoke right
now but just being very very
good more about the the time.
Thank you madam chair so I just
wanna also.
Accenture total that is we just
came out of a pandemic some
people argue was.
So with these reasonable backs
they can pick up germs madam
chair singers and the actually
the house so.
I'm looking at all the different
things we're trying to
supplement these plastic bags
with and every single one of
them has some kind of downsized.
so.
We are to look at the data
service at last that we looked
at the downsides of the
environmental impact paperbacks
we looked at how health concerns
are we plopped chair and so I
think this is this bill in my
opinion is a solution in search
of a problem is that a problem
senator because where I live
chair Senator I'm not anyone
else where they live in my city
I don't see plastic bags fine
and we I address Los crucis del
Paso to order all the time and I
don't see much of this is
probably so madam chair
representative Senator I would
also just to for you to
Albuquerque but they do have a
plastic bag bans and their
progressive but city provokes
that so why are we now forcing
it down our throats in every
single city because we didn't
get are we now after.
Well Madam chair at this is this
is really good policy that
people are asking for all the
state I think you just heard
from in Albuquerque city
councilor who I would trust her
knowing her constituents in the
history of that the thousand
that resolution proper by kids
wouldn't call the new city
council representative
progressive
with all due respect and you
know one of the one of the
counselors who of course on the
sponsors of the legislation as
well but now this is just you
know this is one of those things
that is really in the interest
of so this is not just in the
state of any community but
globally that we deal with
plastic pollution is very
appropriate for us to take it up
as a state as other states are
doing so we're not shut it down
this road I think is that huge
public benefits to citizens
across the state it's going to
save their communities tax
dollars that they can use for
other local purposes going to
clean up the roadways in the
state we're all trying to grow
the outdoor economy it's going
to prevent pollution from their
water from their lands from the
wildlife from the future
generations so it is a really
good built in state.
Thank you madam Sir Senator I
would just prove that I think
that this is a it's an unfunded
mandate that.
Forcing every single person in
the state to live under the
staff where is I believe in
local control I think it's
Alamogordo wants to do something
different than state they should
be able to and I don't think
that we should mandate local
municipalities to do something
that.
Maybe people in Santa Fe or
Albuquerque may or may not want
Italy's rival we don't want to.
Thank you.
Your.
Next we have Representative Lord
thank you I'll be brief to the
time thank you madam chair
Senator
the act you know I kind of I get
it we want plastic bags and
plastic Andrew want all things
or two in the earth and then I'm
like going okay.
So what can we do.
So I looked up that study in the
university of Georgia and it
gets frustrated because Dr Wong
it's an apartment condominium
they found to be California to
the ban plastic bags in increase
of.
One gallon trash bags with fifty
five to seventy five percent and
eight gallons by eighty seven
two hundred ten percent some of
the funds people search trash
bags with trash bags out there
either so much okay what is the
solution so that I started
looking up
The sustainable bags and then it
turns out I hear about banks
going another by Millis so they
could be worse option because
the terms of their impact on
climate permits for water
pollution toxic emissions to get
more depressed as a ground the
conflict would work actually no
classes because it depletes also
discussed plastic does so throw
me into the year so we're going
to just have to get our
groceries and put our hands.
What or get sticks and twigs and
make baskets but I just the
meeting was completely
frustrated okay well here's what
happened when they did these
bands and then these other
things I mean I'm not as good so
I don't know what the solution
and not really having the.
Thank you.
Thanks for making me think so
much
thank you Representative.
We have Representative.
Thank you senator and madam
chair I love this bill I I hate
seeing the banks in trees
depending on what my mood is I'm
either angry or I'm really sad
so thank you.
Madam chair moved to pass on
that in the Senate bill I'm
sorry house bill the community
Committee substitute for House
Bill four thirty two.
Very inserting passed we have a
representative Thompson.
Totals.
Representative walked.
Representative working.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Here we we have yes.
Madam we have a vote of three to
four to pass you have.
Sanford to pass what
sorry.
I believe in the power of the
total back.
you have a do pass on committee
set up house bill four thirty
two.
Thank you exactly.
I'm next we have Representative
Matthews for health bill for
seventy nine.
We.
No you all of our places okay do
I.
So I'm this is a very very quick
so this is a bill.
That came about because of the
presentations that I have.
That we decreasing down
transparency.
Our state government.
Really so it was interesting
that for the first time when I
actually Representative is over
and Rep bill Representative
sorry to interrupt but you can
move the Mike that way.
Otherwise you have to press the
button on the other Mike.
Right here we go the this but
okay hi
So.
Our state government I think
it's getting more more towards
it and not transparent more more
hard to reach it's very
difficult to figure out who she
contacted an agency for help and
and even trying to do
constituent service frequently
it takes I have to contact the
chief clerk to find out who in
HSD is a person
how do I reach the secretary or
how do I do these various things
and I and one of the things that
made me think about this is the
fact that we recently had some
shootings at legislators homes
in Albuquerque New.
Our email addresses.
That the state provides is our
public record
we have total phone numbers that
are public record that are in
our offices most of it is course
used cell phones but you can
still call us at the numbers and
it made me think about this
whole question about what's
appropriate in terms of public
information.
About people in government
including legislators and people
government including the state
officials who run the government
and
it was interesting to me that by
presenting this bill by
introducing this bill I got more
information I got more more
response from state.
Government departments and I
have doing anything else ever I
mean thank you all right in the
state except for two of them to
say what it I was.
I.
Moralists.
And the gaming board and the
Indian Affairs Department hi
noted the intent of a
transparent fair and open
government is best executed the
citizens have access to it those
who work in it.
I know that the number the
agencies were very unhappy with
the specifics of the bill and so
I'm going to suggest that the
bill should probably be rolled
so that we could work out some
of that and so forth but I I
wanted to just start having a
conversation about.
How are information should be
available as public officials as
elected officials but also how
that should be working with the
governor's office the attorney
general's office and other
elected officials and also and
the state department in the the
state department state actually
work run our government and how
hard it is to figure out who to
contact you can't give you can't
leave a phone message you can't
leave email messages I mean it's
like a black hole and are I
think it's terrible for our
democracy the effectiveness of
our government so with that we
quite.
Thank you Representative
Matthews and I appreciate you
laying all that out so what I'm
hearing you say is that you want
to continue to work on this
legislation and not take a vote
on it today.
I Madam I think that probably
would be appropriate unless
everybody's willing to just vote
yes and.
Representative Matthews I I know
that there are folks who have
some concerns on this on this
committee and so I think folks
would be very happy to be able
to work with you on this because
I I I don't want to speak for
everybody but I know that
transparency is a big deal for
for many of us and so that would
be.
Sure thank you madam chair so
rather than having each employee
but at maybe have a phone number
for the division's yes with that
with the description of what
they cover so I because I can't
imagine having to update your
website everything date to get
people off of let the new people
on so if you could maybe make
bigger jobs rather than
individuals thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative thank
you I appreciate the
representative suggestions
and at this is something we can
continue to work on thank you
thank you thank you for waiting
it out until the end.
I would I was reading of the
bill sponsoring on disclosure by
the at CYFD CYFD which is
hopefully going to be heard very
quickly and at.
chairwoman terms and help you.
Thank.
All right great this is the end
to the committee today for
health consumer public affairs
we will see you on Thursday.
