Representative Armstrong.
here.
Representative Borigo.
here
Representative Brown.
Representative Doo.
Representative Hernandez here.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
I lotta
De la Cruz here.
We have a quarrel.
OK, Representative Terasas, you
ready to start?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning.
Committee, let me just interrupt
because I'm forgetting something
that's important. This is for
all the members and presenters.
Please remember to turn off your
mic after you speak, so after
you speak, please turn the mic
off.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Uh, I am presenting
House Bill 371.
It's related to more vehicles
authorizing local and county
elected authorities.
To allow off-road motor vehicles
to operate on paved streets.
And highways within its
political boundaries of the
authorized.
I think I have looking for him.
His name is Chris Johnson. He's
with NMO, so I don't know
sit up here.
There you go, OK.
I've never met him my expert
before. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so,
uh, again,
Mr. um
Johnson is with the NMOHVA.
Recreation resources director.
And with that, basically I stand
for questions.
Uh, Representative Tarasso, did
your expert want to say
anything? Uh, basically what
this, uh, legislation would do
is uh
Remove the state transportation
commission as a
Uh, uh, deciding.
Authority over whether off
highway vehicle traffic would be
allowed on paved roads, uh,
within a particular, uh,
Uh, jurisdiction, uh, being a
municipality or a county.
And uh as it stands right now,
uh, counties and municipal
municipalities under the OHB Act
can designate certain roads
within their jurisdiction to as
open to a highway vehicle
traffic, and among the things
they can do is they can
designate separate speed limits
for off-highway vehicles. Uh,
the state transportation
commission right now has
jurisdiction over any state
highways within those political
boundaries.
Of
our municipalities or uh
counties and uh the state
transportation commission has
formed a policy called CP 71,
uh, which, uh, gives them
guidance as to uh which uh uh
roads or paved roads, they would
open no traffic to, uh, and the,
uh, uh, policy, uh, says that
uh.
OHVs would not be allowed on any
paved road, any state highway
that has a speed limit above 45
miles an hour.
Uh, and they have not
entertained any uh ideas of
designating separate speed
limits as empowered by the OHV
Act. Uh, so this legislation
would basically remove them from
the deciding factor because
there are multiple communities
and counties that have sought to
designate certain roads within
their political boundaries and
the state transportation
commission has not entertained
those petitions, uh.
they have not decided
Uh jurisdictions.
Thank you. So Representative,
you have an amendment.
Not on this bill, uh, Mr. Chair
it's on on on this one.
OK, uh, questions from the
members. I'm sorry, who do we
have any in the audience who was
in favor, if so, raise your
hand, you wish to speak, please
line up behind the presenters.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee on Howard Hutchinson
registered lobbyist with the
Coalition of Arizona and New
Mexico counties.
This is something that uh
counties have been requesting
for a number of years.
To create uh essentially OHB.
Loops
Uh, it's a part of a
consideration for economic
development.
We do have some problems with
OHB users on a private lands.
But um for the most part, OHP
users respect private property,
uh, leave fences and alone and
gates closed when they passed
through them.
And we hope uh that uh with the
power delegated to a local
authority that they will be able
to develop rules and enforcement
to curtail that type of
activity. Thank you.
I.
Um, thank you for listening to
us. My name is Amy Gaines.
And my concern is when you buy
these, you ask them, well, what
do I need? Well, I need a
license plate, and on the
license plate, it says on
highway use.
So I'm allowed to go on the
highway.
I also have to have
As chairman of a committee
members, thank you for
listening. My name is Les Keys.
I live in Grants, and Grants is
very similar to most small towns
in New Mexico. There are 3 ways
that are the main arterials that
are the state highways. We had a
rugged west event that had over
300 ATVs and OHVs in our
community that was highly
successful.
But because of the inability to
drive on Santa Fe Avenue, Lobo
Canyon, and a little section of
53, which is a half a mile,
literally the event was killed.
So we have ordinances or we have
signed agreements from the
Cibola County, the village of
Milan, and the city of Grants to
allow ATVs and OHBs on those
roads. So when we have this
event, the game and fish
department and the state police
have a heyday.
And so ultimately we canceled it
because there's so much
confusion from people from out
of state that have an out of
state license OH license, and
then we have one like my wife
had said on our vehicle, it's
just too much chaos. So even if
this bill doesn't go through, we
need to get that fixed somehow
because it's just dirty the
water for tourists and
economies. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
online?
iPad
Hello.
It's Rick Alcon. I own R&S Power
Sports Group in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. I also am the current
chairman of the New Mexico
Off-highway Vehicle Safety
Advisory Board to the game and
fish and immediate past
president of the motorcycle
Industry Council at the national
level. Uh, we stand in support
of this bill for clarification,
um, and, and ease of use by the
uh users.
Thank you.
J. Hogriff.
Good morning, Chairman and
commission?
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Um, you're very muffled.
Good morning. My name is Jerry
Holr.
I am the police chief in Angel
Fire, New Mexico and for the
same reasons that have been
mentioned, uh, to grow the
economic opportunities and truly
allow the village of angel Fire.
Uh, OHB users to have access to
local forest roads, I am in
support of this bill.
Michael Larik.
Hi, Chairman, uh members of the
board, uh, thank you. My name is
Misha Laish, uh.
I used to be the planning and
community development director
for Grant County. I wrote one of
these ordinances when it was
allowed back in 2016. I am
currently the planning and
development director for Navajo
County in Arizona. And I just
wanted to uh say that I'm in
support of this. Arizona State
University finalized the study
in 2018 and found that residents
and tourists spend 1.86 million
$billion billion on off-highway
vehicle recreation, which
equates
to $221.76 million in state and
local taxes for Arizona. Um, and
with it the continued economic
growth, uh, we're seeing
improvements to rural
communities and increased
accessibility to trails
throughout the state.
I do know that OHVs are designed
by manufacturer primarily for
use over an improved terrain,
but in order to get to most of
this unimproved terrain, OHB
riders must either trailer the
vehicle to designated
trailheads.
Thank you.
Reminder one minute per person.
Edna
Good morning. Thank you for
allowing me to speak. Uh, my
name is Edna Trager, uh, back in
2016, I
The elephant Butte City council
members who worked on allowing
ATVs on our city streets, um,
after Elephant Butte, Truth or
Consequences followed along with
Williamsburg and the county, uh.
Find ourselves 10 years later,
still dealing with interrupted
access. Uh, we've seen interest
in ATV writership continue to
grow year over year. The state
and our county, we, we promote
to our neighboring states to
come visit us, uh, yet we're
still not able to properly
promote uh trails or direct
riders to uh the, the
appropriate areas. Uh, we don't
have the easy access. Uh, I
support HB 371 as a common sense
solution.
and an opportunity to grow an
already established group of
visitors as mentioned before
that um do bring a lot of money
into our state. Thank you.
James Coons.
Good morning.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Perfect. Good morning. Ladies
and gentlemen of the committee,
uh, my name is James Coons. I'm
from Silver City, New Mexico,
and uh we have a state highway
that runs right through downtown
with a low speed limit, and it
limits the pathways and roads to
our local trails and our vast
area of forest and public lands.
In 2016, the Mexico Senate Bill
270 was passed and was signed
into law. That current law
allows communities to decide if
they want off-highway vehicles
and can be operated on paved and
unpaved roadways within that.
jurisdiction, that current law
is municipal counties the power
to create ordinances to allow
them on specific roads in their
boundaries.
That law was passed in 2016 in
uh in New Mexico because we have
a rural state with large
agricultural, dairy, and
ranching community that is
heavily relying on highway
vehicles, off-highway vehicles,
because Mexico is known for its
vast public lands and trails and
many great outdoor uh
recreational activities, Red
River, for example, is replete
with trailheads where offroad
enthusiasts travel across the
country to experience their many
women.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in opposition if.
Do we have anyone online in
opposition.
If your hand is raised on Zoom,
please be in opposition.
Thank you, Representative
Borego.
Mr. Chair, um,
And I, I appreciate you guys
bringing this bill forward. I
guess I just have a question
with regard to.
The the urban areas, obviously
that's a big, it's a little
different in the rural areas,
having grown up in rural New
Mexico.
Um
So
Can the municipalities, um.
Make it more restrictive.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Borego, let me go back and I
should have explained the word.
Uh, quickly because I felt like
I was running late, but
basically this is what happens,
OK? I've had a, uh, I've had a
forever, OK.
And I got, this is a confusion,
Mr. Chair, Representative. They
issued plates that said that we
could use uh.
You have people that are getting
there's a plate and there's a
sticker can ride on the
highways, but you don't know
where it starts and stops, and
it's kind of confusing. It's
very confusing. A lot of what
was said, um, uh, represent
Borego is true. You, you can get
to a certain point, but then the
next trails over and it might be
only 500 yards, maybe a half a
mile over and you can't access
the other one, so what they're
doing is they're sometimes they
go off the side and so we're
trying to avoid all that and
give more control to local
authorities.
To answer your question,
Your local um uh municipalities,
cities, counties, they would be
able to control this. Now they
couldn't, that doesn't mean that
we would have access to
interstate, no interstate at all
on this just on state highway.
So you get up and, and, and the
Glenwood area.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Glenwood area reserve area where
there's a lot of hunting
activity, um, and it's
confusing, especially when they
come from out of, out of, um, to
recreation or to hunt or
whatever, and they get that,
they get that sticker, and they
see that it's, you can be on
paved roads and then they're,
they don't know where to stop
and where not to do. So this
will just clean it all up and
allow the ordinances to the
municipalities.
The local authorities
clarifies my question. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
And, um, representative and,
and, and.
Presenter, um,
Sean County has 60% of 7
counties federal land, and uh
111 thing uh first off, Mr.
Chairman, um.
Proximity we are to like.
Many other nationally known
recreational areas like Moab,
you know, people who are
traveling there and traveling
from there, tend to stop in San
Juan County, spend, spend the
night in San Juan County and uh
we, we also are growing our,
our, our recreational community,
you know, we have choke Cherry
Canyon, Glen Glen Run
recreational Canyon and so
there, um, I'm starting to see a
lot more use of these.
Off, off-road vehicles, Mr.
Chairman, and uh my, my question
is, um, what's the, uh,
What's the
Um
There, there are also a
difference between, uh, you
know, um, policy or the, the,
the, the, uh, the laws of, of,
of.
Of um
Using these on BLM lands like
I'm just trying to understand
is, uh, like with with this
apply, uh, you know, I
understand that the
municipalities and counties will
will will have control of this,
and I'm I'm just also trying to
understand is, is there also
concern, uh, when it comes to
like BLM land or other other
other uh lands, as state lands.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Hernandez. So
actually we could be on BLM land
now, that's off-road mostly,
right? And you get off on these,
and I'm assuming that's what
you're asking if you can go on
these uh uh dirt roads and stuff
that they have, you can do that
now. What we're, what we're
trying to do is, let's just say
you have, if you ever take, do
you have an onyx, do you have an
Onyx uh app if you guys have an
onyx map, it literally show you
all the state land, private
land, and it's, it's a hunting
app that lets you know.
when you're in compliance to
your, your section where you're
hunting, right? Your unit. And
so sometimes this is
checkerboarded with that private
land, uh, and, and these other,
these other state lands, right?
So, and it lets you know where
you're well where when you're in
wilderness for service when
you're on, on, on the lens that
you just talked about, so this,
it, but you can cut across all
those as long as you stay on the
on the on the uh on the road
that's been cut there.
What this would do is sometimes
those trails will loop over.
And there's a state highway that
connects, let's say in, in the
Mimbres area where I live, uh,
where it just connects it's a
big loop and so you they go up
and then they come around and
they drop back down onto the
state highway, and they've our
county has approved certain
sections, but then there's other
sections that are not, and it's
difficult to know where you can
and can't. It's just
checkerboarded. And I think this
is, that's get the, the out of
state people that come in and
they, they buy that that permit
and the automatic.
oh, I got a permit to write on
the on the on the big streets
and they can't. The other thing
is in.
Silver City right in the middle
of town, Hudson Street, because
Hudson is 90 and 180 comes
through there.
You can, you can write on all of
the paved streets around it, but
you can't be on those two
streets.
Even though they're only 35
miles an hour, you can cross
them.
So you got people doing all
kinds of weird stuff rather than
just going up. Now, just for
everyone's um information.
Uh
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representatives is you have to
have all of the to qualify for
this, you have to have your
mirrors and you have to have
your brake lights and signal
lights. You've got to have your
seat belts, you've got to have
all the safety equipment in
order to qualify to do this. You
can't just jump on a deal and
take off. You've got to have all
the proper equipment to to do
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The checkerboard really
connected with my community.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't
have any questions for the
presenter. I, I understand what
the bill is and I'm gonna vote
for it, but I did wanna thank
Mr. and Mrs. Gaines for coming
up here, uh, and the
representative for carrying a
bill that they care about,
particularly in light of the
fact that they don't have a
district rep at this time.
Which is unbelievable, but
anyway.
vote for your bill. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
What is the will of the
committee?
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Morning. I, I
appreciate this bill very much.
I do have a few questions, so,
um, so a little better
representative, so, um, I have.
And lots of tituents saying this
is so confusing, and we want to
be compliant, but verify things
a little bit so.
Um, I think this bill would
really help with that.
And I wonder if Mr. Chairman,
the state rid of this.
Uh, task, um, apparently, um,
they don't deal with it very
often and it.
I really do believe that the
local officials elected
authorities, they know, trust
them.
To, um, pass ordinances and.
Very workable, but one question
I do have.
I'm driving down
The road, Mr. Pyramid paved road
and I'm all of a sudden here
comes an off-road vehicle
probably going a little slower
than I might be going. Um, what,
what do we think about the other
motorists when we look at
something.
Mr. Pier.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Brown, again, I've, I've got, I
have one and I've operated mine
and, and when they get, people
are doing it right now.
It's just probably not.
Problems of access on certain
roads. It's kind of weird
because then they, which I think
is more dangerous, but um when
you come across again, you have
to have all those, all your
All those uh safety features on
your, on your, on the other
thing is they're almost the size
of a of a of a small car. I
mean, these things are, they're
not little bitty tiny things
these are.
Big vehicles that uh you know,
maybe aren't weren't designed
just for streets, off-road, but
they're, they, they can be used
there. I mean, they're.
I don't, I don't see any
difference from that to, I think
it's safer than a moped going
down the the road. So, I mean,
I, I don't know how to say that.
I, I, I think it stands out a
lot more, nothing against uh
motorcyclists, it catches your
attention a little bit more.
That's, I don't know if that
answers your question.
Yes, I, I think it does, Mr.
Chair representative, uh, these
aren't go-karts. I, I've been to
one of the.
Sellars we have in our in our
community and I was really
actually impressed by some of
these vehicles very.
Very popular too.
So
Um, Mr. Chairman, I uh,
I, I do I really want to
understand, um, letting the
locals.
Thank you. What is the will of
the committee, please?
We have a Peter Armstrong and a
second by Rank.
OK, if you take a roll, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Barrego,
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Doo.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Buckman Bha.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Yes.
Representative Romero? Yes.
Vice chair Latta.
Yes.
Chara de la Cruz. Yes.
Pass.
You have a due pass on your
bill.
Mr. Chair, um,
I don't know if this is proper
for me to ask, Mr. Chair. Let
me.
No, we have a bill ahead of you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Members, we are moving on to HB
310, Representative Ortez.
You wish to
Introduce your expert, please do
so, and begin your presentation.
Uh, I have with me Deborah
Kaeloff with Western Resource
Advocates. We're here to talk
about House Bill 310, um, I'm
back like the zombie batteries
that we're bringing back to
life. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
gonna go.
We do have a
OK, so we have motion is that a
motion Representative?
We have mostly, we have a
second.
A more second in the opposition
to that?
OK, let's move forward.
Great, so I'll just do a buildup
is um this bill uh puts a needed
policy framework in place to
manage their when they're
removed from the vehicle at the
end of the bill provides clear
guidance, um, which is
insufficient at the um we this
bill ensures that the batteries
are not landfilled.
Or uh used in other improper
ways, and it really makes sure
that those batteries can be
reused again, remanufacturers
those remanufactured those
batteries are values, so we want
to make sure that we to handle
the batteries, uh, when that car
is no longer batteries and make
sure those batteries do, um.
That's really what the bill
does, and I want to tell you a
little bit about the committee
substitute and why we brought
it, um, it removes the battery
state of health requirement of
specialized battery recyclers,
and it moves the legislation
effectively to 2027. Uh, it
clarifies that vehicle
manufacturers, not the dealers
are considered battery
providers, and it ties this act
with existing and removes a
prohibition on regulating, um,
and these changes were that is
what the committee.
Institute stand for questions.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in support of the
bill.
If you are in support and wish
to speak, please line up behind
the presenters.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Dan
Najar representing waste
management, we strongly support
the prohibition on batteries
being not realized the hazard
that batteries of any size pose
in landfills, they cause fires,
they can even explode. So we
stand in support of this bill.
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
in our 35,000 members and
supporters. We stand in support
of HB 310. Electric car
batteries like other consumer
and transportation products are
manufactured using natural
resources that are extracted
from our earth.
As with any product we use, we
should think about the impact
that the extraction of
components used in its
manufacture, as on our air,
water, land, and workers
involved. And when the
extraction of those components
is costly and impacts our
environment, as with the
production of many modern day
car batteries. It makes end of
life recovery and reuse of those
resources wherever possible.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
Howard Hutchinson registered
lobbyist for the coalition of
Arizona and Mexico counties.
Many of our New Mexico counties
operate landfills, and we
appreciate this legislation
being brought forward to protect
those landfill landfill
operators.
And also the responsible
recycling and disposal of those
batteries.
Thank the sponsor and thank you
Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is Tim
Peterson, and I'm here for
Lutheran advocacy Ministries, we
also, uh, lobby with the
Presbytery of Santa Fe and the
New Mexico Council of Churches,
and we support this bill because
it will care for creation and
the future.
of our state. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
online?
Ashley seaward.
Hello all. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
OK, I don't think my camera went
on, but uh I am, I am here and
as long as you can hear me,
that's great. Uh, Cheer Cruz,
members of the House
Transportation and Public Works
and Capital Improvements
Committee. My name is Ashley
Seward, and I'm testifying on
behalf of Redwood Materials. We
would like to express our
support for HB 310, uh, but with
some amendments, Redwood
materials is building the first
US-based close loop supply chain
for lithium ion batteries, and
this involves the collection,
recycling, and remanufacturing
of batteries into critical
materials that can then be used.
To create new batteries, um, as
stated so far, EV batteries are
not waste. They contain high
value materials that are managed
by licensed professionals
throughout their life cycle.
Redwood in the market are
already meeting the goals and
intentions of this bill, but we
do see merits encouraging
responsible end of life
management within statute. HB
310 achieves this and creates by
creating a streamlined
market-driven framework that
ensures responsible management
and balanced uh accountability
across the value chain.
This bill is the result, as
stated again, uh, of stakeholder
discussions and lessons learned
from the first EB battery
management law in New Jersey and
policy considerations in
California. Uh, Redwood has led
the development of battery
management across the country.
Thank you so much for your time.
Evan Horn
Hi, my name is Devin Horn. I'm
senior lead policy advisor for
batteries at Rivian Automotive
for an American EV manufacturer
and our mission is to keep the
world adventurous forever. Uh,
we very much support the
responsible management of EV
batteries and thank the
committee for your leadership
and drafting.
Legislation that does so, while
we would prefer uh a national or
industry voluntary program
instead of a state by state
model, we recognize and
appreciate New Mexico's
leadership, uh, in creating the
most practical and implementable
bill currently under
consideration. We agree and
strongly support the transfer of
responsibility upon modification
of the battery to a secondary
handler, or secondary user,
along with the labeling that
makes clear the requirements,
uh, for end of life
responsibility post.
We also support the removal of
the state of health requirements
from this bill. State of health
is something that Rivian can
provide during a battery's
vehicle life cycle, but we
cannot guarantee the accuracy
once the battery is removed, the
battery management system, which
estimates the state of health is
designed for in-vehicle use.
Thank you for your
consideration, uh, in
considering Rivian's
perspective. Thank you.
Emile Nussbaum.
She Erus members of the
committee, thank you so much for
your time. My name is Emil
Nussbaum. I'm with the
Automotive Recyclers
Association. We represent 1100
automotive recycling facilities
throughout the country,
including New Mexico, and we're
supportive of the bill with
amendments, uh, and we
particularly appreciate the fact
that the bill is essentially
adopting the battery management
hierarchy to reuse, repurpose,
remanufacture batteries prior to
being recycling in order to
maximize the existing value of
batteries. However,
we are very supportive of the
state of health language in
terms of battery data, which is
absolutely essential for all
vehicle owners in terms of
acquiring a used vehicle and
especially important in making
sure that batteries can be
reused and repurposed, uh, so
therefore, this also promotes uh
safe handling as well as safe
transportation and ARA is
already currently obtaining
battery state of health data
similar to what was in the
originally introduced bill uh
from a couple of the OEMs and a
pilot programmer running with
our members, so it.
is possible and our members
don't need proprietary
information. They just need a
basic condition under a
conditional.
Hi. Thank you.
John logged on.
Good morning.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jean
Logston, and I represent the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. We enthusiastically
support this bill because it's
part of the circular economy to
be able to re a purpose.
Materials that still have some
useful life, and certainly we
want to keep these dangerous
items out of any kind of
landfill, uh, or an illegal
landfill, uh, and so, uh, this
is something that is extremely
important to the welfare of
future New Mexicans. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Do we have any anyone
in opposition to the bill in the
audience of so, please raise
your hand. Do we have anyone
online in a.
Catalina
the persons and members of the
committee, good morning. My name
is Catalina Gerri and I
represent LKQ Corporation. LKQ
is the global leading auto
recycler and provider of
aftermarket recycle recycle
remanufacturing and specialty
auto parts, our facility in
Albuquerque is located in House
District number 10. We
appreciate the time to meet with
committee members last week in
person to address our concerns
in opposition to this bill. The
bill as amended is not currently
addressing our concerns for the
whole remanufacturing and
recycling industry, House Bill
30.
defeats environmental and auto
recycling efforts by imposing
end of life and financial
responsibilities that belong to
vehicle and and battery
manufacturers on recycling
entities, HP 310 deviates from a
traditional extended producer
responsibility program by
shifting responsibility away
from original producers and
downstream to where
environmental friendly entities
such as auto dismantlers and
remanufacturers. Vehicle and
battery manufacturers should be
held accountable for the
products they manufacture and
originally placed on the
market, recycling entities such
as remanufacturers should not be
targeted as a battery producer.
We appreciate the opportunity to
provide input and we ask you to
vote no.
Sandy
Thank you. Uh, good morning,
Chairman Dela Cruz and members
of the committee. My name is
Sandy Blaylock, and I'm at the
executive director of the New
Mexico Recyclers Association on
behalf of our members and
majority of which are small
family, multi-generational
businesses. I am here to express
our opposition to provisions in
House Bill 310 that would impose
undue responsibility for hybrid
and electric vehicle battery,
recycling on secondary handlers
like auto recyclers. We fully
support environmental
responsibility.
and ensuring that all automotive
parts are handled responsibly
and profitably, but shifting the
burden of end of life vehicle
battery management onto our
industry is misaligned with the
principles of the extended
producer responsibility.
Additionally, the market
conditions in New Mexico create
significant challenges for
licensed recyclers, as the
majority of vehicles are
purchased by unlicensed and
unregulated buyers, further
complicating our ability to
manage vehicle recycling
effectively. How will
oversight of those batter buyers
be managed. We urge you to
consider that these provisions
and adopt a solution that holds
original producers accountable
by supporting the expertise.
Thank you, that's all of the.
For and against, uh, we have.
First Representative Armstrong,
is that correct? Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for, uh, thank you for
your amendments. Um, I, I
appreciate a lot of those, um,
one of the questions I have is,
why are we exempting
manufacturers without a
franchise agreement.
Armstrong, we are not exempting
manufacturers without look at
the definition of battery
provider that is in the bill,
um, it is a multi-part
definition and so while the
first definition is a vehicle
manufacturer that has a
franchise agreement, um, if no
such party exists, it goes to
the second sub bullet of that
definition, which is the owner
or licensee of a brand that is
sold or distributed into New
Mexico and
So under that definition, it
would be a manufacturer that
does not work with franchised
auto dealers and so those are
not um excluded from the bill.
Thank you, um.
Mr. Chairman and, and ma'am, so
why do we have two separate, why
don't, why don't we have some
kind of language that
incorporates everything.
So, given the complex Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Armstrong, given the complex
landscape of all the different
entities that could be
considered battery providers,
um, this definition breaks it
down into those entities and the
language in that sub bullet one,
that vehicle manufacturer that
has a franchise agreement with
the entity that initially sells,
um, was actually developed and
amended in cooperation with the
New Mex.
go A Dealers Association, they
requested that specific language
about a vehicle manufacturer
that has a franchise agreement
to clarify that for those
franchises auto dealerships, the
responsibility lies with the
vehicle manufacturer and not
with the dealership.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
so Tesla and Revian are captured
in this.
Bill. Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Armstrong. Yes, it is correct
that they are captured in this
bill.
OK, thank you for that. And Mr.
Chairman and Representative.
Can you tell me what a spent
battery is the definition of a
spent battery.
And where that might be located
in your bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong, it's.
Because we didn't read out that
number.
you do have the number710.4.
OK. Thank you. Important to
check, um, on page 5Q, spent
battery means a propulsion
battery for which costs
associated with reuse,
repurposing.
The battery from the vehicle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for pointing that out
to me. And can you tell me, um,
were you working with the
recycling entities.
And um
Were they at the table and, and,
and can you give me a little bit
of background about why we might
have some that are on Mr.
Chairman, Representative
Armstrong. Yes, the definition
of spent battery was worked on
with a variety of stakeholders,
um, including the recycling
industries, uh, American Auto
Recycling Association, who spoke
in support online, um, which is
the umbrella group nationally
for auto recyclers. Um, I
believe that the concerns that
you are referencing that were
brought forth by OKQ.
are specifically, um, we believe
that when there is a product as
complex as an EV battery, which
has numerous modules and cells
which can be refurbished and
replaced, um, and reconfigured
that.
It is a product that is complex
enough that if an entity makes
those changes, it is not fair
nor valid as a policy to hold
the initial producer of that
battery, um, as the responsible
entity when such significant
changes have been made, I think
that when you're talking about a
product like an EV battery, it
does make sense to have that
provision that if the battery is
significantly modified, um, that
the responsibility.
for that battery at the end of
its life passes to the entity
that has made those changes.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That was a very good explanation
to me. I didn't understand that
part. Um, you have to understand
where I'm coming from, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, I
have a superfund site in my
district.
From a battery manufacturer.
And so, um, that for many, many
years ago. And so I'm, I'm
concerned about, of course, I
don't want these put into a
landfill or anything else, and
so, um, I, I.
will be supporting your bill,
um, as long as you had all those
entities at the table and and.
Um
Thank you, Representative
Representative Doo.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Representative.
And I, I really appreciate you
guys bringing the changes that
were addressed. I, I still.
I, when I was first reading the
amendment, I'm like, OK, good,
because.
Our franchises and our auto
dealers are not modifying a
battery.
But Mr. Chair and
Representative, when you started
describing what the spent
battery mint.
And now I'm trying to modify
means removed.
Mr. Chair and Representative Doo
modify does not mean remove, um,
and you can see that in the
definition of treatment, which
is in section one, it describes
a number of activities which are
exempt from being considered
treatment, and that includes
just removing the battery, um,
discharging the battery and
other simple tasks that might be
performed just in kind of the
removal and storage process of a
battery and so.
It is not intended that the
simple removal of a battery from
a vehicle or even tasks that
might be associated with safely
storing that battery, um, should
be viewed as modifying a
battery. It's things like
removing modules from a battery
pack and other significant um
alterations.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
So walk me through this because
on page 7.
Um, line 16, section 4. New
material responsible entity for
spent batteries. The responsible
entity for a spent battery shall
be the battery provider unless
the secondary holler or
secondary user has modified the
battery. I'll start right there.
And then the definition you just
gave.
were spent battery.
On page 5, line 24, spent
battery means the propulsion
battery for which costs asso
associated with reuse,
repurpose, remanufacturing.
Or recycling the battery present
a burden for the secondary
handler or has
Or secondary user that has
removed the battery from the
vehicle. What am I missing Mr.
Chair Representative Doo. So
essentially the spent battery
definition is kind of the
failsafe for any battery that is
removed by a secondary handler
or a secondary user if they for
whatever reason, do not feel
that they have the expertise,
um, or the skill set necessary
to be able to take that battery
and either reuse, repurpose.
manufacture it, um, or get it to
an appropriate recycler. They
are able to contact the battery
provider, um, which generally
will be the auto manufacturer
and that auto manufacturer will
be responsible for coordinating
the necessary activities for
that battery, which was referred
to as a spent battery, um, and
so I'm a bit confused by your
question representative Doo
because the spent battery and um
the modification are.
separate, um, I hope that
answers your question, Mr. Chair
and Representative Doo. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. It does. And
then,
You mentioned a recycling
entity. How many recycling
entities do we have in New
Mexico when we're and
representative Doo. So for the
definition of specialized
battery recycler, um, those are
recyclers that are equipped to
handle, um, these batteries and
that use technology that can
recover critical minerals, um,
currently this is an incredibly
nascent industry, um, in the
United States just because there
are not many of these batteries
that have.
the end of their life, um, and
then required to be recycled,
and so really some of the only
um recycling facilities equipped
to deal with these batteries are
currently low, um, and then I
believe that there's also a
recycling facility that is being
constructed in South Carolina,
um, but these are very, very few
and far between these
facilities. Thank you, thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative, who pays?
To get them to Nevada and pays
for the disposal. Who pays for
that?
Mr. Chair Representative Dao. So
under this bill, um, with a
spent battery, the entity that
would be required to.
Um, coordinate that would be the
battery provider in most cases,
or if the battery has been
modified by the responsibility
would then fall to them.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representatives. So, Elon Musk
is going to have to pay.
To have these batteries, Mr.
Chair and Representative Doo in
the case of a battery that was
originally produced by Tesla and
say that vehicle has been
totaled and towed to a Tesla
service center, um, that.
Would be the responsibility of
Tesla to safely remove that
vehicle battery and then ensure
that it is transported to a
specialized Thank you, thank
you. I have one more question,
Mr. Chair and Representative, is
there a penalty for
noncompliance and what is
Doo, so the committee
substitute, um, tie the existing
hazardous waste statutes, um,
that are in New Mexico and so
the penalties, um, would vary
based on the exact um.
Issue, but they would be the
penalties that are already
existent for hazardous waste
mishandling, um, for those Mr.
Chair and I, I don't know what
those are. Can you tell me what
they are representing?
Um, Mr. Charon Representative
Doo, so it really varies based
on the violation. So for
example, if a battery was
unsafely transported to um the
recycler that would be one type
of violation, whereas if the
battery was improperly disposed
of instead of being transported
to the recycler, that would be
another type of violation, and
so it's just a bit difficult to
give you one specific answer
about what the exact penalty.
should be. OK, Mr. Chair and
Representative, why, why don't
we just say manufacturer versus
when when does the the New
Mexico owned and operated
franchise or secondary dealer.
If they do not modify the
battery, in what other way could
they become responsible for this
if they do not modify the
battery or any.
They remove it, they
How
What is the risk that remains
with the amendment to a New
Mexico dealer.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo, I
would say that we have
eliminated the risk to the New
Mexico dealer, I think the only
issue that I can conceive of is,
um, if for whatever reason a
manufacturer is the dealer, but
again, they are the legal entity
that is responsible for the
battery, um, provider definition
and so from this bill, there is
no uh risk or scenario in which
a New Mexico dealer who did not
modify the battery and simply
removed it would be help.
as the responsible entity.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Hoffman V. Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
the bill. Um, I want to start
off by saying thank you, um, I
have been worried about this
issue since we started.
Mass manufacturing electric
vehicles, and I know that
battery recycling has been kind
of a mystery issue for a lot of
us for a long time and um to
have all of these very large
lithium ion, highly toxic
batteries kind of swimming
around, um, I think made a lot
of us nervous, so I'm really
glad to see, um, you grabbing
the bull by the horns on a
policy from a policy
perspective, I do, um, have a
couple of questions as to the
process, and I think it's just
because I'm still confused.
myself, um, and so what would
really help me, Mr. Chairman
Representative, is just talking
through scenarios, so let's say
we have a, a Model S that has
been abandoned at the side of
the road, plates taken off, we
have no idea who.
Towing yard, um, what happens
then is that the responsibility
of the towing yard to then get
in charge with the battery
provider who is then in charge
of.
Properly disposing of the
battery.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Hoffman V. Hill, thank you for
that question. Um, so first, I
want to be clear that these are
really valuable commodities, and
so it's possible that when it
gets towed to that yard, um,
that this will actually be
something where the owner of
that enterprise will be able to
remove that battery and then
sell it, um, but if the case is
that the battery is damaged or
they do not feel that they are
able to remove it and handle it.
Um, they would be able to call
the vehicle manufacturer, so in
this case, Tesla, and as soon as
Tesla was notified of the fact
that that that battery exists,
um, they would be the
responsible entity. There is a
responsibility on the owner, um,
of the yard where it's taken to
to make that initial call to the
vehicle manufacturer because the
vehicle manufacturer has to be
able to know where that vehicle
is and where that battery is.
But as soon as that quality of.
vehicle manufacturer. OK, thank
you very much, Mr. Chairman and
and representative because that
was one of my concerns is how do
battery producers know where all
of their vehicles are dissed or
they don't know where they are
so, um, I, I, I want a little
more clarification, Mister
Speaker, um.
Representative
For the secondary handler.
Definition, can you just break
that down for me and plain
terms, who who was a secondary
handler versus a producer, Mr.
Chair Representative Hoffman B.
Hill. So,
lottery provider is generally
going to be the entity that
initially manufactures the
battery, um, like we said in the
vast majority of cases that is
going to be the auto
manufacturer, but it's also
possible and the reason we have
that extremely extensive
definition is that there are
fringe cases, for example, um,
if you were to repower a
vehicle, um, you might go to a
specialty auto shop and simply
buy um an electric vehicle
propulsion battery that doesn't
come in a vehicle, so that's
kind of.
that definition is so long and
wonky, and then for secondary
handlers, um, generally those
are going to be entities like.
Auto recyclers, um, as well as
any sort of business that, uh,
repairs batteries, so that could
be like a specialty, uh,
Traditionally could be
remanufacturing facilities, um,
so facilities that take
batteries that perhaps can't be
directly reused, um, and then
are able to refurbish them to
either sell back to the vehicle
manufacturer that that battery
originated from, um, or for
another use case.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman Representative. So in
the case of you have a vehicle
that's at an auto recycling, um.
Business or location.
As the primary responsibility,
the producer or is it gonna be
the recycler.
Mr. Chair Representative Hoffman
B. Hill. So in the event that
the auto recycler, um, does not
want to um sell or otherwise
send to recycling the battery.
They are not obligated to.
They're only obligation is to
make that initial contact, um,
with the battery providers, so
most likely the vehicle
manufacturer and then it becomes
the responsibility of the
vehicle manufacturer, and that's
why the definition.
spent battery, um, is so.
Open is because we don't want
there to be any situation in
which a secondary handler,
secondary user has a battery and
feels that they are unable to
dispose of it or don't know what
to do. We always want there to
be that failsafe where they can
call the battery provider and it
becomes the battery provider's
responsibility
that leads me to um my next and
I hope to be final question.
I, I understand again, love the
bill, love the premise of the
bill, I understand, um.
why you've set up this process,
but the thing I can't quite get
my head around is why not just
make.
Whoever's name was last on the
title of the vehicle, the person
responsible for disposal of the
proper disposal of the battery.
Why, why are we putting this on
the the battery manufacturers or
providers.
Mr. Chair Representative Hochman
D. Hill, um,
We determined that given the
fact that this is a large
battery, it's thousands of
pounds and that these are
batteries that are ignitable and
can be extremely dangerous. We
did not want to place any
responsibility on the consumer.
Um, we didn't want anyone in
their garage thinking that it
would be a good idea to pop the
hood and try to figure out how
to get one of these batteries
out, um, additionally, the auto
manufacturers that we have
worked with have been.
supportive of this, um, they
want this circular economy to be
able to get these batteries back
because really the most valuable
material for making new
batteries is old batteries that
have the exact chemistry and
composition that they are
seeking to make new batteries
out of. And so they would like
these materials to return to
them when possible.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman and and Representative,
and if you could just um repeat
for me the answer to the
question that Representative Doo
asked, Is there both who do not
properly dispose, Mister Chair
Representative Hoffman B. Hill.
Yes, there is a penalty
associated with this bill, um,
this bill, uh, adds the penalty
sections that are under the
existing hazardous waste Act in
New Mexico statute, um, which
has very specific penalties for
embryos.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you.
ranking member Brown.
Yes, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
say
because it's so complicated,
really, and I think we all
agree, Mr. Chair, that we go for
the obvious reasons.
Certainly the reasons stated.
Um
I guess I'd like to go back to
the question of the stakeholders
with whom you consulted, so if
you would just run down that
list, and this is regarding at
least the committee substitute,
and you may have consulted with
others, with the, uh, Mr. Chair,
if you could just give us that
one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Brown. Um, a
number of stakeholders, I'm
going to read them out, that's
OK. Uh, Mexicore department,
plug in America, Tesla, Redwood
Materials, um, the US, uh, life
cycle Union of Concerned
Scientists, Rivian, Earth
justice, earthworks, CalSTA.
Automobile recycling, Gaya NRDC
Green Latinos, portable,
rechargeable battery
association, Serba.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much.
It's a very long list. And so
were they personally consulted
or did you just look at, say,
something they had written.
About, about this issue.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
all of those entities were
personally consulted.
Thank you. And, and Mr. Chair,
so LKQ letter when we heard the
original bill from them, they
were not in favor of the bill.
For the people at sulted over
the of Mr. Mr. Chair
Representative Brown, LKQ is
technically represented by the
automobile recycling
association, um, which is in
spoken support of this bill
earlier, unfortunately, we were
not able to make a personal
connection with LKQ until a few
weeks ago, so they were not as
involved as some of the entities
representative Ortez read out,
but we have met with them, um.
Unfortunately, we were unable to
reach an agreement because as I
um explained in a previous
answer, we believe that with the
complexity of these batteries,
that significant modifications
like the remanufacturing that
LKQ performs, um, make it so
that that entity that does that
remanufacturing should be the
responsible entity at the end of
the battery's life.
Thank you for that. So I, um, I
have a concern that LKQ thinks
this bill.
I think the point they're
they're trying to make is.
Because it's, it's end of life
disposal.
So I'm concerned about that, but
Mr. Chair, let me move on to the
next thing.
So, um, Rick Hoffman v. Hill
brought up something that I was
wondering about, and that's
about say a towing company.
scenario towing company.
Uh, toes and um.
It's abandoned the, the owner of
the vehicle abandons it, so.
It's sort of a bailment.
Uh, so ultimately, I believe you
said the tow truck company needs
to call.
The manufacturer of the battery
Chair Representative Brown, it
would not be the total company,
The manufacturer of the battery
Chair Representative Brown, it
would not be the Tocha country
company. It would instead be um
the operator of the salvage yard
chair and represent, so I'm, I'm
looking at her.
It's not gone foral tow truck
Company.
Just for a long time.
My understanding, Mr. Chair,
that companies can catch fire,
that a lot of them are faults.
The story so
I, I think I'm Mr. Chair and
Representative Brown, I am
unfamiliar with the process, um,
that needs to happen before an
abandoned vehicle that has been
not been marked as salvage, um.
Can have the battery removed as
well as have its constituent
parts, um, scrapped, and so I'm
unfortunately unable to answer
your question on that exact
scenario.
Um, so I appreciate that, um,
yeah, I, I do have a concern
there that we need to work to
spend time and effort and, and,
uh, you know, people's uh money
trying to get a resolution. I do
have a.
But
I can foresee some.
action over over this. So one of
the questions I have is how do
you know?
The battery has been stayed.
chair and Representative Brown,
um, in the bill, there are
battery labeling provisions and
so when a battery is modified or
remanufactured, the entity that
does that is required to relabel
that battery to make it clear
that they have modified it, um,
and that is a provision of this
bill that requires that entity
to mark the fact that they have
modified that battery.
OK, that makes sense, um, I hope
people are compliant about that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, um,
Also wonder if
When you were working on this
bill.
At the start, if you considered.
Sort of like a joint and several
the original manufacturer and
whoever.
Something to that bad you looked
at perhaps.
And what I'm thinking of the uh
recycle or the uh.
Remanufacturer might say, well,
original, we touch it and you're
holding us responsible for it.
So have you considered kind of a
shared responsibility and if.
If so, what made
Mr. Chair and Representative
Brown, thank you for that
question. Um, I first want to be
clear that just because a
remanufacturer touches a battery
if they haven't modified it, um,
they are not the responsible
entity until modifications have
been made, they always have the
opportunity to say, you know,
this battery is defective, it's
unable to be remanufactured. I'm
going to call up the battery
provider. It is their
responsibility, um, and on the
joint and severable liability
piece, uh, we did.
briefly consider that. However,
it just got to be extremely
complex on exactly how that
liability would be pieced out
and so we felt that it was
appropriate that if an entity
did make significant changes,
given that they have the
opportunity up until they make
those changes to contact the
battery provider that the
liability would be transferred.
Thank you, and I, I think I was
being um.
Moderate when I said touch the
battery. I did mean modify the
battery. So I, I guess.
My
I do believe this is an
improvement this committee said
over the original bill.
and
Um, and I
My mind is going to the question
of what's happening in other
parts of the country on this.
Imagine you
Do a survey and maybe down this,
but
Right now I'm just a little
concerned it's that this bill
would actually retarded.
Recycling or not again, it's
kind of putting the the well,
I'm calling it liability, but
you're saying it's responsible
in the kind of the midstream uh
space of things, so I want to
vote for the bill, but I just
OKQ I, I know.
But um it's my understanding
it's the largest recycler.
I heard that the last time we
did that, I make sure that we
have something everybody can
live with, but thank you, I know
I'm um.
I, I do appreciate everything
you've done here.
Thank you.
Representative, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and uh thank yous
representative and your, your
witness.
Um
I, I really appreciate that you
did this, um, I personally did a
little bit of research cause I
was thinking about doing a bill
similar to this.
Um, because I was concerned
about battery.
The batteries and what happens
to them and the disposal and all
that sort of thing. Um, so I did
some reading about how the
batteries are dismantled.
And, and what element it is that
that actually makes these
batteries run, um,
And what is reused in the
battery.
With the, the, you know.
Parts is parts.
Um
I really appreciate all of the
the uh.
All of our representatives
questions because it really
helped me.
Um, think through a lot of
questions that I have.
But
And I appreciate your your
discussion because it it was
very logical and followed very
logical steps, but I also know
that there's a population out
there that's not very logical.
Um, and seeing these new cars,
it's like.
You know, um,
What
How would we educate the public
in thinking that, um, how would
we educate the public to know
that they have that these
batteries are special. I mean,
there's a lot of thieves out
there, guys.
And uh we were trying to see if
Tesla's could be could be stolen
and we figured out cameras and,
you know, or even if they broke
into your car and took the
battery.
Um
So I'm just wondering, is there
like an education program around
disposal of batteries and how
it's gonna be done and we have
some sort of a.
I don't know, an education
process for the public.
Mr. Car was in where I go, um,
we surely need one, but it's
not. I'm, I'm glad some of the
DOT folks are sitting in the
audience listening to this
discussion.
But you know.
I, I mean.
And I and I said that
respectfully that, you know,
you're very logical about
things, but.
They're in the real world, I
must live in the real world.
Things are not always logical,
and especially in urban areas
like Albuquerque or Santa Fe or
Las Cruces, where we have people
stealing vehicles right and
left.
And breaking into houses and
breaking into people's, you
know, um.
Private, um,
Properties, um, it concerns me
some that, you know.
Maybe a thief might think, hey,
here's the battery. I'm gonna go
sell it, you know, they're doing
it with solar lights. They just
stole my mom's solar lights in
her backyard in Espanola that I
just put in this summer. So, you
know, I, I, I, it concerns me
some that.
Um
And I, and when we talk about
the real life.
Situation, you know, I, so I go
buy a Tesla and I'm like really
excited because I have a new
Tesla. I just went to um I went
downtown Albuquerque the other
day in a new Tesla in an Uber.
Beautiful car
And I was like, wow, this is
really nice. Maybe I should
consider buying one,
But you know, I just, I just
wonder like, so that battery,
you know, you take it out of
your car and people who around
the state are not all educated
on what a Tesla battery is.
Or the, the difference.
And they start working on their
cars.
You know, I mean, so I think
that the education element is
really, really important because
the more information.
Information that gets out.
I mean, the better, because
these batteries are dangerous.
And if they end up in a landfill
or in a in Arroyo.
Or somewhere or one of these
cars ends up in one of those
places.
Um, you know,
It could explode.
Or even in your front yard, if
somebody's tinkering with it.
So I, I just raised that
question because I and I know
it's not part of this bill, but
I think it's something that we
need to be thinking about.
Um
Can you expert explained to me
and just for all of us, for our
satisfaction and for our
education because I did read
about this.
How those batteries are
dismantled.
Chair Representative Brego,
first of all,
um.
to respond to your question, um,
I think that there is this
common misconception, which
again points to the need for
more education on this topic,
um, that an EV battery, the
vehicle propulsion battery is
perhaps similarly sized to the
vehicle battery in a gasoline
car, and that is simply not the
case, so the vehicle battery
that powers an EV actually
weighs thousands of pounds, um,
and so I think when you think
about.
Theft and things like that. It
isn't something like catalytic
converter theft where it's easy
to just take that one piece and
then cart it off, um, so I think
that is an important thing to
note. And then regarding how
these batteries are dismantled,
um, generally what will happen
is that a battery will be
removed and then it will not be
dismantled at say like a.
Auto shop or like at a dealer
service center, generally what
manufacturers will do is they
will have these batteries, um,
safely shipped back to a
facility where they can be
dismantled, um, also on the
dismantling begins is that they
will test the battery and see if
there are certain cells or um
packs of cells that are not
holding charge in any way, um,
and if at all possible, they
will only remove those cells
that are.
damaged or defective so that
they don't have to dismantle the
entire battery, um, if they do
need to dismantle the entire
battery, um, there are various
processes that they can take.
One is called um
hydrometallurgy, which is
essentially they are dissolving
the battery, um, so it really
depends on kind of is it
complete recycling, um, or is it
just to remove certain cells and
be able to refurbish that
battery for use again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
Madam Representative, um, and
your witness, I, I think it's
important to know that there are
elements within that battery
that can be reused.
And um that, you know, but your
local thief doesn't know that,
so you know, and and this
happened to us and I'm just
gonna give you an example in
Albuquerque our our um our
lights, our street lights, they
were, they were stealing the
copper out of the street lights
and we didn't think that they
could get into him, but they
did. And so the, I mean, you
know, thieves.
We'll get into whatever they
can, um, and I, and I just
raised that question because I,
you know, so let's just say I
own that Tesla and they break
into my in my front yard and my
car, and they try to take that
battery or they or they
dismantle it. Then what happens?
Do I have to call the
The dealer, or do I call the the
auto recycle place.
Mr. Cherry, Representative B
worker, I think you called the
cops first. Well,
yes,
batteries are 1000 pounds of
that hood and try to take out
that battery or or try to
dismantle it, but I'll I'll let
uh my.
This is the case.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brego,
um, another thing that in this
case is battery is not kind of
something where you pop the hood
and you can see it and it's
right there. Battery is actually
embedded kind of under the
chassis of the vehicle, um, so I
think that might be helpful
context, um, in the case that
you were describing, like all
the cops, um, and then after
that I imagine you would
probably call your car insurance
company, um, and then beyond
that, uh, whether you're able.
to receive a new battery or if
the battery is able to be
repaired, um, that with the
vehicle manufacturers center.
OK.
Alright, well, thank you for
that. I, I, I'm sorry, but you
know, I, I digressed a little
bit because, but I do.
Live in the real world and you
know.
Albuquerque is.
It is a tough place sometimes
and um there's not always um.
You know,
Logic in some of the things that
happen, um, but I, I do want to
stress that whole education
piece because I think that it's
really important that people
understand this new technology
and what what it um.
You know, I mean, obviously
we're seeing more and more of
these types of vehicles on the
road, and I think that's the
goal is that we want to see more
of that, but on the other hand,
you know, until that day comes,
I think that people need.
Throughout New Mexico to to have
understand, have an
understanding of what this is,
um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate your comments.
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll be
brief. Um, thank you, uh,
Representative and presenters,
um.
I'm gonna take high level.
Um
Um
Mr. Chairman Representative will
HB 310 encourage more electric
vehicle service centers in New
Mexico.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Fernandez, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative, um, where, where
I live, uh, I, um, in Salmon
County, we have what's called a
compacted tax credit.
Bill, your bill.
Encourage or bring in maybe a, a
Lithium ion recycling facility
in New Mexico.
Mr. Representative Hernandez,
uh, yes, I think because it
clears, it spells out clearly
what the process is and how you
handle these batteries.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, uh,
presenters over the summer, I
had the pleasure of spending
time with Congressman Joseph
Morali from Rochester, New York,
who just secured a lithium ion
recycling facility. There's also
a sister uh facility in Gilbert,
Arizona, that also does the
recycling of lithium ion
batteries. Mr. Chairman, uh,
there's a process known as black
mass, um, experts, are you
familiar with the, with that
term terminology?
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, yes, I am.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Getting to that black mass in in
the recycling process, um, Mr.
Chairman, um, Representative,
uh, an expert witness, would it
be possible to take our
batteries and give it to the
lithium ion facility and help
contribute to the bigger, you
know, picture of, of building
these.
Uh, recycled electric batteries.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, yes, emphatically
yes, and I think that's what's
so exciting about this bill is
that it encourages the circular
economy.
Thank you for sharing that
concludes my question.
Thank you
Representatives.
I'm sorry
Representative Jennifer Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Ortiz.
Clearly you've done a lot of
work and it's, it's complicated,
obviously, since there are so
many concerns as I've listened
to the questions.
Um
I just, I just wanted to clarify
one thing. Did you say that we
really don't have any spent
batteries yet. Did I hear that?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Jones, um, I wouldn't say that
we don't have any. I don't ever
like to use absolutes as a rule,
um, but I will say that
generally the vehicle propulsion
batteries, um, and.
Electric vehicles, um.
They often are very like a
Powerwall where it's residential
energy storage after they are
done being used as an electric
vehicle battery, um, and so
while we think that it's a case
of the spent battery definition
for any batteries that do tend
to be repurposed,
remanufactured, etc. etc. um,
for the most part, these
batteries are valuable
commodities and the batteries
that are in electric vehicles
and from vehicles that will very
much in use, um, either.
As vehicle batteries or
potentially in other use cases.
Mister Chair. There's, there's a
lot to learn about this, and
it's very complicated. And I
wonder since it, it's, it's not,
it isn't, it's an urgent issue
on, on the one hand, but since
we're not dealing with an
abundance of these batteries at
this.
Weight and, and really get the
details uh.
Hammered out, so we all can
agree that we have.
what this looks like, um, it is
anticipatory, but also I think
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chair, Representative, um, I
have no doubt it's a very
serious issue, and I just feel
like at this point I can't
support it in this in the state
that it's in, and I'd like to
see the details worked out, but
I do appreciate all the work
you've done. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.m.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do have
a couple of questions, uh, the
first is, and I, I listened to
it the first time, but maybe did
have an expert.
Why are we exempting
manufacturers that sell vehicles
without a franchise. Chair and
Representatives that sell
vehicles without a franchise
agreement. The battery provider
definition is multipart, um, and
so it essentially is that if you
don't qualify under 1, you go to
2. If you don't qualify under 2,
you go to 3 and manufacturers
that sell vehicles without a
franchise are captured in
subbullet 2 of that definition.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
um.
Another question I had which
might be a little off base, I
hope not, but is the uh.
Environment department, the
department then that is uh
respond it comes to liability
issues.
Lundstrom, yes, that is correct
and Bureau of the Environment
Department in developing this
bill.
Uh, I'm not sure what those
hazardous amounts are. Do you
have a sense of that?
If someone is in violation
Representative Lindstrom, um, so
again, it really depends that
there are penalties, for
example, for improper storage,
um, and those tend to be a fee
for every day that this
material, um, and then there are
also penalties for improper
disposal, um, and those.
So Mr. Chairman expert.
Yeah, I guess it would be like
an awful low amount as chairman
expert.
Dangerous, that kind of thing.
Do you have a you have a better
idea than a range of.
But I know that some act is up
to Mr. Chairman, I, I think
that's true when it comes to
water contamination if this
would fit into that or not,
maybe.
The other question that may be a
little um.
A little out of bounds, but I
want to ask it anyway.
I have, I have, um, a feeling.
As I've gone through and Google
this morning, all the agencies
that have been um.
That federal agencies that have
been under the dope. One of them
is has been the environment. I
just have a bad feeling and I
see it as an unfair potential
practice, Mister Chairman.
When you think about with that
potential conflict of interest
is.
Are we going to see those kinds
of funds cut to once this
particular manufacturer.
Yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we can't answer
that question, no one can at
this point, but I, I think, Mr.
Chairman, I do have some
concerns about that.
Um, so everybody else gets
dinged.
And uh so I'm not sure that that
this is particular. I um.
You know, been concerned about
this department of government.
I would imagine things around
the environment department and
has review also.
Count big on that federal money,
Mr. Chairman and
Rope to come to the state of New
Mexico to help us with
monitoring of this kind of
thing, so.
I don't know, Mr. Chairman
Representative, if I'm quite
ready to support this yet, but
um I like to see how the members
vote. I.
I just think it's an unfair
advantage, Mr. Chairman, for
Tesla. Thank you.
Thank you one more time,
Representative Ranking Member
Brown.
Thank you for the indulgence,
Mr. Chair. I, I just have 11
final question, I guess, and
that is, this is the act that
would promote responsible end of
life management.
Of electric vehicle.
Batteries. What happens if, uh,
Mr. Chair, I buy an EV and I.
I use it, and then
I just park it in my backyard
and don't use it anymore because
it's real, I'm done with it. The
battery really isn't or under
the committee substitute, what?
I'm not basically Mr. Chair. I'm
not doing anything with that
vehicle or that battery, it's
just gonna sit there for the
next 5 years, let's say.
would vary.
Yeah, and, and I think that's
what I'm thinking, Mr. Chair, is
there's no affirmative duty.
Somehow safely dispose of a
battery if the owner of the
vehicle just, it just sits there
and that's
Probably not a responsible, I
was just curious, thank you.
Thank you.
Representative, I, I, I think
all of us recognize the need
for.
Batteries are going to have to
be disposed of somewhere.
There's and I think the time is
gonna come for vehicles and the
batteries that are associated
with their time.
Um
And I will tell you I in another
life I was deputy director of
the Albuquerque Solid Waste
Department.
And one of our facilities was
Cer Colorado, which is probably
the largest landfill in the
state.
And everything ends up in the
landfill.
Everything.
Everything from electronics that
could be recycled.
Many things that could be
recycled still end up in the
landfill.
Um
And including things that
shouldn't be in the landfill.
Uh, and I will also share with
you members that.
Not every business is ethical.
And so it is not that.
Difficult to imagine that a big
honking battery that weighs 1000
pounds could end up in the
landfill, and the reason that
can end up in a landfill, you
say, well, how could that end up
in the landfill? Well, it easily
can land land up in the landfill
because.
The city and private businesses
provide what are called open big
containers, and they can have
lots and lots of construction
material in them. They can have
lots of variety of debris and
it's not.
Unimaginable that a big battery
could end up in the landfill.
The problem with a battery in
the landfill.
Is that if it ignites for any
reason.
One of the things that happens
in a landfill as material
degrades, it turns.
Creates methane gas.
And methane gas.
Is exactly that. It's flammable.
In fact, one of the projects
that we had at Cerro Colorado.
Because an adjacent facility was
MDC.
That's the county lockup. It's
the largest one in the state.
And so what we did is we were
able to pipe the methane gas.
From the landfill
To the jail
To heat the boilers.
That's how much gas is created.
And so we really, really need to
do something to.
Make sure that these batteries.
Don't end up in the landfill.
That being said,
There are questions about the
bill. There are gaps in the bill
that I see.
I'm actually going to support
this bill because I think that
it is urgent that we begin this
process.
But
Representatives gaps, I think
the members have called out the
gaps.
And so
I would encourage you that if
this.
Bill passes, you still continue
to look for amending it, and if
it doesn't get back.
So with that said,
Representative La.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm do
pass on house registration,
Public Works and capital
improvements Committee
substitute for hospital 30.
Thank you. We have a motion. Do
we have a second?
Take it.
A second from Representative
Romero.
And a third from representative
Hernandez.
Thank you. Let's go ahead and
take a roll.
Representative Armstrong.
pass.
Representative Borego.
House.
Representative Brown.
Uh
Mr. Chair, I
I am going to vote against the
bill, but I would like to
explain.
Representative Dow.
Mr. Cherno
And I like to
was that it? uh no.
Thank you to explain.
Representative Hernandez? Yes.
Representative Hoffman B Hill.
Yes, and I'd like to explain.
Representative Jones,
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Vierlata.
Yes.
De la Cruz.
Yes.
We had a, we had a Armstrong
class.
And Morego. So we'll start with
uh Representative Armstrong.
Uh, no.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my.
You have a
build it past to move on,
however we have.
A representative Brown to you,
Mr. Chairman.
This is one of those bills where
I could have gone. I'm casting a
no vote simply to signal.
The next commit that.
There were some issues.
He
Thank you, Do to explain.
Mr. Chair and representative
similar reasons. I, it's urgent.
We need to take care of it, but
we also need to get it right.
I'm a little, I have a little
bit of PTSD passing bills that
uh.
Don't they're not quite ready
and I'm, I'm glad we have time
on this one to get it right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Hotman
v. Hill to explain
and um.
Thank you, sponsor again for
bringing this bill. I choose,
um, and so I'm voting to advance
the bill, but I don't think the
bill goes far enough.
Actually, um, I think that
properly disposed of these types
of batteries should be levied on
everyone.
Um, every single person who is
driving these types of vehicles,
the producers that are selling
these types of vehicles, um,
secondary, uh, secondary
handlers of the batteries I.
Excuse me, just Mr. Chair
sponsor, I think that um right
now the way the bill is drafted,
it, it puts um little too much
responsibility on the producers
to do the right thing when
really it should be on all of us
to do the right thing. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Morego
to explain.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative. I, I
do feel that you're on the right
track.
Um, I think that, um.
As I mentioned that we really
need some serious education. I
mean, there were a lot of
questions on the podium today
regarding just how this industry
works and how we.
Envision it to work, um, I also
think that um we really need to
work with some of those recycle
companies that were up on the
screen, uh, opposed to this bill
and see how we can um.
You know
come to terms, maybe or maybe
not.
Um, but just really work a
little harder and I know you've
already worked really hard on
this, but.
To, you know, those those
companies are located a lot of
them in Albuquerque.
And um.
You know, we need to get a
little.
Thank you.
Members we have one more bill
hopefully represent the Rassas
isn't too far away, we have HB.
372 off-highway motor vehicle
act changes represent the Rassos
and Dao.
There he is
Representative Doll, do you want
to join him down?
Representative, go ahead and
proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you committee um HB.
372.
I've got an amendment, uh, Mr.
Chair, that
I apologize. Somehow there was
a.
Thank you, we have a motion in a
second. Anybody in opposition?
Go ahead and explain.
OK, uh, the, the amendment, Mr.
Chair, is basically online, on
page 2 line 9, strike out low
pressure and assert in lie
thereof.
Non-highway
On page 34, strike under and
insert in lieu thereof.
No greater than. So it's just
clean up, sir. It's, it's
tracking with HP, excuse me, SB
462. And so, um, it asked us to
kind of
Mirror that that language with
the amended bill.
So, uh, Mister, uh, committee,
basically this bill is mostly
clean up language. Um, I won't
go through each thing, but I'm
gonna just read the relating to
the motor vehicles, amending the
off-road motor Vehicle Act to
reflect changes in the, in the
off-road miracle.
Off-highway motor vehicle
industry and improved
registration enforcement and
responsiveness to the need of of
highway motor vehicle users. A
lot of this, um, there's just
because of the changes in sizes
of of these OHBs, uh, language
and it's all clean up, mostly
clean up, um, I don't want to go
through line by line, but it's
basically
Mostly just clean up so that um
when officers and and
registration issues, um, I'll
let my expert witness, uh, uh,
explain the bill a little more.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh, my name is
Christopher Johnson. I'm with
the Mexico off Highway Vehicle
Alliance, also known as Nimova,
and I speak here today in
support of House Bill 372 and
its companion legislation,
Senate Bill 462, 372 aims to
update and correct several
provisions of the Off-highway
Vehicle Act, uh, 66-3-1000 to
1021 NMSA. There are 4 major
elements to these amendments on
page 3, lines 3 through 10,
update the language.
in the act that defines what an
ROV is, that's a recreational
off-highway vehicle, uh, to add
to include new and future
machines that emerge on the
market, uh, these machines
exceed the currently defined
gross vehicle weight rating of
1750 pounds or they exceed the
defined engine displacement of
1000 cc's.
Uh, examples include the
gas-powered Polaris Razor Pro R
with a 2000 cc engine, uh, and
dry weight over 2300 pounds and
the electric Segway SX20T with
curb weight over 2700 pounds. On
page 4, line 25, and on page 5
lines 1 through 4, eliminate the
provision of the OHB Act that
provides for reciprocity between
New Mexico and other states
regarding OHV out of state
registrations. No other
neighbor.
ing states honor ourHB
registrations, uh, and yet we
honor theirs uh as a result, New
Mexico is foregoing non-resident
which registration revenue.
Uh, the Department of Game of
fish is authorized to sell a
non-resident OHB permits to
visitors, $18 for a 90 day
permit or $45 for a two-year
permit and $7 for a paved road
permit that never expires. When
game and fish sends these
permits to an out of state
buyer. They also include in the
packet a hard card that uh
describes New Mexico's OHB laws
and rules, and also has
information about safety and
responsible ethical.
be used if a non-resident uh
which user brings their
machines, uh, but relies on
their home state registration,
they don't mandatorily see this
information unless they happen
to check the game and fish
website or if they stop at one
of our ports of entry or if they
visit one of the uh visitor
centers and some of our tourist
destinations.
Um
On page 9, lines 3 through 9,
correct a flaw in the language
of the Act, the restricts no HB
operator under 18 from carrying
passengers and requires the
operator to have adult
supervision as it stands now, a
fully licensed 17 year old can
carry passengers in a car or
truck legally on uh New Mexico's
uh highways, uh, however, they
are not allowed to carry
passengers in and off-highway
vehicle being operated on public
lands, and a
teenager who passes are uh.
Uh, of every vehicle, sorry.
Or off highway vehicle education
requirements, uh, is, is uh
required to have parental
supervision. However, the, the
OHV Act as it stands now does
not permit uh that young
operator to have a parent or
guardian sitting in the
passenger seat and fulfilling
their role as a
Supervising adults.
Um
Uh, new mother wants to
emphasize that the fix for this
provision should only apply to
side by sides ROVs, uh, and it
should not apply to operators of
all terrain vehicles off highway
motorcycles or snowmobiles, and
it is not intended to apply.
Thank you to any of the
provisions we don't need the
entire bill. I, I think we're
good.
we have anybody in the audience
in support of the bill.
Raise your hand if you do.
If you wish to speak, please sta
stand chairman representatives.
We're here just to support this
bill, kind of cleaning up the
language on it, make a little
clearer, uh, for out of state
users and for local users. Thank
you.
Is there anybody on
Charles Warren, Charles, please
unmute you, Mike.
I'm sorry, sir.
My name is Charles Warren. I
live in Elephant Butte. I've
been an OHV enthusiast and
followed legislation on the
sport since Senator Steve
Neville's first bill allowing
OHVs on roadways back in 2016.
The sport and the vehicles have
changed radically since that
time. The purpose of House Bill
372 is to make necessary updates
and clarifications to our OHV
Act due to these changes in the
climate of our sport. When I
ride my OV in Colorado, Utah,
Arizona. I have to buy a pass
for $25.
New Mexico, on the other hand,
still provides reciprocity, free
riding for our neighboring
states. We're missing out on
funds for, for all the state
riders that come here. I've
studied all parts of the bill
and consider all the updates and
changes as a necessity. Thank
you.
James
Yes, sir. My name is uh James
Coons, uh, I'd like to thank uh
the chair and the committee for
allowing this bill to be heard.
This is a no nonsense approach
to cleaning up the language on
the current OHB bill. It'll
provide clarification, uh, where
there's some controversial
wording that uh obviously it
causes a problem and directly um
goes against one thing or the
other, but it will clarify, so
I'm definitely uh uh oppose, I
don't oppose this, and I think
that it's a no nonsense.
approach and a respectfully
appreciate your consideration on
this bill. Thank you.
And
Yes, uh, good morning. It's, uh,
Edna Trager again from Elephant
Butte. Um, I do agree that it's
time to update the language in
the New Mexico OHV Act. Um, I
was recently at the game and
fish expo, and there were a
tremendous uh uh
New versions of the equipment
that have all been updated,
they're, they're wonderful, um,
so the current language doesn't
match these new vehicles. Also,
a lot of these attendees were
families, uh, a very high
percentage of them, so it would
be very helpful to have that
language cleared up, uh,
regarding the younger operators
and additionally the state of
New Mexico will benefit from
updating reciprocity, uh, it's
time for us to generate
additional revenue from the out
of state riders, and if game
fish has the ability to study
impact and economics, um,
hopefully we can allow smart
growth, so, um, please support
this bill and thank you very
much for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in opposition.
Do we have anybody online in
opposition.
No, Mr. Chair. All right, first
we have Representative Lestro.
do pass.
Ranking member Brown.
I missed it.
We had a motion in a second.
And no, and no opposition.
We have a motionless second.
Take the roll. Representative
Armstrong.
Senator Borego?
Yes.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Doe.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Hoffman v. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Thanks a lot.
Yes. De la Cruz.
Yes. You ever do pass.
Thank you,
members.
