He
Madam Vice Chair.
Sorry, that's me here.
Madam Chu
present and I'm sure we have a
quorum.
Thank you. Now we'll go, um.
To, uh, House Bill 73, childhood
sexual abuse statute of
limitations are representative
Anaya.
And Thompson.
And correct.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee.
Um, thank you so much for having
us today. This is House Bill 73.
It is also called the Survivor's
Justice Act. Um, and what it
does is it repeals the civil
statute of limitations for
childhood sexual assault.
Um, with me, I have two experts
uh by my side and went on call,
um, if we need her right next to
us. I do want to add, Madam
Chair, um, that this is now a
very, very bipartisan bill. Um,
we have the women of the house
and the women in the Senate who
are very much signing on to this
bill, um, and so with that very
quick intro, I'm going to turn
it over to my experts to
introduce themselves very
quickly and then I will give an
explanation of the bill.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for hearing how school 73
today. Is that feedback that I'm
only hearing or is it coming for
you too?
OK, it's just
yeah, don't, yeah, not so close.
OK.
Can you hear me now? OK, cool.
Uh, my name is Lex Garcia and I
will be speaking today as a
survivor of sexual child abuse.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alexandria Taylor. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Coalition of sexual
assault Programs, the statewide
organization leading um the
prevention and intervention of
sexual violence in our state and
representing our programs that
serve over 8000 survivors every
year. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and for
our legal questions, we have
Teresa Hussey right next to us
over here, um, Theresa, if you
just want to give a quick intro.
My name is Teresa Hassey. I'm an
attorney and I represent victims
of childhood sexual abuse.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And with
that, I will go over, um, the
main tenets of the bill, um, but
just to start us off, I know
there's been a lot of
conversation around this bill. I
want to get us um to the right
statute. So I'm going to tell
you what it's not before I tell
you what it is. Um, this is not
on the criminal side, so this is
not a criminal bill. It is only
dealing with, uh, the civil
statute of limitations. It is
also not the Tort Claims Act.
And under the Tort Claims Act,
that is where governmental
entities would reside, um, we
are not touching governmental
entities. We do have a problem
with what's going on in
governmental entities, but this
is not the bill for that. Um,
this is also not our general
statute of limitations, which is
3 years. It's not that either.
This is a very, very specific
portion of law that is the civil
statute of limitations for
childhood sexual assault.
That is all it covers.
This bill does two things. It
repeals the civil statute of
limitations for childhood sexual
assault, and it allows survivors
to come forward when they are
ready.
Um
Our, our current statue as it is
right now, it's actually pretty
convoluted. Um, and one of the
things that we try to do as we
are, um, improving lives uh
throughout the years as we want
to be sure that if a sexual
assault survivor sees something
in law that they know exactly
what their rights are. And that
is also what we're trying to
clarify in this statute as well.
Um, the reality is that um
survivors of childhood sexual
assault, the average age for
them to come forward is actually
52 years old.
Um, and so as we were asking for
signers on this bill, um, what
I've discovered is we actually
have a body full of legislators
whose loved ones or they
themselves have been harmed by
entities like the Boys and Girls
Club, like the Boy Scouts, like
the Catholic Church throughout
the years.
And for a very long time, Madam
Chair, we have had these
entities who have been trained
to escape.
Um, accountability.
And as we know, we all have
survivors in our lives. There is
a huge cost on the lives of
survivors. So, as we're talking
about crime this session, um, we
really need to do more for the
survivors of these crimes, and
we need to make sure that these
survivors can seek justice when
they are ready.
And so I am going to turn it
over to my expert witness, Lex
Garcia, who has a story to share
with us, um, about her own
survival, but also, um, about
how statutes of limitations
limit survivor justice.
And 2 endanger the lives of
other people in the meantime.
Next
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
My name is Lex Garcia, and I'm
here to share my experience as a
survivor of sexual assault as a
child.
So high school in Rancho for me
was not marked by Friday night
lights or wondering if my car
could make it up the Mesa.
What defines my childhood as a
man who stole that childhood by
raping me for 2 years.
This man was my teacher.
Today he is still in education
and today he is still dangerous.
I find that today I am in love
with you, Alexandra, and that
makes me feel good.
It helps relax the feelings that
want so much to see you again.
To kiss you, to put my mouth on
your body. I think of little
else.
His words repeated in hundreds
of emails that he sent me,
romanticized and justified this
criminal conduct. For years, he
carried out compulsive sexual
acts on me in his classroom, in
closets, in parking lots, or
wherever his urges demanded that
I be.
This sexual assault occurred on
a nearly daily cadence.
So much so that I still feel the
association of completing daily
tasks as an adult, like washing
dishes.
With my daily tasks in high
school, washing petri dishes as
his lab assistant.
While his hands were inside of
me.
Every day my heart breaks for
that girl, the younger version
of me.
She should have been discovering
who she was as a teenager.
Not being groomed, isolated, and
abused.
Through years of therapy, I
deconstructed the illusion that
this was a love story.
I then questioned what now?
Has it been too long?
How can I hold him responsible?
Who else has he harmed?
I soon realized that the real
question was,
Just breaking the silence now
allow for the truth to be heard.
The answer was a resounding no.
As my abuser founded and is
still deeply involved in a
collection of charter schools
right here in New Mexico and in
our neighboring states.
This is despite my reporting and
evidence. I made reports to the
police.
To the school district, to New
Mexico PED.
And despite him signing an
affidavit acknowledging his
sexual abuse of me and
surrendering his teaching
license.
My reporting and evidence has
not been enough to keep this man
out of schools. It has not been
enough to keep him away from
vulnerable children.
And this is a critical component
of HB 73.
Because by opening the doors of
justice by opening the doors to
the courthouse, we allow
survivors to hold their abusers
accountable.
In my case,
It opens avenues for me to get
this man out of schools and away
from children where all other
avenues have failed.
It took 15 years for me to admit
to myself that I had endured
sexual exploitation and longer
to admit it to anyone that could
help me.
This was long past our current
statute of limitations, but it
was long before the national age
of disclosure, which
representative Anaya mentioned
is 52 years old.
Our current statute.
says that abuse can be reported
within 3 years of first
disclosing to a healthcare
professional.
I actually fall within this time
frame of the statute. However,
because my abuser was a public
employee, my abuse had to be
reported within one year of
turning 18.
So by 19 years old, the law
required that I process this
trauma.
Realize that this was a crime.
And take on the terrifying task
of reporting a man whose
manipulation I was still very
much under the control of.
It took much longer than one
year to realize that this was
not normal, that this was a
crime and that this was abuse.
Neurobiology data actually
supports that our brain cannot
process this trauma in any
physical capacity in that small
time frame.
Childhood sexual abuse continues
because the abuser uses their
power to silence their victims
until it's too late for them to
seek justice.
In my case, every time I
reported my abuser, he would
reach out with threats about how
this would affect my future.
what people would think of me.
And he played on emotions that
he had twisted in my childhood
that would shift the shame and
the blame from him.
place it onto me and forced me
back into silence.
All while a clock that I did not
know was ticking continued to
race until I was out of time to
report this abuse.
Trauma is not tied to a time
clock.
It's layered, it's non-linear.
And the law cannot dictate how
long it takes for someone to
share their truth about abuse
and seek their justice.
I share this now very publicly,
knowing that my abuser will see
it.
Knowing that he is still in a
position of power and entrusted
with our vulnerable kids.
Sharing my experience has been
terrifying.
But I share this now in sincere
hope of changing a system so
that people who sexually abused
children in New Mexico are held
responsible for the lifetime of
pain that they've inflicted.
sharing my story, I have had
others come to me about the same
man.
And my heart breaks that I could
not protect them.
That my reporting did not
protect them. I will carry the
guilt of not protecting them for
the rest of my life, but you can
protect the students that are
still very much in this
predator's reach.
You can decide today if we
continue to ignore sexual child
abuse.
Powerful insurance companies and
institutions don't just ignore
child abuse of this nature, they
actively work to silence
survivors like me.
Not to protect children, not to
seek justice, but to protect
profits.
Budgets and reputations.
So I asked what matters more.
A budget or a child's safety.
A bottom line.
Or someone's life who is forever
changed.
If I could go back and if I
could stand between little legs
and what she went through, there
is no amount of money that I
would not pay to save her from
this pain.
And I know that if it were your
child or someone that you love.
You would do the same.
Investing in accountability and
justice is not just the right
thing to do. It creates real
change.
When we enforce laws that hold
abusers accountable. We don't
just seek justice for survivors,
but we prevent future abuse.
Predators thrive when there are
no consequences.
But when New Mexico law stands
firm.
When abusers fear real
punishment.
Facing twice
And that hesitation is another
child that's spared.
By allowing child survivors who
are now adults to seek justice.
We protect the next generation.
And that is an investment that's
worth making for every New
Mexican.
Please do not allow abusers to
continue to hide behind the law.
The survivors deserve to be met
with systems that support and
empower them on their journey to
justice.
No matter how long it takes for
us to find the courage to do so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Committee.
And with that, Madam Chair,
committee members, we stand for
questions.
OK. Thank you. Um, we're going
to go to the audience and um.
If you're in opposition and or
just raise your hand if you're
in opposition.
OK.
And do we have anyone,
no one online for opposition.
How many people are in support.
And want to speak.
OK, so we have.
OK, so, um, we're going to take,
um.
If we can
delivered
Um, 2 minutes and 10 people. If
you all want to decide who I'll
um should speak.
Pardon?
Yes, we already, no one is here
in opposition.
Yes.
OK. Well, we called for
opposition first if you want to
go ahead.
Oh,
OK, you're, you're neutral. Is
that what you're saying?
I didn't the sponsor say that
this, this does not include
public bodies, so I'm not sure.
Madam Chair, that is correct,
this does not affect
governmental institutions.
You
Do you still wish to make a 2
minute statement.
OK.
Um, can you hand him the, um,
Well, we'll do supporting first
and then we'll do opposition.
OK.
My name is Teresa Hassey. I'm an
attorney and I represent victims
of childhood sexual abuse, and I
support this bill.
Um, survivors of childhood
sexual abuse have spent a
decades unable to voice their
stories. This is giving them
access to the courthouse, access
to justice. It doesn't prejudice
the abusers, uh, it may make
things harder for their
insurance companies potentially,
uh, but it's a mechanism to
reflect our values as a
community that children are
special and we should honor, uh,
the development
of children by recognizing what
everyone should know from common
sense that these types of
injuries are systemic and they
take decades to fully appreciate
what's happened to the person.
And so by reflecting the reality
that that survivors of sex
sexual abuse do not come forward
until 52 on average, and
allowing them the space to come
to the courthouse so they can
have their stories litigated and
heard by a jury of their peers,
uh, it just seems fair.
And I stand in support of this.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Andy
Costellano. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak for you
today.
In 1987 and 1988, I attended the
Albuquerque Old Town Boys and
Girls Club after school and
during the summer for their
youth programs. I was 12 years
old and 13 years old during my
time there.
I was one of many boys who were
who were sexually abused by the
director of the Old Town Boys
and Girls Club during that time.
In the year 2000 when I was 25
years old, the memories of my
sexual abuse started to flood my
mind and my dreams while I
slept.
I was embarrassed that I had
been sexually molested, and I
tried to drown my bad memories
with alcohol.
In 2003 when I was 28 years old.
I had just been arrested for my
2nd DWI.
In 2003, I finally told my mom
that I about the sexual abuse I
endured when I was a child.
My mom immediately helped me
find a therapist to begin
healing and an attorney to seek
justice.
The attorney asked me to get
other victims to corroborate my
story.
In 2003, social media did not
exist yet, and I couldn't not
find a contact phone numbers or
emails of the other victims to
ask them to join me in a civil
lawsuit against our abuser and
the Boys and Girls Club
organization.
In 2003, I had no choice but to
give up seeking justice, but I
remained in therapy.
Fast forward 20 years later and
in 2022, an attorney called me
and said my name was given to
him by other men who were
sexually abused at the Old Town
Boys and Girls Club.
The attorney asked if I wanted
to join a civil.
Lawsuit against our abuser and
the Boys and Girls Clubs of
America.
I said yes, I absolutely will
join the lawsuit.
I cannot believe that after all
these years, I would finally
receive justice and closure.
A week later, my attorney called
me and said, because I was
talking to therapists about my
sexual abuse and did not bring
legal action within 3 years of
talking about my abuse, I was
disqualified from being part of
the civil lawsuit.
Due to the statute of crimes.
Madam Chair, just real quickly
for those online and in the
audience, I do just want to
publicly state a trigger warning
for many of the survivors that
are here that.
re-traumatizing so many folks
that this may be bringing up, I
just want the public and those
on a disclaimer. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Julia
Archibec Guerra, and I am the
mother of Andy Costellano.
Uh, I thank you for this
opportunity. I come here today
also as a Mosack, Mosack is an
acronym for a national support
group.
Mothers of sexually abused
children.
For the last 23 years, I have
tried to do everything in my
power to help my son heal and to
seek justice.
He is one of many boys who was
sexually abused at the Old Town
Boys Club.
Um
He didn't tell me. He didn't
tell me. He didn't disclose to
me until he was 28. This was 6,
16 years after the sexual abuse
occurred.
I immediately found my son, a
therapist, and we contacted an
attorney and as my son said, we
were told without the
corroboration of other victims,
we could not move forward.
Also, as Andy said, fast forward
to 2022, these 15 men, now men
came forward to different teams
of attorneys in Albuquerque
represented these men. They
recently uh settled in October
of this last year.
Again, my son was not was
disqualified for participating
in these, in these uh lawsuits.
I come to you as a mother who
has
is heartbroken, who has been
traumatized along with my son.
And I asked, I am humbly ask
that you support this
legislation to
Bring healing to those who have
been abused and to hopefully
prevent further abuse in this
state. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Bridget Condon. This is
emotional for me to support our
friends.
I have worked in this building
since 2012, and this is only the
second time that I have come
forward on a personal note to
support legislation. That's
because of how important it is.
Prior to my current role, I
served you in the legislature as
a policy analyst with the New
Mexico Legislative Education
Study Committee. Conversations
over the 13 years I have been in
this building have been largely
focused on insurance premiums
and have been missing the voices
of victims and understanding how
to truly eradicate abuse from
our systems.
As recently as September, we had
school systems that were
entering into agreements because
they had already violated laws
that are on the books. We know
that in October nemipsia uh
supported some of their predator
um training to help those spot
predators, and the objective is
to lower the amount of claims.
I'm asking you to have the
objective to support victims and
to dismantle any systems that is
protecting predators over those
victims. This is incredibly.
Morton, I ask you to support
this bill. I would love to see
your names as sponsors of this
bill, and I ask you to urge your
colleagues to move this quickly
through the legislature. Thank
you. Thank you. Next.
Hello, my name is Sophia
Sanchez, and I am deputy chief
of staff to congressional member
Representative Melanie
Stansbury. Um, I'm here to read
a statement from her.
As the representative of New
Mexico congressional District
One, it is my duty to protect
our children.
I write to you today in strong
support of HB 73.
This bill is a fundamental step
toward justice and
accountability.
Childhood sexual abuse is not
just an individual tragedy, is,
it is a public safety crisis.
Our current system allows
predators to escape
accountability while continuing
to have access to vulnerable
children.
Survivors often silenced by
fear, trauma, and systematic
barriers are left without legal
recourse when they are finally
ready to come forward.
As a result,
They remain in positions of
trust, able to harm our children
while survivors are denied
justice.
This is not just about one case,
it is about an entire system
that protects abusers of
children.
Survivors like Doctor Lux Garcia
have bravely spoken out, sharing
firsthand how the legal system
has failed to not only protect
them, but every student after
them.
This is not an isolated
incident. It is a systematic
failure.
Please help me protect our
children. Doctor Garcia, as your
congresswoman, I'm proud of you
today.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Julian
Myers, and I am here today in
strong support of House Bill 73.
I am also here as a survivor of
high school grooming. When I was
16 years old, a person I
trusted, my educator, a person
in position of power took
advantage of my trust.
Began as a mentorship quickly
turned into manipulation. They
blurred boundaries, isolated me,
and made me believe that what
was happening was normal. I
didn't understand what was, I
was experiencing at the time was
grimming.
By the time I realized the full
weight of what had happened, it
was too late.
The law didn't protect me. The
person who harmed myself and
others was able to move on with
their life while I was left to
pick up the pieces of mine. This
is the reality for too many
survivors.
HP 73 closes a dangerous
loophole in our current laws,
one that allows authority
figures in schools to exploit
their influence over students
without consequence.
We know that grooming is not
about consent. It is about
power, manipulation, and
control.
I stand before you as an adult
today, but please take a second
to think about my 16-year-old
self.
I wish she meant to know what
was happening to her.
I can barely reckon with that
today at the age of 31.
This happened to me in our
school system in our state.
We simply cannot stand by and
let this happen to New Mexican
youth.
The spill isn't just about me,
it's about ensuring that no
predator can hide behind a legal
technicality.
Victim's trauma does not
disappear after arbitrary
statute of limitations passed,
and neither should their
justice.
I urge you to stand with
survivors and vote in favor of
HB 73.
Let's make sure that no other
students have to go through I
and many before you today have
had to go.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for your time today. My name is
Victoria LeBlanc. I'm a deputy
district attorney at the
Bernalio County District
Attorney's Office. In our
office, we have our special
victims unit, and each day those
prosecutors, victim advocates,
and support staff, see the
trauma and the lifelong impact
that childhood sexual abuse has
on survivors, and even though
this bill is for civil remedies,
the office of the district
attor.
Bernie Sam Bergman, absolutely
supports it.
I hold it, OK. Oh, no, oh sorry.
Um, uh, Madam Chair and the
members of the committee. My
name is Leah Hosfield. I started
high school in 2007 at Rio
Rancho Midhi in 2008, I started
the 10th grade at Rio Rancho
High School, and by 2009, I
started to hear rumors, rumors
about a hot teacher and a 15
year old student.
For the rest of my time at Rio
Rancho High School, the rumors
about the teachers stayed stayed
consistent with the students'
names changed.
In 2011, I graduated, moved on
from high school, and I started
a family of my own.
My son is going to be 13 next
week and he starts high school
in 2 years. We should be having
conversations about his first
crushes, sports, and what he
wants for his birthday, but
instead, I'm talking to him
about grooming and what he needs
to look out for when he's around
his teachers or other adults.
Last summer, Lex Garcia and I
reconnected on a personal level
over house Bill 73.
3 years ago on the night of my
29th birthday, sitting in my
living room with 3 childhood
friends, I was told a
devastating secret.
A a secret that leaves you
seeing red with nothing to say.
I was told to keep her secret
and not say anything to anyone
because she was scared, ashamed,
and embarrassed.
She told me she was 15, and he
was her teacher.
She told me she still has the
messages.
Almost 14 years later, she has
the proof, but nothing will
happen to that man, the man who
is still in education.
Because she took too long. It
took a 15 year old too much time
to process what happened to her.
It took her too long to realize
that she was groomed, and it
took her too long to realize
that it wasn't her fault.
And before I go any further, it
was not Lex Garcia.
She went to school because that
was what she was told to do at
15. She went to all her classes.
She was a straight A student.
She trusted her teachers and
their opinions. She trusted the
hot teacher when he told her
that he was hard on her because
he knew that she could do
better. And later on, he made
her trust him enough with her
body.
That 15 year old student.
Um, all right. Well, you guys
can all change that and you
should so that another child
does not have a story to tell in
15 years and we don't have
secrets to keep anymore. Thank
you.
Good afternoon,
thank you. Good afternoon,
chairwoman and committee
members. My name is Erin Ganra.
I come to you in two capacities,
one as a mother of 3.
teenage daughters, and another
as a survivor as well, um.
Doctor Lex Garcia is a very good
friend of mine, but beyond that,
an amazing human that
Besides everything that has
happened has overcome it. I
implore you to support HB73 as I
as a mother I also having
discussions with my children
instead of what sport are you
gonna play and what are you
gonna do, um, please make sure
you tell me if anyone does
something they shouldn't do, and
what that looks like, cause
sometimes it looks like things
that
OK.
It took me 15 years to recognize
as well that I was.
A survivor of sexual abuse when
I was 9 years old.
And I implore everyone to please
understand that this affects
people and the rest of their
lives in
Who they marry, how they marry,
and what they do. Thank you very
much.
Thank you.
So, um, so if you wanted to.
Give your opinion.
Oh, OK.
I think she's
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Marty
Escovel, and I'm the general
counsel for the New Mexico
Public School Insurance
Authority, um, we fully support
what the objective of
Representative's bill, um, and
before I go any further, I know
this is a very important
emotional issue, and I want to
stress that the public schools
insurance authority along with
its loss prevention specialists
over the last 8 to 10 years have
been really aggressive in trying
to focus on the importance of
this issue with our school.
Um, we have, uh, been active in
training, some of you, 4 or 5
years ago may remember House
Bill 128, which heightened the
bar for teacher reporting and
teacher training. So we really
have um understood the
importance and when I've gotten
up to speak on this issue, um,
I'm not focused on the dollars
and millions of dollars in
settlements that we've paid out.
I focused on the harm to
children. So we certainly don't
mean to minimize, um, that harm
and the port
of this issue. I, I would like
to say that there was some
that this bill does not apply to
public institutions, and that
would be our only concern today
that we've offered some
amendments to the sponsor to
clarify that the bill would only
apply to against private
entities and not public
institutions or public
employees, um, obviously there's
some concerns about the costs of
litigation, of litigating cases
that are 25 or 30 years old. So
that's all we're offering and we
fully support the objective here
and just want to thank you very
much for all your service and
your work. Thank you.
Smith
We have room for one more in
support. Are you in support,
sir?
recommendations.
Oh
OK, thank you.
All right, I inadvertently
forgot people in support on
Zoom, so we have.
Two people. OK. You have one,
well, 2 minutes.
OK
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Madam. My name is Gabrielle
Dietrich, and I am the executive
director of Mexico. I come to
you in my professional capacity
as a representative of an
organization that advocates for
individuals with mental health
conditions, their families, and
I also as a survivor of child
sexual abuse.
I cannot emphasize strongly
enough how important it is that
people are able to what happened
to them to reclaim their agency.
We have a lot of research that
shows that the reclaiming of
agency, reclaiming of the
ability to take control back
over their lives. It's the thing
that prevents mental illness in
the future.
And for that reason, I advocate
strongly for this bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. Next.
Hello. Can you hear me? Yes,
yes, we can.
Go ahead.
My name is Lord Kopek, and you
all heard Lex Garcia's story
today, but what you did not hear
is that in that same report just
a month later, there was an
additional report attached for
the similar complaint on the
same teacher who was using the
same tactics to pursue
relationships with multiple
girls in the classroom, but
already engaged in a sexual
relationship with one victims
unaware of each other until
these events have recently come
to light.
That second report is mine in
the report is tainly evident
that I went to protect this
individual.
It doesn't hundreds of messages
which he carefully sent from
school email than a personal
one, then to test all calculated
to secrecy as the messages
became more personal and
intimate, as he told me it's
inappropriate appeals to me
talking of moving, moving away
together.
Well, he was already sexually
abusing the victim you heard
from today.
He was another.
The last message and perhaps
most important for me to him
after the report was filed. The
title subject line reads an
explanation and apology. It goes
on. I know you were angry, but
please hear me out. I want you
to know what happened. I said I
wouldn't cooperate and I refuse
to say anything, but the police
kept questioning me. I've called
every week to get them to drop
the report. I feel horrible and
I still do. I've spent the last
24 hours crying so hard I've
thrown up. I tried to stop it. I
really did. I hope everything is
OK. I know it probably isn't and
I've screwed up.
I'm so sorry. I've never
regretted anything more.
It took me years to process that
I was not the one that should
have sent that message to have
those regrets that I had nothing
to apologize for and that the
one who's ruining the lives of
others was him and not the child
that I was.
The other children that he was
sexually abusing in his
classroom at the same time
That reflects by ending the
statute of limitations on
childhood sexual abuse is
critical.
Although in my life didn't
protect me from physical abuse,
the impact on my psyche at a
young age 15 from being groomed
by this predator is evident in
that message.
I'm here to ask your support for
this bill because no child in
that situation is equipped to
defend themselves and process
their trauma a young age,
especially when predators
instill such a profound sense of
protection in their victims.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Do you have anything you'd like
to add?
Before we go to the committee,
Madam Charnell, we stand for
questions.
Thank you.
They
Yeah
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you
for the talk we had today about
the bill beforehand and thank
you to our expert for your
powerful testimony.
Um, regardless whether they like
a bill or not, I have to ask
questions about it so I can
understand it in all of its
complexity or maybe not.
Um
The comment though about.
Pedophiles don't think twice.
That's the unfortunate thing is
that they do. They perpetually.
less children.
And
It's incredibly frustrating that
there's no cure.
So we can do the best that we
can, but there's no way to cure
pedophiles.
As far as we know.
Um, I'm sure, I, I have a
question for you right off the
bat. I have a lot of other
questions, but
Regards, I don't know if you can
answer to what.
Two gentlemen, one from the
insurance and one from APS. and
my understanding that they don't
want.
Public employees to be part of
this lawsuit, is that what I'm
understanding? Can you maybe
explain if you understand what
they were asking, you explain
because it sounds like they're
saying teachers can't be, is
that what I'm understanding with
that my chair and
representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
I believe I I've interpreted
what they um what they said
today because we've had
conversations previous, um,
I, I'm not sure why folks are
unclear, um, on the fact that
this bill actually has nothing
to do with public employees.
What I like for it to, actually,
yes.
I would
But that's not the spill and
it's not this year.
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I believe what it is
is a lot of folks are now seeing
that survivors are coming
forward together to talk about
these issues. We're coming
together to talk about sexual
assault.
Um, we are not ashamed of that,
um, in any way, shape or form.
And I do believe that folks are
starting to feel antsy about the
fact that we're talking about
this very publicly, um, and
we're talking about it together.
So I would imagine, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
although I do not want to
interpret um.
For other folks, what their
intention was. I do believe that
it is just a lot of anxiety
because this bill has nothing to
do with public employees. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative
for explaining that because I
kind of took off a little bit. I
wasn't quite understanding uh
what the question was about or
why it was brought up.
Um, and to go back to what
you're saying too. It, it's a
very uncomfortable conversation
that needs to be had openly and
publicly.
Because uh the research does
show that it takes up till I
said.
I saw 50, but around 50, 52
years old with a lot of therapy
before people even talk about
it, so I understand the premise
of the bill, um.
But I do have some more
questions. How does it affect
Me? How does it affect a civil
lawsuit because as I'm thinking
about this, I'm also thinking of
children, sorry, adult.
and molested.
Um
How does this help hinder or uh
what effect would it have on a
civil lawsuit or if any.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, it would not
affect any pending litigation.
Um, so, you know, if there's
something on the civil side
right now that is going through
court, it would not affect those
cases, um, but this would allow
for folks to be able to come
forward once again on the civil
side um to bring a case against
their abusers.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I said,
I would imagine too that.
Unfortunately, it's probably
challenging as it is to, because
you have to come forward. I
mean, as a kid you don't want to
testify anyways and then to come
back as adult retestify.
To me, it seems that.
The Sybil and unfortunately
probably ends up being the
bigger end, especially if
there's more trying to come up
with more.
Evidence for the case. I'm
trying to tread lightly on all
this stuff because I.
It's got to be challenging when
you're 50 to say, OK, I was
molested by this person and then
go back and try to prove those
and get that to go through in
the first place. To me it seems
like the civil and if there was
more people to join in, it was a
better way to do it, but I I'm
not saying anything about the
bill. I'm just saying that it's
very frustrating.
It's for all of anyone who's
been.
Groomed, raped, molested,
doesn't deserve it, and then to
have to go back and relive this,
I can't imagine that would feel
like.
Um
I have some questions because I
wanna ask some stuff that has
come up about the objections,
and I noticed in the CYFD
analysis.
Um
It seems like a lot of this.
There's a lot of concern about.
costs
Uh, CFD of all things, as sorry,
your brain knows how I kind of
feel about COFD but CFDs big
issues, uh, is how much money
this is going to cost and
potential damages against CYFD,
um, manager representative,
would you like to make a comment
on what CYFD has said about
their objections.
Absolutely, Madam Chair, um, I
actually really appreciate that
question for further
clarification, um.
This bill once again does not
affect governmental entities,
um, and so CYFD would not be
affected. I will say though, I
do want to put a pin in the data
that we're receiving, um,
because sexual assault is a
problem, even within our
governmental institutions, so
once again, not this bill, not
this year, but it doesn't mean
that it doesn't need to be
addressed. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, thank you, Madam
Chair, an expert. I was looking
here CYFD child sexual abuse
settlements in 2022 for 90.
$5000 and they have quite a bit
of sexual abuse cases, um,
Matter of fact, when we were in
the health committee, I told you
earlier when we were in the
health committee, we had heard
about a child that was pulled
out by CFFD and then give them
back to their father, who then.
Abuse the child. I'm just gonna
say that.
Uh, for the entire weekend
holiday weekend because there's
no.
Background check to make sure
that they aren't sexual
predators.
Um, be a chair and
representative. Oh, there's two
things from CYFD. Boy, they
really had some issues with
this. I don't know what the
problem is in this, but um.
They said the significant this
is from.
CYFD
And, and this was one of the
main thing I wanted to ask you
because this is gonna come up as
you go through judiciary and as
you move forward, so I want to
make sure that you're prepared
for all of the stuff of what CFD
has said.
Um
Removing the statues, complex
issue that raises several legal,
practical, and ethical concerns.
It's an interesting word to use.
There are due process concerns,
the accused may face difficulty
defending themselves years or
decades later, unavailable
witnesses, faded memories can
undermine the fairness of the
trial.
Uh, they seem to put a lot of.
Wording in here, worried about
the accused. Do you have
anything you want to address on
this analysis by COFFD Madam
Chair representative.
Absolutely, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I'm more
than happy to talk about that.
One of the things that I
probably should have mentioned
in the intro is that this also,
this bill also does not change
the burden of proof for
anything.
So any of the cases that are
coming forward would still need
to prove the exact same thing.
Um, as before, um, if this bill
is passed, Madam Chair. And so
burden of proof does not change
um, the person who
Um, comes forward as an accuser,
um, still needs to present
evidence um to make sure that
their case is successful.
Man of chair representative, I
agree with you on that. Do you
have, I don't understand, if you
can address this for me, why
they feel there's a due process
problem because.
Purses being accused, they still
have a trial, and you know,
don't even answer that. I, I
just, I can't figure out because
I'm very familiar with due
process. Nobody's taking
anything, their life or liberty
away from them because they get
a trial, so I thought that was
just interesting that CYFD had
it in there. Also thought it was
uh.
There was a concern about
Um
The immunity to the person by
removing those states. I don't
know, I just thought that was
interesting wording from CYFD.
put in there that that was our
main concerns that they were
worried about the person being
accused and not having their
rights.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
um,
It was a concern, but I think we
may have addressed that. So the
AOC.
And this is something that's
gonna come up as you move along
with this, had a question about
elimination of the statute of
limitations could result in
dated or stale evidence that
requires more careful vetting of
judges and defendants. Do you
have anything that you want to
say about that objection by the
AOC?
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I know.
All of us now live in the age of
technology, um, and so I know
there have been significant
improvements in terms of DNA and
technology, um, as well, Madam
Chair.
And Madam Chair and, of course,
we always have the backlog of
the uh.
Looking at DNA too, which
Probably will need more funding
we're still backlogged on that.
Um
They all kind of stayed the same
thing, Madam chair that there
seems to be.
Issues with stale memories. I, I
see that repeatedly in there.
But I guess I would ask what's
the difference between 1 year, 2
year, 3 years, 10 years if it
all comes up in therapy at a
later time.
So my representative, um,
I support this bill.
But I needed to ask questions
cause I, I bet every bill
whether I like the bill or not,
because that's what my
constituents want. That's why I
when I can't support a bill
blindly without reading the bill
in its entirety.
I think
Even if you go a year after the
event, 2 years, 3 years.
No matter how many years you go,
there's always going to be an
issue with the stale evidence.
There's always the burden of
proof, right? Unfortunately for
those that are accusing the
person, they're always under the
burden of proof of having to
prove it.
Um
So I don't have any objections
on that. I just
I think the main thing I want to
say on this is that there is no
cure for pedophiles. They're
going to keep doing what they're
doing. This is just one other
tool to try to get them.
And hold them behind bars where
they deserve to stay.
I don't want to say anything
more about that because I.
I have too many things to say
about pedophiles.
And that I think they should
have much longer sentences
because there is no treatment
for them as far as I'm
concerned, you can just put them
in there for the rest of their
life.
Um
I want to thank everybody that
came forward because I know
there's a lot of emotions and
this very hard thing to talk
about, but it needs to be
discussed because.
It's always in the shadows,
right? We don't, don't talk
about it. Don't get them in
trouble. We don't want to get
them in trouble. They're gonna
twist it. They're gonna turn it.
They're gonna manipulate.
And pedophiles are master gas
lighters.
They will do everything they can
to make sure that a child or
anybody doesn't speak out
against them.
So I do support this bill and I
thank you for talking about it
earlier, but again, I just had
to bet the bill to make sure
that there wasn't anything in
there of what some of the
objections had to do with.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and,
and thankfully Representative
Lord asked a lot of my
questions, and we've also had a
conversation before this bill
about some of those questions
that I had, Madam Chair. And so,
I just want to first of all say
that
You know, I've had, I have many
friends.
Who've been through
Situations like this, and
It has changed the trajectories
of their lives.
And it's amazing like Doctor
Garcia, you've been able to
Become such a great
person
And you've accomplished things
that I'm sure you've wanted to
accomplish, despite that, and
I'm sure many of these victims
have too because they
persevered.
And Madam Chair, I do want to
just say thank you to all the
folks who've spoken up today
because I know how hard.
Probably has been, because
you've been in a very vulnerable
situation where
You were not in a position of
authority.
And that person was.
And that person took advantage
of you. And, and it just breaks
my heart to see that because I
know people who have been
affected exactly as you and many
people here today and each
experience is so different and
it's so nuanced and
It transcends just
individual's life, but also
their family members, you know,
like, it breaks my heart to see
mother have to.
Think about what someone in
authority who was supposed to be
taking care of children.
Did
In such a horrific instance to
to hurt a child, which just
blows my mind that anyone would
do that, but it's just
It just really
bugs me. So I would say
something else, but I don't want
to get go down or something, so.
I'll, I'll leave that at that.
Um, a couple concerns though, I
just, I've seen other states'
bills.
Regarding the constitutionality.
And I know that I've looked into
this very nuanced wise, we
cannot retroactively take it
away for criminal.
My understanding, but if it's
civil.
It is allowed in some cases. So
I just want to make sure that
this is as tight as possible
because I would just hate.
For legislation to be stricken
down on some technicality, and
I'm just wondering if you have
spoken to, you've spoken to
attorneys about this, but I just
want to make sure that this is
ironclad to ensure that these
victims absolutely can get
justice. Adam Chair,
Representative Ana.
I believe this is the question,
but I do want to, uh, Madam
Chair, I representative, thank
you. I do want to turn this to
page 2 of the fiscal impact
report that you all have, um, at
the very end of page 2, it
actually notes that the
administrative office of the
district attorney discusses the
legal implication of retroactive
application, um, and it's, and
appears to believe that this
provision would survive legal
challenge. So, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you Representative
for the question.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, and I, I just wanted to
make sure that was on the record
that
There is ironclad proof that
this can go forward, it's
constitutional, that we can do
it. So that's great news. So,
Madam Chair, just a couple of
quick questions as well. I, I
just wanted to actually bring
our attention to the LESC
analysis.
Which I have in front of me,
Madam Chair.
And I just, it kind of blew my
mind when I saw this.
Because
I'm on page 2 of the LESC
analysis. It talks about
pneumepsia cases.
And I mean these cases, there's
so many numbers of cases that
are there. And I know this is a
topic for another day, right?
When it comes to the public
body, but 129 educators sexual
assault, misconduct claims under
6 106 of those are closed. 23
remain open.
I see 76 student on student
sexual misconduct claims, 58 are
closed, 18 are open, and so
Madam Chair Representative, I
also wanted to touch on this.
What about the student on
student claims. Would this bill
have any kind of effect on those
because it did happen in a
certain amount of time if we
take off the limitations with
that individual still be able to
get justice in that case under
this statute, I haven't looked
into that, Madam Chair,
Representative and I thank you,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I will go back to.
fact that this, um.
Schools, public schools are
governmental entities and so it
would not apply, um, but do
believe me, representative, and,
uh, Madam Chair, that I have put
a pin in this uh particular
information. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative, and I
would love to work with you on
that. I think it's critically
important to ensure justice for
all these victims. And, and so I
just want to reiterate, Madam
Chair Representative, uh, Doctor
Garcia and all the victims here
today. I just, I support this
legislation I've read through
your bill. I mean, thankfully,
it's you.
pages long, it's not too long,
but I, I certainly
support this and I do want to
just echo the concerns of
Representative Lord had. I, I
want to make sure that these
victims finally can get some
kind of closure because you can
never be whole again,
unfortunately after this has
happened.
But this is a start.
And so I think it's
The bare minimum as a body that
we can do is at least give you
that outlet to at least seek
justice. So I appreciate you all
and thank you so much for the,
the answers and
Good luck on your bill. Thank
you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Romero.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you to the sponsors and to
the survivors who spoke out
today, um, and for your strength
and for those supporting this
bill, um, I certainly understand
the intent. I just wanna make
sure I'm clarifying the
mechanisms that are in place
through the bill. Um.
So I'm, I'm, I'm trying to
understand first and foremost
we're, we're looking at a
Civil statue um within section
one that calls for damages due
to childhood sexual abuse.
Um, however, as we get, um,
about the commencement where it
could be any time eliminating
the statute of limitations.
You get to be, which talks
about.
Um, that abuse being prosecuted
in a criminal manner, um, would
constitute a violation. So I'm
just trying to understand
through that.
The statutes that are referenced
for the criminal penalties. How
does one prove um.
That the criminal level of um
activity is um proven for this
civil
Um, opportunity.
Madam, I will turn to one of my
expert witnesses. Teresa, would
you mind?
Madam Chair Representatives, uh,
this bill is impacting only the
statute of limitations for the
civil claim, it's referring to
the criminal code for defining
what constitutes, uh, sexual
abuse under the context. So it's
not altering the criminal
statutes, nor is it altering the
statute of limitations for the
criminal statutes, what it's
doing is it's essentially
providing some form of
definition or what constitutes
sexual abuse in the civil
context. Did I answer your
question.
Uh, maybe I should clarify a
bit, um, Madam Chair.
If we have to prove the criminal
matter.
How do you do that with the
statute of limitations limiting
on the criminal side.
In order to be able to prove
damages on the civil side.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, so the criminal
statutes identify the elements
that need to be proved in order
to constitute a crime, so that
could be um specific touching
where that touching is.
Uh
Those are the elements that need
to be proved in the criminal
context, so what the statute of
limitations is doing for Sybil
is saying those elements are the
same in the civil context, as
you have to prove.
Where the touching is, how the
touching occurred. So it's just
in, so that's the the burden of
proof is just about the elements
identified in the statue of what
you would need to prove in order
to have a civil claim.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, um,
representative expert, um.
So I'm clear, and I don't know
if the language is clear just in
the way that I'm reading it.
In the sense that
We're just trying to meet the
elements of each of the criminal
statutes and uh.
So my concern with that is that
because of the statute of
limitations that exist within
the criminal statute. If we're
referencing.
That I don't
I'm, my concern is that even if
you met the elements of the
abuse.
That it's unclear that the
statute still um may preempt the
elimination of the statute of
limitations.
Um, Madam Chair on the civil
side.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, I
would also like to point out
that that's current law.
and we are not changing that
with this spell.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
my, my question is just about if
you're opening it up to
reference the entire statute,
you're also referencing the
statute of limitations in that
statute. So,
So I just want to make sure that
we're not preempting without
explicitly stating that we're
eliminating that statute of
limitations from those, from
those criminal statutes to do
that, and I don't know if
The commencement at any time
reinforces, um,
That
Specific, um, ability to.
Eliminate the statute of
limitations.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I believe I understand your
question, and so how I would
answer it is that the statute of
limitations is not an actual
element of a lawsuit. It's a
defense. So the elements are,
um, you know, who touched to
when and where. Those are the
elements.
What how statute of limitations
works is it's a defense that
after somebody makes a statement
about I was hurt by these bad
acts, the defendant can come
forward and say, I have a
defense, and you didn't file it
timely, so that's something the
defense has to prove is that
they didn't meet the statute of
limitations, not the survivor,
not the victim. And so it would
not impact the elements you have
to prove because statute of
limitations is not an element
that any one.
filing a lawsuit needs to prove
it's a defense to a lawsuit that
the defendant needs to prove.
Thank you for the clarification,
Madam Chair. Um,
If there is an opportunity to
clarify the elements in this in
Part B. I would recommend, and I
don't know if this is the right
time to make that
recommendation, but as far as
just the clarity for an
amendment, but.
That
Childhood sexual abuse means
that means conduct that.
Um
If prosecuted, the elements of
childhood sexual abuse, um.
Something to that effect.
Um, would be proven in a
criminal manner would constitute
a violation of just so that we,
I know that we're trying to do
that with section C.
Um, but I don't, I would hate
for it to be somehow referenced
that the preemption of the
criminal statute would
Prohibit this from um happening.
So I, I don't know if that's
necessary, but I would just love
clarification for that. The
other form of clarification I
would like, Madam Chair.
Um
is on the exemption of the
public entities.
Versus the um individuals who
were targeting for this
reference, and I'm just curious,
Madam Chair representative.
Is there room for the explicit
exemption within the statute to
ensure that
What was brought up as to the
targeting of overall um
organization or entity itself
would be possible to exempt.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
Um
So there's not.
You can't just sue the
government. You can't just sue
public entities. They're immune
from lawsuits unless expressly
waived.
And there is not a New Mexico
statue, um, other than the Civil
Rights Act.
That would wave.
Uh, lawsuits against
governmental entities for sexual
assault. This is a statute of
limitations regarding injuries,
it does not waive sovereign
immunity or a governmental
entity.
So when you are seeing lawsuits
that are prosecuted for against
governmental entities, they're
relying on other areas of law
that have waived sovereign
immunity, the most common of
which is a federal law, Section
1983, in which case the case law
is very, very clear that this
statute does not apply to the
statute of limitations against
governmental entities. So to say
that this wouldn't apply to a
governmental entity would be um.
Unnecessary because there needs
to be a statute saying you can
sue the government for child and
sexual abuse and that statute
doesn't exist.
Madam Chair, representative,
expert, thank you for the
clarification. We often uh refer
to uh federal statute to
clarify, that's an opportunity
to, you know, assuage any of the
Potential um holdups for this
bill, um, I would also recommend
if there's a an ability to do
that, that would be helpful.
Um, again, thank you to all the
survivors and thank you for the
clarifications. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, um, Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and now
I will be brief. I just have to.
Expressed my disappointment that
some of our state agencies,
their first thought was money
and, and not people.
And um we all know, I mean,
I've, I'm a, I'm a survivor. It
was minor and one time, but it's
still there, um.
I believe my brother.
I was also a survivor. He died
of a heart attack at 49.
And I wonder how much of it.
So, um, so just I'm expressing
that and then, you know, I hear
this stale evidence.
There's still evidence get just
as stale for both sides?
It does.
So you always hear, oh, you
know, they can't defend
themselves. The evidence is
stale. Well, all these people,
their evidence is stale too, so
I'm I'm just saying I'm tired of
that going because it goes to
both sides. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, any
other questions?
Representative Block
And I'm sure I would do pass.
I second.
OK, we have a motion for do pass
and is there any objection?
We have unanimous, OK, you don't
need to take roll call.
Thank you all very much. We
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee.
Do pass
on house Bill
I'm sorry to hurry, everyone,
but if you could clear the room
so we can get the next uh bill
in order.
Thank you all.
Um, next we have a House Bill 86
human trafficking changes
representative Thompson and
Matthews, I'm not sure if she's
here.
Representative Thompson, do you
have your experts or which I do
have experts. I'm not sure who,
who's who's what will sit here.
So I'm sure, I, if, if
you're ready, I, I will kick it
off anytime and I texted my
co-sponsor, so let him cheer and
House Bill 46886, excuse me, it,
I believe this is the 4th time
I've carried this bill and then.
trying to be politically correct
and say that there is a
committee in the Senate.
That contains the gravestones of
many of my bills.
Including this one. So
essentially why I got um
involved in this bill was when I
learned that the the penalty for
trafficking drugs was higher
than the penalty trafficking
people.
Um, and that we were arresting
victims as for prostitution when
they were being forced.
Into a, I'm sure what's a
horrible life.
So, um, as I said, I started
this with the um with when um
Hector Balderas was the Attorney
general, and so we've been,
we've been working on it. The um
my expert our expert is Rob
Hart, who is with the 2nd
judicial district and um just I
will go over quickly um what it.
Is that me
Oh, wake up.
So, um, so it adds human
trafficking to the list of
crimes for which there is no
statute of limitations.
It, um, raises the victim
victimization age from under 16
to under 18 because we were
treating 1716 and 17 year olds
more like adults than as
children, um.
We add it to to the list of
crimes falling under the
Racketeering Act.
It adds methods by which human
trafficking can be committed,
changes the mental state from
knowing to knew or should have
known increases the penalties to
second-degree felony for adult
victims and first-degree felony
for victims under 18 prohibits
charging human trafficking
victims with prostitution
prohibits certain defenses such
as, oh, it was a cop pretending
to be an underage person.
Um, and makes a person convicted
of human trafficking subject to
the forfeiture Act.
Um, section 5.
It's a victims of human
trafficking and sexual
exploitation of children to the
victims of Crime Act. We know
they need services and we want
them to get services, um.
In section 6 gives sentencing
judge discretion to reduce the
amount of good time deductions
that may be taken from a prison
sentence for human trafficking
from day to day.
Such as 50% of the sentence to 4
days per month, and I will let
my um
Co-sponsor, carry on.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative and Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Um
Just a couple additional points
I would make, um.
Human trafficking is one of the,
is the single largest source of
of illicit funds for cartels.
And so this crime, which can be
human trafficking can either be
sex trafficking and or labor
trafficking trafficking in both
occur in this state.
Um
It also feeds into to the drug
problems and all the other
problems that cartels and
organized crime.
Create for the state, um, so,
responding to this crime should
help us with other crimes.
Um
And uh
I'm gonna let our expert talk
about what it's been like to try
to prosecute under our current
statute.
Um, and it's limitations and why
we're suggesting some.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, members of the committee, my
name is Rob Hart. I am the
director of the Governor's
organized Crime Commission and a
deputy district attorney in the
Berlio County District
Attorney's office. So I thought
I'd start by giving some
examples of the human
trafficking operations we've
worked this last year as law
enforcement with my team, just
so you kind of understand what
we're up against.
Um, in the fall we did an
operation operation disruption
along the southern border of the
Las Cruces Santa Teresa area and
during those operations we made.
We rescued over 200 migrants by
separating from the human
trafficking groups. We state
police made over 2000 traffic
stops.
Um, we found a woman dying in
the desert. I mean, we, we
worked extensively and law
enforcement did tremendous, put
forth tremendous effort.
Not a single person was able to
be charged under the state human
trafficking statute the way it
currently stands.
Um, another example, there's
been cannabis farms disrupted by
law enforcement all throughout
the state. Everyone's working
really hard on that issue.
And we have been finding
migrants who are, I think, being
labor trafficked in deplorable
conditions.
And again, not a single state
charge of human trafficking
under the current statute.
And then I also want to talk
about we've we've worked really
hard on massage parlors, there's
been trafficking, we, there's
been a lot of sex trafficking
through massage parlors. My
team's been working with various
agencies. We've, I think
statewide there's been over a
dozen shutdown.
Over $100,000 in cash seized,
women who are forced, forced to
work again, awful conditions.
And there's there will be
probably one charge of human
trafficking that comes out of
all of those, one state, so
that's kind of the scope, that's
what we're looking at. This is a
huge problem, um, and as, as
Representative Matthew said,
human trafficking is the most
lucrative business.
The cartels.
are involved in. So more than
fentanyl, more than arms
trafficking, more than anything
else, it's human trafficking.
Last month, many of you may have
heard about the tunnel that was
discovered in the El Paso area
along in southern New Mexico.
I can give you some information
on that.
That tunnel was open for 6
weeks.
It was being run by one.
Organization
This isn't like Sinaloa cartel.
This is one human trafficking
organization, a small sliver of
the organized crime that we see
in this state.
They operated for 6 weeks, and
we estimate that over 2000
people.
We're, we're brought through
that tunnel. They were charging
upwards of $10,000 a head.
So if you want me to do the math
for you, that's over $20 million
that these human trafficking
organizations made off of 6
weeks of work.
That, that's not how much human
traffickers in the state made.
Last year, that's 6 weeks of
work from one small sect.
So
They're going to keep doing
this. Law enforcement in New
Mexico is up against a pretty
impossible task because
The criminals do know that our
laws are lax. It gets pushed
here from Texas. It, it gets
pushed here from Arizona, and so
most of the human trafficking is
coming through New Mexico. In
fact, most intelligence reports
that I've been receiving
indicate that New Mexico is the
hub for human trafficking.
We have more stash houses in
this state.
Specifically Albuquerque, but
it's all throughout the state
than any other city in the
country, more than Chicago, more
than.
Phoenix more than anywhere else.
More stash houses here.
That's the scope of what we're
up against.
Make no mistake. What we're
looking at is modern day
slavery. This is an indentured
servitude that people can't get
out of. Most of them are taken
advantage of, they believe
they're coming here for better
lives, and then they're stuck in
this loop that they never get
out of, whether it's sex
trafficking or labor
trafficking.
I was looking at some of the
numbers I've received throughout
the year and my estimate was
there were at least, at least
300 migrant deaths.
That were
found in our state.
Last year of people being forced
through the desert, they're
typically dehydrated and beaten
before they even get to the
United States. They just
continue west and west and west,
try and circumvent any type of
law enforcement presence and
then they don't make it in the
desert. The trafficking
organizations just move on
because it's, it's no loss for
them, right? They, they don't
see this as human life.
They have no overhead costs.
It's all profit,
so they,
I think that's those are the
main points I wanted to make for
now.
I'm
more than happy to stand for
questions as well. Matt, Madam
Chair, we stand for questions.
Thank you. He will go to the
audience, um, well, um, take,
uh, anyone in opposition.
OK, anyone on Zoom?
No, OK. Um, so then we'll, um,
limit it to 10 people who want
to speak in support.
There's about that many if you
want to, you want to hand them
the
OK, sure, might be easier.
bring you the microphone so
having to stand.
Now, he'll hand you the,
yeah I know what to do.
Don't drop the mic. I won't. I
won't. Thank you so much. My
name is Heather Baddell and um I
learned about this. Sorry, I'm
talking too loud. I learned
about this while I was making a
documentary about
Surviving trafficking, we
interviewed survivors around the
world, and that was in 2019 that
I started making that, and I met
these wonderful people and I
learned about our laws, and I
was shocked. I was so shocked.
And I thought, oh, this is a no
brainer. I'm gonna get involved.
I'm gonna come up to the
roundhouse. Well, this is the
5th year of this no-brainer. And
um I'm, I'm honored to be here
in front of you. You all are
great. You guys pass this every
time we're here, we run into
issues when.
we get to the Senate and I would
really ask for your support and
um encouraging your colleagues
to put us on their agenda,
specifically Senator Cervantes
possibly, um, but, uh, I wanna
leave you with a few statistics.
One, this is $150 billion
industry a year, and this is not
just sex trafficking, this is
human trafficking. I was at a
task force 2 weeks ago in in
Demming, they had a massage
parlor. They, um, found people
from New York who didn't speak
any
English, a Mandarin, didn't have
anyone to translate, but this is
happening. We are seeing this in
our tiny little towns. So, it's
$150 billion dollar industry. If
you have 5 people in your
stable, you make a million
dollars tax-free.
Um, these people are not able to
leave, and I think that's
something that's really
misunderstood, is they are kept
locked up, and they don't have
freedoms that we think, oh, why
don't you just walk away. So,
um, I want to thank you for my 2
minutes. I want to thank you.
You're gonna see us wearing lots
of blue shirts this session and
um please support our bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, next.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you so much.
Um, I'm Lynn Sanchez with the
Life Link. We've been providing
services to victims of human
trafficking since 2009.
Um, we are
You know, we've been here many
years trying to um support this
bill and different iterations to
get passed and uh as Heather was
saying, you know, it just
doesn't make it through to the
final resolution. We're hoping
that that doesn't happen this
time around. I know that
everybody here cares about this
issue and cares about the
victims and the vulnerable
people in our state that we need
to protect with this tougher
legislation.
Um, I just wanted to say quickly
that, um, over the last 5 years
I've been contacted from by
press from all over the world.
And they want to know about
what's going on in New Mexico.
Why are 2000 to 3000 Chinese
migrant workers in Farmington,
being trafficked. How come
nobody's been charged.
Um, we've had press from Japan,
from China, from France, I mean,
the BBC, NPR, you name it. And
it's about why our laws are so
lax. Why are we setting our
state up to be a playground for
traffickers, and we already, you
know, I've talked through the
years about why Epstein was from
here. So, um, I'm not going to
take up any more time, but I'm
just, you know, really grateful
that this bill is here this year
again, and I'm hoping that it
gets passed all the way through.
Next
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Maureen
Lamahaptua. Um, I've been
working beside Lynn Sanchez and
the human trafficking aftercare
program for over 12 years. And
um I work very closely with the
survivors that come into our
program and even survivors that
we try to relocate and get them
resources around other states
and around the communities.
Um, it's very crucial that this
bill gets passed, um, hearing
stories and seeing what these
survivors have gone through, um,
is very, um,
is very
Try, try, try, it's a very uh
extreme tragedy that they go
through. Um, and we need as much
as the state and the community
support as much as all you guys'
support and the legislating
office to help us, because we
can't fight this alone. We need,
you know, your support, and we
need all the community support
to help us with this. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Lorena
Cunha, and I've been working
with Lifelink for.
16 years now.
As a victim advocate.
I think it's uh.
Very
For lack of a better word.
Disgusting that.
The traffickers get a slap on
the wrist, but the victim
survivors.
They suffer in their own prison
with their trauma, their whole
life. Most of them don't get out
of that.
Some do get through, but most of
them don't, and some of them
have a lifespan of about 6 years
after they've been rescued.
They don't make it very far.
And I think that it would be
great if you guys could support
our bill and get it passed
through the hallway this time.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Madam sure members of the
committee, name is Jason Bowie.
I'm the secretary for the
Department of Public Safety. Uh,
this bill is on the governor's
call, all of us understanding
and recognizing the importance
of the fight against human
trafficking, sexual exploitation
of our children. I also serve on
the Governor's organized Crime
commission along with the
Director Har expert here today
and no small part of the chair,
Sam Bregman. We worked closely
with the organized crime
commission to really identify
the challenges in New Mexico and
we've, we've joined in
operations, uh, with our federal
partners in no small part in the
Mexico state police, uh, I was
really surprised to find.
uh, as we started in the
organized crime commission, how
pervasive this really was, not
only in the United States but in
New Mexico and what perhaps was
kind of the most surprising and,
and uh appalling was that you,
you stand to have a higher
penalty for trafficking of
controlled substance than you do
for a human being. And, and that
was very surprising to me. I
just never really stopped and
contemplated it, um, and that
should never be last year, uh,
as we were having one of our
committee meetings and we had a
briefing from our federal
partners we had learned that 86.
migrant and it was early in the
year had already died, um, on,
on our side of the border and
left, left abandoned and that
was just, I mean, you know what
happens when you hear the number
that early in the year, the
number, uh, being at 86 people
had died and left abandoned. It
was shocking, but it was even
more appalling was the
traffickers would then take
pictures.
Of the people who have died,
sent it back to the cartel
saying this one didn't make it
and then they would further
exploit and extort the families
for yet even more money. Um,
this is a tremendous failure,
uh, that we have within our
system. It's something that
needs to be remedied. We asked
for a, a unanimous support for
this. I'd be remiss if I didn't
mention organized crime
commission member, uh, John
Allen, Sheriff of Burnley
County, couldn't make it, and he
wanted to make sure that he
voiced his support for this as
well. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for being here.
Next
Hello, my name is Quentin Ray.
I'm the district attorney in
Curry and Roosevelt County. I'm
here today on behalf of the New
Mexico District Attorneys
Association, that is comprised
of 14 elected district attorneys
from both Republican and
Democrats, uh, we as an
association just wanted to be be
present today and say that we
support this bill, uh, to help.
Uh, bring justice and
accountability to our community.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, members of the
public. My name is Benjamin
Baker and I have the privilege
of working for our governor, um,
without belaboring, uh, with the
representative so eloquently
brought up the specific ways in
which this bill will address and
strengthen the weaknesses within
our human trafficking law. I
want to address what I hope will
come up later in your
examination, um, has to do with
the fiscal impact report
submitted by the Office of the
Public Defender. And what you'll
find is there in there is an
extraneous amount of detail
associated with um
What goes into the criminal
investigation, prosecution and
conviction of a human
trafficking offender, but what
you won't find in there is there
are very few examples from which
they can draw from.
I had the benefit of working on
both of the cases cited as an
investigator assisting the
prosecution and the appeals of
those.
New Mexico needs to pass this
law so they can remove
themselves from the list of
permissive states within this
country where human traffickers
seek to come open their billion
dollar enterprise. Uh, I am
grateful to the sponsors for
their willingness to lead on
this, and I'm grateful that for
this committee's continued
support, uh, to help us, uh, try
and forward this initiative.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee. My
name is Amanda Guterres. I'm a
major with the New Mexico State
Police. Uh, thank you for
allowing me uh a minute or so,
so.
Give some remarks in support of
this bill. Uh, this bill will
provide much needed updates to
the statutes related to human
trafficking in New Mexico.
As it currently stands, as
mentioned, the penalties for
trafficking and controlled
substance are much greater than
trafficking living human being.
is critical, this loophole is to
be, uh, this loophole in the
lobby closed. DPS strongly
supports this bill and believes
it will give law enforcement
additional tools to deal with a
crime that has become
increasingly prevalent in our
communities.
Human trafficking often targets
the most vulnerable populations
of our state, in particular, our
youth. It is critical we have
additional resources to help
protect them. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee, Frank
Zubia with the New Mexico Crime
Victims Reparation Commission,
our commission provides direct
compensation to victims of
violent crime in the state of
New Mexico.
In addition, we're also the
organization that funds 192
projects statewide. Some of
those organizations provide
direct victim services to those
victims of both sex and human
trafficking and labor
trafficking. I say that, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, because our
organization has expended close
to $600,000 on compensation to
victims of human trafficking in
the last two state fiscal years.
So we need to take care of this.
tissue because it from just our
projections that number
continuously increases every
state fiscal year. So that
number is getting larger.
I say that because it again, it
makes it easier for individuals
to continue to
Do illegal activity because
it's, it's a state that actually
has no accountability when it
comes to both labor and sex
trafficking. I thank you for the
opportunity, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Zubi.
And
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Victoria LeBlanc. I'm a deputy
district attorney at the
Bernalio County District
Attorney's office, and it is no
secret that human trafficking is
a crime that has victims all
over the country and New Mexico
has become an epicenter for this
kind of conduct, um, passing
this bill would be a huge step
in the right direction for both
law enforcement and prosecutors
to hold these offenders
accountable and to have more
protections for victims, and
Bernaleo County District
Attorney Sam Bregman absolutely
supports this bill. Thank you.
OK, is there anyone on soon?
7. OK. Um, because of time we're
gonna have to limit them to one
minute, um, first person on
Zoom.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle. I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
and New Mexico stands and strong
supporter of this. Thank you
very much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Larry
Sontag here on behalf of Better
Together with Mexico. We support
House Bill 86 because it brings
important amendments that will
enhance our ability to protect
victims, prosecute offenders and
work to prevent the sacks from
occurring.
Increasing the age of protection
to 18 years old will help
safeguarding our youth from
sexual exploitation. Likewise,
classifying human trafficking as
racketeering opens up a broader
levels of avenues for
prosecution, allowing for more
comprehensive approaches to
dismantle these criminal
networks. Human trafficking is a
scourge that requires our
immediate.
Action. We encourage you to
support House Bill 86. Thank
you. Hello, my name is Amber
Sullman.
I'm an native, a social work
student, and a mother of two.
My children and I are survivors
of sex trafficking. We're in our
3rd year recovery and still
receiving housing assistance and
other crucial recovery services.
Well, our story is compelling. I
don't have to share it with you
today.
I just want you to understand
that we did not receive the
justice we deserve.
As a result of that injustice,
my perspective
As a result of that injustice,
my perspectives, aspirations,
and quality of life are
impacted.
I have learned that injustice is
a common experience.
This from reality has motivated
me to continue pursuing higher
education.
And I intend to study public
administration graduate school.
One day I survivors with the
justice and support any appeal.
That's why I'm here 86 as it
aims to protect against
prosecution and expand recovery
services, address the underlying
demand of sexualation within our
communities and provide
survivors with more
opportunities for justice.
Thank you.
Madam chair, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Mason, and I'm a board
member and a registered lobbyist
for the legal and voters of
Mexico. The league stands a
strong support of HB 86 and
wants to thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward. The they
well involved the United States
opposes all forms of domestic
and international human
trafficking of adults and
children, including sex
trafficking and labor, um,
trafficking based on that
position leads to.
country who supported
legislation that will reduce
human trafficking.
So we did that cos
um to be passed this legislation
and give it a due pass. Thank
you.
Um, and you yourself and go
ahead.
Yes, uh, can you hear me? Hi.
Good afternoon, Madam chair of
the committee. This is Kathleen
Burke. I'm a resident of Bernao
County. I'm one of the people in
this committee meeting today
who's been fighting for
increased penalties on sex
traffickers for 5 years or more,
um.
Madam Chair, I would like to
make a plea to everyone in the
room today who comes from law
enforcement or comes from uh an
office of one of our elected
officials. I think that it's
really important that each of
you reach out to Senator
Cervantes prior to the bill
hitting the Senate and
Senator Cervantes, the necessity
of scheduling and passing this
bill through his committee, um.
That, that is where this bill
has been stuck, uh, in years
past, and we really need to be
proactive with. So please reach
out to him, um, by the way, I am
a former member of the New
Mexico Human Tracking Task Force
and I'm the former associate
director of Street Safe New
Mexico, uh, where I personally
knew dozens of sex trafficking
victims.
Myself and other people in this
room today have been sounding
the alarm about human
trafficking in New Mexico for
years. We have known for years
that New Mexico has been
vulnerable to becoming a haven
for sex traffickers, and now
we've seen that happen. It is
more dire than ever that we pass
this. Thank youresentative
Thompson. Representative
Matthews for bringing it, uh, to
committee once again and again,
those of you who are in
positions of power, please reach
out.
Senator Cervantes at your
nearest convenience. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Oh, OK
Duval.
Good afternoon committee and man
chair. I'm Duval Westfall vice
president for policy and
programs
at the Chamber of Commerce
and strongly supports HBAs for
bringing it forward. This bill
is all about protecting some of
the most vulnerable people who
wind up in our state. People who
are being held and traded like
commodities for profit, even the
sick pleasure of the very
disturbed individuals. Human
traffickers are extremely
heinous.
And critics will trot out the
defense and harsher penalties
don't criminals
that in the face of what you've
heard today in the headlines of
these modern slave owners who
profit off the misery of
their victims and preventing
more should not be put on the
back burner and for another
year. We respectfully encourage
you to once again pass 86. Thank
you.
Go ahead, Sabrina.
Yes, thank you. Um,
representatives. So my name is
Sabrina Montoya licensed
clinical social worker. I
specialize in working with
children that have been
trafficked. And I would like for
you guys to on how the 86. I've
been doing this work since 2013
and I have seen all ages of kids
that have gone through this.
And the importance of changing
this bill has the gravity that
you can't even imagine.
One of my kiddos that I worked
with was traffic for 13 to 15.
She read her victim in passing
that
She read her victim in passing
when one of her traffickers was
being sentenced.
He was sentenced to 10 years,
and that was the max. The other
traffickers were 5 and under.
When the outside of my office
and told me it feels like my
soul is leaving me every time I
lay down with John and I don't
know if there's anything left.
His heart wrenching.
And an unbelievable pain.
Passing this bill may have had a
little more justice in the very
unjust system that she had to
stand against as a child.
I hope.
On
everything there is in this
universe that you guys can pass
6
because the impacts of the
children that sit across from
me.
Those kids.
They are America's daughters.
They are part of our community.
And I hope that you vote.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that's OK.
Um
So is there, are we um
Well, is there anything else
you'd like to say before we go
to committee, OK?
Um, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives and experts.
Thank you for that earlier.
That's quite.
Shocking information.
And for those of you who don't
know, I have the um Chinese
slaves in my district.
In Torrance County and the
marijuana grow houses, the
gentleman that had it in
Farmington moved out to
Torrance.
Everybody knows it's a free for
all in this state.
They know they can get away with
whatever they want. We don't
have enough regulations. And
what I was trying to pull up,
Madam Chair Representatives and
for uh other people who
testified, I don't know if you
guys have this. I have the um.
Civil lawsuit, you guys have the
civil lawsuit by any chance of
the gentleman that is being sued
by the Chinese slaves. I'll get
that to both of you, Madam Chair
and our representative is got a
lot of information. I read that.
I have a ton of information,
which is quite shocking.
And I'm very glad that they're
suing him. They're not gonna get
anything because.
Um, that gentleman, I don't want
to mention his name because the
guy kind of scares me a little
bit. Um.
I also have what was released
from the um
The secretary to the US
attorney, I got that.
When that first happened, Man
Cherubs and they couldn't give
out any information, but I got
what they unsealed a few days
later cause I kept pestering
them every day.
And um,
I don't know what's gonna happen
to him, but they're looking at
life in prison for him, which I
hope he gets life. I hope he
spends the rest of his life in
prison, so he can know what it
feels like.
to be put somewhere where he
loses all of his freedoms.
Um, the civil lawsuit, Madam
Chair Representative is, is
quite horrifying. He, so there
was a gentleman in California,
right, so first of all, a lot of
the girl houses are being
invested by the Chinese. It's
right there in all the
documentation. The Chinese are
the actual ones who are
investing in these projects.
There's a gentleman, Madam Chair
representatives in California. I
believe they already picked him
up. What he does is he goes and
sends out to China that we need
people to work in New Mexico.
They tell them they're gonna be
cutting flowers.
And I, when I get this for you,
you can read it in there.
And then what he does is he
determines where he wants to put
these people.
They either go to a massage
parlor. Some girls are only 14
years old working in the New
Mexico, uh, massage parlors,
that's obscene.
for us to have that.
Or they go to the grow houses.
Or uh restaurants and nail
salons, some of the places,
these people are slaves.
When you read the conditions.
They worked
14 to 18 hours a day sitting on
a Home Depot bucket.
Trimming flowers.
I can't believe that this
happens in New Mexico.
I just can't believe that this
happens in New Mexico.
They're sitting on buckets. They
get one bottle if they're lucky
of water. This is what they
reported in the lawsuit. 1 may
be 2 if they're good.
And mostly no food and no money.
That slavery
The modern day slavery happened
in our own districts,
but man representatives, I will
print that out for you so you
can see and I don't know if
you've seen it, OK, I don't know
if you guys, I'll get you a copy
for you, you out there in the
audience as well because it goes
into great detail of what this
man was doing and how they went
to the paper and bragged about
what they were doing.
Uh
I have a hard time with how this
has been happening. I've been
screaming about it for the 2
years.
And I appreciate our law
enforcement officers who were
prepared to do something, but
then the feds took it over, and
I understand they have to take
longer, but that still broke my
heart, that took another 2
years.
To get where with the feds, but
there's a lot of charges being
launched at this man and I hope
to God that those stick.
So the most recent one, Madam
Chair Representative, um.
What has happened because I
learned about this from crimes,
crimes against children when I
went to symposium for that.
When they went to rescue a bunch
of the the Chinese slaves.
They didn't want to go cause
they were scared to death
because they're afraid that they
were gonna get killed or their
family was gonna get killed.
So they didn't go, they stayed
there.
Um
In the most recent raid, they
got 2 girls.
Out of there.
And one girl was actually being
sexually trafficked on top of
that.
So I've got people living in my
district.
Madam Chair Representative.
They are being held hostage and
I cannot wrap my head how this
is happening.
Other than the fact
There we are too lax on our
human trafficking. We went back
in, uh.
I think it was last year where
we added human trafficking on
the cannabis bill because we
passed that without enough
regulation. So we're, the
problem is,
This guy literally gave the
middle finger to New Mexico and
said, I'm going to keep
operating. I don't care what you
do, and it did take the feds to
go in and get those people out
and close them down cause he
would still be operating today.
So the biggest issue we have in
New Mexico Man representative is
that we don't have.
Enough teeth to go after these
people and to make it stick, to
make sure.
That
We don't have this happen again,
I, I still, I say it all the
time. I just can't believe in
this day and age I've got slaves
in my own district.
When you see what they were
living into, Madam Chair and
representative, everyone should
be absolutely disgusted living
in this plywood shacks.
No heating, no air conditioning,
living in bunk beds.
Men and women in one area. God
only knows what was happening.
So with that, I think I've
pretty much made it evident how
I feel about this. I'm just
frustrated that it it it's.
Taken this long and had to be
brought back repeatedly. It just
seems like sometimes those
things seem just like no
brainers like, oh, this is a no
brainer bill.
And then I know it goes to
certain committees and somehow
that bill gets killed there.
Um
Second to take a breath, very
frustrating topic for me cause
I'm very
Sorry, lack of a better word.
Irritated beyond belief that it
has taken this long.
And that we had people living.
Under these conditions for the
past 2 years in Torrance County.
And Estancia and two grown grow
houses.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, I just have
a few more questions on this
because I know you guys have
your dinner tonight. I want to
be respectful.
Madam Chair and Representative.
An expert.
Um
Also want to see
Thank you to DPS.
GPS because DPS does support the
bill, noting that it'll provide
additional legal tools to combat
human trafficking.
Um
There was something I did note
again with CFD, Madam Chair
Representative, something that
we need to look out for that may
stall this although I don't know
how.
CYFD would technically be
involved in that, but they're
stating that.
Um, they have a program for
minors.
That are being trafficked, um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
so.
It looks like they're kind of
been up a little flag, they
might need some more issues for
that, and I don't know why that
would affect them, but that's
one of the things that CYFD had
in there.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
Let me go back to the bill now.
Um
I'm just going back to what you
had said, Madam Chair
representative about the border
too, because we went to the
border. I don't know how many of
you have gone to the border.
And the border agents told us
with the human traffic and which
is huge down there.
What they will do, they go
around where the edges of the
wall are and it's just right
there.
And they'll cause a commotion so
that all the agents run over
this way.
And then they just release these
people from us. They showed us
they're like right there, that's
a stash house. People are living
in there, you went down there,
they're living right there, and
they pretty much starve them and
dehydrate them and they send
them out. It doesn't matter if
they die because you know what
I've told them we don't care if
they die because then all those
the 8 border agents run over to
rescue this person. It's usually
within a quarter mile of the
border.
Before we got there, I think it
was 2 days before an elderly
woman had died of dehydration in
the dump.
In the landfill, a woman died.
Because human trafficking makes
so much money.
She went to cry, she died.
And no one should be dying in
the dump.
Um, but it is a big issue on the
border.
Because there's so much money as
you stated Medicare expert, um,
for instance, there's so much
money in human traffic.
That
They don't really care about
somebody dying because what they
said when they talked to these
people, they don't care because
that now brings the agents over
to the dead body.
And they can scurry more people
over.
And that's a reality, and that's
a burden. I don't know if you
guys understand for us as
representatives a thing that we
learn and the stuff that happens
in New Mexico.
And the stuff that every year
we're like, why isn't this
getting fixed?
Why is this being stopped? Why
is this bill not going through.
I don't think I have any
question, I'm gonna leave that
to rips and block.
Thank you. Ask a bunch of
questions that Mo's more of a
statement of I don't understand
why.
This is an issue. It's
Beyond embarrassing, it's just
abhorrent.
That we are allowing this to
continue, and I think that this
should be the year that it goes
all the way through, and there
shouldn't be any stopping it,
and I cannot understand.
Why
And anybody who votes to kill
the bill.
I think they definitely should.
have a very detailed explanation
because I will be writing an op
ed of why they tried to kill the
pill because that's the only
tool that I have in the minority
is to call people out for not
passing a good bill.
So with that, Madam Chair, um, I
thank God that the Chinese
slaves been picked up, but guess
what?
They also take him to Oklahoma
and California.
So it's still happening.
They just rerouted them, the
ones that stayed are now in
other states, so it's kind of a
global issue that we need to
address.
And we've got people that you
can just basically send a text
handy slaves to come work here.
So, Madam Chair and
representative, that's all they
have.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
uh.
Representatives, right? There's
2 of you, and experts. So, Madam
Chair, Representative Matthews
and Thompson.
Uh, so I, I guess I'm wondering
currently,
What are the federal statutes
regarding human trafficking and
Are they even being prosecuted?
Madam Chair.
I don't know if that's for your.
Madam Chair Representative
Black, um, the federal statute,
there are federal statutes, of
course, on human trafficking,
um.
They typically are prosecuted if
they're.
Heinous enough conditions, I
suppose is the best way to put
it.
Um, you'll see them prosecuted
if it's just.
Very clear signs of there's been
rape, there's been violence
typically is a big one.
Um, so if there's been outright
violence towards the victims and
it's just kind of something
that's reached such a high
threshold, but outside of that,
You really don't see it much,
and I think because of some of
the tensions between especially,
you know, previously, some of
the tensions between prosecution
and border patrol, that kind of
limited people's ability to go
forward, but again, since
that's, I'm not a federal
prosecutor, I'm not.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives, and
I, I agree. I think that's
And a horrifying that it would
only be the worst of the worst
crimes cause some of these
people have been trafficked for
years at may not seem.
Horrifying
Maybe as horrifying, but you
know,
One instance of being forcibly
having to work.
For example, for subhuman wages.
And then being forced to do that
for years, I would think that
that would at least get
attention or even days, weeks,
months, but
OK, so that makes me understand
a little bit about why this bill
is so important and I did vote
for this last time, and I
totally support this
legislation. I think it's great,
first of all, so I'm not trying
to
Anyway, dismantled it, but I do
want to make sure that that is,
that is something that we
consider. So, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I did
like what you said about
The issue that we actually have
as a state because New Mexico
are laws, we don't have very
strict laws when it comes to
human trafficking and especially
regarding the border crisis,
because Madam Chair
Representative, when we were
down on the border.
What we heard
Was
Just a horrific story.
Of these traffickers who they
ask for 10,000 bucks a head.
To come across
And a lot of that, some of them,
they give 6000 upfront. They
have to work off the 4000.
And they are brought over, it's
mostly in Santa Teresa or Mount
Cristo Rey is.
And they have to
walking really hard to rein
across the desert, especially in
summertime, 10 105, 106 degree
heat.
And then they bring children
with them.
And what they do, Madam Chair,
is they use the child as bait.
When they get to the, the end of
the border barrier.
And because of the regulations
of border patrol, the child has
to be attended to mandatorily by
border patrol. So, Madam Chair,
while the, while they abandoned
an innocent little child.
At that border entry.
They are also bringing people
across and the few people that
are not able to be quick enough
to not be apprehended.
They, they can be left just to
die out there and, and the
wilderness. And
Then those people, they just
die. And like you said, the
cartel, it's, it's a no loss for
them, cause they've already
gotten their 6000 upfront.
They already made a profit on
this person. And that's just
horrifying. So,
Madam Chair Representative, how
would we be able to
To prosecute these individuals
when it comes to just like
single cases such as abandoning
a child.
And then how, how can we weave
this into our current statutes
when it comes to
Kidnapping laws in New Mexico.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Um, laws, if we, if we make the
amendments to the human
trafficking law that have been
suggested here, it will be much
easier to prosecute those.
Types of individuals. Right now
everything is so victim-based
for prosecution, and that's a
huge burden.
Um, for for your example, let's
say officers would be able to
testify based on their
observations because they'd be
able to say.
Um
We, we witnessed.
That they were providing and
moving these people across,
right? And we have a more
broader.
Definition of physical restraint
and those types of things. So it
allows state officers and state
law enforcement or state law
enforcement.
Federal federal law enforcement
can come testify in state court
as well, right? So just because
a federal prosecutor doesn't
prosecuted, a border patrol
agent, and we've had, you know,
they they're willing to work
with state law enforcement could
come testify. We could do a TuI
letter and they could come be
our witness and say this is what
happened.
So, I guess the answer to your
question is passing this bill
would allow us great. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair and
representatives, and I agree. I
think that that is so critical
that at least you have more
tools in the toolbox when it
comes to prosecuting these
people, which is just crazy.
And some of, honestly, in this
bill, looking at the current
statute, it really blew my mind
a little bit when I, I'm looking
at page.
3
When it comes to the age.
It's the age of 16 right now
when it comes to exploitation of
children for prostitution?
And so
Madam Chair Representative
currently in the state.
So if, if someone is 17 years
old.
They currently couldn't be
prosecuted under this statute,
that.
Kind of not the person, but the
The exploit
entity.
Madam Chair, is that kind of the
way I see that? Or is that in
some other section.
Because it appears that this is
just a higher degree of
Of the crime
You just lose it on that.
Madam Chair, represent a block.
Got it. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That, that is
just really blows my mind, and
New Mexico's statutes that.
16, which is
I just have such a huge problem
with that. So, continuing on,
Madam Chair here, um,
So can you go a little bit on
page 4, I see lines 3 to 7,
we're adding new language. Could
you just give me a little info
on why this is needed to add to
the statute, Adam Chair,
Representative, relating to the
peace officer.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, um.
So
This is specifically for sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution, so I don't know if
you're familiar with um.
There was, I think it was
November that Attorney General
Torres had announced that they
had found a sex trafficking ring
of parents selling off their
children.
You know, the officers are often
posing.
As either
Minor or something like that. So
this, this is a defense that you
see this on other types of.
Child sex cases. This just
brings it in line with kind of
everything else we normally do,
and we don't think that a
defendant should be able to
claim that as a defense that
they didn't, they didn't know
that it was a peace officer
posing as a child.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair. That does clear that up
for me. And then continuing here
on page 7.
So, I'm on the bottom of page 7
lines 16 to 25, we're adding
language harboring maintaining,
patronizing, providing.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess, is this intended just
to make the the verbiage a
little broader, so that
If, if someone, let's just say
they were soliciting, but they
weren't.
Providing
Or harboring the that could
maybe be a defense, I guess, or
is that kind of the definition
of why we're trying to
Rework the language, Madam Chair
and representative.
I chair, Representative Block,
this is, honestly, I think
something that would make this
easier is a specific example
would be stash houses. It'll be
much easier to prosecute people
for human trafficking when
they're running stash houses
because in that situation they
either harboring or maintaining
them and then providing will
make it easier, um, specifically
for people who are transporting.
So we have a lot of these Uber
drivers who know what they're
doing, they understand that
they're taking them to a stash
house. They're they're not
letting them out of the car.
So
you know, all of this just makes
it easier for those types of
situations because this is the
human trafficking situation has
changed so much in the last 10
years that it's set up like a
business and everybody does it a
different chain of.
Of the business just like it's
any other type of transportation
of goods. This expands that
definition to fit the actual
human trafficking process that
we're seeing.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and experts,
yeah, that, that does.
Give me pause that that's
currently not in the legislation
and we've seen Madam Chair, news
reports, even in communities
close to mine and border
communities especially, that
there's these stash houses and I
don't even know if you could
call him a house. I mean, like,
it's like a dilapidated single
wide trailer where they have 80
people living in there, and
they're living on top of each
other and it's horrifying and,
and I'm so glad that we're able
to close that up because I can't
believe that that is even
allowed in the state.
And I've seen in other states
like California, I think, and
Texas, they've done their job
to.
Clean up their statues and
ensure that this is added to
The criminal codes there.
So, I'm gonna continue here,
Madam Chair. I also want to say
it's kind of horrifying on page
8. It's the age of 13.
Regarding trafficking, guilty of
second degree felony, and I'm
glad that we're adding that to
18.
For the record, I'm glad that's
happening.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so next here page 9, I'm looking
at the word physical restraint.
So
Is there nothing in the current
statute that is barring someone
from
causing harm to a person but not
regarding physical restraint. I,
are we just trying to clarify
that as much as possible with
that language, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, I'll give you an example,
um, I don't want to give too
many details, but we had a
recent case where they were just
locking them in the room.
They locked them in. They didn't
hit him necessarily, I I
actually think there was some
force, but they were physically
restraining them in the room,
and this happens all the time.
So under the current definition,
right? It didn't.
Necessarily threatened to cause
harm.
Right? Even we don't always get
from the victims, especially
when English isn't their
language or they're just so
scared they don't wanna speak
with us. We don't always get
from them that they, they
threatened to kill me. We don't
always get, we almost never get
that great articulate phrase. We
just know they that they were
locked up, not allowed to leave
forced there for 3 days without
food and water.
That would help this.
This would now allow us to
charge them with human
trafficking.
Whereas
Right now, those, those guys are
not gonna be charged with human
traffic.
OK, that makes a lot of sense.
And thank you for the, the
scenarios. I think that's super
helpful to see how this could
actually be put into practice.
So that is incredibly helpful.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
I think I just had a couple
other questions.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
what about retroactivity?
When it comes to this
legislation, is it retroactive?
I'm sure.
Madame Cher was in a block, it
is not. Criminal laws are almost
never considered retroactively.
I know there are some exceptions
to that, but no, this will not
be retroactive.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives,
expert that helps me on that.
Want to be clear.
And so, yeah, I just, I guess
that's kind of mostly what I had
question wise, but I do want to
reiterate that I believe that
this legislation could help
alleviate.
The border crisis in the state,
and I hope it
Asses
And I pray it passes, and I pray
that the Senate
Votes on it and
Yeah, I, I have given my support
100%, and I hope this passes
just as last year from this
committee, but
I'm sure it'll get there, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your testimony and
uh for your insight and your
perseverance, representatives.
Thank you for being 5 years
strong, the 5th year is the
charm, I believe, Madam Chair.
From my lips to God's ears, I
hope.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Thank you, Representative, and
um I.
Um
I think this is something that's
really necessary listening to
all of the um testimony that
we've heard and also I was just
wondering, are there things you
added, um,
This
time this year, this spill, um,
that maybe wasn't in it before.
That will
Help with getting through the
Senate.
Madam Chair, um, that's always a
crap shoot.
It's, it's, um, it's very
similar to what there has been
some um reiteration, but it's
very similar to the, it wasn't,
it was more than 5 years ago,
but 5 tries.
So, um,
I don't know um if if the expert
has something else, but it's
it's markedly the same. Madam
Chair, I'll, um, I'll note that
we did add some debt bondage
language.
When we introduce this as House
Bill 116 last session.
And so I worked with the
Department of Justice of New
Mexico on this and we made some
very minor tweaks on that draft
for House Bill 116, but this
version is identical to House
Bill 116 from the left.
From a session a year ago.
Thank you very much. Um,
Is there anything else?
Um, Madam Chair, I just have one
quick question on the situation,
um.
Madam Chair, is there a mirror
bill in the Senate?
Yes, there is.
and, uh, representative, um, is,
does it go to Senate Judiciary
by chance.
I'm not sure, OK.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, it has not been
scheduled yet for Senate
Judiciary.
But I should.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
thank you for, for that and, and
just as a comment, I'm.
So admire your diligence and
persistence in doing this, and
we've seen this bill every
single year and support it every
single year for all the reasons
stated and um I hope, as with
every year that this is the
year, um, and, you know, uh
support it completely. Thank
you, ma'am. OK.
Thank you. Um, we have a
Our secretary is gone for a
minute, so we can.
Wait for just a moment, ma'am
sure.
OK.
Do pass in a second.
And
We will
Take roll call in just a moment.
Is there any opposition?
OK, we'll, we'll go ahead and.
Move for due pass uh without
opposition.
Thank you. You have a pass for
house Bill. I can never find the
Um, I just like to also add on a
boat of um 125.
55 to 0 is a due pass and if we
can have the room, uh, change
those who were here for '86 and
are not here for House Bill 89,
if you could please quietly
leave the room so we can bring
in other people. Thank you.
We have, um, House Bill 89
graduate scholarship Act
changes, um, Representative
Hoffman Ville.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
this is House Bill 89, uh, this
is changes to the graduate
scholarship Act, which
modernizes the graduate
scholarship scholarship act by
removing barriers to access for
postgraduate education in New
Mexico.
Especially for vulnerable
populations and the working
class and and working class New
Mexicans, just a few highlights
and the changes of this bill.
It prioritized students who are
New Mexico residents or who are
otherwise underrepresented.
It would create a new minimum
education requirement of a 3.0
out of a 4.0 scale GPA.
It would expand enrollment to at
least a minimum of 6 credits at
uh at the time of enrollment, it
would add a GPA requirement of
remaining in good standing
throughout the scholarship. It
would create a 6 credit maximum,
um, and it would also create an
award cap for students who
either receive their degree or
complete 8 semesters of the
scholarship, and lastly, the
amount of scholarship shall not
exceed 100% of the tuition and
fees funded one semester at a
time, and with that, Madame
Chair like
induce my expert sitting to my
right, um, Mister Victor Reyes,
who can explain a little bit
more about the bill and who he
is and his qualifications.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today,
um, and on behalf of myself, the
student region for the
university of New Mexico. I'm
also here on behalf of the
graduate Professional Students
Association who brought forward
this bill and asked um
representative Hochman B. Hill
to carry this important piece of
legislation. We're currently um
prohibited from covering what is
now the full cost of tuition, as
we've seen the cost of education
go up, graduate students have.
been limited in what they're
able to receive from the
scholarship. This scholarship
allows for the full cost of
tuition to be covered by these
important scholarships,
important recruitment tools,
important to make sure that
we're able to recruit and retain
New Mexicans and uh to be part
of these programs and
participate in the field of
graduate education and so I
think the sponsor for bringing
this bill forward to this bill
and um at the appropriate time,
I stand open for any questions.
that we stand for questions,
Madam Chair.
OK. Thank you. Um, is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill?
In the audience.
How about online?
I'm sorry.
OK
Um, is there anyone in support
of this bill in the audience.
OK, we do like to speak. OK, um.
I think
Uh, Sergeant at our our
security.
Abra,
uh, can you ask her the
microphone.
Give 2 minutes. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee and Linnea Montoya and
the associate director of
government relations at UNM. We
stand in strong support today of
this bill, and on also behalf of
our GPSA president. I'm not sure
if he is online or not. He was
in class at the time I was
texting him, but we want to
Just thank you guys for hearing
this bill and standing in
support of it. We also want to
thank our wonderful sponsors of
the bill as well. I know that
the GPSA has been working for
the past couple of months with
other um graduate and
professional student
associations at different higher
education institutions.
Uh, to get their input on this
bill as well. So we hope you
give due diligence to the bill
and thank you.
Hey, is there anyone else who
wants to speak in support.
OK, how about online?
One person, OK, go ahead, yeah.
1 or 2 minutes.
Mm
Hello, honorable committee, uh,
my name is Michelle Rivera
Ramirez and um
I am the graduate and
professional association at the
University of New Mexico, uh,
unfortunately I had class so I
can't attend in person, but uh I
in um in an approval of HB89
because I feel that in a
nutshell, this bill is meant to
Mexico residents graduate
programs with a scholarship that
is meant to cover whatever
living expenses they, they, uh,
need for graduate programs here
in the state,
uh, we've known for a long time
that um there's a lot of
professional fields here in the
state that are widely needed
from nursing programs to social
work to the law that are
lacking here in the state to
provide scholarship that really
incentivizes people to stay in
New Mexico and practice in New
Mexico goes a long way to fill
in those gaps and in my opinion,
uh, so I see this bill is a
direct investment back to
students who want to study in
New Mexico who want to uh later
practice in New Mexico, uh, for
myself.
You know, I come from a very low
income background and I'm
currently in law school and I
know how much of a burden
finances can be on um on
someone's education, and I know
that firsthand, but here I am
and I to fully practice when
they become a lawyer and
graduate from law school, but
again, I wholeheartedly uh stand
in uh approval.
HB 89. Thank you guys.
Thank you. Is there anyone else?
OK. All right.
Did you want to say anything
else before we go to the
committee.
Uh, no, Madam Chair, I think
we're just ready for questions.
OK, thank you. Um, we have
Uh, representative block first.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Reyes. Good to see you
guys here in front of our
committee.
So, Madam Chair, uh, a couple
questions, maybe more than a
couple, maybe a few, maybe
handful or 10 or 15, who knows?
But I'm just gonna start, Madam
Chair.
No pressure, right.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
OK, so I'm wondering, first of
all, the first page we're
talking about.
20
We're taking out 3 quarters and
we're just saying 2 semesters.
Not 3 quarters.
What, what change does that
make? Does that just
Is it because summer semesters,
some are quarters, some are.
Many quarters. I, I'm not
exactly sure. Can you just give
me a little info on that, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you Representative
Block. Um, I will give you my
best answer and then I will
refer to my my uh expert who can
confirm if I am correct, but I
believe you and I used to be on
a quarterly system and it has
since changed to a semester
system. So this is just updating
that language so that the
graduate scholarship Act is
current with what the semester
system is that we use.
And.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative. And
this goes to not just UNM but
any public institution in the
state.
So, Madam Chair, are there any
that do use quarters or or all
semester based now?
I just want to make sure that we
don't have to come back and
change it if they decide to be
special.
Oh
Madam Chair Representative
Black, I believe all are on the
the semester system, all of
them. OK, thank you so much. And
then next, Madam Chair.
Same thing on the first page.
I'm on line 22, says who's a New
Mexico resident?
So, Madam Chair Representative,
are we saying that currently
folks who are out of state
residents.
Could potentially get this if
maybe it was a distance learning
program, I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative
block, that is correct. We did
not have a requirement before,
uh, that's being in New Mexico
resident to receive this
scholarship, and so that is
definitely one of the changes
that we are looking to make
today.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So,
That helps a little bit with
that.
And then Madameer page 2, I'm at
the top on line 5. We're talking
about the higher or higher
learning commission, Madam Chair
Representative, I guess is North
Central Association of Colleges
and Secondary Schools, which
doesn't really flow off the
tongue. Does that still
or has it just been rebranded,
Madam Chair.
Madam Fair Representative Block,
same thing that is an an old
nomenclature for a uh a a new.
Old nomenclature for an
institution that still exists in
it.
Different name.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So then, going
down on the same page.
We're taking out the word degree
in.
And then we're changing it to a
doctor of
So, Madam Chair Representative,
currently, did this have applied
to people who are getting things
like master's and in public
health or other kind of
medical-based degrees and does
this narrow it to specifically a
doctor of medicine, Madam Chair,
or what about DOs like Doctor of
osteopathy, which is technically
a doctor of medicine, would that
also be included in this, and
I'm sure, and I don't know if
that's a public institution. I
think that re College, for
example, is private, but
I just want to make sure it's
all inclusive. If there's an OD
program in the future.
NMSU for example, or somewhere
else. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Block, um, this
actually everything would be
included except for those
doctors and medicine programs,
so those do those doctors will
be.
Everybody else would be
included.
OK, that does help me, Madam
Chair. Representative, OK.
So everyone, but
People getting an MD.
I believe so,
but what about Dio's?
There is no DO program at a
public institution right now, so
that would, it's, it's like it's
currently a non-issue.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, and that, that
helps. Although I do know that
there are public funds that did
go into helping build that
institution.
Back in 2016, I believe.
So
And how that falls, but if it,
if it doesn't fall on the bill,
I'll just, I'll just leave it.
So thank you all, Madam Chair
Representative. So going down to
the bottom of page 2.
Line 23, we're talking about a
scholarship may be rewarded to.
A New Mexico resident, which we
already had in page one.
Who has
Is a citizen of the United
States is what was stricken out
or has permanent resident visas.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
this is something I have a
little bit of a concern about
because Madam Chair, I just want
to make sure that
We're giving
Funds for educational purposes
to folks who want to stay in the
state.
And so Madam Chair
Representative, I know that.
It's kind of a problem we've had
and we've talked about it in the
health committee over the
interim. We want to make sure
that we're keeping New Mexicans
in New Mexico and people who
come to the state in New Mexico.
So.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
just wondering, do we have
concerns regarding if these
people would just come here and
get a, get a scholarship, and
then leave the state to go
somewhere else, a different
country, a different state.
And have we contemplated that in
this legislation.
Man.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, I'm gonna let my expert
go first and then I'll add a
few.
words.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, it's not a concern. The
reality is, is when we're able
to recruit individuals into the
state, what we see is that by
and large, these individuals
stay in New Mexico. And so being
able to bring students into
these uh these graduate programs
really increases the likelihood
that we see that that they stay.
We see this in in our graduate
programs in nursing. We see them
in graduate programs in law, um,
and some of the like really high
demand professions that we have.
So it's, it's uh
While your concern is well taken
in the reality is is that our
best tool and asset for being
able to recruit and retain
individuals is getting them in
the door at one of these
programs and institutions.
If I may add, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, this is
for New Mexicans,
right, so Madam Chair,
representative. And so does this
individual, do they, I know it
says resident. Do we have, do we
have a definition of what a
resident is in the bill, Madam
Chair, Representatives.
And if we don't, is it in
statute, and what is that
statute? It is?
Madam Chair representative
block, it is not specifically
defined within the bill, but I'm
sure you know a resident within
the city in Mexico is defined in
many ways in case law, um, also
in our venue statutes this for
the state of New Mexico and
civil procedure. And Madam Chair
Representative Block, the
Department of Higher Education
also has a definition of
residency that's, it's the same
residency requirement that would
exist for say the opportunity
scholarship currently.
Or the New Mexico Lottery
scholarship currently.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So I, I guess my
I ran a bill about the
scholarship a couple years ago.
And when I was researching it,
The opportunity scholarship, you
could technically give it to an
undocumented person.
Is that correct with this?
When it comes to the
Higher education scholarship,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair representative block
I actually anticipated that
you'd be asking this question,
so even though it is not
specifically in this piece of
legislature, legislation, there
is a federal requirement that,
um, these students are um
citizens and that they are
residents of the state in order
to uh in order to qualify.
To get these funds, so it is not
in this state law per se, but it
is a.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative that.
OK, so there are federal
regulations. Is it a regulation
or is it just law?
Because I just want to make sure
if it's, if it's in regulation,
it can't just get stripped out,
for example, by an executive
order in the future
we know Madam, if you give me a
second, I can, it's actually in
the analysis, but we, you can
move on and.
OK, sure. Well, I kind of was
going to get to the analysis
too. So I think it's in the fur
on page.
One
And I think it's the 3rd 1 on
the fur, is that?
But you were also looking at,
madam.
I'm, I'm sorry, madam Chair
Representative block, can you
repeat, repeat that? I'm
sorry, my apologies. Thank you.
So I think, is that on the
representative Lord saw it, OK.
Uh, I think it's on the 2nd page
of the fur.
And it's under the UNM reports,
Madam Chair, I think it says.
HB 89 removed citizenship or
other naturalization
requirements to qualify.
And it also says,
They must remain legally
authorized to study.
That's just a study. So Madam
Chair Representative, I guess.
For example, if they had a visa
that that ended.
At a specific date after that
date.
But
The state
Pull back the funds for future.
Educational opportunities in the
state, or how, how does that
work? Cause I know visas are
very fickle with.
Time and date and they they
expire in certain places and I
just want to make sure that
these people, if they're not
legally in the country, they
would no longer receive the
funds, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, representative
Black wine, not an expert on
immigration law, and I do not
purport to be one, I, the way I
would read this language is the
person, uh.
Receiving access to these funds
must be here legally and
authorized to study in the
United States, so they were no
longer authorized to study here,
they would no longer be uh
eligible for the scholarship
funds.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
are the funds paid upfront? or
how do, how are they paid out,
Madam Chair, representative.
Madam chair.
It would be Madam Chair,
representative, so my
understanding of the way this,
this, uh, these funds are
distributed is it would be
awarded through the bursar
account of each individual
student, so the universities
would be given the funds, the
universities would make the
awards, um, and then the bursar
accounts would be updated
knowing that that scholarship
existed. So, um, a student would
know at the beginning of the
semester, whether or not they
would would be receiving that
award.
OK. Sounds good, Madam Chair
Representative. And is there a
check for
folks who are not documented or
they, they have a visa, for
example, would, is there a check
and balance to make sure that
that visa doesn't expire before
the end of the term.
In the application process,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, my
understanding and speaking to I
can speak to the University of
New Mexico in the way that we do
it. What happens is that um when
you say an international student
comes in and is is is working
under is a a studying under a
visa, the university knows that
and is um is ensuring that there
is compliance with that visa.
Um, and so we would know.
What everybody, what the status
was, um, certainly when and when
making these awards.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Represented that.
That's good to hear that.
Universities are doing that. I
just want to make sure that
not.
Giving money and then they have
to leave the country or or
whatever it is, and I think
that's important to.
At least ensure that we have
compliance with the law. So, OK,
continuing here, I, as you can
see, like my bills I write so
many words on them, and I have
questions. So I'm gonna continue
here. So on page
3, Madam Chair, Representative
Mr. Reyes.
We
Have online survived to 9.
That it says enrolls in at least
6 credit hours in a graduate
field of study.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess I'm just wondering what
was
So it used to say full time. So
full time previously, what was
it defined as and is this
redefining that or is, what is 6
credits because Madam sure, it's
been a while since I was in
graduate school.
And
I think I took maybe
9 credit hours a semester, so
I'm just wondering, is that
Normal or what, what is the
normal?
Full-time requirement, at least
in statute or whatever we're
trying to define here, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Black, I think this is another
example of when we were just
trying to modernize language, so
Mr. Ray is um again can kind of
help, um.
Explain how that modernization
makes more sense in this
context.
Absolutely, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, um, this,
what this language change does
is it recognizes the reality of
the varying types of graduate
programs. For instance, they're
a doctoral MD PhD MD program,
the PhD component doesn't
require as many hours because
you're also at that point
working on your thesis, right?
And so you can be what you would
consider to be a full-time
student would be considered to
be a full-time student by the
university by having 6 credit
hours at that point. So this
makes
make sure that we recognize the,
the varying different degrees
and what their requirements
might be.
All right, thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative Mr.
is, OK, that, that just, that
clears it up for me, but I think
Maybe
I I don't know what a PhD
program has, I think that there
actually are.
Credit hours for those times
that you are doing your thesis,
maybe, and I, I don't know what
PhD there's like PhD, there's
doctor in education, there's
A doctor in business.
I know programs are all
different. So by defining
specifically 6 credit hours,
let's just say you took off.
You want to spend much time
actually doing your thesis and
you took maybe a 4 credit hour.
class, and that's all you took
in that one semester.
Would it elapse that semester if
you.
Didn't want to take 6 credit
hours to get your PhD and could
they be eligible again in the
next semester if it did indeed
lapse, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative, if
I understand your question
correctly, you're asking whether
or not if a student who is
currently receiving the
scholarship, chooses to take
less credit hours, would they
then not be eligible for the
scholarship?
In, in the future, Madam Chair.
The answer is that they would
not be eligible for the
scholarship, Madam Chair
Representative, my apologies,
that they would not be eligible
for this scholarship that
semester, but they could be
eligible in the future. So there
is a minimum, this would
establish a minimum threshold of
the credit hours that would be
required for them to take in
order to receive it for that
semester. But this does provide
more flexibility, Madam Chair
Representative for the students
um who would be receiving and
could continue to be receiving
the scholarship.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative. So as long
as they
do not have credit that
semester, they are still
eligible. So it wouldn't be,
it's not like a one time thing
where you got to get it now and
if you don't, you're done. OK.
That helps a lot. So continuing
on here, I see some stricken
language on page 3.
15 to 18.
And it talks about Reddit.
Served or
Uh, service and unpaid
internship or assistant role.
Why are we removing this portion
of the statue, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
again, this kind of reflects the
realities of where we are, I
think in higher education spaces
right now where we are, we don't
offer as many unpaid internships
as they once were, um, TA
positions, for instance, are no
longer unpaid, and these are
critical positions that are
graduate students serve. And so
by removing this requirement,
we're not keeping people out
simply because they're being
paid for their participation in
these types of graduate programs
and assistantships.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK. And then
what about, does that also
include such things as if you're
Working as a library assistant
or some kind of other.
job
Type thing on campus.
Does that change any of that
with this legislation or would
the individuals still be able to
be like a library.
Person at all hours of night
cause I know some people have
done that.
I'm just wondering if that's
changed it all.
Madam Chair Representative, this
is in, in mind of that library
assistant, right? So, somebody
who is working at the library
and being paid um for that
service would not be precluded
from being from participating in
this simply because they are
participating in that
programming.
All right. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Representative. And
then next on page 4, I'm just
gonna go a little quick and go
to the middle of that page.
And we're talking about receives
a terminal degree or as
qualified. So Madam Chair
Representative, that
So, we're talking about terms
versus semesters there.
You just give me a little info.
On that
Language.
That's on line 15.
Madam Chair Representative, a
terminal degree would mean the
completion of the degree.
So they've completed that degree
in that study or qualified and
received 8 semester scholarship,
whichever one occurs first.
So my, my understanding of what
a terminal degree, the
definition of a terminal degree,
um, it's a higher education term
which means the completion of
the highest form of degree. So,
for instance, in the law, it
would be a juris doctrine.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Would this
person be eligible for like an
LLB then? I know that's after.
Doctorate after a JD. If, if we
offered that program, yes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. OK, that helps.
And then
Another question about graduate
study. So if, if someone has at
least 6 credit hours, let's just
say they have 9, and they fail
one class, but they keep their
GPA at 3.
0
I believe is the requirement.
Would they still be eligible for
this? And would we still be
paying for that failed class,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative, yes, they would
still be eligible if they failed
the class and maintain a 3.03
point average, they would
obviously not be receiving
credit for the class, um, for
those credit hours.
It's very difficult, I think, to
maintain a 3.0 when you when you
fail the class, it gets tricky,
you need to be outperforming in
some of your other classes and
depending on how many credit
hours you're taking, but uh yes,
we would the scholarship would
cover that class that that the
student did not receive credit
for.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, because I know
in graduate school, you don't
get a B.
At least the graduate school I
went to EMU, if you don't get a
B, you fail.
So, let's just say you have like
a 709.
And it's right on the cusp
there. So if that
Agree, you do not get that one
class, which is
technicality. I know some
professors are very strict about
that. They're like, well, it's
not a bee, so you didn't pass.
So I'm just wondering,
Is the state still paying for
that class, even if it was not
completed with actual credit,
Madam Chair, and I'm seeing a
head nod. Could you just, Madam
Chair Representative, it, it
would be covered so the student
would not be on the hook for
paying that class if they were
not able to receive. For
instance, I think, uh, at the
law school, I think you have to
receive a 2.0 in order to get
credit for the class.
And so, say I were to, I
Um, say there was a student that
was receiving the scholarship,
and they received a 1.9, um,
they would not receive, they
would not receive credit for the
clause, however, they would not
be on the hook for paying that
paying for this, that that
credit hour.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
then my last question is, I know
we're changing the word
commission to department. Was
there previously commission that
looked over this because I know
we have HED now, so I'm just
wondering.
That's clean up language or what
does that mean? Madam Chair.
Representative, and that's on
page 3. That's line 11.
31
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct. That is just cleanup
language.
All right, thank you so much,
Madam. Thank you,
Representative, and thank you,
Mr. Reyes for the detailed
explanation. Thank you. Thank
you.
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative experts. I
just have a few questions, um,
I don't know, I don't think
represent block.
Answer this or ask this
question.
What is the drive to push this
from full time to part time.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
it's not so much a drive to push
it from full-time to part-time.
This is just recognizing the
reality that different programs
require different to have
different requirements when the
graduate field, for instance,
the PhD programs have different
requirements for what would
might be considered to be um a
full-time student. In addition,
uh, representative Lord.
Especially when you're
completing your program, they're
often times where you're going
to see that you don't have, for
instance, a full-time law
student, um, is 12 credit hours
at the minimum. And there's
gonna there are students that
they hit that last semester, and
the reality is, is that they
only need 6 credit hours.
And in order for us, we don't
want to waste resources, we
don't want to force students to
take classes that they otherwise
wouldn't need to take to meet
their graduation requirements,
especially for instance in the
law, I'll give you the example
that I'm closest to. You have to
start studying for the bar. Um,
you have part-time employment in
order to start paying for your
bar prep services or whatever it
is, your housing, your meals. So
this recognizes that we're not
going to try, we're not going to
um require students to use
resources that they otherwise
wouldn't need to complete their
degree program.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
represent an expert. I can
understand that when I
transferred to one school to
another, they did not take a
bunch of my credits and I just
take a bunch of classes I didn't
want to take just to keep cause
I had to keep that.
So many credits to graduate. So
man, I want it on the.
I want to address some of the
University of New Mexico
concerns.
And they had
Uh, with this scholarship, by
the way, before you get to that
miniature who, uh, what is the
picking procedure for this
particular scholarship.
What the requirements, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, the the way that this is,
uh that happens is that the
higher education institution
gives out these funds dependent
on it's a, it's a formula that
they use based on enrollment to
ensure that every single higher
education institution has access
to this this funding, um, and
then the institutions themselves
have the discretion to award
these funds.
So we are what what this bill
would do is it would give a
little bit more guidelines and
framework on how to award them.
Uh, the reason I asked Madam
Chair and representative because
I know that.
With the line of work like what
my husband does, they give
priority to certain people. Uh,
if you are a female in the
military, you get top choice
when you get a contracting job
for the government. Is there
anybody who is giving, giving
top choice when they apply for
these scholarships. Is that part
of the process, Madam Chair
Ribson?
Madam Chair Representative, one
of the provisions in this bill
is to look at underrepresented
communities and so that could
include veterans, that could
include rural New Mexicans,
people from communities that are
underrepresented within the
school. So there would be um the
the um kind of signal to these
higher education institutions to
look at some of those factors
when making their
determinations.
And men of Cha representative
expert, would that be looking at
the school in its entirety or
the programs that they're at or
the scholarships, would they be
looking at our school needs more
of this or this program needs
more of this or the scholarship
needs more of this.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe that it would be looking
at the program and saying that
this program needs more of these
of these type of these
individuals that have this uh
these underrepresented that have
come from these underrepresented
groups. Thank you, Madam Chair,
I appreciate that answer. Um,
So repeatedly, I know you'd
addressed this question, but I
want to readdress it repeatedly
in every single one of the
analysis man representative
expert talks about this is going
to remove citizenship or other
naturalization requirements to
qualify the scholarship.
Graduate students must remain
legally authorized to study in
the United States. Can you
explain what that means? They
have to remain legally
authorized.
The study in the United States
because it's conflicting. It
says a lot that you have to be a
citizen, but then it says you
can study. So can you explain
that part to me?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, so I mean, I think you
have to look at it to two
different.
Parts, right, so there's the
federal law equivalent and that
you have to have a visa, student
visa or some sort of federal
authorization to allow you to
study and then you have the
actual uh requirements of the
scholarship through the graduate
act through the school through
the state of New Mexico, which
have all of the residency
requirements, um, so you have
to, you have to be able to meet
the requirements of.
Both of those.
Buckets, both of those
requirements and Madam Chair, I
understand it's just like in
every single analysis like
that's the first significant
issue that they keep pointing
out.
Um, Manchurian ribs and I don't
know if you also saw um.
UNM reported.
A significant issue.
Um
The bill sponsor may want to
reconsider some of the language
choices in an amendment, Section
2. B, removing the criterion of
full-time student.
Uh, criterion of enrollment in
at least 6 credit hours may
create confusion because
full-time status is calculated
different. You go on a lot of
words in here. Did you read
that? And do you have any
answers to this because they
have issues on section 2 point B
and Section 3A.2 and a specific
GTA uh GPA criteria of
maintenance grade point average
of 3.0 or higher on a 4.0 scale
induces a significant issue when
paired with the existing
language that they remain in
good standing.
You want to address either one
of those from him. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. So I did see um
that in the analysis, uh,
unfortunately I did not receive
the analysis until just a few
hours before this committee, um,
of the little digging I did do,
I mean, it it you know is a
large place, right? And so the
different graduate programs have
different uh.
Language and different
requirements, the way that they
look at things and so um I do
have an intent to go back to
GPSA and make sure that whatever
language we do utilize is is um.
Usable throughout the app, so
there is no question as to what
the requirements are and how we
treat them and what the
language, what the proper
language should be just because
different people use different
terms in different places, but
thank you for bringing that up
and yes, I do, uh, intend to go
back and you want to add? Sure,
I'll just add, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lord. So this,
uh, I believe that this analysis
was provided by Dean Lane and I,
I, I have a call into Dean Lane
to to discuss this issue.
I, I don't see it as much of an
issue and neither did I think
the individuals that actually
administered these scholarships,
um, as being an issue with this
language, but it's certainly
something that, you know, as we
move forward in the process, uh,
God willing, um, that we could,
that we can look at and address,
um, but the, the reality is, is
it beli I believe that what it
points out in my opinion, is
that the language works it by
making it a requirement that
they hire enrolled in at least 6
credits. We cover those students
who have assistantships.
And those in addition without
assistance ships. So I, I don't
see it as much of an issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
actually like yours higher of
the 3. now I'm like, you know.
Just think from when I was in
college, 2.0 is really low,
sorry, if you're gonna get a
scholarship, you should be
putting in the work and getting
a 3 point or try to figure out
why you're not.
Getting higher grades in
college, um, just to let you
know, I'm, I'm, I'm not opposed
to the bill, but I'm gonna vote
no because I have more
questions. I don't fully
understand and before I vote for
anything, I like to dig and do a
lot of digging to find out what
the bill fully encompasses and I
don't have a full grip on that.
So just let you know, it's going
to be a no for now until later
when I can talk to you more
about the bill and talk to other
people. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Next, we have um
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just have a few questions on the
um
Just on some of the language and
then on the credit hours just so
I can familiarize a little bit
better, just on their credit
hours with 6 credit hours. Is
that the average amount of, um,
just where did the credit hour
number threshold come from I
chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, I think what the 6
credit hour threshold is exactly
what we were just talking about
a little while ago, that 6
credit hours is what you would
need to be considered to be an
enrolled student when you have
an assistantship. So that's kind
of the, the bottom threshold
there for what it would be to be
a full-time or what might be
considered a full-time student
with an assistantship would be
that 6 credit hours.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
are there any scholarship
programs for those who are part
time working, supporting their
families and also trying to earn
their degree while juggling a
lot of that. I know there's a
lot of students that would love
that financial support.
also, you know, academic
readiness.
But can't afford literally to
even take a scholarship because
they can't afford the time, um,
that it would take to be a
full-time student.
Um, do we have any programs like
that currently, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
Madam Chair, representative
Romero, um, the answer is yes,
there are scholarships,
absolutely for part-time
students. And the reality is, is
that this, this scholarship.
With these amendments would be
able to cover and make sure that
a student could complete their
program, right? And making sure
that a student that's awarded
this, it is so long as they're
enrolled in 6 credit hours, they
could complete it, which is not
full-time, full-time status in,
in certain programs. Um, so
that's something, something to
consider, but yes, the
university has a variety of um
institutional awards that would
cover, to cover varying
part-time enrollment and um
It's not to say that we don't
need more.
Um, I think it's, I think what
I'm hoping in part this
conversation around this bill
is, is that
The graduate education continues
to be one of the places where we
need to increase our support for
because it continues to be out
of the hands of a lot of New
Mexicans, and we need to do what
we can to ensure that we are
providing that support because
as we, you know, we all see it
that an undergraduate degree is
truly becoming the floor and not
the ceiling, and we need to be
able to show that we're, we're
incentivizing that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, and
Victor for helping fill in the
gaps. I think part of the
Question, I know that when
deciding to go to grad school
myself and juggling this job in
particular and know so many
folks are in the same.
is to try to figure out how to
make the finances pencil out,
the more that we can do to meet
students where they are, um, the
better, and I know that it was
never an option for me cause I
couldn't afford to extend, you
know, um, the amount of time to
do that. So any way that we can
sort of.
Think that through and you said
the university, Madam Chair
representative.
I'm, I'm thinking also of our
community colleges, I'm thinking
of some of our, um, you know,
smaller schools around the state
that aren't just UNM that um you
know, could potentially be a
part of this program that could
offer a broader variety of
students that opportunity, if we
can create more flexibility
there. It's just a comment, um,
Madam Chair Representative. I
know that there was a bit of
chat uh about the why we are
excluding doctors of medicine.
Can you just clarify for me, um,
is that an expense situation or
Why we're excluding the PhDs or.
Um, upper level degrees in this
category considering that JD's
are in that category as well,
Madam Chair, representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, what the reason that
they are not included in this
scholarship, and that's current
actually as it is right now, is
because that there are other
separate scholarships that are
er that are solely for doctors
of medicine. OK. And so we have
those funds, uh, that are
appropriated every single year
specific towards those awards.
And Madam Chair Representative,
when we looked at the FIR for
the folks who are already um
eligible for.
The current scholarship program
for upper level students, are we
meeting the um.
I guess
With the funds that are already
appropriated for those graduate
students, are they being
expended fully every single
year, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, yes, they are.
And so, Madam Chair,
Representative, how many more
students would we be able to
support with this bill.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, this bill would ensure
that we're able to cover the
full cost of tuition for the
students that are already
covered the 6 students, Madam
Chair, representative, would now
be fully covered through the
program to be fully covered.
That's correct. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative, and then
just a suggestion in section 2,
and I don't, I'm trying to look
at.
You go to HEC next, um.
And that's education, right?
Sorry, I don't know any of the
acronyms anymore, um, but I
would just recommend, um, on
page 2, section 2, starting on
line 18, and this is just
recommendations from, um, the
drafters catching, I think some
of the redundancy with the New
Mexico residents, um, is that
rather than priority just.
Talking about award recipients
shall be given.
Um, 2, and then.
Basically take out, well, you
could leave a New Mexico
students and then take strike
who are resident, New Mexico
residents, even with greatest
financial need and students and
then strike who are residents,
um, and just leave in from
groups underrepresented in
graduate education. I'm happy to
provide that for you in order to
remove the redundancy, and since
you define award recipients, I
think it would clarify that
language, um.
And with that, thank you for
bringing this forward, Madam
Chair, um, I think there's just
so many opportunities to expand
the other thing I would also
love.
This is just broadly and of
course I'm not working on the
bill and it's always like, well,
bring the bill if you want it to
do that, um, but Madam Chair,
uh, representative is to figure
out how to keep people here
after they get their degrees and
incentivize that through doing a
year or 2 years of public
service doing um some way for us
to tie it to jobs and the
handoff to a New Mexicoba job as
soon as your scholarship is
being completed in your last
semester, that this is the
handoff to that skilled.
Job that you just earned your
credential for, so, um,
I don't know of anybody that's
working on that, and I didn't
bring the bill, but Madam Chair
Representative, if there was
somebody doing that, that's what
I would love this scholarship
program to also tie into it.
Thank you. I wanted to make a
comment.
Oh, are you, I was, I was gonna
make a motion now for due pass,
OK, we have a motion for a due
pass, but I have a question. Um,
I'm carrying a bill for graduate
behavioral health scholarship
fund, um, that will include
counselors, counseling,
psychiatric nurse practitioners,
psychology, social work, and
Do you think your bill is more
is more overarching or um
Victor, I think you mentioned
there were other um
scholarship funds that
had different, um.
Targeted students.
Yeah,
Madam Chair, the answer to your
question is there is
No limit to the amount of
scholarships that we can have
that we can cover. So currently,
the students that you, they
believe that your scholarship
would would cover would be are
eligible for the graduate
scholarships. That does not mean
that they cannot also be
eligible for another type of
scholarships. Right now, the
appropriates of the graduate
scholarship Act is $488,000.
That in no way covers the needs
of all New Mexicans who are
entering into graduate programs.
And so, you know, I think it's a
great thing that we're
creating more scholarship
opportunities and that
especially when you're looking
at some of these fields that you
believe are a priority. I think
we should be finding ways that
we can incentivize students
going into those programs.
OK, great. I just didn't want to
be.
Dundants and um to.
A that have it as an add-on. OK,
thank you. So we have a motion
for do pass so I here a second.
OK.
Yeah.
Is there any opposition to this
bill?
OK, so we'll take roll call.
Representative B block.
No, ma'am.
Representative of Lord. No.
Representative Ramiro
Representative Thompson, yes,
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
Chair. Yes.
You have on a vote of 4 in favor
and to opposed for a due pass,
um, on House Bill 89.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Do
OK, next we have House Bill 87
nonconsensual touching
clarification, um,
Representative Hochman B. Hill,
anytime you're ready. Thank you
very much, madam. I, I'm sure
members of the committee. So,
um, we find ourselves in a very
interesting place with this
bill, um, I am my own expert,
uh, this issue was brought to me
by a constituent in house uh
District 15, and so essentially
what she let me know was.
Um, she had a young daughter who
was unfortunately the the victim
of an unwanted sexual assault,
and she found out through that
process that New Mexico's
current law, the way, uh, is
written in terms of a
nonconsensual touching is that
such a touching has to be, um,
without clothing in order to
constitute a nonconsensual
touching, which to me,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, doesn't make a lot of
sense.
So, uh, we did some research on
it, we tried to look into the
legislative history, see if we
could find any testimony, uh, to
kind of give us more thoughts
into the legislature's state of
mind when they are passing this
bill couldn't really come up
with anything, and so I thought,
uh, that it would behoove me to
bring it in front of you, my
esteemed colleagues and this
committee to uh talk about this
issue and see if this is.
Indeed, the um the nonconsensual
touching act that we want to
keep on the books in New Mexico,
if it makes sense to keep it
this way, or if we want to have
a conversation about changing
it, and so I am here, uh, in
front of you, I'm looking for
essentially.
Your thoughts and the
committee's thoughts on this
bill and whether or not uh
whether or not it needs to
change.
So here we are, madam, and I'm
open for for questions.
Thank you.
It is so brave to take
constituent issues and just come
in, but it's worthwhile and very
appreciated, I'm sure, um.
Oh, yes, we have to go. Is there
anyone in opposition?
I was gonna go to the audience
with this, OK.
Anyone online.
Anyone in support.
One person, OK.
Good afternoon again.
I'm West vice president for
policy and programs is the great
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
and the chamber really
appreciates the sponsoring for
this bill and strongly supports
86. This bill is all about
protecting, um, you know.
I'm sorry, sorry.
Did the FIR shows uh the the
section of the law has not been
updated since 1993. And since
then, there's been a greater
understanding that unwanted
sexual contact can occur
regardless of how or whether one
is dressed. The majority of
other states have amended their
laws, addressing unwanted sexual
contact either not referencing
dress at all or specifying that
it versus unclosed is
irrelevant.
This amendment would update
definition of.
Criminal sexual contact to allow
more assaulters to face
penalties for unwanted sexual
contact and be more consistent
with other definitions
nationwide. It's designed to
better protect New Mexicans,
especially our children from
predators. And then again, we
applaud the sponsor for bringing
it forward, and we encourage you
to support. Thank you.
Thank you. OK, now we will go to
the committee. Is there anyone?
A representative Lord first and
then block and.
see.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, just a few questions
on this.
Um
And this is for Madam Chair and
this is for all ages, right?
All, everybody, all ages, so
it's not just minors, not just
adults, it's everybody, is that
correct? Madam Chair
representative, I believe that
is correct.
And Madam Chair Representative,
um,
If someone is convicted of this,
do they go on the sex offender
registry.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
what I do not believe so. I
don't think that's part of the
bill, but I could be sent
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
what I do not believe so. I
don't think that's part of the
bill, but I could be corrected
if there's another expert in the
room who knows better. I know
you have some great criminal
lawyers sitting behind you.
Yeah, Madam Chair my, my, I
would like to because I want
them to, I mean, if they're
groping people, they should be
on a sex registry, so I just
wanted to know if this 30-9.
12 there were.
Mending
There's nothing in this Me, how
long ago was this written?
At Madam Chair Representative
Lord, I believe 1993. Yeah, it
looks like it.
It really does,
um.
OK.
So what we're talking about.
Touching somebody
inappropriately, cause I wanna
make sure this is defined in
here. Hold on one second.
OK.
So Moun Chap representative, um,
So criminal sexual contact does
not include, that's as in B.
Touching by a psychotherapist on
a patient.
That is inadvertent.
Casual, so it's it's interesting
they put that in there, so there
must have been an issue with
this casual social contact.
Um, I'm sure representative,
would you?
Think that would be like giving
someone a hug. They were a
therapists hugging.
What would be social.
Casual social contact
psychotherapist.
Uh,
Madam chair uh Representative
Lloyd, you're you're asking me
to, um.
Go into a hypotheticals, but in
my mind I think about, you know,
maybe you go in for a hug on
someone and you accidentally
touch a part of them that you
didn't mean to, and that would
be an inadvertent.
Contact. And I, I agree with
you, man, cause I was going
through them, it's like, OK,
it's got, they got it.
When things aren't, you know,
defined for me, I have to try to
grasp at what they're trying to
get in, I think what they're
saying.
Thank you for taking out the
is all they really need to say,
but it could have gone with some
more descriptions.
Um, so, Madam Chair
Representative,
So when it goes on to see and
the I'm asking this specific
reason, criminal sexual contact
in the 4th degree consists of a
criminal sexual contact.
Perpetrated by the use of force
or coercion, so we have that.
What I'm thinking in my head, I
want to make sure.
And representative that.
I'm trying to find the for me in
my head, the definition between
overt.
Inadvertent, meaning you
accidentally do something.
Because whenever we'd go to
change something, I want to make
sure that.
There's a very good descriptions
about.
What is covert, what is?
Touching another person.
I think Madam Chair
Representative at court, I do
mean covert or coerced Covert, I
mean, like if you go up and grab
somebody, that's very they
touched you inappropriately.
I'm trying to make sure.
I'm Cha representative. I don't,
for some people, just touching
them in general and be.
Considered an assault.
Hugging them can be an assault.
Hugging them tightly can be an
assault.
Uh, representative, um.
This bill is just adding whether
or not it's clothed or.
Right, yeah,
that's OK, I'm trying to get it.
If someone is not clothed and
you touch them, that is.
It's very strong evidence that.
They were coerced into something
and touched inappropriately
because no means no, right?
I'm
Help me to understand the fine
line because I support your
bill.
I'm just trying to find that
fine line of
Not making sexual contact.
Because it says inadvertent.
Or I get hemmed up is.
What if somebody hugs you too
long.
See, without things that are
described to me, my brain has a
really hard time.
Trying to figure out the
difference between
I mean, somebody's not clothed,
right? You touched as blatant.
But if we're saying that they're
clothed, yes, blank would be go
up and grab somebody's.
Genitalia part. That's obvious.
But where are we, is there
someplace in here that you could
just show me to give me peace of
mind that
If somebody's being hugged.
Is 1 2nd, OK, 5 seconds now
becomes.
A sexual contact. That's what
I'm trying to get at cause I
want to support your bill, but
that's the only thing I'm still
hemmed up on, if I could, um,
bring your attention, Madam
Chair, Representative Lord to
page 27, subsection C. Criminal
sexual contact in the 4th degree
consists of all criminal sexual
contact perpetrated one by the
use of force or coercion that
results in personal injury to
the victim, 2, by the use of
force or coercion when the
perpetrator is aided or abetted
by one or more persons.
3, when the perpetrator is armed
with a deadly weapon, so I think
that, um, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, that kind
of gives you the um.
That kind of gives you the
definition you need as to when
you find coercion or when you
find that that line has been
surpassed and, you know,
inadvertently.
Versus
Forced versus inappropriate
versus a line has been
transgress and I see what you're
saying, and I understand that. I
guess because of all the
language and stuff I've heard
from previous bills that have
been presented.
By use of force or coercion
could mean if you had a boss
that hugs you too.
Then that becomes.
They would fall under this
category, I guess.
I guess what I'm trying to imply
is the implied no. Where is that
implied no if your boss touches
you too long, holds you too
long.
Where that falls into that
because you could say that that
was coercion, my teacher hugged
me for too long and it felt
inappropriate, but I was
clothes, so I didn't don't want
it to fall into this, so that's
my problem with the the whole
thing, I just.
I like more explanation instead
of vagueness, but I, I know what
you're saying the force, but
coercion could mean anything. It
could mean teacher says, come
here, I want to hug you, because
you got a good grade, they're
wearing their clothes. The
teacher holds them, that child
feels that that was um.
A sexual contact and
representative, this is already
in the law.
I know, Madam Chair, but it's,
it's defining the difference
between clothes and unclothed,
very obvious. Those questions
are probably more appropriate
for representative.
Yeah, Madam Chair
representative, but I'm trying
to think in the future of how
this is going to play out, so I
still have an issue with that.
I'll still support the bill, but
I think that
Unclothed and coerced is very
obvious hugging somebody too
long when they got a good grade
could then draw some sort of
weird gray line with it we can
now get into this becomes a
sexual contact.
Anyways, that's all the
questions I had. Thank you,
madam.
Thank you. Um, next we have
anyone on the committee?
Madam Chair, move it to pass,
and I'm just gonna shout out
affirmative consent.
We have to wait till our.
was a dull moment, and I had a
chance to cheer for one of my
bills with this huge audience
watching us.
OK, we still are on webcast.
And deputize someone.
Um, it's been, um, moved and
seconded for due pass and there
is no opposition, so, um, you
have it.
Pass
The boat of 6 to 0. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committee.
CPAC is always fun.
OK, now we have House Bill 83
permitless theory of firearms
represented a block. Mm.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I guess
it's kind of easier for me to
not just jump back over there
and have Representative Lord
come here to ask questions, so I
guess I'll stay here. Uh, so,
Madam Chair Representatives, so
I'm presenting House Bill 83
permitless carry of firearms.
This would, Madam Chair.
Do a lot of interesting things
and awesome things that I think
would benefit the state.
And so Madame Chair, I'm just
gonna have a quick little open
and then I'll go for questions.
So, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
Representatives, this critical
step forward is for affirming
the rights of law-abiding New
Mexicans, and in my opinion, the
right to bear arms is a
fundamental constitutional
freedom, which actually is not
just my opinion, it's in the
Constitution.
And I believe requiring a permit
to carry a firearm imposes
unnecessary bureaucratic
obstacles on responsible
citizens.
This bill brings New Mexico in
line with 25 other states, so
half the country, and they've
successfully enacted permitless
carry in states such as Vermont.
So we're not just talking about
deep red states, we're talking
about states across the country,
including Deep Blue Vermont, and
so HB 83 does not change
restrictions on prohibited
persons, so I know that was a
concern in in FIR that I read,
but this does not change
regarding prohibited persons,
nor does it lead to an increase
in crime, and I have statistics
and and different.
such as the Journal of Law and
Economics, as well as the Cato
Institute.
Heritage Foundation, Crime
Prevention Research Center, even
the Gifford's Law Center, which,
which state similar.
So uh by passing this bill, we
ensure that New Mexicans can
protect themselves and their
families without needing the
government's permission to do
so. So, Madam Chair, uh, I will
stand for questions.
OK
Um, who's first on the list?
Opposition.
Oh
Yes, I'm sorry. Um, is there any
one in um opposition.
And he went on
OK, anyone in support?
OK.
Would you like
And
support.
So it or opposition.
Hello, this is Kathleen Mosley.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Uh, my professor was killed in
one of the first mass shootings
in the US in '91, that left 6
dead and 1 paralyzed.
And uh chair prairie and rested
members of the committee, excuse
me, the
foreign trainee had actually
applied for a permit, and the
local sheriff almost stopped
this shooting because he did not
feel he could do a meaningful
background check.
The student appeal, the sheriff
was overruled and of course we
all know the rest of the story.
Permits are one of the most
effective policies we have and
permits to purchase can decrease
gun trafficking.
Please do keep this important
policy in place and consider
strengthening it.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
in opposition?
OK. Go ahead, Beau.
Can you hear me? Yes.
OK, good evening
representatives. My name is
Wilson. I am a current freshman
at the University of New Mexico
and a student leader with
students demanded action, gun
violence prevention organization
in the past two years, our state
has made some incredible
progress on the narrative around
gun violence
and background checks on all gun
sales lawmakers have noticed the
call gun safety laws in recent
years. So I pass a dangerous and
unnecessary bill.
Let me be clear this will
intensify the fear and danger.
has already been through.
I am extremely worried about
this type of bill. It will make
a more unpredictable than they
already are. This past Friday
night there was a small shooting
at a UNM dorm where 2 people
were injured passing this bill
will raise the stakes of
another
of another shooting like that
happening.
Why are we debating passing like
this when we should be focusing
on protecting families from gun
violence. Thank you.
All right, now we'll go to the
gentleman in the audience for um
support the bill.
Madam Chair Representatives. My
name is Anthony Seguro. I'm with
the New Mexico Shooting Sports
Association.
Um
This year, 2025.
I have surpassed my 50th year as
a firearms instructor.
And
15 years as a concealed carry
instructor.
However, I am in favor of this
bill because
Constitutional carry and I have
to correct one of the items.
It's not 25 states that have
constitutional carry. It's
actually 29 now.
Permanent carry including we
will be in mainstream with
states such as Arizona and
Texas.
That have
Uh
Permanentless carry.
Herla does not stop criminals,
only law-abiding citizens who
follow permit, uh, carry permit
laws, criminals carry
regardless.
The Mexicans already carry
openly without a license. This
would put that in the line as an
open carry.
Uh,
law.
Self defense is
A right, law abiding citizens
should have.
Not have to ask for permission
and or pay fees to exercise a
constitutional right.
Shall you permits would remain
so that if you needed
reciprocity from one state to
another, you still can acquire a
permit.
It just says that a law abiding
citizen can carry a firearm
without having to have a permit.
And again, 29 states.
In the United States already
have perus carry, and the
results are that crime is going
down in those states, because
people don't know that you are
caring.
And this gives more opportunity.
And I'm gonna give you an
example.
And you're more than welcome to
come with me anytime. I have two
homes in Mexico.
When I'm down there, I want you
to know that everybody lives
behind wrought iron bars and
barbed wire in the in that
country. And the reason is
because you cannot own a gun or
ammunition.
People are scared to death
because who runs Mexico? It's
the cartels.
And if you want to see it,
because I've seen it firsthand,
you can more than welcome to
come with me at any time.
So the whole thing is just
basically the block.
Gun sales. Thank you. We're
Your time is up, but also we
want to keep it to New Mexico.
OK.
Thank you. Um, OK, do you have
anything else you'd like to
close with or
say that. No, I, I agree and I
think uh the gentleman for
correcting me on my state, I
guess since last time I, I put
this bill forward, we've had 4
more states added, so I think
that's great. Also, I did want
to make sure to reiterate that
folks can indeed get a permit if
they want one. You don't
necessarily even have to have a
reason for that, travel, etc.
you can just get one just
because you want to have the
permit.
And just so your own peace of
mind. So this isn't taking away
that permit process, it's just
allowing folks if they, if they
do want to get that, they can,
but it's not going to be a
requirement. So that's all I
would add to that, Madam Chair,
and representatives, I'm happy
to stand for your questions.
I'm sure I'd like to move to
table.
I have questions, Madam Chair.
Uh, we'll finish discussion. Go
ahead, then. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative Block.
So one of the biggest things
I've noticed uh about.
With the permitless carry, our
constitutional carry.
Is all the research that I've
seen is there has been no uptick
in crime.
Let me ask you a super important
question. Um, Madam Chair and
Representative do criminals obey
laws anyways?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. They do
not.
And Madam Chair representative,
when you go to buy a firearm at
uh from an FFL. There's an
extensive background check.
Some of the questions are, are,
are you addicted to any drugs?
Do you have a felony? Is there a
DV?
Um, so, Madam Chair and
representative, there's already
a check process, uh, to make
sure that
People who are mentally
adjudicated and whatnot, cannot
carry a firearm. Is that
correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative that, that is
correct. There is
A very robust vetting process
And I think that especially in a
state like ours, that's one of
the highest gun ownership rates
in the country.
citizens are very.
They tend to be very respectful
of laws.
However, those you bad actors
who do want to cause havoc, as
we see in in metropolitan areas
and rural areas alike as as well
as frontier areas, they will
cause havoc regardless because
they are criminals, after all,
Madam Chair, Representative.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, um.
So the costs are pretty
extensive.
When you take in.
The state fee, so you have a
$100 fee, you got fingerprints
for $60 a class could be
anywhere about 200. You're
looking at $360.
So Madam Chair and
representative, how does that
help our?
People that are low income who
need this more than anything
else that they cannot afford
that.
Would that leave them vulnerable
then to not having a firearm.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. It is my
understanding and my opinion
that that would be correct. So
for example, if there was a
single mom who just got threats
from uh a violent X, for
example. She doesn't have time
to go through an entire process
to conceal carry her firearm in
her purse, and so if she did
that currently, she would be in
violation of the state law, and
so she couldn't immediately be
protecting herself and her
family if such an instance
happened, she'd have to jump
through hoop
hoop as well as me.
Subject to the time of having to
take the class, and if she's
already a gun owner, she's
likely already very well versed
in how to use that firearm.
She's also been through the
system to check her records. So
she's already been a legal
firearm owner and also Madam
Chapresentative.
She, she's in a situation that
could be life or death. And I
think it's the prerogative of
the of the state to put people
and their safety first above any
kind of.
Bureaucratic
$100 200 dollars program that
could preclude somebody from
protecting themselves, Madam
Chair representative. So Madam
Chair and represent block, one
of the issues I had was there's
a gentleman that is in a
wheelchair.
He still carries, I'm not gonna
give his name, but he still
carries because he cannot, he
cannot afford it.
And he cannot get down to the 2
day class. You can also not do
the refresher class, so he is
carrying and knowing very well
that that could back to bite
him, but he has, he's in a
wheelchair.
He has no other way to protect
himself, so he's still carrying.
He cannot afford this $360 plus
the refresher course of a couple
$100 every single time, which
requires you to go back and
shoot. So that is also an issue.
So, Madam Chair Representative.
Um, there seems to be lacking
equity because our seniors.
are on low income, who need a
way to protect themselves. They
also may not be able to afford
it. Our low income people that
do need that more than anybody
else can, and our handicapped
people are left out by not
having constitutional carry
because they have to go through
this process and they cannot
afford it. So that's one of the
biggest issue is that this
concealed carry has become a
thing for rather elitism and
that only certain people.
And carry a firearm if they can
afford it.
There's no equity at all in our
concealed carry program.
So Madam Chair and
Representative.
I know some people brought up.
Um, there seems to be a big fear
of farms and there and there
should be when there's
criminals.
They have firearms, and
currently we have a very high
rate, uh, it's in one of the,
um,
And one of these analysis that
talks about how incredibly high.
R
Firearm crimes in this state.
But don't we already have a
concealed carry program, I mean,
shouldn't that, I mean, if
that's the defining thing when
you think that having a
concealed carry would lower us
already instead of just saying
the Constitution carry will
increase crime. That makes
sense, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you representative,
and I did want to, first of all
say yes, I think that when we
talk about an equity issue, we
want to make sure that folks all
across the state of all
backgrounds and all situations,
whether they're disabled,
whether they are a single
parent, for example.
That's just first and foremost.
Second, Madam Chair
Representative, I've seen the
crime statistics in New Mexico,
and we have seen not, we've seen
in the past few years we've been
increasing the amount of
Legislation targeted toward
guns.
And we have not seen any
significant changes in the
crime.
And I also will say, Madam Chair
Representative, if we look at
other states that have put
forward constitutional carry
legislation, and there are
studies that are peer reviewed,
so these are real studies such
as the Journal of Law and
Economics and then the American
Journal of Public Health
Research, they have statistics
showing that after these laws
have been passed in states that
it says states that have adopted
right to carry laws have not
statistically seen significant
increases in any violent crime
rates.
Madam Chair Representative.
Uh, I would also say that
because of this, like this long
standing.
Peer reviewed research that we
can be very.
Confident in passing such
legislation in New Mexico,
especially with such a high gun
ownership rate. I believe it
sits around 46.2%, Madam Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair it's it's
right in here that we have some
of the highest firearm death
rates in the state.
And that's not because whether
we have concealed carry that has
absolutely zero effect on it.
And it won't have any bearing on
it if we pass constitutional
carry because our lawful gun
owners aren't the ones that are
committing the crimes. The one
that are committing the crimes
are the people that have
intentions to harm other people.
They don't really care what we
pass up here, and that's always
been the problem with all the
2nd Amendment bills. They don't
care what we pass, right? I, uh,
somebody who wants to commit a
crime is going to carry the
firearm no matter what, no
matter what it says. I know
there was an issue that I kind
of laughed about liquor
establishments. What I loved
about Idaho, you can carry a
firearm and
Idaho into a bar. Actually you
carry two firearms on you at all
times in Idaho, and when I lived
there weren't there weren't any
shootings in the bars. Um, you
just can't be.
Incapacitated, but you can.
Very much carry a firearm into a
bar and in other states too, but
in this state we've decided that
that isn't something that we
should have, um,
This would also allow, there was
also some concerns over people,
uh, that shouldn't be carrying
firearms that will be carrying
firearms, um.
Madam Chair and represent block.
Do you know of any bill in the
world that will that will stop a
criminal who's intent on doing a
crime from carrying a gun in
their pocket.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I am not
aware of any such study,
however, I am aware of studies
that prove the opposite effect.
So when there are bills such as
legislation requiring these
kinds of.
Firearms safety training, etc.
government-mandated fees, uh,
the Journal of Public Economics
found that these barriers
actually act as barriers to
lawful gun ownership without
significant impact on safety
outcomes and actually fuel.
Illegal firearm.
Uh instances in the states. So I
would say it's actually the
opposite effect, Madam Chair,
representative, and I'd be happy
to get that study for you. Yeah,
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. That's the
things from the things I've
looked at the study.
Is there's either no impact or
some of them have actually
stated that uh firm.
Crimes have gone down.
When they've passed those.
So Madame Chair and
representative, um.
When you go, I'm looking here,
so when you go to buy a firearm
from an FFL.
You already have to.
He citizen of the United States.
Have to be a resident of New
Mexico or the armed forces.
Um
You can't be a fugitive from
justice.
You can't be convicted of a
felony.
Um, you're not currently under
indictment for felony criminal
charges.
You know, not prohibited.
I haven't been mentally
adjudicated. You're not, you're
saying you're not addicted to
alcohol and controlled
substances.
And um
That is everything that the
states already. So would you say
Madam Chairman represent him
when you go to buy a firearm and
And FFL that these all these
have already been addressed when
you fill out that FFL form.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I would
agree with that statement. I
especially when I go to buy a
firearm, which I have multiple
times.
It's been because I'm a lawful
gun owner and I am intent on
knowing how to use that firearm,
and I also go practice at my
local shooting range.
In Almogordo
I think that a majority of folks
who go to legally purchase
firearms and obtain firearms
legally.
Have the intention of using them
in a lawful way. And I think
especially in New Mexico, we
even had an instance of a
lawmaker last session of a
firearm stolen from a truck, a
legal firearm, and a lot of the
crime epidemic that we have in
New Mexico is.
fueled by the violence that
happens with stealing firearms
and then using those stolen
firearms in crimes following
that, Madam Chair, Madam Chairs
in the up gets stolen out of
cars because there's so many
places that are restrictive like
restricted in a liquor store. I
don't even understand that if
you're a lawful gun owner,
you're not gonna suddenly go
crazy because you see a bottle
of bourbon.
Um, some men are chair and
representative, um.
Although representative, there
is a high um madam chair, our,
our mason's rules say not to be
interrupted, so I'd appreciate
it if I could just finish my
line of questions, and you can
follow up afterwards I was just
adding to what you were saying.
And uh as a point of
Personal privilege.
a point of privilege, um, that
just to let you know that um
there is a high percentage of
alcohol involved.
Gun violence.
Madam Chair Representative and,
and I would argue that in Idaho,
you can go into a bar and drink
and they don't have shootings at
bars, so I would, I would.
like that
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Um
So besides the fact of equity,
it doesn't increase anything.
People are gonna do bad things
with farms are gonna do bad
things anyways. Uh, do you
remember representative, did you
come to the roundhouse where we
were allowed to carry firearms
openly here in the roundhouse.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I was not a
representative at the time, but
yes, I remember the glory days,
right? So Madam Chairian
representative, that's one of
the issues like for now you
can't carry in here and nobody
ever, there was nothing, nobody
ever did anything. I was one of
the people that sat up there
with the firearm and never did
anything. My firearm never
jumped up and did anything to
anyone.
My point being that it seems to
be a lot of vilifying of the
firearms and that causes us to
put it in a car that then allows
them to be stolen.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, um,
With the states, I know there
was a.
I believe it was Moer Vermont or
New Hampshire that has
constitutional care and they're
a blue state, is that correct?
It's one of those?
Vermont.
OK,
so Madam Chair, so in the state
that Bernie Sanders represents,
they allow constitutional carry,
is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord, yes, that's
correct.
So Madam Chair and
Representative and to be.
Careful with our time so that we
can get out of here so that we
can go to dinner.
Um, miniature and
representative.
One of the questions that I
often hear, so we've, we've
addressed the studies and
there's numerous studies and the
interesting thing is that most
of those studies show that there
has not been an increase in
violent crime.
Um
Which leads me back to what I
said earlier about our concealed
carries if they're, if that's
supposed to work so wonderfully,
why isn't it help you with the
crime issue?
So Madam Chair representative,
is there a reason why that you
put the age at 18.
Instead of another different age
and representative. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Yes, actually,
this is something that I thought
about very closely. And we're
talking about.
Individuals who can be
conscripted into military
service.
We're talking about individuals,
Madam Chair, representative, who
can vote.
But they cannot
Have this right
And so Madam Chair represented,
that is why the the age is 18. I
think it's a very.
Very simple and very.
Adequate age, especially since
you can vote for somebody who
could vote away your gun rights,
but you cannot actually have
those rights find it a little
circular in the argument, Madam
Chair and representative. Yeah,
Madam Chair, I agree with you.
You can join the military where
you get a firearm, and you're
old enough for that, and you can
also buy a house.
So I, I think if you're old
enough to buy a house to go in
the military that you have the
right to defend yourself, so I
agree with you on that.
Uh, Medi Chair Representative
does HB 83 make it easier for
our criminals to carry guns.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So as we
established a little earlier
ago.
Usually criminals don't.
violate
Or they don't, they don't
support laws, they don't follow
laws. So they're always
violating legis legislation that
we pass anyway. So, Madam Chair
Representative, we've also seen
in many fiscal impact reports
that say that.
Increasing X amount of
Criminal penalty will not.
Decrease
So by that same logic, Madam
Chair Representative and
are criminals.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Madam chair
and like I stated before, if
you're a felon domestic abuse.
Um
TV, anything on that keeps you
from getting a firearm.
Um, Medi representative.
Will this bill
Make it harder for law
enforcement officers to do their
job. I don't believe it does,
but explain to me why you think
that it won't make their job
more difficult.
Sure, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives. So
no officers already assume
individuals may be armed and
they will continue to have the
authority to ensure public
safety. So criminal misuse in
the state, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, because you have
to have probable cause anyways
when you're going to go to
somebody, you already are
assuming.
Based on things that you're
seeing and hearing or anybody
else has said this person may be
the person that they're looking
for, the law enforcement is
already hypervigilant to what's
going on and can read the room
pretty much with people like,
this seems like a law abiding
person, this person seems
sketchy, nervous. I'm gonna
detain them and ask more
questions.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um.
Well, I wanted to expand on what
you said about the option, cuz
all the states that have passed
that, including the state with
Bernie Sanders, um, they allow
people to still get the
concealed carry permit, and the
reason for that is reciprocity.
Meaning that they can then
travel to another state and they
have that concealed carry
permit.
That's why most, that's the only
reason most people do that
unless I mean you can go in for
the training, but.
Um, most people don't. I'm not
gonna do that because of the
cost, the, you know, the $300
and some odd dollars for the
cost of that.
Um
Madam Chair and representative.
Uh, with the removal of the
concealed carry permit
requirement cost the state any
money? Will it cost them money,
not lose money will cost some
money.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So yes, the
Department of Public Safety will
see a reduction in concealed
carry permit revenue. However,
this is a small price to pay for
protecting constitutional rights
too, and to have equity so that
our people who can't afford to
go through this possible process
or physically unable.
Um,
Medi share representative.
Um
Why do you feel that New Mexico
should pass this regulation or
pass this bill, sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Well, first
of all,
Over half the country, as we've
established.
Has passed legislation to give
constitutional rights
to 1.
And so that's number 1. #2, as
we've established as well, Madam
Chair, we have a high gun
ownership rate as it is, and in
a state especially as New Mexico
with increasing crime such as in
metropolitan areas and rural and
frontier like, we need more
protections for individuals that
don't require these boundaries
to safety. And so Madam Chair
Representative, like you said,
the equity portion, we're being
equitable to all New Mexicans to
ensure that those folks can be
protected, can feel safe and.
don't need a stamp from the
government to say you can
protect yourself. This is
something that I find to be
common sense and something that.
Many people, especially a
majority of Americans support,
Madam Chair, Representative,
including in Bernie Sanders'
home state of Vermont, like we
established.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
Again, I feel like the concealed
curry that we have that, it's
already been done in other
states where they've removed it
without issue.
And New Mexico already has the
highest.
Firearm related death in the
United States. And again, we're
not addressing the root issue
ever of of what is causing that.
I
Taking away the concealed curry
is not gonna have any.
effect
on what people are doing with
firearms, and people are still
gonna do bad things.
So, Madam Chair and represent
just a few more questions, we
can stop before 6.
Um
The biggest thing I see, and I
already know this is going to be
moved to table because guns have
been so vilified in the state.
And I know what you're trying to
do, and that's why I agreed to
this because it's already been
passed in other places. We have
the 2nd Amendment right to
carry. It does not increase the
crime.
The key issue is that this is a
bill to help our lawful gun
owners. It doesn't do a darn
thing to the people who are
going to do bad things, they're
gonna do it no matter what we
pass.
Uh, we never seem to really get
to the root issue and the root
causes and locking people up and
keeping them behind bars.
And it's unfortunate that a
bill.
Man, how many people in our
state owned firearms. I know
it's a lot. It's like 49% or
something. We're one of the
highest.
We're in the top 10. I'll just
put it that way. When in the top
10 highest gun ownership.
Those lawful gun people are not
doing anything and they always
get very, very tired that we
keep passing things that
penalize them.
Since instead of rewarding our
law-abiding citizens, we're
gonna go ahead and continue to
punish them by moving to table
this bill that a big chunk of
our people want, including.
Democrats.
Not just, it's not a Republican
gun to. This is a, I got lots
and lots of people in my land
grants who own firearms are
really tired.
of
the incessant nonstop
infringement on their rights,
especially now we have the other
bill coming up.
So Madam Chair representative, I
fully support your bill based on
All the studies based on the
fact that in Idaho.
We had far more lax.
Bills there. But yeah, New
Mexico.
Has an issue. New Mexico has got
some crime issues, period.
And until that gets addressed.
There is no bill in the world
that we can.
put forward or rescind or do
anything else.
Until we get to the root cross,
why are we so high? Why are we
so ridiculously high.
And don't want to pass
something.
That won't affect that crime
level. So with that, Madam Chair
and Representative, I leave a
few more minutes, um, for the
representative he wants to wrap
up or if anybody else has
questions. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you representative Excuse
me, I think that's the chairs
the obligation to offer that.
I'm sorry,
Madam jumped
unless you had a question that
he had to answer, but um if you
had anything else you'd like to
say.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'll, I'll
be super quick. I know we're
trying to get out of here. I
also just want to reaffirm that
we want to enshrine
constitutional rights for all
New Mexicans. We want to make
sure that people feel safe in
their communities and especially
in my district, this legislation
has been promoted by people
across the political aisle we've
heard from people who just want
to make sure that they can
protect themselves without
having to jump through these
hoops, especially for low income
communities. So I would just
say, especially an equity issue,
this is needed in New Mexico,
one of the
firearm ownership rates.
We want to make sure that, that
there's a seat at the table for
everybody. And I think that this
legislation will accomplish
that. So I'll leave it at that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
urge you to pass. Thank you.
we're on the tabling motion
regardless. We, we have a
motion, uh.
Uh, a tabling motion, uh, by
representative Romero in a
second by a representative
Thompson.
Um
Please call roll.
Representative Block noted
Representative Lord, noted
table. Representative Ramiro.
Representative Thompson. Yes,
Madam Vice Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, yes, to table.
OK. So,
On a vote of 4 to 2, um, in
favor of tabling, um.
House Bill 83 has been tabled.
I think we are done.
