Your.
We are here chair for our yeah.
Sure we have a one thank you yes
now we have a quorum please
present your.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee first of all do you
have the committee set up.
Do you want to move that before
explained
to us thank you.
I hope to discuss with the get
the.
We have move at and the second.
Thank you for discussion on your
commute a committee substitute
for house bill seventy three.
And madam chair committee it's
essentially the same bill but by
the time we had a all the little
amendments we mated Committee so
so it's getting too complicated
right.
So let me explain house bill
seventy three the biomarker
testing insurance requirements
next I sections of the insurance
codes required coverage of
biomarker testing provides
definitions and it describes
what biomarker testing coverage
is and just to review it bio
marker testing is used to help
determine.
S. treatment for a patient can
include analysis of a patient's
tissue blood or other bio
specimen for the presence of the
biomarkers it's an important
step in accessing precision
medicine including like that's
the specific targets that the
specific therapies that can lead
to improve surviving illness a
better quality of life for
cancer patients most of them
focus on oncology and autoimmune
diseases but research is now
exploring other benefits to look
at conditions like heart disease
and neurological conditions like
Alzheimer's why is this
important first of all it's a
question of equity patients who
are older African American
uninsured or Medicaid insured
are less likely to be tested
there's lower late lower levels
of testing and community centers
versus academic medical centers
where I personally received
testing some insurance plans to
requested incredibly extensive
paperwork and authorizations
that can take months well the
patient's disease gets worse of
the needs there so there needs
to be equity in availability
regardless of your economic
status your reserves of code or
the kind of coverage you have so
testing helps doctors pinpoint
the best treatment or if a given
treatment is the appropriate
treatment are working I'm gonna
give a couple personal examples
I mean ovarian cancer survivor
of twenty years I stopped
breathing during my first
chemotherapy treatment because I
was allergic to the chemo today
a doctor could yes at ten point
a better treatment for my case
also as the knees of an ovarian
cancer person who died.
Biomarker test could have shown
that I should watch for that and
rather being fortunately shades
to it might have been caught
when I first had symptoms.
And another example
It's it's six thousands of
dollars it saves thousands of
dollars for individuals it saves
millions of dollars for all the
various medical coverage plans
I tried for nine years to get
pregnant my husband and me we
were just about ready to go to
in vitro fertilization which is
like ten thousand dollars a shot
when my doctor did to show
testing which is a form of
biomarker testing he discovered
that no matter what I did I was
going to have miscarriages
thereby saving us the heartache
of failed you know pregnancies
the difficulty of thousands of
dollars of medical debt and
saving my insurance company and
others like me hundreds of
thousands of not millions of
dollars so this bill didn't
really supports catching
diseases before they enter more
serious stages.
Joining the best and most
appropriate treatments to avoid
it ineffective extended
treatment and the associated
costs and saving money for us as
individuals and saving taxpayers
money for the other that that
that all the plans so to me it's
a real win win chasing knowledge
gene where medical science is
now.
Headed and already there and I'd
like to introduce my expert
witness Linda Siegel to at
especially the more technical
aspects.
Thank you madam chair Linda
Siegel with the American cancer
society cancer action network
and.
Mr really touched on the key
point is that this is precision
medicine.
And natural we're seeing with
all the clinical trials and the
new drugs about sixty percent of
all cancer drugs approved in the
last five years require or
recommend biomarker testing
because the because of the
precision that that now we can
treat cancer and these targeted
cancer therapies account for
about a quarter of the new drugs
approved by the FDA and that was
from two thousand nineteen so
why do we need this mandate and
in New Mexico well you have a
letter there from doctor Mack
and may need to has run a cancer
treatment program in Albuquerque
and Gallup many decades and she
says in that it's often
extremely difficult or takes a
long time to get the approval
for these tests and in the
meantime you're diagnosed with
cancer and you're waiting six to
eight weeks to see if you can
get a test and see if you can
get started on the precision
treatment that that may be
available to you and sixty six
percent of the cancer docs in
the United States are indicated
that that getting insurance
coverage is either significant
for or moderate barrier to
testing their patients.
we know from the national Cancer
Institute figures that thirty
nine point five percent of us
will get cancer at some point
during our life that is kind of
concerning and and we would all
want the best kind of treatment
that the treatment that target
specifically our disease now we
do I did hand out.
some information about how
testing actually can save money
because you can get the test and
then you can get the precise
treatments for that type of
cancer and not have to have
different types experimenting
and having bad reactions for
having to go through multiple
efforts to see if you can sure
your cancer there were there a
couple of studies that are C. B.
R. Sanchez a study that looked
at one small one cell cancer and
though they said the up front
costs there are of the testing
cost more that they but that
they use saved money down the
line in the treatment and
they're been several studies
done on this are.
The study up on the use of
biomarkers and precision
treatment and how it's save
thousands of dollars of could
potentially save that we we we
don't guarantee all those things
and then another study was done
to look at.
The impact to members of our how
much their premiums will go are
and the premiums when they did
this study said that they might
be as little as eight cents a
month per member or up to fifty
fifty one cents per member and
it seems a small cost for us to
pay for for treatment that might
save our lives and and save time
in in getting our house back.
Thank you madam chair and with
that Madam chairman excuse me
Madam chairwoman we stand for
questions.
We'll go to the audience.
Hey this is down.
When in opposition.
Chair yes thank you.
Thank you.
Sure that would be.
It.
Started talking about the bill I
forgot all about yes okay we
have a
second okay and second.
Is there any opposition to that
Committee substitute for house
bill seventy three.
Okay so this.
And now we will go to the
audience anyone in opposition.
Okay and went on to.
Okay is in support.
Okay yep you'll just come in
lined up in.
Take the money can be sure that.
Hello.
Madam chair my name is Matt
Thompson.
You bet you get one of.
Getting.
Madam chair members on my name
is Matt Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for
strategies three sixty and on
behalf of our client the
biotechnology innovation
organization otherwise known as
bio we are pleased to support
house bill seventy three.
Bio is the world's largest
advocacy association
representing member companies
state biotechnology groups
academic and research
institutions and related
organizations across the United
States and in thirty plus
countries I supports timely
appropriate and equitable access
to biomarker testing as well as
adequate coverage and
reimbursement by public and
private payers when backed by
clinical guidelines or peer
reviewed scientific evidence
delays and biomarker testing and
coverage may lead to worse
outcomes for patients As you've
heard.
Ewing advances in science and
genomics or drop are driving an
increased understanding of human
physiology and how diseases
affect the body these advances
are helping researchers
researchers identified new
biomarkers as more biomarkers
are identified they have the
potential to greatly enhance the
drug development process by
providing researchers with new
ways to measure disease
activity.
We're going to make you that
we're here for precision
medicine thank you.
If you're headed to the next
person.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Ken looking
at today I come to you as a
patient advocate.
Thanks cancer diagnosis is
terrifying I know because I'm
currently undergoing treatment
for breast cancer.
I have not been fortunate enough
to receive the biomarker test
but what if your doctor could do
a simple test to make sure that
you got the best treatment for
your cancer with biomarker
testing doctors can find out
which treatments will or won't
work for many patients based on
the markers in their cancer
cells this information often
allows us to avoid more
generalized treatments like
chemotherapy and radiation which
I have undergone.
And it and instead use targeted
therapies allowing doctors to
identify the most effective
therapy which can result in
appears fewer side effects
better quality of life and
better.
Most important increased chance
of survival.
You for your consideration and
thank you in advance for your
support of this vital
legislation.
Very much.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Andreas
are to let up I stayed here with
the imac to registered lobbyist
with an impact The New Mexico
outside counsel on tobacco we
stand in support of this bill.
This testing not only has saved
lives but has given you know at
individuals and and their
families more time crucial and
valuable time.
It's a more but at a yeah we
stand and support thank you.
Time.
Thank you madam chair oops cut
damage our first representing
aflac I'd like to thank the
sponsor in the advocates for the
amendment that corrected the
impression that this would apply
to a limited benefit health
insurance policies as opposed to
comprehensive on behalf of Merck
we stand in support of the bill
for all the reasons you've heard
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee on more tall a
registered lobbyist for GSK for
all the reasons previously
stated but particularly the fact
that multiple biomarkers can
really inform the use of
targeted drug combinations we
stand strong support of this
legislation and ask you to
support it as well thank you.
You.
Hi wanted dances I am from and
from the Human Services
department I'm the chief medical
officer of Medicaid so we
neither support nor oppose the
bill I just wanted to bring a
few
operational challenges the part
with
National clinic we recognize
guidelines sometimes their to
guidelines that conflict so that
puts us in kind of it find if we
are supposed to follow all
clinical guidelines also this is
such a ballooning feel that
they're changing constantly so
having a cadence of how often
we're supposed to really be
following this and also it feels
we're really talking about
cancer so that would help
limited to help us say okay
these are the guidelines we
should be watching regularly so
just want to point out a few
specifics thank you.
Is there anyone on state.
What.
Okay.
Do you have a sorry.
What.
Hello madam chair and committee
members my name is Linda Webb
and I stand before you today.
Yes sorry we try to get over
here is that better yes.
Excellent okay my name is Linda
Webb but I stand before you
today because of biomarker
testing I was diagnosed in
twenty nineteen with a rare form
of lung cancer called a okay and
given a year to live.
Because of biomarker testing a
targeted drug was identified I
could take for a late call the
T. K. I'd.
As my disease progressed
additional testing has been
ordered called a liquid biopsy
and sent out for biomarker
testing to try and determine
what the driver of my cancer is.
I marker testing is expensive
and sometimes reaching into the
thousands but they remain the
only way to identify some of
these cancers so correct
medication can be prescribed I
was lucky.
My insurance company paid for my
first test but not the
subsequent to.
I'm already in a fight for my
life please don't make me battle
the insurance companies to
please support house bill
seventy three today thank you
thank you let that.
Okay is there anything else you
like to say briefly closing
because we're trying to do half
an hour each bills no we stand
for our committee questions okay
and if you to keep a answers as
brief as possible a committee
members to.
Madam chairman would you pass.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and expert
witness can you tell me what
the facts of insurance companies
but how much will per individual
in that plan how much would they
have to pay extra to add
biomarker testing.
Madam chair representative or
block we don't know that we know
that there have been studies
showing that they can save money
there have been studies that
show a very slight increase
needed to
provide this coverage so it.
If we cannot make a definitive
statement that it saves money or
that it costs.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yeah that that's
just an important question I had
because I certainly I don't sure
it's one reason insurance is a
difficult game and there's a lot
of moving parts especially with
creating plants.
Representative health care how
much that would cost so I
appreciate that answer thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Thomson.
Thank you thank you for this
bill it's a great bill but one
thing I've been complaining
about since I came to the
legislature's we can't look
forward it's going to save
millions of dollars in I needed
expensive treatments and
surgeries and inability to work
and it you know it's going to it
may raise the rates of insurance
but it will save the insurance
company millions if not billions
thank you madam chair.
The staff to say saving lives
what act.
Second.
I mean.
Before.
That's right.
I'm like yes okay we have been
moved and seconded for a do pass
is there any objection okay
right.
We have.
Thank you and thank you live.
The committee.
The state under thirty minutes.
Okay house bill one eleven has
been asked to be rolled and we
will next year House Bill three
fourteen.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair House Bill
three fourteen
is essentially
In addition to what we now
understand about our expungement
law regarding cannabis
basically this clarifies the
role of the Courts in
automatically expunging the
records and ensures that we have
the framework for them to do
that in their capacity and
basically clarifies what their
role would be so with that madam
chair my expert here is the Lena
Jones with the
This report and all that are
introduce or self.
Good good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
When the administrative office
of courts started to study
efforts to automatically expand
records that involved cannabis
or cannabis related charge what
we discovered is that it would
not be an automated way to
address the portion of the
automatic expungement
requirements addressing
questions of public records and
some of our exploration there's
been a lot of background work
that's been performed by the
judicial information division
part of our exploration really
indicated that we would have.
Thousands of records to review
manually and then for those
types of cases that involve to
mix charges and by that I mean
charges offenses involving
cannabis in those that did not
effort would require annual
review of those cases millions
of millions of pages and then
we'll talk reduction and this
separatist distinct from the
effort to identify those cases
that involve cannabis and
cannabis related charges.
In the latter case only those
cases involving cannabis we're
able to fully expunged entire
case everything there for us
having.
Budget.
The from this.
there is arguably the last
benefit twenty division will
have cases on mobile charges in
there if the case is still
there.
Officials are still there for
their.
Reaction from Mendis time and
expense and so what this bill is
focused the efforts to help as
far as what all those simple
cases that just involved here
and we can probably expansion
and bring the greatest amount of
relief to affected individuals
but still keeps the door open
and this is part of the part of
the proposed amendment still
keeps the door open to allow
individuals who might have what
I'll call next George K. to
administratively administrative
process hi I have notify the
administrative office of the
they have a case that doesn't
involve political cannabis
charges and request that we
proceed with a selective
reduction that will in those
cases that have been.
We think we can address this
issue in that.
Forward fissions and effective
way bringing greater benefit to
those into effected individuals
and much faster rate of time
through this clarification thank
you madam chair without madam
chair I just you have a
Amendment amendment front of you
I haven't read the tier two if
there's there's only one.
Which is the
So basically this ammendment
madam chair I need to do so our
hope we don't have internet
coming.
Thank we have a motion made to
discuss in order to hear you
which is that I did a second
okay have.
Okay please explain your image
thank you madam chair the last
prisoner project is the national
project that over views
essentially a number of these
expungement laws across the
country they made some
recommendations that help
clarify what we intended with
this law on an automatic
expungement that ensures that
the role of the courts and the
role of the public record access
and so this just this language
basically just adds to the
clarity of what the rules again
of the courts the public how
that that.
Works.
Is there any other discussion
funding.
I move that we adopt the
amendment okay in the second
seconded
Your amendment is there any
opposition.
K..
With that will stand for
questions thank you Mr thank you
we'll go to the audience is
there anyone in opposition.
Your.
It's in support.
Was there anyone wants to report
okay and those in support okay
do you edit it and we went would
like to speak
walking into the might be cute.
Good afternoon I got a little
excited there my name's Brian is
someone I'm a justice on the New
Mexico Supreme Court and I'm
asking you to support this is.
Because the Supreme Court
supports it the entire judiciary
towards it we want to do right
by the individuals who have had
cannabis related charges that
are no longer charges but we
can't do it immediately and we
can't do it overnight so this
amendment creates a process to
get the cases that we can get
explains most expeditiously
expunged and secondly it gives
the opportunity for the affected
individual to go on a website
and quickly list their names and
sorry and then get it done
And asked that the case be
pushed up to the top so someone
has a job application or housing
application they can quickly do
that and that's why I think this
legislation so significant thank
you.
And anyone else who would like
to speak in support.
Okay.
I'm here meeting.
National association of social
workers chapter.
Strong support.
Well I think that just this
morning that it backs she said
that
they are that that we need to do
right by.
You are have you made.
Thank you anyone else anyone
else in the okay thank you did
you want to add anything else
manager I just want to thank the
Supreme Court for participating
in this and being really
honoring the understanding of
our our legislation passed in
twenty twenty which was about
automatic expungement and
basically finding a way in which
to do that we're we're basically
this helps clarify the automatic
doesn't mean instant because we
have so much data to work with
but that said there is a full
fledged process here for how the
public engages with that and how
the court engages with that
clarifies all of those rules so
I just want to thank them for
bringing this forth and for
committing to that bottom
automatic X. provisions madam
chair.
Okay thank you and we all agree.
Representative Rubio.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
legislation forward I I'm glad
that I was one of the folks who
got to vote on this the point
legislation I will say and I've
shared with you before that it
took me awhile to get there just
because I feel like selling
cannabis and and all of that
became just such a popular thing
for some people without
Representative recognizing that
so many black and brown mostly
men were impacted for decades
and having to I mean this issue
with mass incarceration it had a
lot to do with with with
cannabis and especially when
it's low level and so I
appreciate you bringing this
legislation forward because this
is one of the main reasons why
supported legalizing cannabis in
the first place with that we
would make expungement and
such a big part of this this
conversation so thank you for
bringing four.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative block
thank you Mr Representative.
Timing.
Real quickly charges.
Rep which that thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
so basically anything that is
legal today and our state to
lawfully own and possess
cannabis is now no longer crime
in which case that at the end of
the anything that was
criminalized previously is
basically no longer crime in
which case that that off record
gets automatically expunged the
madam Representative with this
act retracted.
Madam chair representative
precisely so for those who were
criminalized for possessing
cannabis in the past that no
longer where there's no longer
crime today their record is
automatically expunge madam
chair the minister
Representative seven however
these eligible records.
Madam chair representative so
this is where the semantics are
important in New Mexico are
expungement laws mean that the
records are still there for the
courts to see for so it stays on
your record of course federally
it's still ill will elicit so in
which case that stays on the
record however the public facing
element of that so for instance
if you were doing a background
check for housing we're for jobs
after that would not be public
facing any longer in which case
that's what we're trying to
remove many of these things that
were criminalized in the past we
know we're targeting as
Representative Rubio pointed out
black and brown communities they
were policing in these ways to
simply charge for this type of
crime and that's what we're
expunging madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair thank Representative I
think you are pourtant
legislation.
I I just have a concern about
the federal law and.
So we want to.
Five year.
But we would hate to have that
background to come back and see
that federal building on the
record so anyway that's.
As a state to insure that we can
work with federal stakeholders
that that totally chair.
Madam chair representative block
I wish we had that opportunity
to do that federally wish we
could just you know to sedition
since our values as a state have
shown how important this is but
that said madam chair
representative you are trying to
get a federal job today and we
have many in our state that will
still be on your record and so
no unfortunately we we cannot
expunge that at that level madam
chair representative.
After the representative of the
questions I have thank you just
on that point
Does the person have to divulge
if they are asked.
Madam chair representative I
would probably say us I mean on
a job application if you're
federally being screen to you
should disclose you know any
sort of record that you may have
madam chair representative madam
chair even though it's.
Expect.
This is where it gets a little
tricky as the Representative
block pointed out
Federally out because it is a
schedule one substance madam
chair it's still on your record
federally in which case if your
seeking after federal employment
this will be on your record in
which case you would likely need
to disclose that in a job
application if you were speaking
federal employment.
However in the state in our
state for state of related work
madam chair or any for licensure
for those types of issues in our
state we protect that
expungement
and and ensure that those
records are not public okay.
Thank you of Representative Lord
I thank you madam chair and I
actually have Representative
Romero I have some questions on
that so that I think it was one
of my concerns I have before
because I remember if you have a
Q. clearance high security
clearance you still have to it
meant that sat correct Madam
chair representative that's
correct okay so so I to some of
high security clearance and then
also the same thing to apply
okay so.
Trying to think of the FFL
important because you know you
can't now it went from addicted
just to smoke marijuana I guess
it would be more the current not
in the past how does it affect
somebody purchasing a gun on a
federal level Madam chair
representative you would still
have to disclose that okay
that's that's what I thought I
because I know fan is going to
be as long as it's still
anything federal yes Madam chair
representative you would need to
discuss okay when we went to
that so so purchase again
security clearance
And then the other question I
had was the reserve rate X. I
want to K. V. asked me in my
district manager is and how this
is Plymouth stated with beds you
can purchase and and your point
landlord thing which are schools
that so okay so should be super
simple if it's just cannabis
what would have to start it I do
question that with the
complexity of somebody has
multiple charges and they have
the Cannabist are tad is that
work out chair representative
Madam chair representative all
let Selena answer that one on
how the data recent and past
have stored and how this
expunged.
Thank you madam chair
representative what we put I
would I would be required to do
since the families of those are
still remains a public reckoning
Mr intact that would require me
to be process to actually
reject.
By hand the information.
Training to.
In our case related to.
Okay and madam chair just that
with that just the cannabis
practiced on there but we have a
multiple things just is going to
be the canister job.
Check and advise okay I think
the tech one when it went to I'm
so tired from today
Okay so madam chair
representative so if let's say
worst possible case there could
think of somebody was arrested
for just distribution of
cannabis and then they did it
again that still is a full
explains of course can still see
that prosecuting attorneys could
see that they had a history of
it okay that's my only concern I
want to make sure they don't the
fact okay mentor to request to
have thank you.
That is.
That we have to do.
On and.
As a matter.
Correct.
Your team.
Is there any opposition.
Okay right.
And
I you have a.
Six.
Tell me please.
Thank you madam chair.
You get to vote your vote.
Do you think the six zero as
amended.
And I'd like to also make a
correction
on house bill seventy three it
was I do not pass on house bill
seventy three and I do pass on
the committee substitutes.
This.
Okay thank you
We have now house bill three
sixteen property seizures by law
enforcement Representative Dixon
and do what we.
This.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you madam chair it's a
pleasure to be with you with all
members of the committee we're
here to introduce to you House
Bill three sixteen which seeks
to amend a sliver of the of the
forfeiture law.
R. madam chair and president all
proceeds that are the right from
the forfeiture whether it's a
vehicle up real property or
money goes to the general fund.
R. but that does not include
what happens at the federal
level and with federal law
enforcement with federal law
enforcement seizes property.
Even though our local law
enforcement has been
participating in working in
tandem and team with them
the federal the federal law
enforcement agencies are the
ones that get all of the funds
that are derived from the
forfeiture.
What this bill would seek to do
would allow the state local
state disparities to also
benefit in a very positive way
to get a part of the proceeds
that are derived but only after
there is a federal conviction
and what the the funds could be
used for and will be used for
would be for drug we're
awareness programs
drug prevention programs and
also anything related to gangs
all call so that is the essence
of the bill and we do have some
experts all witnesses with us
today and our representative
Martinez will introduce them.
Madam chair representatives I
appreciate the opportunity to be
before you we do have.
Subject matter experts with us
And I'd like to introduce to
you.
Mr Damon Martinez.
I believe share of John Allen is
on June.
And also will last be or they on
June.
We also with us in person is
lieutenant Ryan Nelson from APD.
Appreciate them being here.
And with that we will check
staff progresses much for
questions thank you
We go to the audience is there
anyone in support of this bill.
As we can the would you like to
speak Senator.
Thank you madam chair I am one
of the sponsors of this bill and
hi actually right.
I normally have this attached to
my body so I forgot to pick it
up
anyway madam chair and staff
legislative colleagues that do
stand in very strong support of
this bill as you know my focus
over the last year three years
has really been on mental health
particularly substance use and
how can we be making a a much
greater impact and I don't know
if you're committee will be
hearing my mental health parity
bill I know it's going to health
but in the funds that we can
recover to do the amazing amount
of work that we have to do and
we're just not making much
progress on in terms of
substance use and particularly
with the overwhelming impact as
we knew from yes rock no of up.
And now now getting into the
building
tools and products just anything
that we can recover to put
towards those
services that would that work
with folks who who do have
substance use disorder we should
grab in as I understand from the
experts were going to hear
there's a pretty substantial
amount of money to be able to do
that with so I just want to
stand in support as a co sponsor
from the Senator and will carry
in the Senate should it be able
to get there and thank you for
this opportunity.
Is there anyone else okay is
there anyone in support
yeah okay.
Opposition.
Yes would you like to come up
and speak.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee hello
Representative hi my name is
Naomi Valdez on I'm with the
ACLU of New Mexico we stand and
pretty strong opposition to this
bill New Mexico decidedly made a
choice a few years ago that we
did not want to police for
profit in this state any longer
we have what is the national
gold standard in terms that
eliminating that practice I
respectful and respectful of the
Sanchez efforts to to bring in
funding however with a
particular to address the opioid
crisis but I think with over you
know three billion dollars in
surplus with the attorney
general's office securing almost
four hundred million in opioid
crisis settlements there's just
no need to a road road at our
civil liberties at this point
thank you very much.
Good afternoon madam chair my
name's Lou got there with
Americans for prosperity a
lobbyist with them I am.
You're also in opposition of the
bill we are actually standing
with the usually we provided of
the committee with a one pager
handout explaining our position
on it
this is a money grab it is not
a.
An instance that we're we're you
know we're violating people's
civil liberties were taken
people stuff before their
convictions and often times they
don't get it back and so we
don't like to do harm to people
we wanna make sure that we're
taking care of you know people
and their assets thank you.
You.
There anyone.
All of us.
I had.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee but it's Paul
guessing ahead of the Rio Grande
foundation a conservative think
tank based in Albuquerque
dealing with New Mexico politics
we.
Propose this particular
legislation the civil asset
reforms passed in New Mexico
maybe New Mexico national leader
on that issue my apologies.
And it's it's something that we
should be preserving and not
having our assets taken by the
government without a criminal
conviction as one of many
problems with this particular
legislation hi the encouraging
you to keep the existing law
which.
Reserves the rights of New
Mexicans from illegally seized
with from seizure of their goods
thank you.
Anyone else.
What.
It go ahead and.
You madam chair.
We're looking.
Louder and only yeah can you
hear me better now.
You are.
It.
I'm sorry we're not hearing you
Well.
Is there anyone else.
And I was.
Go ahead can.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and I'll try not
to repeat those except for me we
do have concerns at this
legislation for many of the
reasons already stated
particularly those mentioned by
the ACLU of New Mexico at New
Mexico law has already made a
strong statement about
considering against asset
forfeiture and we do have
concerns about
at a funding stream like this
causing an incentive to make
filing criminal charges where
they otherwise might not be
filed or they may be unfounded
in order to acquire the assets
and where connection is not
required as others have
mentioned and so we do have some
concern about that and we do
support obviously funding the
the services that that that the
bill is trying to find but as as
others have said before us I
think there are better sources
for those funds that do not
potentially create an uptick in
system involvement in the
criminal justice system so we do
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Okay.
Okay thank you let's give ME
another try.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me now yes very well okay
great thank you so much for the
opportunity Emily Kaltenbach
with the drug policy alliance
and we also stand in strong
opposition along with our
partners
we all work together to amend
our asset for but on two
thousand fifteen we absolutely
support the core content our
intent of the bill the senator
had mentioned the concern around
the opioid overdose crisis
that's the work we do every day
but House Bill three sixteen is
not the vehicle to fund these
much needed services we can not
a red New Mexico's asset
forfeiture law it's not a good
idea to funnel these cases into
the federal system where
sentences are offer often longer
and more harsh and like other
drug court program civil asset
forfeiture is in
disproportionately be used
against up for people and
communities of color and as I
said earlier let's turn to
opioids settlement funds there's
a bill to fund all revenue from
cannabis taxes to treatment and
prevention and education and so
I'm hoping that we can look at
this other funds but this is
definitely not the vehicle thank
you so much.
During.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so I I think it's
important to understand first of
all that this does not to renew
the forfeiture Act that is
completely in tact what's
happening now and I'll just
reiterate a little bit of what I
said earlier is that federal law
enforcement is seizing the
property we don't have any
ability to to to have any
proceeds from those seizures
because it is it's it's there is
now we would allow us to share a
little bit.
From the proceeds are their work
okay.
The work that the taken thank
you.
And so
And and I understand that this
is important.
It would only happen if there is
a federal conviction.
And the money could only be used
for the things that I already
signed in so there is nothing
that expands or roads the act
itself which by the way you hi I
supported and I support now.
I don't know if the phone
service Representative Matthews
was Madam chair representative.
I really want to reiterate.
That if you go to page six.
Winds twenty three and twenty
four make it clear that that
property.
will be seized.
The owner of the property is
convicted in federal court.
So it's not like we're taking.
Property from somebody that was
found innocent somebody that
didn't commit a crime.
This money is being seized.
All we're asking for is for our
local law enforcement agencies
to be able to get a cut of that
and use it for their programs
Eight six line twenty five a law
enforcement agency
participating.
in federal equitable sharing
program she'll spend the money
received from a program on drug
prevention or awareness programs
so despite what are good friends
from the Americans for
prosperity said we're not taking
innocent people's money these
people have been convicted in a
federal court.
That money is going to be seized
or that property is going to be
seized anyway.
We would like to be able to use
some of that money in New Mexico
for drug awareness programs.
So I think that's very important
to to remember we're not the
roading.
The bill that's or or the
statute that's in effect now
we're actually enhancing it to
allow our local law enforcement
agencies to be able to take
advantage of some of this.
And I don't know if the Mr
Martinez or for of new tunes has
something else to add.
The solution.
Madam chair.
Is it Madam chairman is okay if
I sit are Chand what you're.
Usually I stand this is soccer
city
Madam chair
Will Glaspie who's the director
of hide up he was supposed to be
on the line he's not online
right now.
But he he sees across the state
hi to stance for high intensity
drug trafficking area.
And here's what's already going
on is.
Since the law was re written in
fifteen in speaking to him this
morning and hopefully I'm not
misrepresenting this but from
his calculation the state has
already lost about I believe it
was twenty seven to twenty eight
million dollars so what is
already occurring is there's
already federal investigations
happening by the DEA FBI ATF
homeland security local police
agencies such as APD are already
involved in these
investigations but yet when
there's assets forfeited the
local police agency does not see
any of that money so for example
if of let's say hypothetically
last year APD could receive two
two million dollars that money
is already going to the federal
treasury that's what's happening
this this is money that New
Mexico that New Mexicans the
local law enforcement agencies
are getting.
And this is money that could be
put into prevention and
education sitting alongside me
today is Montoya Nelson he's in
charge of the narcotics
operations and he can give you
firsthand experience of how this
money could be used if if Madam
chairwoman or any of the panel
is interested in this but this
is money that's already been
lost and if I could just
reiterate that some of the
points that were brought up is
The policing for profit as
Representative Martinez said.
This is limited to those
investigations that are already
occurring that
There has to be a federal
conviction to occur so that
means that the due process
rights were taken to get into
consideration and if and a
conviction occurred at the
federal level that also means
and this to address one of the
points is having been the former
U. S. attorney of under
president Obama
The the the amount of cases
going into the US attorney's
office they're not going to be
taking cases just to try to give
up money back to the state I can
I can guarantee you that that
that that level that's not
incentive for the U. S.
attorney's office to be doing
also there was mention of the
three billion dollars surplus
and the opiates stipulation I
was an assistant Attorney
General here in the United I was
the assistant you a need for the
state of New Mexico and during
my time period there there was
the tobacco litigation that was
a one time payment this is
something that if this can be
set up this is something that
would be going for
drug prevention in perpetuity
and then
As far as a grab
it's not that this is meant to
deal with stuff as the fat now
epidemic that we're currently
dealing with thank you for your
time.
We'll go to the committee
we have Representative Romero.
thank you for being here to
discuss this
I I guess I have a few questions
as to.
I want to start you to sorry it
doesn't have an answer for this
so hopefully you do
Madam chair I'm curious as to
why you know why we would need
this law if we if there was a
mechanism to be able to receive
federal funds or that that would
which was already received by
the federal government rather
than sort of managed up from
this why not just you know
receive the funding that we feel
like we are owed for the work
that New Mexicans you know law
enforcement spending in and and
go from that from that source
down.
Rather than sort of preempt
their process by seizing at that
getting a federal conviction and
then receiving that seized goods
Madam chair representative thank
you madam chair Representative
Romero I'm gonna have a Mr
Martinez Research.
That.
Madam chair representative
Representative Romero
When the law was drafted in
fifteen.
It was drafted in a way that
contradicted what was possible.
So when it was drafted back then
it said that the money would
have to go to the general
treasury here in the state
however according to the
Department justice and other
federal agencies such as
homeland security it's my
understanding that has to go to
the specific law enforcement
agencies can't go to the general
treasurer of the state so right
away there was a disconnect to
answer your question more
specifically I and let me just
talk about the department of
justice is under their
guidelines and I'm pointing here
to their to their regulations
they have twelve areas that they
allow the local law enforcement
agency to keep the money.
Such AS towards equipment such
as doing matching grants things
like that.
In in drafting this bill.
We're only picking one of those
twelve areas and that in that
one area is for prevention and
education with the drug money
and so I hope that answers your
question.
Sort of Madam chair
representative I guess the
question is more so I I don't
disagree that we would love to
have the funds for you know
deres and the folks that we you
know want to educate about the
programs that we know we want to
fund
That said my concern is this
mechanism right the seizure
mechanism if worse because of
the with the way that the
process works at this point my
understanding is that he sees
the property then you got the
federal conviction then you
either return the property or
keep it up so it's meanwhile
it sits in limbo.
For the folks who are innocent
right so my concern is to to
fault one that you're perhaps
incentivizing this feature
because hopefully we'll get to
keep it to fund these programs
and to for those that you know
have their.
Property seized they have no
recourse for action until it's
returned so I I understand
wanting to fund the programs but
my concern madam chair
Representative is is what we
were trying to prevent my
understanding in twenty fifteen
and why this law was put into
place the way that it is so I I
guess how we proceed if you know
what the what's different but my
understanding.
Driving past the Mike or
somebody just a minute but I
think it's the committee needs
to understand madam chair that.
For future recurring now okay
whether it's by local law
enforcement or or federal law
enforcement property sees the
only thing that the law tend to
do was to do Senator by our the
for profit they which I get but
none the less the state is still
be writing a budget instead of
going to law enforcement goes to
the state in this case and what
we're after and with the the the
tweaking of this law is that
when the federal law enforcement
season they have.
If we have we don't have it.
But we may have helped in a
condition we may have been
participating but we do ride the
state right nope if they needed
to local law enforcement it all
goes to the federal government
now.
And so what it would allow us to
do is to be people in essence to
build the federal government to
say Hey we were participating.
You have got the conviction you
have this property we get a
percentage of that property
after that conviction.
Madam chair.
So madam chair Representative.
Mike my concern is that
incentive right because we're
now saying.
Seasonal.
Seize the day it with whatever
it is that is potentially on the
table that because it's seen as.
Perhaps you know something that
is going into a good call us
however that incentive to me
seems like the wrong one when
we're talking about just
administering justice in those
circumstances so.
While I totally understand the
need to fund these programs my
concern is that when you take
local law enforcement are
working with
the fed's and full disclosure
you know I my brother's a cop so
we talk about this quite a bit
and I understand the frustration
of seeing how this this property
gets you know looked at it's
like everybody knows it's from
illegal activity and then you
just need to wait for the
conviction to happen however.
My concern is that in the
administration of justice where
is the ability to save this is
my property and we talked about
a few cases where back in twenty
fifteen and to present where
property has been seized that
was certainly not
I'm often we obtained I'm
awfully I guess procured by the
by the then
accused so my concern is that we
would see that as an elevated
amount of this because it's like
great we'll just wait till the
conviction comes but we're going
to keep it and and be able to
fund these this is good because
we're for miss we're missing the
mark on what that incentive
would be for that Madam chair
representative and so I guess
going back to twenty fifteen why
would I think this law was
changed was to be able to sort
of manage that interest in the
way that we currently do and I
think we heard that from
advocates
but that's that Madam chair
representative I remember being
in high school and dare would
come with this really like
sports cars Committee drug
dealing look with that but it's
K. we were like this looks cool
show I'm so also I just wonder
about like how these are being
held as would you know be
education is when it comes to so
that that those drug programs to
educate folks for not wanting to
be part of that as well that's a
that's an aside and I know we've
got away from that practice but
that said I think what we're
what we're trying to do here
perhaps just missed the lines
those values and what what we
would want to accomplish thank
you madam chair madam chair if I
could just clarify one point on
page one line twenty four.
Very clearly says.
that the the four.
line twenty it starts the
purpose of the for forfeiture
Act or two and then skipping
down twenty four protect the
constitutional rights of persons
whose property is subject to
forfeiture and of innocent
owners holding interest in the
property.
So we're not roading the
constitutional rights of those
innocent and I don't necessarily
see it as incentivizing because
the job of law enforcement.
Is to enforce the laws and I'm
sure Montoya can can clarify
this there are very specific
parameters under which any
property can be seized.
I don't know that law
enforcement goes into a drug
house and just starts taking
everything.
There is there are very specific
rules on what they can season
and maybe Mr Martinez or
chairman Nelson can speak to
that.
Yes Madam chair representative
on try to remember to say that
as often as possible
I guess the the best way I can
describe this is our federal
organizations our federal
partners they do large scale
investigations so the majority
vast majority of investigations
happen at the state level and as
the progress they go to the
federal level.
So we're talking about criminal
organizations we're not talking
about individuals economic nice
car for talking about like a
couple months ago we seize over
million dollars in currency
people that are creating wealth
criminal organizations that are
creating wealth for more
vulnerable populations that's or
talking about that's receiving
these assets from so it's large
sums of money large like houses
and and and things like that so
I don't know if that clear I
have been asked to as to what
we're what we're taking from
from criminals but and and if I
could clarify a little bit
About.
seizures generally since prior
to twenty fifteen they they're
not include they haven't they
haven't decreased their
continuing that we're on the
same trajectory so we're not
increasing or decreasing because
of asset forfeiture laws here in
New Mexico.
We are I think the only state
maybe one of two states that
don't participate in asset
forfeiture with federal with
federal agencies.
so that we can all these all the
seizures are happening by the
federal agencies in the act they
haven't stopped and they won't
stop the only difference is
these funds go to the general
fund and then distributed to
other communities to help them
out.
And not here.
Thank you anything else.
Thank you
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Senator back
there
so if I understand this
correctly ranchers and
Representative.
I've talked to the sponsor this
if we're missing out of how much
money four million.
Is it because that was the
amount that she gave me that's.
Even not that we're missing out
on in the state.
Actions which there about.
Thank you madam chair I'm I'm
gonna have a Mr Damon addresses
because we also have someone on
the line they might be able to
win okay.
Madam chair representative
Representative Lord it's my
understanding that will Glaspie
who's the director of high to is
on the line and he can he can
answer your question.
Thank you ma'am I'd love to hear
that I want to know how much
we're missing out.
You have.
Okay okay go ahead.
You know hearing.
Madam chair it's pleasure to be
with you this afternoon my name
is will last beyond the
executive director New Mexico
high intensity drug trafficking
area program better known by the
name of the hi to specifically
to the to the question in hand
for the last three years from
what I can see from our hi to
enforcement initiatives there's
been roughly thirty million
dollars in cash in assets seized
by all the initiatives of our
state local.
Of Law Enforcement agencies
would be missing out on
approximately eighty percent of
that so roughly twenty four
million dollars over the last
three years.
In addition to that one House
Bill five sixty became on twenty
fifteen the state of New Mexico
walked away from five million
dollars it was sitting on the
table at the department of
justice.
It was never it was ready to be
shared but because the law the
new law conflicted with the
federal policies that five
million dollars was never shared
back to us here in New Mexico.
Okay thank you chair of general
understands is a lot of number
so it's five million dollars
that we're missing or is that
correct.
Madam chair representative board
over the last three years the
state has lost out on twenty
four million dollars okay so I
got I support is twenty four.
Okay that makes it even bigger
amount of money okay so madam
chair representative so if I'm
understanding this so there is a
federal case and usually those
of their cases.
And.
But it's happening in these and
I believe is stories expert said
that seizures have not.
Sign up is that what I'm
understanding to twenty fifteen
nobody's got out and ran I got
more there's no there's
fluctuations are correct the
amount of seizures twenty.
Madam chair we're gonna have the
expert dresses.
Madam chair representative the
fluctuates by natural naturally
but there hasn't been a drastic
decrease since the bill and
there wasn't so I mean the
trajectory of the state thank
you Mr that's what I get I try
to see things is always going to
fluctuated see there's expects
that for now okay.
So I understand what happened
sources better paced Yushi like
with a lot of criminal
organizations try to figure out
because I don't know what a
federal case thank god I don't
know what one is so they happen
and they're big case.
The property is seized.
But it doesn't go anywhere
nothing happens to it and to
help the conviction of my
understanding that right madam
chair and representative madam
chairman I have Mister Martinez
Research.
Madam chair representative of.
To simplify things and to talk
about the way that this would
happen in this case is.
Do you what would have a local
law enforcement agency involved
such as the Albuquerque police
department and
A person an officer like
lieutenant Nelson may be wearing
different hats he may be he's
working for APD bodies also task
force member he'll be working
with the federal authorities
whether to FBI DEA.
They will seize property and the
way that this would work is
traditionally and just to give
you some safeguards on how this
works in the federal system is.
you have prosecutors and from my
experience I was the supervisor
of the wire taps section which
basically meant that we did wire
taps on the on the cartels so
you're going after an
organization one of the
safeguards in place is the
prosecutor who's working with
that law enforcement agencies
let's say the FBI
you have prosecution then was
put in place you examine to make
sure that there's probable cause
going forward then you indict
you indict the case and you have
individuals in that indictment
you're gonna be talking about
announcements you're gonna be
saying okay these certain assets
are what have been.
Have been identified or seized
at this point so then basically
that individual or the
individuals are given notice
that there's a there's a
criminal complaint.
Criminal notice of our notice of
criminal charges being brought
against some then you go through
the process the end of the
process which comes back to this
bill is a federal conviction
they plead guilty to such and
such charge only upon the
federal conviction can the local
police agencies such as a P. D.
dent except that money the
percentage of what they put into
that case and that's when they
can use that money four of the
prevention education side of
this so those are the safeguards
that are in place.
You madam chair and
representative you might wanna
standards question and you.
Okay so.
I've only Senate movie so I
don't know how it works you know
take a turn and make their taken
separate guess that's not the
case so let's say there was a.
Mexico PTA's and mentioned to me
times people that was that
selling channel and making a
tremendous amount of money
there's a group of them and
they've got cars they bought
with the drug money and they've
got cash and all that stuff and.
Is that still sees that that
members that come later after
there's probable cause.
Representative of I'm sorry
Madam chairwoman Representative
Representative Lord I think
probably the best X. explanation
would come from Montana Nelson
to tell you how it actually
happens mentor matching you with
the possible.
I I do we are Madam chair
representative the ideally we do
the investigation prior to so
we'd be able to track and prove
that those assets were purchased
with illicit proceeds so that
would happen on the front end
sometimes there are
circumstances where there is
a million one point five million
dollars in currency and a house
and forty pounds of meth and
over million federal bills which
we found recently
in that circumstance it there's
reason to believe that that
currency was done with truck
drug trade especially because
the house is primarily Indian
was instructional is it was a
drug trafficking organization so
in that circumstance we we would
cease that currency
With the belief that that was
due to drug proceeds.
Right that kind of acceptable
marquis and that so so you go in
you can invest in you know that
this is happening workshops
whatever.
That stuff get sees as their
leader part we said something to
prop up their second happen is
another part we say we go to the
court to say here's all the
items that we have and
everything is listed out and we
you know we believe that this
was used in the crime and here's
what we're seizing does that
happen later most commonly it's
wrapped up into the indictment
okay.
So it's it's done that way
either way it's the same burden
of proof for the seizure okay
so.
Probable costs okay I like to
hear this term so all right so
then things are seized in a
stored somewhere like let's just
say there was weapons are going
to be Stewart to they're given
did our house what's the story
with that it every agencies a
little different
some of them just deposit
currency into the bank
vehicles are held in a secure
facility
houses there's they were held up
by the marshals.
office there's a there's a lot
of different components
depending on the asset and I
think this might maybe not I'm
gonna go see and so if madam
chair.
Representative
So things are stored securely
the question.
is there like an inventory that
the person sciences is yes we
have four hundred thousand.
This
year the money into the stuff
that's getting cease is anybody
signing off on that or anything
Madam chair representative so
there there's absolutely
detailed tracking of everything
okay this kind of I think.
second tier I think.
Okay and it's active okay
economic questions answered
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Alex we're at the half
hour mark.
What okay.
With okay.
She that she.
Thank you.
So first I just want to know
we're these funds.
So if this bill passes the state
folks get the money.
Fund where these go they just go
to the specific I'm just really.
Chairman representative block my
understanding is that there
would be percentage I would go
back to the agency or agencies
that participated earn money
that isn't all of the proceeds
is only percentage based on the
time and effort that they
invested into a particular case.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so with this also
go to prevention programs thank.
Programs or would that just be
the.
Madam chair Representative block
that's a great question on page
seven.
starting in line wanted to lay
that out very clearly.
Starting in the middle of that
first sentence program she'll
spend money received from a
program on drug prevention
awareness programs including
costs associated with conducting
law enforcement agency awareness
program so this is very
targeted.
Very specific they're not going
to be using it for new cars or.
Some other line item in their
budget it's it's very very
specific.
Mentor Representative yeah I
think that the kind of questions
or even we see profit because
these funds go right back to to
ensuring that our communities
safer we have less.
people who are addicted to drugs
and different.
Program sure that we got that so
I think that's a good thing I
also want to make sure that we
don't Madam chair of
Representative but we just have
one piece in in conversation
with Representative Dixon was
actually the lead on the bill
are you she's interpreted after
consultation that would also
apply for gang intervention as
well as all call.
Thank Madam chair representative
of a good thank you for adding
that.
And I just want to know what the
state the setting of these
assets seized.
Cadillac's house is cast and
these come from the proceeds of
the collective so it's not like
we're.
We're doing is ripping away all
the well.
You made it through this mostly
violent with respect kinds of.
One of the things that happened
to these communities these funds
are not just for.
These come from people.
It.
Court.
For action.
At.
Thanks is for a lot so I just
wanna make sure that that's a
clear point we.
Target.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and sorry
I was out I had a bill in
another committee but I am
concerned about policing for
profit and probably those of you
who are old enough to remember a
few years back in Albuquerque
there was a young black man
riding the train yes his family
had given in cash you save that
money to go start in the music
business in LA and they took
everything we had he was totally
innocent he never got it back so
how can how can we be sure that
that doesn't happen.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Martinez who went
as well but I think what's
important to make clear this is
important or by the we I
remember that case and I was
poor and I am going to be a
supporter of this particular
statute I think it's it's it's
needed the but the reality is
this no matter what happens with
that we do anything with this
bill we don't do anything with
this bill there will still
continue to be.
Seizures.
Property as as the lieutenant
stated earlier it hasn't gone up
or down since we passed this law
the only difference that in
instead of it being the poster
child abuse particularly law
enforcement was bragging about
seizing this property it's the
season and it's still being sold
the only difference is it
doesn't go to that agency it
goes to state coffers it goes to
the states general fund it's
still happen it just no longer
is an individual department
that's doing it still happening
in this particular case again
it's it's just a sliver to amend
that when the federal government
and the federal law enforcement
use of the property and have and
if we participating level we can
then claim a little bit of the
proceeds a percentage of it so
it's only a percentage of it and
you can only be used for very
positive things madam chair so
madam chair and representative
what what what is in place to
guarantee what will happen to
that money.
So the the laws specific it says
that can only be used for
drug intervention prevention
education and also to include
our gang prevention awareness as
well as it could be used also
for all call works as well thank
you madam chair just one more
one more question if it comes
back in here how does this fit
in with innocent until proven
guilty so the property is seized
under the experiment have Mr
Martinez to do a better job than
I do but in essence it sees
that's held until there's a
conviction and if there's no
connection equipment returned to
the owner.
Madam chair and and that didn't
happen to young man on the train
he did not get it back so I'm
not convinced that I mean I know
stuff happens but can you
imagine when you were twenty one
twenty two years old could saved
in your family invested in you
and all of a sudden it's gone
only because you are caring
cash.
Madam chair representative
Representative Thomson
The incident that you're
bringing up would not this would
not apply to that because that
was a civil forfeiture and this
bill deals with the criminal
forfeiture so this is this is
one of the Altman safeguards
it's in place to answer your
question is the language within
this bill is the local police
agency APD cannot accept that
money until there is a criminal
conviction now the in the
example you're bringing up that
I if my memory is correct there
was not a criminal case there.
And so the the safeguards I
spoke to Representative Lord
about those are in place all the
way through.
First of all one of the things
that a judge has a
responsibility of doing whether
it's in a trial or whether it's
in a call colloquy when they
accept the plea of guilty is to
make sure that there's actually
the facts in place for that
person to plead guilty to make
sure that that person just as in
pleading guilty to two of.
Because they're on their own
they're forced to.
And so you have the process of
the the US attorney's office and
you know having been in there
for seventeen years I truly
believe that the goal there is
to do justice not just to get
convictions I truly believe that
and so when it says in this bill
that there has to be a federal
conviction it's going to the U.
S. attorney's office then to the
process telling about not only
to the U. S. attorney's office
but then through the court
system itself the court process
you have a judge involved that
again either with a trial or
with just a plead guilty to a
plea agreement that judge cannot
accept a plea of guilty unless
the facts of this substantiate
that and when you're asking for
guarantees that it's not just
going to someone's not just
going to have their assets taken
and not given back that's why
looking at the law or the words
in this proposed law a federal
conviction occurs and again the
trigger is that federal
conviction and APD or any other
law enforcement agency can't
accept that money until that
happens.
Madam chair in this not really
question just a statement but
the people who are assets are
seized from if they're they're
gone I mean if someone got cash
to buy a house and they got sees
that they missed out on the
house then even if they got it
back you essentially run that
person's life so I had still
have some issues with it thank
you madam.
Thank you Representative thank
you Representative thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative I also have some
questions
Can you give me the definition
for drug intervention programs.
Madam chair I'm gonna have our
experts are identify that's.
Madam chair representative
Representative Representative
Rubio I'm not familiar with the
specific definition for that I
guess I would ask will Glaspie
if
if he's aware of one who's on on
the line.
This.
I am asking.
Yes.
Madam chair if I can before I
get into that in reference to
the previous scenario of the
gentleman that had dues money
seized from nam it is not true
that he was an innocent.
A guy going from Detroit to Los
Angeles for a music career he
was in fact a drug trafficker
any was in fact under
investigation at the time that
the money was seized by
authorities back in Detroit just
for clarification I know what
came out in the paper
but it's really hard for law
enforcement to talk about
ongoing investigations at the
time and that gentleman was not
just an innocent would be
musician.
It is far as this bill though I
I I I think I can't define what
a drug intervention is of the
other than providing education
educational opportunities for
the youth and our communities to
help them understand the dangers
of drugs it's something that
high to works with prevention
initiatives around the state on
a regular basis and I think that
would be a good use of these
funds.
Thank you madam chair
Representative that who then
makes the decision of
who decides.
What a
What a drug intervention program
is.
Madam chair Representative Rubio
so I would like to think that if
you mentioned several right so
that we can get the word out the
fence and all is deadly on
multiple levels we were riding
things are negative
I'm sure the difference just
disparities are counties would
be creative and how the use
funds for the benefit of the
public but to define one I I we
could do that for you.
I just.
You have.
Thank you Representative so I
mean I certainly have concerns I
think one of the things that
I've heard today that I think is
a bit problematic is that we're
leaving money behind.
And
I think I guess I'm just.
Why do we take cues from the
federal government in these
types of situations and and I
guess it's not our our it's not
part of our values set here in
New Mexico where we are like I
don't believe that we should be
profit we should be addressed we
should be going towards profit
driven practices that don't
necessarily address our our
current issues I think we should
we have the state should be
making those investments and I I
mean I I hope that we continue
to work on these issues but this
it doesn't seem like the right
The right Avenue and so
I just I think it also I don't
know I just I have a lot of
questions about this issue and
And and I just don't think that
this is very much in alignment
with who we are as New Mexicans
and so with that I'll just I'll
just leave it at that.
Madam chair if I could just make
a brief comment about that
I have I have been a legislator
for one month.
I also walked the halls of this.
Wonderful building for sixteen
years fighting for benefits for
veterans and their families and
we constantly took cues from the
federal government I remember
sitting in taxation and having
Representative it Santa tell me.
We need to follow what the
federal government does.
We take cues from the federal
government all the time.
And as far as policing for
profit I don't see.
Taking drugs off the streets.
Testing dangerous criminals whom
many times especially lately are
pushing Fenton all that's
killing our kids is a bad thing.
If we can recover some of that
money so we could.
And Institute some programs to
educate young kids about help
that federal is and how taking
one pill could kill you I don't
see that as a bad thing.
Are we going to get money if
this passes are we going to
retrieve some of that money
absolutely but we're not going
to be spending it frivolously
we're gonna be spent a program
that will educate young kid.
Don't get into a drug drug
program of drug problem
don't join a gang.
These are things that we need to
be teaching our children.
I'd love to see kids call from.
Large gravel from bad
neighborhoods who shined and
I've seen that in my lifetime.
But it takes investment to be
able to do that.
All we're asking.
This stuff is happening we've
heard that that.
The seizures are happening.
A lot of the state of New Mexico
to retrieve some of that money
so we could then invested into
good programs I'm not asking to
retrieve it this money to buy
more guns to buy faster cores to
by obtaining.
I'm asking to use this money.
For programs are going to see
our children I have four
grandkids I want to make sure
that those those kids grow up in
a world that's safe and
protected and that's what we're
asking to do.
Madam chair thank you very much
thank you madam chair.
What is the will of the
committee.
Adam chair I move to table.
Representative.
Representative well known and
liked the.
Representative Romero yes.
The Thomson yes.
By your.
Yes the table.
Yes table and like to explain
my.
Madam chair of the forty to
table.
Representative.
Yes thank you mentioned you're
not
I would look at is the stuff is
being seized for missing on a
twenty four million dollars were
diverting those funds to
something that is very helpful
and beneficial so that is my
reason it's not like we're just
going to taking Representative
things we go to the problem
itself there's a reason for no
to table thank you.
Thank you and I'd like to
explain why those
even though we might have less
of funding have to go into
programs I don't believe that
the police departments are set
up to execute those programs and
the funding that we do get going
into the general fund will be
more efficient to go into
drug and alcohol treatment
programs and also prevention so
Fund that was reason
to stop thank you you have
tabling the thank you bill with
the forty two.
K. next we have House Bill three
twenty eight.
It was.
You know.
Glee that's only the second time
I've done this agency.
Okay we try and do this in half
an hour so that we can be out by
seven we have one more bill
after this
One three six.
At three years old welcome.
Six o'clock
and we have a committee
substitute.
Correct.
Thank you as much as three
twenty eight okay great.
At that we just didn't think.
The amendment to all second okay
it's been moved and seconded
that.
Would you like to explain the
committee sessions thank you
madam chair so this was a work
in progress and the first out
that we had and it was we hadn't
had an M. D. O. T. the secretary
we and so with their input I
think we have a much better
bill.
There is there any discussion on
the.
Committee set to.
Madam chair I thank you and Dawn
committee.
I move to adopt the for the
second.
Okay committees up you have.
Adopted it is for you.
Yes for section oh sorry.
Okay go ahead and please explain
the apple.
Thank you madam chair of the
members of the committee so as
everyone is painfully aware we
have a great number for Televisa
run the state certainly in my
community a self value Melba
kirke
I was approached by the middle
Rio Grande council of
governments are because they as
part of the regional planners
recognize that our roads are
designed and how we do business
to approve one to the future it
has to absolutely take into
account pedestrians bicyclists
and also mortars and show with
this particular bill attempts to
do is to enshrine in law that as
we move forward we're absolutely
cognisant of our bicycle this
our pedestrians and of course
our motorists so that they ought
to Perkins harmony and we have
we were able to reduce our
metallic and so.
You know.
This is a I just read this this
morning and so I was
disappointed because we have the
trip report put up today is your
work and we have over twenty
thousand but tell that he's in
the last five years my money
just last year alone we had over
almost five thousand was four
hundred and eighty of
pedestrians and and bicycle X.
kids on our roadways and.
We we need to take this
seriously out I. will tell you
that our municipalities in our
state D. O. T. everybody is
trying but with this bill will
do is create a focus on that
effort sure that we have someone
that is specifically dedicated
to try to make sure that as we
move forward we engineer we
build we prepare we modify or or
and we so that they are friendly
to human beings so that is the
essence of it madam chair and
with me I have the secretary of
NMDOT Mr chair.
Thank you madam chair by me I
can add a couple of reports
first of all I want to thank our
sponsor representative in a
cruise for working with us on
the amendments those were some
items that we felt give us the
flexibility to achieve the goals
of the bill just a point of
clarification as Representative
shared the fatalities was two
thousand seventy one I think the
number mentioned earlier was
twenty so it's two thousand
seventy one deaths going back to
two thousand seventeen.
To be sure what what this
Senator really entail right we
have metrics that we have to
report on annually fatalities
alcohol related non alcohol you
know bicyclist pedestrian you
name it and there's no question
that as we make games and
certainly we're satisfying our
responsibility to our federal
partners but there's still
something unsettling about
single we're getting closer
we're reducing debts and this
number is better and it's okayed
because it should be okay we
should be at zero so we see with
this bill is an opportunity to
to identify right not only how
we bring together our planning
part design and our traffic
safety bureau but there's going
to be an effort that's going to
be necessary for us to call on
partners with other agencies
when we talk about homelessness
when we talk about the whole
homelessness and transit
populations play a role in
pedestrian related deaths
distracted driver gets things
like that so we see the role of
this position not only bringing
together multiple bureaus within
the agency but how we would
really call for a collaborative
effort among multiple agencies.
Federally add one thing that I
think important note many of the
roadways that we that we use now
we're designed in a time where
we were more focused on vehicles
and we were on bicycle this
which by the way I'm one of and
as well as pedestrians
and so like if you look at
route sixty six Central Avenue
in Albuquerque that point of
that road correct Mr Roch
secretary there is a maintenance
agreement with City of
Albuquerque you have that with
early counties well particularly
a long course Boulevard and
others and so what it will allow
us to do and to reiterate what
secretary just says to work with
our partners to ensure that we
have built roadways and walkways
that will help save lives thank
you madam chair.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience is there anyone here in
opposition.
Is there any funds to new okay
is there anyone here in support.
soon.
Okay so go to the committee.
Representative Rubio thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I I'm very
supportive of this legislation
I am a bike commuter when I'm in
Los crucis I rode my bike from
Los crucis to Santa Fe twice
I'm and I did it because one I
love to cycle but also I think
it's important to highlight the
importance of
not only being outside but just
the fact that we are very much a
very centered apar centered
society and I think we can agree
that
there are.
There there's just a real a lot
of really inconsiderate drivers
out there that make it really
hard for people to not only
enjoy the outdoors but also to
get to and from where they need
to go and
I think that for for myself I've
been working really closely with
the city of Los crucis to make
sure that we could be
potentially a beacon for the
rest of the state but also
hopefully for the for the entire
country because it's it's there
are many many opportunities that
we can do locally I do have a
question in return regards to
the the the process particularly
for the coming year I just
wanted to just say that this is
something that I would really
want to be involved in
and and I know that there's some
work that you all are are are
that I was reading about the
process the work that will be
done in the interim and things
like that and so I'm I just
wanted to let you know that I'm
I'm very interested in this and
I'm I'm really happy that that
you brought this point of thank
you and I'm sure Representative
Rubio I would absolutely welcome
that I would consider you an
expert as well.
Thank you.
One.
Representative block thank you
madam chair thank Representative
first of all I want to major
props Representative Rubio honor
to journalists from others and
fantastical well I might have to
try.
It's been that so good.
And then so I'm just reading
about this issue throughout the
try to sweeten.
I'm just wondering what is the
solution the proposed there to
help stop these yes sure Madam
Madam chair representative thank
you that was worried that
friction ruby was going off to
fight us to do that trip with
her when she first started
speaking but up at all the for
later.
We'll get it right this will
have to do so up there there's a
models actually throughout the
throughout the nation right so
we don't have to look outside
the country Albuquerque is a
municipality is a actually
adopted vision zero as well
Massachusetts other examples
certainly of our city so I think
there's a couple of things that
have to come together one of
them is the education component
right we have to be sure that as
we look to reduce fatalities
associated rate with multi modal
ways of coming up commuting that
it's about education also right
so we have to inform drivers
about motorcyclists pedestrians
cyclists we got to build a
culture right that certainly we
have to be mindful that we're
not just in passenger vehicles
anymore as a state so that's the
first step and then the other of
course is how we build multi
modal into the design and
planning for roads right be
mindful of where we are relative
to business and school districts
and how we're going to monitor
and keep track of crash data to
understand whether we need to
look at signaling intersections
you know left lanes for turns
you know deceleration lanes
acceleration lane so part of it
is really capturing the data
around crashing Vitela the data
so that we can go ahead and pick
where we need to not just
generally speaking but by
individual communities in
geographical areas so it is a
combination of what we need to
do educationally and what we
need to do with planning and
design of roads and then how we
use the data around patches to
make changes as we move through
you know devotion of roads and
maintenance and things like
that.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative so.
You know I think this is the
target folks are walking.
I mean and I just deporting.
You kind of.
Activity would also include
focused on motorcycles as well
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
absolutely impacted you know one
of the areas that the state has
done a phenomenal job doing is
reducing alcohol related crashes
going back several years right
we were ranked high among the
states within the nation in over
the last several years we've
chipped away at that so we will
also include passenger drivers
right distracted drivers texting
while driving but absolutely
able include what we do to you
know the better part you know
prevent crashes it with
motorcycles or involving semi
trucks involving pedestrians
cyclists when we look at
multimodal we need to understand
how we really begin you know the
different modes of
transportation that we really
want to engage in understanding
that behind all of that are ways
to help us achieve other goals
like overall reducing our carbon
footprint right so those are all
things that just fit into a
bigger vision.
madam chair if I could only on
one aspect is.
When we talk about vision zero
it's it's it's a vision of
eliminating all fatalities all
crashes
You generally have a better
chance of you're in a vehicle a
lot less chance of your on my
screen of your one what and so
we would absolutely include that
as well.
Thank you much thank you
Representative that that's.
Anyone else in the.
Thank you madam chair so Act I
believe I read that you are
point planning to use vacancy
savings and I worry about the
appropriate or saying well if
you can use they can then you
didn't need that position in the
first place so how will you
address that Madam chair
representative re question so
the duty receives funding
specifically to target rate
reduction in fatalities from you
know it could be from seat belts
it could be for many W. Y.
campaigns from you know campaign
specifically directed to teen
drivers and being distracted
drivers so we really think that
vision zero kind of create a
synergy among what we have
already to really support you
know the campaign that we're
facing campaign but we certainly
feel like we have the capacity
within the DOT's budget to fund
the position and supported as
needed and it wouldn't
necessarily take away from the
need to fill other positions so
we we see it is not having any
implications on what we gotta do
in other areas Madam chair
representative having been on
probation that when things get
tough they're always looking for
so just a warning kind of to and
then I in one of the analysis I
read that the bill doesn't
actually state D. O. T. it says
the secretary but it doesn't say
the secretary what so you might
want to do an amendment and make
that clear
and then
Are you planning madam chair and
representative to work with the
Feds it since we get so many
federal dollars for highways and
things like that is there a plan
to be to coordinate thank you
representative will not have the
security interests Madam chair
representative absolutely I
believe that the overwhelming
majority of our budget for our
local department comes from
federal support and so that's
where when I was talking earlier
about our federal benchmarks are
federal reporting so we'll use
those reports and the process be
used for collecting and
reporting that information out
except now the goal isn't just
to see year over year reductions
it is to get to two zero okay
and madam chair copy of try to
be quick so if you I believe you
struck out the budget part of it
so how will we know what you
need if there's no budget thank
you madam chair and thank you
know for the secretary.
Madam chair representative again
we we feel like we have the
resources to implement the
vision of the bill there's no
question about it so the the
hope would be to identify what
above and beyond we have now
available for resources that we
would need to continue to you
know make progress towards
provisions zero and surely at
some point if we felt as though
what we needed was outside the
means of DOT we might be able to
come in and say listen here we
are from the baseline just we've
been able to accomplish to keep
moving that direction will be
this financial support but I
think that's why that first
report out that we would make in
the interim would tell everyone
right this is where we think we
need to go and and whether or
not we would be more resources
thank thank you madam chair
thank you for your answer.
Thank you I just mysterious at
after spending seven years at
traffic safety bureau in the.
nineties how why are you having
to get approval and to provided
for at the station.
Thank you madam chair so I think
that the the thing to remember
is that while in M. D. O. T.
does great job and some of our
local partners to the job.
Unfortunately they get a little
distracted with up if you look
at the number of roles and
responsibilities that just and
then do we do have a long and as
as much as they try they don't
have a single person that's
dedicated specifically or that
has the time to just focus in
one area I think that what we
are seeing in the news and what
we're experiencing in our
communities I like to tell
these.
One more thing madam chair we we
we talk off a televised because
it's the absolute it's an
absolute number but we don't
often talk about is the many
many stories of people that were
injured that will never walk
again they're not in those
numbers there's an awful lot of
those folks as well I believe
that it's time for New Mexico
and this legislature to say look
we take this so serious that we
are going to.
Legislate.
By law the position that works
just on this madam chair.
Mr secretary could you answer
that hi I don't agree that we
need to do this year to start a
program there are many programs
that we had dedicated to
different people.
Madam chair it is a good
question but a couple of points
that allowed one of them is I
think within our traffic safety
bureau right we have a number of
campaigns and programs even if
you pull in other things that we
do for example that are right.
I think what we gotta do a
better job of doing generally
speaking is how do we really
bring these things together to
change behaviors across the
state right when so when you
take for example a campaign like
buckle up and V. W. Y. how might
we bring these things together
to really kind of change driver
behavior and and could you even
cooperating with efforts around
anti litter campaign campaigns
like toss No mas to see could we
just do something around being
respectful when were out on our
roads and so again here the
other thing to keep in mind is
the priority is been on okay
we're going to focus on driver
safety and that's behavioral how
does the spill over into design
how does it spill over into the
planning of roads and how does
it spill over into working with
other agencies so that the some
of the challenges that we face
when it comes to driver safety
pedestrian safety are addressed
as well so we take for example
the work we do in Albuquerque
the City of Albuquerque we talk
a lot about our responsibility
and duty to pick up trash to
maintain rights away what we
know that we can't do that until
we sit down to have a
conversation about homelessness
and we know that in order to fix
the issues that we have a duty
which revolve around your first
you know homeless living in our
infrastructure in our bridges
and our rights away we can solve
that problem on our own so the
position actually will bring
together not only the divisions
at the U. T. that need to come
together but across agencies how
do we say.
This is an outcome for duty that
we report on that we're never
going to be successful and if we
don't involve other partners
outside of the duty to kind of
get to the root of the issue.
can you give me a sample of the
other agencies that you together
that are already the beauty sure
madam chair so the one of the
bigger issues for example with
litter pick up is we work very
closely with the corrections
department right and and the
corrections department has been
a partner for a really long time
as it relates to Senator when we
talk about investing including
roads we don't ever collaborate
with departments like the New
Mexico forestry division are
they having similar issues that
we can work on so that it's not
just on main roads but it's also
for example within the division
of oversight with litter and
with pedestrians we know that we
can target in some areas that
transients on the roads are as
pedestrians right for example
are at high risk of fatalities
for their mobility within
especially within the urban
cities so the issue the root
issue there is a homelessness
issue and the DOT is concerned
mostly with how are we going to
ensure they're not our right
away how we can to ensure that
they're not littering on our
right away but it's ultimately
resulting in a fatality and
that's something that all to the
beauty is responsible for so we
see that there's some root
issues that would involve
partnerships with the governor's
new the established policy
adviser on homelessness with
Human Services Division would
deal wage and with the
municipality to realize that you
know if pedestrian fatalities
revolve around homeless and
transient related issues we
can't cut through that unless we
solve some of those root issues.
Thank you I just noticed in on
page three of the original bill
this you listed the different
qualifications and unit listed
asters are for the great road
wait engineering or design
traffic engineering road traffic
control traffic safety and for
urban and regional
regional Planning.
And then on your commute
Committee substitute
you don't list any of those
things you just a four meter
Does.
I would think having someone as
a traffic engineer or.
Roadway design.
Would be as
That provision as a coordinator
to work with all the other
different agencies and to
implement the program.
is that why you to fill this out
or you just don't want to have
that.
Objects gentleman agree question
and and that was a
recommendation that came from my
experience over the state
personnel office so two things
one is the language suggested
that it was a secretary
appointment the secretary shall
appoint a coordinator which
pushes against the notion that
it's a classified position where
applicants must apply and there
must be a proper vetting process
to ensure that the search was
fair so that that kind of
prompted that change and then of
course provided the minimum
qualifications will give the
agency very little flexibility
if they run a search listing
those minimum qualifications and
we don't find applications that
meet them but perhaps might
demonstrate the capacity right
to still fill the position so
provided a minimum calls for for
a specific position does make it
difficult should the HSD see the
strings and in those anymore
calls in other areas but lack
some of the expertise right that
wouldn't fall within those
anymore.
Okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair I just one
quick question.
Article here about Washington DC
they committed to a vision zero
approach as well and according
to the statistics here's even
more people died were injured
this is how it is up to date put
this forward and from what I'm
reading here says that.
Their approach.
It was heavy on data collection
education.
And some promises that.
Force me but it didn't have as
many years.
Process so I'm just wondering
with this committees that would
just take away that kind of
requirement that you would need
to be here to help facilitate
this because I really don't want
to waste money have the same
kind of result is decent Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative so
removing the minimum quality
doesn't preclude us or or limit
our ability to hire someone it
was a licensed engineer or a
degreed engineer with that
expertise it just doesn't
provide the agency from doing
that so if we passed the bill
with the minimum Paul speak into
it.
We would be able to deviate
right propped those minimum
qualifications but it doesn't
preclude us from ensuring that
they have that background and
expertise thank you madam chair
thank you Representative yeah I
would just make sure look at
what's happening.
Massachusetts that that.
From what I'm reading it's
pretty that what's happening in
the city I don't know what the
circumstances are but I do know
that we want to be data driven
the we also want to make sure we
don't focused heavily on these
were data we do want to have
that
approach with this.
Professional service thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you it is the will of the
committee Madam chairman of the
past for the second.
Thank you is there any
objection.
Representative Lord those five
years.
Okay.
We have to do so.
Okay ****.
Thank you good luck with that
program.
Okay next we have in our last
half hour hopefully
Senate bill three thirty three
Civil Rights Act statute of
limitations health care.
House Bill would I say thank you
an exhibitor at
no we don't we wouldn't be here
but is.
While reading yeah all.
Thank you madam chair.
It's so nice to be with you at
six thirty in the evening hi are
only used to get to the bottom.
Well madam chair members of the
committee I bring to you.
House Bill three thirty three.
S. relating to civil rights.
And it remains the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act could modify
this that to to the day since
the notice requirement which.
I know.
You had a lot of good stuff to
discuss on this one let them
know a lot of analysis.
So what is basically the.
Is it gives a person and we
agreed or injured.
To file a complaint or to file a
claim after they have spoken to
an attorney.
Get food goes above the three
years that.
But the only way that it goes to
court is that this person goes
to returning and that introduces
you have a case otherwise you
and I just kept going straight
to the courtroom and do it.
I hope I explained that to.
So that madam chair and members
of the committee often for
questions.
Experts.
I'm sorry before we get into
your committee I think do your
bills we forgot to do do not
pass on House Bill three twenty
eight and do you passed on the
committee substitute for three
twenty eight.
Yeah.
Opposition.
Okay.
So with that madam chair I do
stand for questions thank you.
We'll go to the audience and is
there anyone in opposition.
This bill.
Do you like to speak.
Yes that we do.
Madam chair the sponsor and I
have talked about this a little
bit the last few days so
good evening at thank you for
the opportunity to speak my name
is grace Phillips I'm general
counsel for New Mexico counties
and we stand in opposition to
this bill
because the concept of a statute
of limitations is a pillar of
what makes our civil justice
system Sarah what what this bill
would do would be unlike any
federal or state civil law in
the country all of which provide
that there will be a certain
amount of time within which
someone can come forward and
file a claim for civil damages I
want to make sure you understand
this doesn't affect criminal
laws this this is not you know
when can a victim state of child
abuse or you know this this
doesn't have anything to do with
the criminal cause of action
this is just under the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act for
money damages and by saying the
statute of limitations and the
notice requirements wouldn't
even begin to run until somebody
has consulted with an attorney
is like eliminating the
requirement altogether someone
could wait thirty years and then
state will now consult with an
attorney and and and what are
the problems with that well
evidence is gone memories have
faded witnesses may have died or
moved on and it really doesn't
give you know our state Supreme
Court has reiterated how fair it
is and how important it is I'm
sorry I'm going on right time we
we just think that this is is
not good policy and
We propose.
Would you I for going over.
What topic lately.
What does it start still okay.
Okay no one else in opposition
stating went on to.
Go ahead Carla.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee it's
Leri Sonntag here I am a member
of better together New Mexico
advocacy project and I stand in
opposition to this bill up for a
lot of the reasons that we're
just very well hi to you there
in person.
Yes unimaginable that somebody
would have there were there
would be no statute of
limitations for civil rights
violations.
These are the kind of violations
that.
Are in your face you know if
there is a constitutional or
civil right that has been
violated and what's in effect
right now is a number of years
that allows people to think
about it to determine if they
have a cause of action and
consult an attorney.
Taking away that you're aware.
They could just as previously
mentioned it could be twenty
thirty forty years there's no
let up on which somebody could
then contact and turning and
then the statute.
Begins to call
the financial analysis for the
that Alice's that's online
points this out that this causes
numerous unimaginable expenses
and no.
factors and I'm not I'm not sure
exactly what the bill's sponsors
trying to accomplish here but
I
think.
Okay does in support.
The question
I.
Are there any support on.
Was there support of the state.
What.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Can you tell me the the
background how you got.
Thank you for all.
What happens madam chair I
Representative rock.
A lot of people the happens to
the long road you know idea that
if we reduce the number.
And then suddenly somebody wakes
him up the idea the thing is you
just gotta remember the only
thing that can happen is this
person asked the job in the
tourney and that it drew me in
as they have to make that
decision that yes you have a
case or not you know.
It is no.
It's gone.
So that's the only thing that
happens but like I say there's a
lot of people that live in our
world.
We are not aware that something
like this could happen.
They could have a claim.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well I.
I guess theoretically I mean
this bill if passed two years
ago so it's Frank.
So I just don't know if we have
enough data.
Yeah forty years from now.
My gonna wake up one day and say
oh well that the city of the X.
or Y. really.
Messed up my civil rights we
could talk to turning so I could
technically was to say I'm I'm a
hundred and ten years old.
Eighty years after the claim
happened I could go to an
attorney and at that point the
attorneys this sharia committees
I think the radically sue that
entity know literally no one at
the end to do exist.
Time to correct chair
representative.
Representative black I'm not
internet somebody comes to me
after eighty years.
I don't think I would take the
cake.
Representative I wouldn't take
the case and I.
But I think that there needs to
be some kind of protection for
that municipality because after
so long.
You know city managers or
alright officials that work
there are things to.
And I just the.
I just don't know how long
limitation would have to be at I
think currently in the law it's
like.
One and a half years or
something.
One year and six months after
the date of the occurrence.
I mean I guess I could
potentially go for longer
statue limitations but I don't
know about excluding it all
together Madam chair
representative so that that's
all I really thank thank you
Representative Robert I will.
Is that your question was
answered.
Yeah.
No he and he asked my question.
no other questions if you want
to close.
I have given you everything of
that.
you can make your decision okay
thank you flexibility committee
madam chair move to table to
look at.
With all the love in the.
We got late night it might not
surprise.
The report right so you're back
online.
That was nine years.
Practice.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Okay.
New Mexico I think
it's just a second.
If.
I was.
Okay.
This.
Is.
With.
I agree with that.
Public.
Because I.
We passed that's right.
Thank you.
