Quorum thank you.
The.
Start with house bill four
twenty nine of Representative
Zamora and read cannabis as a
contraband correction.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
afternoon
house bill four twenty nine
include a relating to
corrections including cannabis
in the definition of contraband
prohibiting cannabis and places
of imprisonment providing
exceptions madam chair with that
Our experts we have a couple of
experts on the on the internet
one of them is a Tim rose with
the ten judicial district
district he's a district
attorney and we also have a mark
I it goes he's a curry county
jail administrator.
And if my co sponsor would like
to say anything.
She madam chair members of the
committee all this does is when
the canvas Act went into effect
it there were there was a crime
there still's apartment building
bringing contraband into jail or
prison cannabis was initially
under that statute and when they
redefine what cannabis was it
took it out as a controlled
substance and so therefore now
what we're trying to do is add
it back into made cannabis
something when it's brought into
a prison is something that
district attorneys can prosecute
I'm in the situations not not
aware person would be walking
into jail and have cannabis on
their person because that
obviously is legal they would
probably be asked if they had
cannabis on them to to take it
out it's it's also it's more so
addressing those people who are
bringing it into other inmates
illegally and distributed among
them started over correctional
facility fences I believe I can
grants to be distributed among
prisoners and so
Marquet goes is also at our
curry county jail administrator
and has a lot of expertise in
the area I believe there are
there are rules in place that
don't allow it in prisons and
jails at this point like alcohol
and things of that nature this
will give this will take it back
to being a crime if you bring
into a prison building a third
degree felony fleeing into jail
for degree felony I'm so I think
we would like to deferred or
experts to make some comments on
it and if if that would work
madam chair before before you go
to the audience.
Thank thank.
The actor.
I think that if they could speak
now they have a some statements
to make on and then if you want
to direct questions to not be on
the same.
I.
The reason.
Right there are two.
Market goes and Tim rose.
Are doing it.
Yes.
Thank you I can barely hear you
mark thank you Sir pre county
adult detention center on been
in New Mexico here in thank you
for allowing me representatives
all representatives
Representative read and and and
more for allowing me to
participate in it and this is a
this is a hospital for twenty
nine I've been in New Mexico for
parts me about eleven twelve
years I was more than a Santa Fe
County detention center now here
curry county detention center
are that I have a caller on the
part of corrections and also you
may be experiencing public
safety I'm support of this bill
bill on.
Two two reasons number one I
have to think about officer
safety when not when any type of
up drugs indoor marijuana is
introduced into our to detention
centers this point in time it
really impedes on not not only
the the inmates have in control
of that type of a set up more
water any other drugs went
really focusing on marijuana but
the other the other thing is
that up the the propensity of
violence I want to persons under
the influence of marijuana we
have seen that in that is
supported by the internal a
journal of medicine are in
individuals who are ingested
marijuana can become violent we
have seen it is sort of our
detention centers I isn't
working the inside of our
detention facility our control
the
What is being done contraband in
the that comes into our facility
and I think that that marijuana
is is contraband and if we do
find it inside the facility will
call local law enforcement and
and make a report about but I am
supported this bill due to the
fact that if it does come in it
is sold at a much higher rate it
would be on the streets and then
and then when that's done if we
confiscated then we have
detainees over each other which
really makes it harder for for
detainees in inside the
population don't get it and that
just because a lot of fights
inside the facility of seen it
pop constant living years inside
of a New Mexico and also again
talking about the officer safety
are we in the individuals are
under the influence of of
marijuana side of it the
detention centers so I'm just a
full support of this bill he
would like everybody to take a
look at it really support our
detention centers across New
Mexico I was previously also the
vice chair of New Mexico
counties off.
Standards appropriations and
that's one of the things that us
is working as we talk about a
great X. extent with each other
trying to control the any
contraband that comes into the
to the detention center so at
this point in time I would like
to stand for any questions if
anybody does have any questions
for me.
Thank you.
The next.
It rose to district attorney to
browse.
Yeah.
Madam chair we can come back to
him if we need to
thank you to the committee on
the label you know.
Yeah.
Well thank you and I think good
morning you madam chair members
the committee and
representatives of reviews the
more my name committee wrote in
the letter district attorney in
the tenth judicial district
which is where the Balkan
Harding County
and I was asked to give an
example of a case that we
prosecutors earlier this year
the case involved an inmate of
the Baca County jail.
making phone calls recorded
phone calls to his girlfriend on
a wrongful and hatching a plan
to smuggle in more wanted to the
to the detention center and the
plan was to for her to bring
marijuana into the visitation
room and hide it into a question
of a the.
And and then it in maybe would
have across the
who cleaned the visiting center
remove the marijuana and in
their forget inside the
detention center and distributed
to the inmate.
Well they were the instructors
heard the recorded phone calls
or where the plan and and let it
play out in recover the more
want to.
after it was the taken by the
trustee and they were both
charged with the group in in the
in the in made with bringing
contraband into the into a jail.
which is been a crime since last
twelve years at least long time
before that which of get the
this common sense reasons why
you would want drugs or weapons
in the in the jail
however what it happened was
that statute read that among the
laundry list of contraband was
in the controlled substances as
defined under the controlled
substances act and of course
more one it was removed.
And so therefore we had to after
we started the prosecution
realize that this is miss the
charges on on both individuals
enhance the problem.
is now not.
the legal to smuggle marijuana
into the into the jail
which need to be fixed.
So with that madam chair members
of the committee stand for any
questions that you may have.
No madam chair I think we're
ready for questions.
To those who.
Support of this bill.
Okay is there anyone in of
support online.
Okay is there anyone in
opposition.
I see none.
Okay
So we'll go to the committee are
there questions from the
committee.
I just had one so let me
understand right now
prescription drugs cannot be
taken into you know that into
the.
Present.
Prescription drugs can madam
chair they're they're loud.
Okay and if it's prescribed for
cannabis then that will with
this bill allow that.
Madam chair representative I in
and I would defer probably to
mark a goes but I don't believe
they allow even prescription
cannabis and even looking up in
Alice's reports they don't allow
prescription cannabis into the
jails but I can and defer to
Mister guy goes and I'm sure he
would have an answer for that
question.
Madam chair members at this time
we do not allow.
Chair wanted to come into the to
our detention center
so that's that's what our policy
is until it into we changed or
changed by any other bills come
four are we do not allow that.
And this bill does not change
that to allow.
This Madam no this bill only
allows it to be prosecuted this
brought in by other people it
has nothing to do with medical
marijuana that had to be a
separate bill all together to
order prisons to allow it I
think that most prisons and
jails don't allow Americans
medical wanted okay so it's it
immediately anyone who attempts
to bring it in.
They can be prosecuted madam
chair river yes I think the I I
don't think it's it's like like
if I were to get arrested and I
had a bag of marijuana in my
pocket the politics they would
say we empty out your pockets
and and it wouldn't be charged
because you're it's a it's legal
it's until you're trying to
sneak it into the facility where
it this is going to take it to
play but we put it on the same
Representative we put it on the
same field have you know
contraband as alcohol or other
drugs yes ma'am okay got it
right flexibility committee.
Okay is there a second on the
table.
I will seconded.
And we'll take up off.
Representative law no to table.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Representative
Thomson.
Excuse me.
Representative excuse me up by
to review.
Yes to table.
Chair for our yes to table I'd
like to explain my nose madam
chair you have to want to do.
Can you
the reason I think this is
penalizing someone who might
just have it on there legally on
their person and go to visit so
that they could be found.
Yeah prosecuted under this chair
if I may.
Check so madam chair
I think there's a
misunderstanding in what the
bill does if if they go to
visit.
And and they're asked to take
their belongings out of their
pockets.
At that time.
They're fine with it.
But but it the problem lies that
that they're trying or they
have.
Take it into the jail and hated
in the jail so that the prisoner
can get a hold of it.
And and that's that's what we're
trying to prevent.
And and.
I think there's a
misunderstanding and maybe eight
how.
Maybe how the bill is this is a.
Was a composer or maybe the
understanding of the committee.
it's we're not going to
prosecute anybody for marijuana
for indoor for going to visit
somebody at the jail and and
having marijuana on their person
on.
As long as they.
Turn it in at the visiting point
and not smuggle it to the
presenters.
And and madam chair I don't know
if it if it be the right thing
to do right now or not and maybe
you can guide me if maybe the
committee would be interested in
and pass it with the no
Representative so that so that
this could go probably to to
Judiciary and and they could see
the legalities of of the of the
problem that the jails are
having.
I think we'll have to take that
up at the you can right now we
have of those three to provide
to table if you wanted to at
another point talk to one of the
people who voted to table them
and they could bring it back at
this point we already have a
vote of three to one to table
thank.
K. next we have House Bill for
forty five human trafficking and
sex offenders tables given that
as.
Representative Thomson is a way
to present another bill would go
to house bill four forty six
long term care facility demented
training Representative Serrato
yeah.
Okay.
Thank you an amendment as well
right to get us out of pass out
the amendment.
Do you like to explain your bill
or have assistance the amendment
explain the bill that I can.
I thank you chair thank you
committee I with me I have
twenty Hernandez who is
currently a long without the
Alzheimer's association two
years ago we passed legislation
to ensure that all long term
care facilities would have
training in dementia because
oftentimes those early signs are
very difficult to identify and
we worked on this for a long
time with the long term care
facilities and and the aging and
long term LTSE the aging and
long
long term care the department
thank you might bring stuff for
it and so this bill what it does
is it provides some more
clarification on what the intent
was when we pass that and so it
it amends that statute that we
passed two years ago to
essentially ensure that out one
the training is not directed at
medical professionals already
have this tuning in geriatric
care you'll see that on page two
one seven through eleven it also
clarifies on page two lines
third thirteen through sixteen
the it is excluding facilities
that are particularly for
intermediate care so not long
term care and that that this is
those with intellectual
disabilities because that is not
the intent of the bill and then
it also clarifies how long the
training should be at the end of
page two online twenty four and
it also finally what it does is
we really want to initially we
kind of kept it very loose on
what needed to be included in
there on this very much
clarifies the state should be
what strategies to to manage
their behavior and and the needs
of those with dementia on and I
should say finally now on page
three line seventeen through
twenty three it also clarifies
that the department can review
and let facility no if there
isn't if this doesn't fit the
requirements however it doesn't
put the it doesn't force the
facility to wait on the
department to approve it just
gives but we need to replace.
so we discuss these edits these
changes with long term care
facilities association we
discussed it with the hospice
providers as well and so these
are are fine we do amendment if
I can discuss that as well and
also clarifies share I have a
motion to discuss the minutes.
Thank you.
Thank you all right the
wonderful session on the
amendment that will thank you
and so briefly on the amendment
what as you need to whenever for
forty six so we were fighting
the deadline to get into our
we can't get everything in and
we noticed it was a couple of
things that we have been missed
as we did that again this is all
the conversations with both the
Alzheimer's association long
term care facilities and the the
P. key pieces here is that that
there we already have
disabilities the first one is
that we don't have facilities
that provide in depth dementia
care there's the eighteen in the
state and they're they're very
well first in dementia care and
this is where by that they would
not be required to have this
additional training it also
changes on page five one sixteen
we talk about how it is a
Medicare contractors can just
put it in their contract that
they there there staff is being
contracted out how does this
training this clarifies that
they don't have to the should
they meet the state may be able
to and then otherwise if they're
not been that long term care
facility one that on on.
I'm here and the the last one is
that we're still working
together to insure the should be
effectively implemented but
right now on the amendment for
would ensure that
thirty ongoing training as part
of annual long term care
facilities ongoing training so
that's the intent there we're
still insuring that that
language works with D. O. H. N.
A. L. GST and a long term care
facilities but at this moment
that's we feel fairly good about
the language to be.
Any questions on anything
discussion.
Options.
Thank.
Thank you you have it that did
of bills it you'd like to say
anything more about the right.
Thank you and I all headed to
Tommy will be brief.
You know a lot going on yes
absolutely I thank you madam
chair members of this committee
thank you to the sponsor for
bringing forward on this very we
think we think the best way to
describe the proposal sitting
before you today is this really
refines the legislation that was
unanimously passed in twenty
twenty just simply some some
overlooking of some technical
language that we're happy to
revisit and and bring this bill
this legislation is so badly
needed in our state is our aging
population grows and
particularly as a dementia
continues to rise that this is
going to still stand to benefit
not only the families of the
loved ones of these facilities
but then also the workers
themselves I think that's
reflected pretty clearly in this
bill so when I go in that thank
you for your consideration and
almost happy to stand for
questions for many the committee
members.
Thank you that was in the
questions okay great we'll go to
the audience those in
opposition.
There is there anyone option.
Hey in support of this bill.
Okay feel
go ahead and come to the Mike if
you can easily.
It's that Baptist church thank
you good afternoon your absolute
good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is the scent of Argus I'm at the
New Mexico health care
association New Mexico Center
for assisted living
For all the reasons that the
sponsor and us the
representative from the
Alzheimer's association
mentioned we support this bill
more than anything I just want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing all stakeholders
together to have a conversation
and collaborate on this up as
time is of of I think a very
refined piece legislation that
will definitely impact in help
the families and the residents
in a long term care facilities
with the New Mexico Gallegos
thank you very much.
X..
Miss madam chair members of the
committee my name is O. T. on
but let me on the advocacy
director for A. A. R. P. A. R.
P. New Mexico we were previous
in support of the original
legislation and stand here today
in strong support of the updates
are necessary for this to to
help with the administration of
of of of the training program
and and thank you very much.
That's.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members my name is
Tina do can I live in Santa Fe
New Mexico and my mom has
dementia she's in a long term
care facility and this bill
would greatly benefit her and
the staff as well and give me
peace of mind and I stood in
support of two passed HB two
fifty and I stand here and
support today of this bill thank
you you.
Afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Carmen less than the state
long term care ombudsman I work
with an agent in long term
services department we stand in
support of this legislation we
believe that mitigates the
barriers to efficient training
and certification of direct
service staff while still
meeting the training
requirements and that will
comply with Do�a standards thank
you.
Thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members the
committee Linda Siegel for the
New Mexico nurses association of
nurse practitioner council we
want to thank the sponsor for
putting that language in
exempting nurses nurse
practitioners physicians who
already get extensive amount of
training on these issues thank
you.
Okay do we have anyone else.
Okay is there anyone on to okay
great.
we'll go to the committee.
If you Representative up I'm
really grateful to have this
conversation.
the start of latitudes homes
immediate about modernizing
Medicare between.
So that's where my questions are
only is I understand that the
standards may kind well as.
from sending States and this is
that was really like a four hour
video and that was kind of the
minimum standard seems to feel
like we're getting well.
That's into these facilities.
Can you just talk about how this
sort of changes were approved
last year repairs news is now
and what what kind is that sure
that there's a higher bar for
the take care thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
for that question I'll be brief
on this I think a lot of that
page three what we really out.
What needs to be specifically
addressed in the training that
was received and so if we need
to look at a new language five
and six cell lines ten and
twelve ten to thirteen but
strategies to manage the
behavior strategies effectively
communicate with us and that
really came from the
conversations with a long term
care facilities that that was
what was needed and and again we
really want to clarify into the
amendment does it was well but
that those are contracted as
well would also need to have
that that trading down so I
honing in on the scope of of who
this applies to but also putting
it on the specifics pieces that
need to be taught I believe
that's how we've actually made a
stronger bill.
Yes my main madam chair
representative remote thank you
so much for the statements of
the question as well I think
that just wanted to provide job
of of
You know what describing what
the issues were in your question
and I just one offer from the
Alzheimer's association's
perspectives the Alzheimer's
association prides itself on
being the nation's wide leader
on research care and support
particularly evidence based
knowing Asian wide but
especially here New Mexico as we
see with the bill before you
today now back to the the
training topics all of these
topics that are laid out in the
bill are evidence based we have
determined through many trials
and research that these are the
best topics to help a workforce
who particularly engages with
residents were fifty percent of
any one person in the long term
care facility has some degree
madam so the training
requirements are laid out in the
bill are evidence based and are
being employed by many many
states across the country so
this really follows a national
model does evidence based in
developed by the topics point on
dementia and Alzheimer's disease
thank you madam chair
Representative thank you madam
chair representative yes but
grew the transmission is that we
talk about the treating first
first day we don't talk to the
trainers and the level of
knowledge they might need to
have and so I guess my.
Consider the
Just sort of tie it together is
this time able to insure that
there is a level of certainty
for the for the folks that are
emerging it is the training that
they're all you know able to.
What what is the I guess the
contact at that we were.
The team across the board for
ensuring that the parameters are
with me on this train to
transfer thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so
there's two elements what is
that that the that they should
be
approved or they should be there
be reviewed by the department in
here but then to in page three
lines twenty four and it goes
the beginning of.
Each for he clarifies that those
that are are are deciding the
training would have to have
experience of working with this
population.
Shares and it is that is that.
Is that happening the through
rural it'll go through the
department said basically that
that.
I respect making decisions about
what we're doing is that
understand how to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes so
essentially a long term care
facility will provide training
that they use they will submit
them to the department and the
department will then you know if
they have any concerns with a
would that have I believe it's
ninety days to say this that
this doesn't actually fit what
we're trying to do here and then
they have to go back and offer
something else at the time if
you would if I may add yes madam
chair representative thank you
again for the continued question
we certainly understand it's not
necessarily just the quality of
the curriculum right that's one
important piece of that but
what's also equally important is
the competency of the person
facilitating said training so I
I think the language in the bill
that hopefully you do see it as
we do that it does satisfy that
because we certainly wanted to
ensure that this language was
specific enough in this bill
that it does provide the
criteria for competency for the
trainer and I think that the two
years again follows our national
model so in case there's any any
concern or or
question about how we arrived at
the two years again this falls
our national model that comes
out of evidence based on
research and less than what I
but briefly madam chair
representative to that point
this is also an in addition to
all the other training that new
employees do get along with that
so we were discussing you know
how you know this is a.
Well four hours of you may not
seem like a long time consider
all the trim the receiving it is
a significant piece especially
on how much that they are
educated interacting with
individuals right I I will hope
that I think folks interject you
guys this is through and you
know we may face charges of
traders as it has been in this
setting I'm just so grateful to
have this thank you that was a
connection point office is
precisely what we discuss them I
was really appreciate reading of
L. in order to.
Chair thank you Representative
loft thank you madam chair thank
you Representative three this
bill forward I think this is
important especially to keep
folks safe in these different
community centers and the steps
of these because I've seen a lot
of news about people being
mistreated and I certainly want
to make sure that that is a key
component of this training is
that included madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair thank you Representative I
think you are spot on and in
particularly when you look at
what we've added in page three
that section one of the key
reasons why I got involved was
that a lot of folks don't
realize some of the signs of
dementia could just seem like
someone is angry or someone is
you know and quicker and
reasonable and all and that may
be early signs of dementia and
so our objective here in many
ways is to ensure that people
are treated with the utmost care
that you know they understand
the difference different
conditions that may be affecting
folks thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I'm
reading my analysis here and it
says that.
Department of health says that
it's repetitive of current
federal and state laws I do do
we know for repeating any lots
of this renewable madam chair
representative I thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
up we do believe it is because
we're adding a current bill that
currently exists in as mentioned
we're honing in on who should be
included in getting the training
and at what in particular we
mean by that training it really
came out after the bill is
implemented we were talking a
long term care facilities not
how do we make this effective
piece legislation really help
folks so we really believe that
it's not repetitive just improve
and I want to thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and my last question is
regarding how much it's gonna
cost the department how much
it's going to be Madam chair
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative considering
they're already putting this in
the place of in I believe the
last several years sauce of New
increased costs there great
thank you madam chair thank
representative nice pretty bow.
What the committee.
Council second the second.
I was first.
I'll let you have it.
Representative Rubio let you
vote for that.
Both ways are unanimous I it's
outside so
no there's no opposition okay
great have a due passi.
As amended thank you.
Four zero five four four yeah.
Okay next.
What the eight Representative
Rehm enter office.
There are.
After the.
Representative Rehm.
You madam chair we have a an
amendment two two five five nine
seven point one.
I can explain your bill first
of.
But I think we also need the
amendment or I can explain it
with that I'll just do that
Madam chair for health sorry
we need a motion to discuss the
amendment.
Okay and seconded.
Thank you madam chair when
you look at the house bill four
fifty eight
what we're trying to address is
the high crime or resetting ness
of felons in possession of
firearms so of a felon in
possession of a firearm would
get a sentence of five years but
if someone who is in possession
of a firearm and uses the fire
are and what we're changing is
crying to felony in the
Amendment would recieve a seven
year sentence then on page three
line four through eight we're
addressing a straw purchase of
straw purchasers is a person
providing a firearm to a person
who was prohibited from
possessing a firearm.
I have a hand out and I want to
highlight on here this is out of
Bernalillo county
when we look down in the second
group of A. B. and C. we see
that.
about sixty six percent of the
defendants that they looked at
in these serious crimes first
and second degree murder.
Have been charged with a prior
felony.
thirty eight percent had a prior
felony conviction and forty
percent of them had either a
felony conviction or been
charged previously with felon in
possession of a firearm.
We really have to get firearms
out of the hands of felons
Madam chair in this ammendment
all it does is change the work
crime to felony.
So it's real clear that you know
we're addressing this serious
of actions of felons with
farmers and madam chair with
that adjusted for questions
first need to amend your bill is
there tho Xin to sentence.
Miss madam chair okay.
How did and okay so you have
your amended bill.
And.
We'll go to the audience is
there anyone in
Position to this bill.
Okay.
Would you like to speak.
Madam chair to.
It would be easier thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook at
the law offices of the public
defender and I think you know
one of the the pieces of this
legislation that I do appreciate
is that part of the increase
does focus on actual criminal
activity but I will start by
noting that the first increase
in penalty focuses on it in your
possession that doesn't involve
any additional criminal activity
and would apply even if the
person never uses it the statue
represents a policy
determination that felons should
not possess firearms but it but
doing so does not present the
same level of risk or danger
associated with the commission
of actual violent felonies your
possession include storing a gun
in one's closet does not require
having it on their person and is
more of a regulatory offense
than an actual violent offense
with respect to the second
increase that is for possession
during the commission of a
felony as amended
while we appreciate that that is
more closely tied to criminal
behavior it does not actually
require that the firearm is used
in the commission of a felony
and we do have a separate
statutory enhancement scheme
that increases the penalty of
crimes when a firearm is used
during that crime so we don't
believe this is necessary thank
you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is was
like apples with gold futures
and we respectfully oppose this
well for the same reasons that
have already been expressed and
for the reasons that we believe
that there are already laws that
address felons having possession
of arms thank you.
Thank you anyone else and
opposition either side okay is
there anyone on simply
would not.
Thank.
And you have one minute.
Okay thank you I won't take that
long was that in the past
And I will for economic reasons
that are that I oppose the bill
but also I don't see how this
actually does what
Representative Representative
three you.
So that if you do to get our
arms out of the hands of balance
I doubt that this will make a
difference in that way there are
so many firearms issues about
whether I.
my firearm to someone you have
to have a felony or even if I
know that they do are not so do
you oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you is there another
person okay okay now go to the
audience and those in support
you great you're here.
Okay there anyone on to.
Okay thank you was there
anything else you'd like to say
before we get committee.
Madam chair there was a
discussion Justin about giving
firearms to someone that you
didn't know was a fellow of we
already have a law on the books
that you have to go to a
firearms dealer to to transfer
possession and that would
provide that that person is that
felon or not if that works.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you all right with the to
thirty Representative blocked
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so I'm just
seeing this handout that was
given to us can you just walk me
through this and how it relates
to your bill madam chair
representative.
Yeah madam chair and
representative blocked so I just
the second District Attorney
list look at the really built
violent ones let's look at first
and second degree murder well
the first group is below that
and they had a hundred cases and
out of that they showed that
approximately sixty six percent
of the defendants previously
were charged with a felony.
And this is the individuals who
have been arrested in the last
year for murder it Bernalillo
county and so then the next one
thirty eight percent of the
defendants were previously
convicted of a felony.
And then forty percent of those
are in that group had been
convicted of a felony or were
charged with felon in possession
of a firearm.
Then the next group that they
look at is basically the same
one and they're looking at
the
Of those in the involved in
violent crime and basically they
have almost identical data.
at the bottom of the page.
Great thank you madam chair
thank you Representative you
know I appreciate that answer
and I think that really helps to
see how these individuals are
acting after they're released
and who is.
Back so I appreciate that so
madam chair representative I'm
just asking about page three.
Lines four through eight this is
regarding this property to
Representative.
Can you please tell me you know
what it was is necessary if it's
already federal law Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
walked not only is this similar
to what's in our federal law
this then puts it into our state
statute not all the individuals
who
supplier farm to a felon or
prosecuted under federal law so
this would give the state the
power to go ahead and prosecute
those who are providing firearms
to
felons or persons that are
prohibited.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that's all the
questions I have.
Anything else.
Representative yeah thank you
madam chair it this is very
familiar.
I think we saw this.
The
For more else's and has raised
the we address this bill
apartments hassle sixty one
is that right Madam chair
representative without this
over.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero yes in but I'm changing
crime the felony make it clear
that what the violation is that
we want to prosecute.
Thank you madam chair I I really
is strong.
These other students and your
colleagues also.
Latest I'm interested in the
standard that you're using on no
person knows or should know
on the sale of a firearm or.
Legislative session giving
loaning selling
we wrestle with this quite a bit
in hospital nine with the idea
of how that position to work and
how you know the this would
playthroughs can you just
explain to me that no or should
have known as a standard for
why.
we would you know now.
Find out the.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero you'll find that in many
of our our criminal statutes and
it deals with intent or mens
right up and it shows that you
have to have specific knowledge
for into the up to go ahead and
transfer.
Madam chair representative so I
guess just on that.
We have talked about negligence
or recklessness that idea that
you know there was clearly at an
interesting so that should have
known participate in the love
are in going back to this
regional basis for that rather
than looking negligence like
standard that's a bit more clear
when we look at the you know
home during instructions allows
for the jury to understand that
that situation would be
so I would just
You think about.
Having a different standards
there
and that is here Madam chair
representative that you were
looking at how to prevent these
types of crimes so that the data
that we received is saying about
twenty percent of all times
In New Mexico farms within
Where folks are in session of a
firearm at the time that they
committed the offense so with
the intent of this legislation
Madam chair representative are
we expected to understand the.
Twenty percent of those crimes
are seven eight.
Where is that the intent.
Or is it just to keep them in
jail longer offers and longer at
what's the correlation with how
we sort of prevent
Enable figuring out how to
tackle this problem madam chair
and representative remember when
I was a police officer many of
the criminals could tell me
exactly what the charge was that
they were being arrested on they
could also tell me what the
penalty was and so what we're
trying to do is make it if you
will a firearm in the hands of a
felon is a hot potato you don't
want to have you know that's
what I'm trying to address I
want to change their behavior.
Madam chair representative is
there any and I can't wait is
there any.
Asian regarding that behavioral
change these laws are enacted.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero I don't know that I can
that I well I don't have the
with me I just know that when I
speak to
when I was a police officer and
I spoke to criminals they they
tended to shy away from certain
things such as if they went to
federal court with this
violation they know that it
would start off as a two year
penalty.
And so the they wanted to go to
state court they didn't want to
go to the to the federal system.
yes so madam chair
representative that still my
concern is it we're going to try
to enact new crime related
I was on the books are increased
penalties I would love to be
able to see the correlation
between how it actually prevents
that from happening if we're
going to spend taxpayer dollars
on TV folks in prison a lot
longer
you know how that correlates
with a change in behavior so
until we see that.
I'm
fortunately not gonna be able to
vote yes thank you madam chair.
Thank you starting at
Representative Rubio did you
have any questions or.
You madam chair I don't.
Thank you Hey what's the
committee.
I move to table.
Thank you
would you please take will come.
Representative walked no to
table.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Vice chair Rubio.
Yes.
Chair for our.
Yes.
Go to forty one table Hey
voted for you want to table the
table.
Thank you as amended.
Thank you madam chair.
Like to.
Right you had to it came.
Go back to Representative
Thomson still house bill four
forty five human trafficking and
sex offenders.
Thank you madam chair this is
mark professed go from the
attorney general's office and
and he knows he knows everything
still and madam chair I
Representative Georgene Louis
and I have carried this bill and
several times never quite
successfully and partly it was
in response to the Jeffrey
Epstein and that our laws were
we're not set up to to deal with
the situation like that and that
thank you madam chair that
really got me.
Interested in this is that there
is no more severe penalties for
trafficking drugs than there is
for trafficking people and that
that just doesn't seem right and
so that's what this bill is
about we had great
Witnesses and people who have
survived trafficking who who
have spoken out and get your
tissues ready if they're here
today so I will mark four hit.
Madam chair members of the
committee a New Mexico
unfortunately has three
ignominious distinctions when it
comes to the broader fight
against involuntary servitude in
human trafficking number one
yeah I was looking up at the the
seal behind you madam madam
chair and that still is actually
substantially similar to the
territorial seal of the state of
what would become the state of
New Mexico and one of the real
stat things when one looks with
referenced federal lawsuits
actually one of the first
references to New Mexico as a
term in federal law was in fact
the anti peonage Act of eighteen
sixty seven because the
continued existence of slavery
and slave likens the conditions
within what would become the
state of New Mexico the second
you know many as fact is the
fact that as was reference by
the Representative New Mexico
was the refuge was the safe
harbor for peta file billionaire
we did not have to register as a
sex offender who took advantage
of our lax laws when it comes to
the treatment of survivors of
sex sex sexual servitude and
slavery and number three madam
chair members of the committee
is the fact that New Mexico in
fact for adult survivors of
trafficking has the least
deterrence least incapacitation
and least serious treatment of
any state in the country when it
comes to incapacitating and
deterring those that perpetuate
this crime this form of modern
day slavery the bill that's
before this committee was
informed and driven by the
stories the life stories the
lived experience of survivors of
sex trafficking many of whom are
inside of this committee room
here today to speak in support
of this bill for purposes of the
public comment I can stand for
any questions and address
different questions legislation
that passed nearly unanimously
in the house and the twenty
twenty and twenty twenty one a
regular session the only
differences are that I can
specifically recall from.
The very first iteration of this
bill others amendment in fact I
believe by Representative Romero
to ensure that for child
survival survivors of
trafficking that the penalty
would reflect the severity of
that crime and I believe that
amendment was which is reflected
in the bill before this
committee was to ensure that
that was a first degree felony
to reflect the worst and most of
Europe uses the children
experience the second amendment
was in consultation after
consultation with the the law
office of the public defender to
address the conditional
discharge issue just wanna to
increase judicial discretion
when it came to out of state
registrants that move to the
state of New Mexico and ensure
the court had discretion to
either exempt with good because
registration requirements where
to find that someone is a danger
to the public with that I.
You madam chair that that was
the presentation I anticipated
for this committee to provide
that historical context and
perspective for this piece of
legislation and to put
potentially answer any questions
that members of the committee
may have madam chair center I if
there's one thing I forgot I
think it's still in there that
under current law a person who
was trafficked can be charged
with prostitution and so we want
to get rid of that
For obvious reasons.
Thank you is there anything else
before we go to the audience
okay
those who are in opposition.
Okay.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee Kim Chavez Cook with
the law offices of the public
defender and as this Mr part of
Prospero noted we have been in
conversation over the years on
this bill and there are many
questions of the legislation
that we do not oppose I only
want to focus my comments on our
concern around increased
penalties which while I wholly
understand the concern that are
that are penalties for human
trafficking appears to be
low in comparison to other
crimes there is a technical
reason behind that and it is the
fact that you human trafficking
almost entirely uniquely in our
criminal code is not subject to
double jeopardy protections so
that the human trafficking
sentence can be imposed in
addition to all of the other
crimes that are also technically
committed at the same time
including things like kidnapping
assault and battery and sexual
offenses and this results in
stacked sentences that are
indeed quite likely a good
example being the one imposed in
state P. person which has a
published court appeals case
associated with that in which
the defendant was sentenced to a
fifty year prison sentence so I
just want to make clear that
although those individual human
trafficking offenses appear
short they do add up with the
totality of the conduct at issue
thank you.
Is there anyone else in
opposition.
It would not seem to okay thank
you okay well go to those in
support.
Thank you like to come up to the
Mike.
Start on the.
The question come on up yeah if
you think the raise your hand
but if you'd like to speak
please.
I just felt like this
That would protect like I have
personal friends that have been
through it and I have seen the
way that it does affect them and
I have seen the way that other
things just for the fact that
they were part of something like
that how they.
Are seen and I felt like this
would help protect those people
from
Those actions and any of the
repercussions that come after.
The my name is very also.
Madam chair representative funds
to Tanya Jackson I am a
survivor.
And the reason I'm here is
because there's no.
Not a day or moment that goes by
that this hasn't affected my
life every possible way.
In my particular case I won't go
into the details.
What the remember the.
The minute I found out my
offender was released a short
stay in prison my life turned
upside down I appreciate it over
and over again and I still look
over my shoulder right now today
wondering if this person is
going to come after me because
they serve such a short period
of time I do agree that a lot of
times there are violence that's
not reported associated with
being a victim of this crime so
I think that the stiffer
penalties will make people think
twice about committing these
crimes on people such as myself.
Is there anyone else you'd like
to speak.
Good afternoon.
I'm.
Sure.
I'm not survivors do I'm sorry
to get out of it since the cause
of running
to say is not the the we're live
seasonal hi with the trauma
in my case is that we didn't
less labor
is new my perpetrator is not
even in jail
sometimes I have to see these
personal wrong I'm is a
nightmare so I we lied to these
would be to go through because
not just for me you know for
that woman and children and guys
that are again captive right now
thank you.
Anyone else in support of Hey
okay.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is do you want
to come on I'm a survivor and I
support this bill I know but
this is because.
There needs to be.
Mannerisms who are stealing our
lives and.
Still walking the streets
because there's not any hard
physical evidence to keep them
in jail for.
Things that get dismissed
otherwise and I support this
bill.
I'm the survivor and kids like
me and all teachers say PH
should be safe because.
People Candace.
Go up nineteen kids and.
Hi hi.
Because.
I I and I know.
This.
Thank.
Do people getting back to me
they look at him and everything
and I know
This should not go on.
Okay this needs to be stopped
people should not be Jack's
going up going off in higher
canton harming whether they want
to pop.
Sh.
Yes.
People should be jealous or
anything yes.
I just believe I just believe.
It is not enough teachers like I
believe that they should not be.
Like at.
To harm anyone because.
I'll ask you a lot of stuff and
yes.
One minute to be stopped
permanently.
Because.
There is the this will send
that.
He will here is someone who that
was really date of money meaning
this one me this guy's name was
gasping.
And he was.
Supporting my mother to
This these things aren't they.
And I believe if you in that the
thank god any more at all I.
The that these pay file should
be yes done with.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you all the
victims for speaking at.
Also in.
Was the victim is still a
victim.
I have to put up with the
repercussions because of what
happened to.
Filia.
Breeds all of the files it's not
something that you can just lock
up and put in jail and before.
I'm so the support of the bill
because.
My fifty one years I see.
What it reads this all into it.
So.
Just think about it that's just
so.
It happened to any of you or in
the virtual.
How would you feel.
I mean.
The most high whole law
The sun.
Sure how much she told high you
have to.
Follow up.
And get rid of the sickness.
Because the sickness reads of a
sickness we live in a sec role
at this moment but you know
what.
Chapter two health food can
happen to anyone the kidnapping
can happen to anyone.
So don't think you safe.
Question hi this this.
walking streets not safe thank
you to happen to anyone thank
you.
Okay.
And.
Madam chair thank you good
afternoon members of the
committee Kathy Burke with the
league of women voters of New
Mexico how do you do.
at first I would like to say
that the league of women voters
of the United States and the
league of women voters of New
Mexico have strong stances on
anti human trafficking and sex
trafficking measures we support
this measure and we think
representative Thompson for
bringing it forward and the
attorney general's office the
Attorney General New Mexico also
for bringing this forward just
to add a little bit of context
to these important comments that
have been made today
In the A. in my former life I
was the associate director of
street safe New Mexico which
does outreach to homeless women
in Albuquerque.
By talking to the women and
taking surveys of the women on
the streets of Albuquerque we
found out that by and large the
greatest majority of homeless
women in Albuquerque.
Are victims of sex trafficking.
That is part of what brought us
to these halls and to your
committees to ask for it this
change that has brought for you
before you today so
just to wrap up I I would like
to say a few things a few years
ago twenty nineteen at at CCJ
one of the members of CCJ
mentioned that this is one of
the most violent crimes in the
world today and I agree with
that ladies and gentlemen thank
you I urge you to vote to pass
on this measure.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair committee members
good afternoon Marcus Montoya a
judicial district attorney and
president of the New Mexico
district attorneys association
thank you for allowing us to be
here in front of you thank you
to our sponsor for bringing this
bill thank you for the hard
working attorney general's
office Mr process your expert
here today I don't this is been
a long time coming and I would
please allow me to thank the
victims who had the courage and
willingness to speak here today
but as far as a prosecution
perspective this does allow more
tools for district attorneys to
prosecute these heinous crimes
for those reasons to support
this bill thank you.
On.
Still okay would you like to
wrap our head here I think we we
stand for questions thank you
the committee Representative
black thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
bringing this very important
bill forward I first want to
thank all the victims who came
today yes I I know how hard that
probably was for you today Madam
chair representative and I've
heard stories for years from
people who were in the lights.
You know and it's indentured
servitude it's wait for it and a
lot of these people they get off
very easy from these crimes when
their charge Madam chair
representative and the victims
of these these crimes.
It goes in our communities you
may not see it every day on the
sidewalk in a big Billboard
madam chair representative but
it's there and it's it's a
cancer that is infecting our
communities our state our nation
our world madam chair
representative.
And so especially the comments
regarding the the pet of files
that are out on the streets that
is just or find that anybody.
Would even consider.
Letting these people out of
prison no I know this doesn't
give them life sentences madam
chair representative but this
does make it a lot harder for
these violent.
Heinous detestable individuals
to get out Madam chair
representative I want to thank
those people who have been
harmed by this.
And you know I am reading your
bill here.
And I see here that it raises it
from.
Is it sixteen years of age to
eighteen years of age madam
chair representative so
currently at sixteen that's a
lab manager.
Madam chair in on goal wrote.
that is accurate for purposes of
the promoting prostitution child
exploitation of prostitution
statute we what did want to make
sure that all children were
protected under that statute in
to make sure that for purposes
of the definitions that are used
in the trafficking statute under
thirty dash fifty two dash one
are we are consistent across the
board in terms of protecting New
Mexico children from the worst
forms of exploitation to include
prostitution of children thank
you madam chair thank
representatives and experts so
how does this bill.
Look in terms of our neighboring
states and other states that
have enacted similar penalties
madam chair representative are
these more punitive are the last
chair madam chair and
representative this makes a more
consistent with the approach the
other states have undertaken for
purposes of trafficking the one
reference that that comes to
mind would be under eighteen USC
section fifteen ninety one which
is the federal sex trafficking
statute of this penalty is not
as of the year this proposed
counties not just appears that
the federal penalty however it
does ensure that New Mexico
closes the gap in terms of how
seriously this issues treated in
our criminal code thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and I appreciate
that that answer Mr expert.
You know I I'm just reading this
bill and I just it blows my mind
that we don't already have these
protections madam chair
representative I know that we
can find out a lot of this
information from these
individuals but you have to know
who they are first Madam chair
representative and so I do I do
to quite an exception to to
comment that was made earlier in
opposition to this bill that
says well we can't be giving
these people double jeopardy
Madam chair representative these
these are creditors.
Who are harming our fellow New
Mexicans madam chair
representative and I think
anything that we can get behind
bars as long as humanly possible
is what we need to do madam
chair so I you know I'm I'm a
person I would say we should
amend this bill to give them all
life sentences for the
horrifying things that they do
to these people so that
individuals don't have to go
back on the streets and see
their perpetrator and see that
that individual go and walk by
the on the street the public
madam chair representative so I
once again say thank you thank
you thank you for bringing this
forward I want to thank all the
victims who came here and
testified I know how hard that
was for you I I do not know
personally what you've gone
through but I am there with you
in my prayers go out to you and
I sure hope that there's some
kind of closure in the future
for other victims madam chair so
that they don't have to suffer
what you've suffered so thank
you all Madam thank you.
Anything else Representative
more on and just one question
Madam chair representative thank
you for continuing to.
Try to get this through another
time in making every iteration
that means become more more.
Eight robust with will power
changes on to this issue what
questions about that since I do
that CCJ the interim we have it
really to my knowledge and these
how many had any sort of
comprehensive understanding
about trafficking in your state
all Madam chair representative
do we have we have that here
Representative I'm not on CCJ
and I'm not a lawyer and I
didn't sleep at the holiday and
so.
The settlement Lexmark.
And madam chair of the
Representative as I understand
the question is this a question
about the scope of the problem
in New Mexico that's correct so
the so the one number that comes
to mind is the national human
trafficking hotline referrals
from the state of New Mexico and
it's approximately five hundred
I I don't recall the precise
number but that was the ballpark
figure one thing that is
important to note with regards
to that figure is just how under
reported trafficking in persons
is especially in regards to
labor trafficking as members of
the committee will will readily
see we included verbs that are
reflected in the federal labor
trafficking statute eighteen USC
fifteen eighty nine in
particular harbor to ensure that
the verbs that are used in our
state human trafficking statute
better reflects the the
persistent scope of labor
trafficking in the state of New
Mexico and so I hundred is the
tip of the iceberg in terms of
the scope of the problem in New
Mexico I would be unable to
provide a reasonable estimate
because there's a variety of
reasons why this is not reported
in particular one of the
improvements to the law that's
reflected in this proposed piece
of legislation is addressing
statute of limitations problems
and ensuring the if you have a
trafficker that budget for
example by successfully
deporting their victim.
That in terms of reporting that
crime the defendant is not the
beneficiary of their own
criminal conduct their own the
distillation of the legal
process to ensure that eight a
trafficking victim is unable to
provide recourse inside a
courthouse in New Mexico and so
the excuse me for the long
winded answer and madam chair I
I apologize I I don't think I
introduce myself to the number
of members of the committee just
hired I heard reference to Mr
expert my name is mark professed
go my position in terms of the
scope of my testimony here
before members of this committee
is as the deputy director of
prosecutions of the attorney
general's office and I do
apologize for that oversight
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for being
here thank you chair thank you
Representative these are it
would be really interested and
and perhaps you you know how we
probably should be thousands law
we're doing down figure out how
to create awareness around a lot
of what you're seeing for those
that why would this is the
office perhaps
so that's one it is one of the
other ones and I'm just looking
at the bill on page thirteen and
be able to
Prosecutors have.
Those at officers in those areas
children online I was just
reading statistics about one in
five children being creative on
the internet
and this is early on what really
internet and where we are now
just the volume of kids just on
their devices and everything
else just have instituting is a
really important at
Everything together so I don't
remember seeing that previously
that Mr prior to that and what
is in there now this is just
realligned K. lots of this
so additional market share to
just want to thank but folks in
the audience for sharing
Your stories and for being rates
to show up for all for everyone
else thank you for sticking with
the process.
Chair.
Representative Rubio did you
have anything that I did see
your hand that I just wanna make
sure.
Thank you madam chair no I'm I'm
okay thank you.
Thank you
what is the will.
Minister in the past.
Yeah the past in the second is
there any opposition to passing
pretty fast seeing none.
You have passed.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Katie.
At the passed with a vote of one
two three four five five zero.
You.
It's like.
That we have House Bill endorsed
seventy as D. W. I. act
Representative Lujan.
And your.
Which is.
I.
Studies have.
For this.
We have a point to committee so.
Yes.
Would you like to presenter Phil
the committee steps to.
Madam chair would like to
present a committee substitute
okay is there
I move to a.
the city manager leads and move
at House into Republic there's
Haiti suffered hospital for
seventy.
At the role that you are.
Yes.
Four nine point.
Just make sure okay it's been
moved and seconded is please go
ahead for the discussion thank
you madam chair thank you
committee members today myself
and senator Daniel Ivey Soto are
here to present this bill that
creates a D. W. I. act in a
compiled motor vehicle code.
I proposing new compiling
existing and amending New
sections for the D. W. I Act
excuse me.
This bill will over how offenses
and sentencing project W. Y. by
liquor drugs and combination of
both the bill also creates
concurrent jurisdiction for
first second and third D. W. I.
offices between the magistrate
and district courts provides a
new penalty FOR D. W. I. with a
teenage minor in the vehicle and
allows emergency medical
technicians and certified
phlebotomist to perform blood
tests madam chair with that
Senator and I I will actually
ask Senator if you like to add
to this thank you madam chair
members the committee the the
bill
R. how do you get over the loss
of kind of gotten out of control
six six eight one oh two is
where most of currently are is
like eighteen pages long.
Right now what this bill does is
it breaks it up.
It is the president of Act
includes the addition interlock
Act and the implied consent act.
The the changes that that that
are made substantively in this
bill or three.
the first being
The first being what's called a
virtual defects so right now we
don't have the ability to get a
blood draw compelled if somebody
is
Is expected to that we want.
And the problem that happens but
with legalization.
Is that we end up with people
who have a very low brought
score.
And we can get about four.
And so and so what this bill
does in that regard it's a very
narrow things and the very
narrow if it's not it is first
the person has to refused a
breath test I'm sorry take a
breath test because of the
reviews that they're aggravated
it you don't need to do the
blood draw.
Second they have to have a very
low blood blood score.
so that so that we're not just
looking at a conviction for the
W. Y. yes I mean press I'm sorry
press what thank you thank you
very much chair that's for so
that they're not
we're not looking so so that
were that we're not gonna be
able to convict the of the W.
I..
How Frank and then third they
have to refuse a blood draw.
Once those three criteria are
met and then the officer in a
written statement to a judge is
able to establish probable cause
that the that the impairment is
inconsistent with the low
alcohol support.
Then and only then can they get
awards for a blood draw for a D.
W. I..
But it does allow that because
otherwise we have people who
have stopped.
We end up with no breath or low
pressure.
And no way to actually prove
that their impact so we do that
the second thing we do in the
bill as we passed to that we are
with a minor in the vehicle.
There was a Senate floor
amendment that reduced Miner two
hundred thirteen so there's no
charge between thirteen and
seventeen.
So we are do that we are with
the teenage under the vehicle.
It's a penalty assessment but at
least there's a charge.
And we also require if it's your
child in both cases.
Whether it's under thirteen
about thirteen parenting classes
if it's your job.
And then the third thing that we
that we add to this bill is that
if you if you
Have a W. I. for the next three
years your insurance company
needs to send them proof of
insurance they can do it
electronically to everybody so
that so that way we know that
someone is injured after D. W.
I..
So otherwise it's a
recompilation of the of the loss
so with that I'm sure we we have
to stand for questions.
Thank you
Mr motion to accept the.
Some.
The debt any opposition.
Okay.
So we now have a committee
substitute.
And you have.
At two and then to the committee
substitute correct and then yes
chair so after going through the
committee sub and and and just
structurally local it will
happen is that if so with this
bill passes from enrollment if I
may have that luxury
it and that is that with these
amendments then it'll get
reported this point three so
won't be report out as
amendments it'll it'll just get
appropriated into the committee
so that comes out but what we
realized was we we actually the
the press level should be should
be consistent with those of them
in the implied consent act and
it's just question what the less
than since we got to the wrong
place and then the second thing
is on the insurance
the the builder after
accidentally
got carried away and and
recompiled into the D. W. I. act
but that provision needs to be
the mandatory financial
responsibility act as of the
second one just maintains that
we're supposed to be in the
mandatory financial
responsibility.
I have a question yes you just
mentioned about
Representative yes yes ma'am and
what is that so the so so under
the implied consent act a bright
corps of last van four one
hundredths is considered not
intoxicate.
So it's not the implied consent
to point that way that's correct
implied consent put a weight is
is considered intoxicated.
Less than point oh four is
considered not intoxicated in
between you can argue the
impairment.
Yes ma'am I just wanna make sure
you are changing that that's
right that's right yes I know I.
And your bill.
Okay as is there any other
further discussion on the
amendment.
That driving we got the madam
chair I yes I would suggest we
reject this amendment was not
given before the twenty four
hour notice within the twenty
for animals.
And I have not had proper time
to look through these amendments
to the committee sub madam
chair.
Hey there is objection.
So we'll take wealth.
Excuse me representative what.
Representative Romero.
I'm sorry venture six thousand
eight hundred into the.
As of.
I I was look at that through a
veces while.
Madam chair so I'll pass.
Representative Thomson yes.
vice chair Rubio.
Madam chair I I I say yes.
Okay.
Ferrary yes.
Madam chair you have a three one
two I thought the
yes I'm sorry yes.
I also will say no just because
I am trying to follow what we're
doing and that doesn't matter.
All right we need to have voted
three to two
Your amendment.
See your path committee
substitute is exact thank you
madam chair and and and also if
I could just say that I really
appreciate the panelists for
this committee because when we
turn this in some of this came
some escape from the feedback
from the analyst that that
helped us realize oh we messed
something up we wanted to
structures that so thank you all
yeah no they did amazing job and
usually we would not accept it
that because
I think these are things from
the analysts and have seems to
be minor enough that I
appreciate that thank you.
Okay anything else you'd like to
talk about the bill okay and
we'll go to the audience is
there anyone in support.
Hey and if you would like to
speak you're welcome back.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and it is I did
before anyone has a heart attack
about me being here in support
of the crime bill we're actually
neutral on the bill but I I felt
a little leaning more towards
support than opposition there
and there's a lot to like about
this bill we don't necessarily
believe that all of the
provisions are necessary we
don't necessarily want to expand
the use of blood draw warrants
but if we are going to to
address what I recognize is a
legitimate issue this is the
most narrowly targeted and most
thoughtful approach that we have
seen this far so we think the
sponsor for working with us on
the language and for that reason
we are neutral and positive
about the bill thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee more
or not after the administrative
office of district attorneys we
are in full support of this bill
specifically appreciating the
Burchfield fix because that has
been an issue that we've been
trying to address was for
several years now so we
appreciate you guys bring this
thank you madam chair.
And that's the first time the
person before we've had yes No
there's.
Madam chair committee members
thank you for lines to be it's
afternoon and think that sponsor
of expert for opening this
legislation together and I agree
with missiles Chavez Cook I
can't mention I could anything I
would say be a better
endorsement for a bill so for
all the reasons stated we do
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
And madam chair Ricky Serna
secretary for department of
transportation as you all aware
of the traffic safety bureau
duties responsible for the
states in our program and we
certainly have are beholden to
measures that help reduce
overall the state's D. W. why
were our conviction rate our
support of the bill we also
think the sponsor for working
with us on some technical
language cleanup so anything
that you saw the contrary in our
FIR is certainly been addressed
thank you very much.
Members of the committee Tim
Johnson of the state police I
think if I say anything other
than this maybe the first time
in four years you Mr Evans
cookers to together on something
I would only be missing the bill
up but we do support this
particularly as everyone
mentioned the first bill piece
we have a huge drunk driving
problem in our state we
currently have a gap of finding
some of those folks are holding
some of them accountable which
we will be able to do that so
thank you for your time.
All right anyone on scene for.
Anyone in opposition.
Up in arms you.
Okay.
I'm sorry did you have anything
else to say.
Representative says were right
now this is a little bit off
topic a little bit but I have a
friend whose father in law is
eighty five years old people
lets you County he's a chronic
alcoholic he has been stopped
multiple times and they have
told his family that they can't
arrest him because he's over AT
and and his family is freaked
out and as the committee I mean
as the community should be so
I'm just throwing this out there
that there are some of that
information running around out
there thank you madam chair you
madam chair that is not a
provision in this bill.
Exactly.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair I'm just going
through some of the analysis and
grateful to us at support for
everything all in the
collaborative service.
Constantly looking for for that.
Questions that I think you
probably see it already that
this season
and in two years you.
Superfluous to have section two
and three and the bills they're
yes reiterations
current statutes and technicians
can we please tell me why the I
decided it'd.
Mr chair so we had actually
three different
definitions of commercial motor
vehicle within chapter sixty
six.
And and I think none of them
actually complied with what we
needed for federal law.
And so and so this way we will
end up with a single definition
and the general definitions of
chapter sixty six.
And and it will be the federal
complaint one.
Thank you for that Madam chair
representative on the municipal
boards concurrent jurisdiction
and others but not hard to
see the light out of that is
that the.
Madam chair.
Your I was tempted to go there
directly.
But decided not to do that in
this bill
however we do remove a municipal
judge from being able to do a
felony warrant.
just because that that doesn't
seem property in our ability to
restrictions.
Officials that as well
I think overall I'm you have
cited to figure out what we more
so just generally what is when
we look at the laws prior to is
this really the cleanup bills
what changes I think overall in
do what I need to be more active
this significant here that as
part of a yeah madam chair and
representative of rural the
The of the six one pages of the
bill.
About fifty nine and a half or.
And and then it's not if the
person six.
it's the it's a make sure their
pet parenting classes and
filling the gap on child in the
vehicle.
And then also the insurance
requirement for for having the
insurance certificate the
transmitted for three at least
three years and then the
secretary has the authority to
to require that beyond that for
class of people if they want to.
Thank you.
Thank you yes Representative
what thank you madam chair thank
you Representative R. Senator
Representative both of the
office so
Section five and six is
regarding.
Representative driving and also
in its drugs Madam chair
representative does this include
the use of marijuana Madam chair
representative.
Okay
that madam chair the the
definition that we've always had
in.
In six six eight one two.
Right is that it is it is
unlawful for a person to drive a
vehicle who's under the
influence of a drug to a degree
that renders a person incapable
of safely driving a vehicle
within the state.
That would be any drug included
prescription drug.
And so we maintain our that
definition.
And
of of drugs in section six of
the and then also have a have a
combination drug and alcohol so
we make sure that's covered as
well.
in this bill thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Senator so.
I'm just wondering how how do we
enforce this in this bill Madam
chair representative so we don't
necessarily have a test in this
bill that would test for a
plethora of drugs is not correct
Madam chair representative.
Yes ma'am chair and
representative block when it
comes to when it comes to drugs
there's a and and and just let
you know which is my background
I used to be up you know we are
prosecutor yeah I was I was the
on call twenty four hour felony
DWI prop prosecutor involucre.
Back in the days of pagers when
I was on call to thirteen
different law enforcement
agencies
I've spent more time at did you
at checkpoints.
just observing that I that I can
recall.
And so when you're dealing with
drugs.
There are some drugs that are
water soluble and water soluble
drugs
you it's it's I can't alcohol in
terms of if it's in your system
you're intoxicated it's not in
your system and I'm touched it
there are others such as THC
that embeds itself within within
the body and and so consequently
it's more difficult to tell if
that is the immediacy of the
impairment or not.
that is that is the status quo
issue.
There is work being done madam
chair representative like
there's work being done.
With them
cannabis there are three six
different capital needs and and
and there's actually there's
some research being done in
terms of one of the other
categories the on THC and CBD
which are the ones we normally
focus on that that may have a
better indication as to the
immediacy of intoxication.
that would be able to develop
but otherwise
you know there's always going to
be challenges and there's
existing challenges which it
state the issue is going to
happen is going to be them
what's the order that the that
the offer passed what is the for
example the bloodshot watery
eyes that may be consistent with
intoxication at that moment
and then what is what are the
signs of impairment that that
the officer gets through not on
the standardized field sobriety
test which Rodman all developed
but there there's some
additional fields writing tests
but drug specific
and there's three years of that
Madam chair representative block
one is that a police officers
generally trying to do the
second is up the the various
program commission experts but
that we we don't have that many
of them and so then there's a
there's a middle certification
or training that a lot of police
officers can get which won't get
you to the level of a DRT but
we'll get to sufficient to be
able to identify immediate
impairment on somebody.
Thank you madam chair the
representative and senator so
okay I'm just wondering because
let's just say someone hits a
pregnant woman.
With their car there they just
got stoned or whatever you know
they they got trucks that were
teach C. or whatever.
How would we prosecute that
versus someone who we can have a
limit yes on that how would we
trust you that differently madam
chair representative.
So Senator yeah certainly so
Madam chair and representative
for school the the ability to to
get up the drug.
I mean a public yes.
It's helpful then in that case
because it could also tell you
whether there's a combination
of of drugs and alcohol and what
that combination maybe
you know in the when we're when
we're prosecuting somebody work
for injury to a pregnant person
by vehicle.
Which is an existing crime.
And
you know that's a thirty we
felony and so it's a high
mentality that it that it does
get the best signatory
attention that it needs in terms
of putting this case together
thank you madam chair
representative so you said that
currently the pregnant person
that gets charged or regarding
this but it's it's currently
statutes pregnant one Madam
chair representative can mandate
pregnant chair representative
so madam chair and
representative like without
getting into what's a woman.
I will simply say that that the
Legislative Council Service is
they have directives about about
genders but specific language
and they're simply following
their directives.
And that is not intended to be a
substantive change well it is in
the bill then to Representative
page eleven don't it does change
from curriculum to bring in
person that's not intended to be
a substituent it is intended to
be consistent with the policies
of the Legislative Council
Service Madam chair
representative by.
Senator I would suggest changing
that back to women.
As biologically men cannot get
pregnant Madam chair
representative so.
I I don't see the point of
teaching that language I don't
see why Council Service would
suggest that since they're
usually very intelligent people
Madam chair representative
Senator so the representative.
Have.
On okay please thank you madam
chair thank you
Representative that is again not
something you're going to do and
under the recommendation and.
Stint language changes that
we've had we will keep that in
place thank you madam chair.
Senator thank you senator
representing.
I think chairman would you pass.
Okay I had just a few questions
before we do that I'm glad you
mentioned about the DRT because
you know then they can of.
Look at some of the other signs
and everything and and interpret
on the categories of drugs the
person might be on even before
the blood test comes back but
I'm.
Wondering if
If the if there is a low brass.
At.
Attacks Alliser response and
then it goes just straight to
the blood tests you don't have
to get the word.
that that could imply someone
who is not impaired from state
cannabis.
But has it in their system for
thirty days how would it how are
the statutes now.
That we have cannabis is a legal
term increase.
Yes so madam chair for small I
want to recognize all the work
that you've done over the years
and the W. I. thank you very
familiar with these issues and
was on the struggles that with
that right on on this.
So when it when somebody
when somebody has a as a but
yes.
And one of the benefits actually
the blood tests because they
could do this but sample and so
the defense can analyze and
independently
and and and so they're not to
simply relying upon what SLT
does this the state laboratory
division.
But but the thing is that when
they when they get the results
back.
Then that becomes part of the of
the overall weight of the
evidence against individual if
it is a drug test not water
soluble you're gonna need to
have additional evidence of
immediate impairment in order to
be able to make your case and
we've already excluded alcohol
as a cause of impairment.
Seven excluded alcohol as a
cause of payment.
And then with the signs of
impairment that the officer
documents.
Plus the blood tests that's how
we get to where we need to go.
But but that's exactly why we
need to be careful about a point
build fix and is that we don't
want to create a personal fix
that is not going to exclude
alcohol first.
Because otherwise we're gonna
end up with people being charged
with drugs when the drugs may be
residual drugs and not an active
component at that time.
I'm glad that that.
We're in the in the bill
absolutely all right
So Representative Rubio did you
have any questions.
Madam chair thank you I I do not
okay thank you what is the will
of the committee I thank you to
do that thanks.
Certificate after.
Yeah actually I need to do it
right out.
I do not pass on house bill
seventy but it for seventy but I
do passed on.
C. pack Committee substitute for
H. B. four seven B. as amended
by three I think that's right
yes.
We'll get to that is to gather.
Okay thank you for that
correction is to
give it back and said that you
have to repeat that now.
Okay
There any objections okay take
real please.
Representative block New.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes vice
chair review.
Yes.
Chair for our yes after you have
a vote for the one thank you
have a four to one on.
Do not pass on committee steps
to our house bill four seventy
and
as amended I mean point and okay
now I'm getting.
On help you with us on house
bill four seventy and I do
passed on how consumer Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill for seventy as
amended.
Point three madam chair members
of the committee thank you so
much and thank you for really
what I think we're very good
questions thank you madam chair
thank you committee thank
okay yes.
Have the house bill three ninety
seven prime of organize risk
residential that
Representative is that it and
bring.
Good afternoon madam chair it
House Bill three ninety seven is
what we.
Call the point spend the bill
and what this bill does is
relating to crime creating crime
organized residential fast and
imposing penalties on.
right now there are a few cities
and and probably many cities
that do not.
US cute.
Estimators and that's what this
is and and so in the in the
aggregate if the commit this
crime several times over within
a one year period and it goes
over five hundred dollars and it
becomes a fourth degree felony
and
That victims
Thirty three and so forth so
this bill just it's a stand
alone bill to make it a
a so any in the aggregate to
commit these mass ever got to
Representative Rehm is with me
as well as Elisabeth Johnson.
Expert in law.
In law not in line.
Read about eight.
Madam madam chair we've all seen
on the next door act before the
ring app porch pirates and them
following
you know UPS trucks that
extracts and as a deliver they
run up and grab whatever
products
have been delivered.
when you look at the penalty
section this follows or larceny
statutes so like are organized
retail crime bill that is moving
this is very similar it's
it that it addresses the porch
pirates doing basically the same
thing.
So we would
to get information from the
shipper that they shipped
whatever item and we would do
add that up or law enforcement
would add that up and they would
have several incidents and then
they would end up prosecuting
the individual wants it but that
a fight that.
Do you have anything.
Gentleman this this targets a
very small group of people that
are at this point in time and we
collaborated to Representative
Matthews language in this to
make sure that she was
comfortable with as well.
Okay.
I think every state no ma'am we
stand for questions no no no
managed I would say it's a
simple bill but I'm not gonna do
that because.
Okay we'll go to the audience is
there anyone in opposition to
disco right you like the last.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender we do oppose
this legislation not because we
disagree with the intent of the
bill at all but because this is
already punishable under
existing law larceny is a
predicate crime for the crime of
racketeering which is a high
level felony for anyone who
either received the proceeds up
or participate in organized
crime and larceny is one of
those predicate crimes SO we
believe this is fully covered by
racketeering and we do not need
any more new crimes on our
statute books thank you.
Your.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee listed like apples
with both features we work with
currently and formerly
incarcerated individuals.
We know that our families on our
loved ones sometimes fall into
these activities for different
needs and we do not feel that
this bill addresses the root
causes of why people engage in
these and most importantly we
know that this is not going to
deter because when people commit
these crimes they're not
necessarily thinking of the
sentences that they're going to
sleep so with that being said we
respectfully oppose this bill.
I'm good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Behrens also with the ACLU of
New Mexico the ACLU and of New
Mexico as part of the New Mexico
safe coalition we oppose this
legislation because we this
proposed legislation because we
don't believe it will address
the underlying issues the space
in our communities we respect
the Sanchez for bringing four
but we believe that we need to
be a bit more creative and think
outside the box instead of
calling on extra penalties I
think if we sort of did a and
assessment we probably can point
to the issues in Albuquerque so
the acclimation to pass tougher
on crime families and create
more problems thank you with
that you all to vote no.
Okay.
Right is there anyone in the.
Okay is there anyone in support.
Funds.
That did you want to yeah madam
chair when you look at
racketeering racketeering one is
difficult to prove and the
second thing is is if we charge
racketeering it's a second
degree felony it's nine year
penalty where as someone that
steals five hundred to twenty
five hundred dollars in this
legislation is a fourth degree
felony eighteen months in prison
and that's why we brought this
forward.
Okay thank you.
The committee yes Representative
I have a question thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
So
This is the definition of
recipient includes businesses
but the title of the thing is
residential that so I'm
wondering was that intentional
was that an oversight
Could you please clarify.
Representative Thompson
It is intentional while
potentially confusing because
residential as defined as such
so we don't need to say
residential and commercial
or whatever so I think the the
sponsors are minimal to changing
that if if everybody seems to be
terribly confused by it but
I don't think that's too big of
a deal thank you madam chair I I
did it just seems strange to me
that the title is organized
residential that but to include
businesses I just find that.
I don't need any help being
conceived so that that I know
that we whenever madam chair and
representative Thompson whenever
we've defined a term we refer to
the crime by that definition so
that would probably require more
than just changing in the title
but.
We we appreciate your feedback
on thank you madam chair thank
you.
Representative dot.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative at
representatives and Mr Johnson
for previous board so.
Currently under the law let's
just say I'm.
I'm someone who's involved in a.
Racketeering ring or whatever
and I.
Follow this UPS tracking and
steel two different packages
first packages four hundred
forty five dollars with the
merchandise the second is five
fifty.
Madam chair representative so
currently I wasn't charged with
racketeering which is super hard
to prove would I be charged if I
was check.
Madam chair and Representative
walk we would take the two
counts and bind them so the
theft would be nine hundred and
fifty if I remember right on
your example so you'd be charged
with a fourth degree felony
larceny over
five hundred dollars but less
than twenty five hundred thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative man what what
this change.
Regarding that
Currently they do have to charge
each individual tapped the first
example was under five hundred
dollars so that would be a
misdemeanor the second one was
over five hundred dollars it
would be a fourth degree felony
by itself.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so then putting
them together and this it would
just make it more substantive
and charge.
Madam chair representative block
yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and if you had
anything to add to that Mr
Johnson.
thank you madam chair
representative of what the
problem is on the first charge
that's under misdemeanor under
five hundred dollars there will
be no arrest in Albuquerque so
they'll be no record of that at
all.
Thank you madam chair thank
representatives are currently
they're not charging that in
Albuquerque or Bernalillo
county.
Madam chair representative no
they're not.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so this would
then compel the district
attorney to file those charges.
Madam chair representative yes
okay thank you madam chair thank
Representative I also want to
just note.
If if someone is doing this and
going door to door in a
residential area madam chair I
would suggest that this is
probably not.
Gated community.
And so madam chair
representative this would
probably hurt some of the middle
income and lower income
individuals not is that correct
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative that
I've been a victim in this as
well as some my neighbors and
we're not in a gated community
so yes you're exactly right.
You madam chair thank you
Representative that's all the
questions I had thank you
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair I'm just looking at
the F. I. R. did you get a
chance to look at it.
On the stand of issues and
concerns regarding.
some of the reports that the
bill creates
I think that may not have been
the intended goals just look at.
Starting with the other girls
are and Madam chair
representative page three of the
F. I. R..
I just think that in the
scenarios within the language in
your bill that
Senator that's that's for
multiple recipients in the state
were value five hundred or less
is taken from each recipient
would again be able to be
charged under the language in
the bill additionally the second
regions ice valued at over five
hundred dollars the only taking
on one occasion would be charged
about.
So I don't think that's the
intent I just think it's perhaps
the language.
That was the intent.
Senator can you just that
question
it's it raining for three star
there's.
K. I. R..
They're just going down the less
there is actually about pages
of.
Issues
Just more so that the way that
the bill as drafted.
Giving some of the confusion
about.
I Representative Thomson brought
up to.
Just some of the conflicts of
the with the intent and so the
confusion surrounding words like
merchandise.
Whether.
Businesses Adam's two
residences because it is
expensive.
and then just some of the
definitions surrounding
organized residents of that.
I was just
recommends looking at some of
the tax and
concerns that some of the things
that are being proposed are at
all times of the bill and thank
you could use another working
here in the building houses just
is the sound on the time that
again at this respective trying
to deal with this issue yeah
I've seen that.
Porch pirates I haven't heard
that term.
Lawful.
Man wanted to be in CA all in
our community is a yes.
but yeah I really intend
In just typing it up right.
Thanks very much madam chair to
can I respond one of the things
that that I want to co sponsors
wanted is to do is in
merchandise we we made that
change and maybe that working
specific so that the retail
amount was what was charged and
then the other part on
businesses there are many homes
now that have home based
businesses and so that was one
of the as well as the legality
of it so thank you.
Thank you for your your
questions as well.
At.
Yeah.
Hi.
Who is also yeah.
that.
Is.
The action or.
Charge in the.
If we could have.
That from also charging with
larceny.
So I think that's something
that.
Would be a good idea yes madam
chair you you couldn't charge
twice because you would run into
a double jeopardy issue.
Well I think they're talking
about something that would
Yes comment for theft larceny
charges to be pursued along with
the conspiracy.
And committed with two or more
people
so the prosecutors would be
faced.
with charging O. R. T. alone for
larceny and conspiracy together
for a felony amount of
merchandise for example I did
twenty five hundred dollars.
As opposed to just that O. R.
T..
So I I.
For that reason I think this
should be a little different but
Madam chair could this protect
me from the suggestion
I read someone here Judiciary
wash read this bill which we all
know how that works so I would
suggest if you are willing to
roll it in trying to clarify
some of the things because as it
is I can't vote for because it's
just it's too confusing so I'm
just just an option thank you
madam chair madam chair we would
be receptive to rolling and
coming back with the sub forty.
Okay.
Yeah madam chair would could we
bring it to you as well and also
to look at.
I I don't I I honestly.
This is a report that that that
that that I think it's very.
We will do that okay thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair.
K. next laughed we have house
bill four seventy seven.
In our.
Our promises.
Of the.
Hello.
Do we have to use this okay can
you hear.
Okay that might.
Okay thank you go ahead
Representative at Jones for
health bill for seventy seven
prenatal substance exposure
screening for right thank you
madam chair members of the
committee we're here to present
HB four seventy seven to you
it's the universal prenatal
substance exposure tool I have
my expert witness Jason Espinoza
with me.
The eighty four seventy seven
universal prenatal substance
exposure tool in acts the
requirement that prenatal care
providers must screen each
prenatal patient at each visit
for use of drugs or alcohol
results of the screening or
confidential and will not result
in referral to state agencies
are actions but do mandate
health care providers referring
the patient to prenatal
substance abuse treatment.
As our legislative bodies
acutely aware of the growing
issues with the original passage
of care up house bill two thirty
into nineteen.
This bill mandating universal
prenatal screening it will help
alleviate some of the documented
issues with this program.
I think you all should have a
hand out there and they care a
handout and.
Do you have that.
Thank.
There.
Okay well I can tell I can tell
you I just wanted you to be able
to see it refer to it but I am
in the Care Act.
On page four it says without
universal screening newborns can
suffer from delays in maternal
substance use treatment or may
not be identified at all.
No that's not it.
This sorry.
I'm just a stand in
it Representative Lord and
witness we're unable to be here
today so I I would sorry about
that I thought you were supposed
to have that but anyway I can
read to you what is part of the
experts of his sons to.
Representative Lord okay I don't
know the name Merioles back
nearly yes okay.
She might you on to the.
Okay so so anyway I just wanted
to read to you that that quote
from the Care Act at that
without the universal screening
the newborns can suffer from
delays and maternal substance
use treatment.
Or may not even be identified at
all and
So.
The F. I. R. we do have the
insurer and and it includes
positive support from both
ECECD and HSD and with that I'm
open to questions.
Or if you have something to add
Jason madam chair members of the
committee Jeez that's been as a.
I have to New Mexico trappers
number
have an answer questions just as
the representative said this
proposal for you is really comes
out of recommendations The New
Mexico department of health care
evaluation.
Their number one recommendation
was to increase prenatal
screening for substance exposure
specifically looking at
universal prenatal screening
because it helps reduce bias and
screening increased prenatal
services for mothers in need and
increase reporting and
understanding of prenatal
substance exposure is an aspect.
So we're open to questions okay
thank you is there anyone in
support of this.
Is there anyone on seeing.
Hey there opposition to this
bill if you'd like to nothing
like.
Our wonderful sergeant of arms
will thank you FC.
You.
Thank you good afternoon chair
members of the committee my name
is Mike if it's any and I'm a
policy manager with all features
we oppose H. B. four seven seven
because as a mother of three
children I know how important it
is to have prenatal care
provided in a safe and
supportive atmosphere when our
families seek prenatal care they
should be valued and treated
with dignity we believe in
building safe trusting
relationships between patient
and provider for these reasons
we ask that you oppose H. B.
seven seven point as of your.
Yeah I think there's a.
Yeah I think I want to say who
but madam chair members of the
committee and calmer and I am
the co founder of indigenous
womanizing also the political
education director and I also
serve as a maternal mortality
review committee member on the
New Mexico department of health.
for the past year I have been
moving cases that already show
where providers are
Yes.
People without their consent and
so we oppose this bill because
it will further criminalized
a new people in separate
families are asked and you
oppose H. B. four seven from
thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee listed like
compost policy director with
bold futures we work with women
who are going through their
substance use and their recovery
journey and also with women who
have been pregnant during the
recovery we've been working with
project echo on creating best
practices for supporting
pregnant women
and what we know is that moms or
substance using and pregnant are
already scared and they seek
prenatal care because they are
looking for help thank you for
their babies they want to they
want help to carry out their
pregnancies
and so our biggest fear what
this bill is that by including
the screenings every time that
someone goes to the hospital to
check on the baby that this is
going to create more state more
more criminalization and more
shame for them and what's gonna
end up happening is we are
already seeing a lot of pregnant
women not seeking prenatal care
for these very reasons because
they don't feel comfortable they
don't feel welcome or supported
and nurtured and so for those
reasons we ask that you please
oppose thank you.
Okay anyone else in opposition
is there anyone in opposition on
yeah.
How many just one
course at.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Chris I am
a member of the Navajo Nation
and I live in Albuquerque
district nineteen I'm gonna
indigenous leader with full
features New Mexico I want to
express my strong personal
position for H. three four seven
seven I am a mother of five
beautiful children and I have
been in and out of providers
here numerous times for prenatal
visits prenatal care is critical
for expectant mothers living in
district nineteen I see first
hand the substance and alcohol
abuse in my community I feel
selective screening may leave
them other stigmatized and not
want to continue care due to a
positive screen result arsenal
area type specially Munster and
demographics like women of color
and low income communities
ultimately resulting in the
discontinuation of prenatal care
which will put the mother and
child at a higher risk of danger
to avoid these dentures outcomes
I urge you to please oppose H.
B. four seven seven thank you.
Thank you.
Hey if there's one more one more
now okay.
Okay Christian.
Hello good afternoon chair
members of the committee my name
is Christian record and I mean
he did just indigenous leader
for both teachers I'm grateful
to have been born and raised in
Utica New Mexico as amended grew
up with an alcohol addiction and
living sober now for three years
I strongly oppose H. B. four
seventy seven prenatal exposure
screening tool you're not
hearing analysis study about
arts in my healing journey I had
not sure judgment or punishment
when I was not able to get sober
for the first time.
Recovery vehicle to access
listed killing their the
resources that PED is a road to
the wonderful by now please
don't discourage mothers are
getting prenatal care by adding
analysis to their doctor visits
thank you so much.
Thank you.
Okay is there anything else
you'd like to add.
Yes.
Yes I I would like to just
address the concerns that you
just heard I think there
probably are some
misunderstandings the purpose of
this this legislation is an
intent of it is to prevent bias
bye bye including questions and
in just a regular assessment
whenever a woman comes in for
her prenatal care everywoman not
not targeting anyone in
particular but every single
woman every time
it becomes unbiased instead of
bias and it the universal aspect
to this is what makes it so
important.
I'm a mom too and I know I I had
a as some of you know I had a
lot of kids and I went to a lot
of prenatal appointments in the
beginning when the baby's
forming and in on into the into
the.
the beginning of the are
probably about the eighth month
there is only one
appointment per month and so if
if there's a sporadic tool that
we use that is biased based on
you know a practitioners
subjective
decisions are discretion and it
really could mean that we miss
the opportunity not a punitive
opportunity but the opportunity
to provide a referral so that
that so that that mom could
could seek help and and and and
could potentially have a better
outcome and to this so that she
wouldn't be missed so I hope
that explains a little bit
better to have something at
Jason yeah madam chair members
the committee just the add on to
that too
R. O. goal is is to really
provide bias and and prevents
state and No easy CD and and
their comments you know touch on
that with universal screening is
not required prenatal care
providers may choose to screen
only select patients which can
lead to miss cases that may
adversely affect people of color
use stereotyping state money by
out so the recommendation to
avoid bias and state money is
the universal screening and
that's what we're trying to do.
Avoid statement of what by us
have universal screening which
is endorsed as a best practice
by the American college of.
That checks and balances thank
you.
Thank you.
Go to.
And what thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
mistress no Sir.
So yeah I'm reading this study
here from this opinion from a
cop the American college of this
obstetrics gynecology in the
state.
The endorsed universal
screenings for substance is used
as a part of comprehensive
obstetric care should be done on
the first pre to visit
partnership pregnant women so
madam chair representative I
guess I'm just not understanding
why some people would be against
the since it would be anti bias
it would not be seeing who who
is who is and it would just ask
the question everybody is not
correct Madam chair
representative.
Correct it would be just part of
this a screening tool a
questionnaire and all of the.
It would just be included in all
of the normal assessment
questions that are asked for to
create a pregnant woman see you
okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and service
but also like to add
it's not just what they're
suggesting just one not every
single time like the bill sets.
To have that screening thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative an expert.
Mistress knows us so.
You know is there is there a
reason why I guess on madam
chair is point is there a reason
why it's every single time.
Will it would be every single
time because the the harmful
effects up for both mom and baby
are are present every single
time throughout pregnancy and
beyond so it it's important to
identify those people if if they
choose to be identified actually
cause more than one to answer
the questions
and for them to to be offered
help by a referral.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and the mistress
but also so yeah I'm just
reading this study here from the
number the University of New
Mexico that did a study on
pregnant women and it showed
that.
There's a large proportion of
ethnic minority women.
And socially disadvantaged
pregnant women who were affected
by this madam chair
representative I think is this
is this bill I'm sure it would
but.
I'm get my time just my question
would be what this protect
especially these minority women
from being harms from these
drugs being able to get care for
them such as methadone or any
other kind of.
Help Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I think it would
it would affect everyone equally
I really don't think it would
target minority women I think it
would affect all women and all
babies.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I I think
that's so important I think
especially in New Mexico we are
a minority majority state I
think you're New Mexico would
actually protect these women and
the children that they that they
are having so madam chair I
appreciate you bringing this
forward I think this is a good
first step to ensuring these
individuals are protected in law
Madam chair representative thank
you.
Senator.
You madam chair thank you
Representative welcome to our
committee eight well first time
I've seen you in here so welcome
I am trying to understand the if
it's just for the bill on every.
This is not my field of
expertise such going off of what
has been provided to us as for
in Dallas and every bit of it
speaks to the fact that.
Reading should happen in the
first trimester.
And on top of that
you know we would rely on
doctors to basically make the
decisions for additional
screenings and find.
That type of care that would be
needed per person
so I guess Madam chair
representative I don't
understand the based on the
analysis from the numerous
organizations the American
college of obstetrics gynecology
from the department how CYFD
HSD.
They all recommend against this
is best practice so I guess
I'm trying to understand why we
would want first but this is
statute versus allowing doctors
to provide care to their
patients and then to.
Why we would need to make a
universal if the best practices
talking about first trimester.
Sorry to questions okay do you
mean universal are you talking
about universal as opposed to
one time because universal I
think applies to every patient
rather than.
Madam chair representative ways
of those written
and the way that was interpreted
since it looks like you as well
the universal prenatal substance
exposure basically looks at
every prenatal check up so
that's the universal version
that I'm talking about verses
just first try Trackmasters
three every regional check well
we're we're definitely open to
looking at the wording in making
changes because it is so
important that we have some kind
of screening tool in place.
So madam chair representative
I'm I'm gonna defer to my
experts because madam chair
Representative Romero you know
the there are some of the other
things talking with
Well we're open to changing the
language on line twenty three of
the bill words every single
track of.
Three analysts first for initial
whichever region like us aligned
with best practices I think our
our goal in this proposal.
To provide additional support
screen relative to Care Act
which in the the OHL emission
talk about the need to cash
subsidies was the worst earlier
in the retail process and.
you know the best practices for
the over the just say during
that first initial.
That helps Madam chair
representative I think.
Following on to that is that
that's sort of already happening
we already have schools to
screen we already have the
ability to screen and as far as
best practices goes are you
doing that so I guess I'm
confused why we will want to put
it into a statue you when were
allowing we're basically playing
doctor right in my humble
opinion how we would want to do
that as provide the.
Doctors care for their patients
in their best practice and
currently that's already
happening so why would why is
this necessary.
I'm deferring to the distressed
assets
Madam chair representative zero.
Yeah our best practices best
practice is is to do that and
the opposition leaders that
again as part of the region
valuation their recommendation
the status of the law that
requires
Looking at that the prenatal.
Screenings will are you aware.
It was recommending.
on the New Mexico department
health care evaluations we can
talk about.
That.
These green screen for
substance.
Recommends universal renewals
three you.
Because they don't have.
Okay the clerk I
The O. H. is.
You know already doing that the
screen treatment they're not.
I understanding is from the FIR
suggesting that they do it every
single.
Check that.
Sure.
I'm the at the maybe we're
looking at universal different I
think maybe that's where the
confusion is again we're
completely open to the the
change to align with that so
that the screening happens just
at the pre first prenatal visit
I think when we're talking about
universal we're talking about
every woman that goes in for
their initial care so that it's
not a selective process and all
the certain winner screen
because that when we leave it up
to the right or to do selective
screening that is the selection
bias and that may adversely
affect people of color so with
universal screening what we're
talking about is everyone in and
again we're open to the change
in terms of that with that
potential amendment every woman
on their initial prenatal visit
with.
The screen.
Madam chair.
Yes Representative Johnson I'm
sorry thank you madam chair so
on the analysis I just totally
sums up what I'm thinking HSD
notes that it is unusual to
mandate matters that require
clinical jump judgment
especially with the professional
organizations that guide
practice have no direction
within proof rule promulgation
much less with in statute so I I
worked with infants and toddlers
for many years and some families
I could come into their home and
we can get started and we could
you know I could asking the hard
questions and other families I
had to go to five or six times
before they fell to the trust
with me so I can see a woman up
going into a position and maybe
it's taken six months for people
to convince her to go and she
goes and the doctor does that
and she never goes back so I
really have issue with taking
clinical judgment away from
professionals who know the
patient and who know the
situation thank you.
I just like to add that
Why would you ask for DO H. two
you know I come up with to
develop a tool when we already
have
espers you know this screening
brief intervention and I think
there's some others that were
mentioned
that.
Using those that are already
science and evidence time K..
Madam chair
I I don't think the language and
R. ten languages not to.
That necessarily developing new
pool of there's existing tools
that that the wages using they
can certainly
utilize those.
To connect the string string.
Okay that I do I do let me add
something to as well I have
this.
On page ten of the NMDOH
evaluation report the number one
recommendation increased
prenatal screening for substance
exposure universal prenatal
screening can help reduce bias
and screening increase prenatal
services for mothers in need and
increase reporting an
understanding of prenatal
substance exposures in New
Mexico.
So that was from the New Mexico
department health evaluation
report.
And Representative I think when
the state increase they don't
need increase for the individual
eighty increase over.
At the span of all pregnant
women who will be going.
prenatal care.
Not increasing the number of
times a person has the right
well I think you're right but
this isn't you they want
everyone to have it.
Yes and what they recommend
that's what already I believe is
in statute policy.
So sure yes.
Yes go ahead thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
do you know if this already is
in statute.
Our best practice my question.
Madam chair representative
locked it's certainly again
you're looking at the American
college of obstetrics and
gynecology and certainly their
best practice that the indoors
my understanding that's not
currently in statute
and again I think.
You know the the committee you
know what's operate amendments
align that to the best practice
that provider during the first
during the initial.
Prenatal visit we're setting up
in that alignment intends again
was universal in terms of every
being screens not.
Practices of these.
Thank you madam chair
representative so you know I I
understand the.
The problems folks may happen
some languages like.
You know maybe.
Maybe too far fits throughout
the entire pregnancy prints
however I do see madam chair
representative there even might
be a.
Ops that the bias Madam chair
representative maybe maybe
physician would be even more
inclined in this day and age to
not ask that question due to
someone's
individual appearance or any
kind of external factor madam
chair representative so I would
actually think that this might
be a good practice to take
weight bias from system Madam
chair representative because
everybody's got to do it and no
one can get discriminated
against with this so madam chair
representative I would just
leave the committee with that
thought process we're trying to
make sure that everybody's
included nobody is targeted
madam chair representative I
think that this would probably
be a very good first step Madam
chair representative however if
you like to make any amendments
madam chair I would suggest if
the committee is open to
amending this bill we may
potentially want to roll it or
if we have.
I feel that madam chair.
Representative tough thank you
madam chair I worry about us
getting involved in clinical
judgment I mean what's next if
someone with diabetes has a
blood sugar up like to blank
we're gonna do this week each
patient is different each
situation is different and I
really worry about putting in
statute.
Things that that the care
providers need to have
flexibility with thank you madam
chair.
Okay thank you.
I just had something else to add
I think that that
The.
The motivation behind this too
was that we're seeing more and
more drug addicted babies that
are born
and the and that that that's
part of the motivation is to to
assist catch those in and offer
treatment before that would
happen and to offer help to
those moms so.
I just wanted to point that out.
Thank you.
Okay we have a motion to move to
table we.
Excuse me representative walked
no ma'am.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Your Rubio.
Yes table chair for our yes.
Sure you have a forty one to
table.
And your bill as people four
one.
Thank you for the opportunity
Preciado thank thank you.
Okay we.
Right.
And just I'm just going to make
an announcement that are
wonderful Representative Romero
has been taking the bar for the
last two days and here she is
today South.
And we're sorry you have two
weeks alone yeah.
I.
Forget about it.
Also.
You had a half and.
Thank you.
Just.
Whatever the new law.
This is the.
