Alright, members, I understand
we are good to go.
Good job, Ramiro and team,
getting us back online.
Let's go back to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe, Representative
Sapansy.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
An objection is ordered. Clerk
to read.
House Bill 13 introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
an act relating to electric
public utilities, establishing
distribution system planning
requirements, requiring
distribution system plans and
energization reports requiring
beneficial electrification
plans, providing for electric
public utilities to recover
costs for beneficial
electrification programs
requiring annual reports on
beneficial electrification.
Establishing the virtual power
plant program authorizing the
public regulation commission to
adopt rules to establish tariffs
and performance targets,
allowing for compensation to
electric public utility
customers for participation in
the virtual power plant program
and utility cost recovery. House
Bill 13.
House Bill 13 have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house energy
environment and Natural
Resources Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 101, introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to firearms, making an
exemption to unlawful possession
of a firearm at a polling place
for commissioned law enforcement
officers. House Bill 101. 10? I
haven't been twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the house, consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 102 introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to corrections
classifying homicide by a
vehicle or great bodily harm by
a vehicle as a serious violent
offense for earned meritorious
deductions. House Bill 102.
House Bill 102 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 103 introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to crime, increasing
the penalty for aggravated
battery upon a peace officer.
House Bill 103.
House Bill 103. I haven't been
there by time or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 104 introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to crime revising the
definition of criminal offense
for the purpose of the victims
of Crime Act to include certain
crimes against a peace officer.
House Bill 104. 14 been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 105, introduced by
Representative Ree, an act
relating to traffic offenses,
providing for testimony by
interactive video, providing for
implied consent to a laboratory
analysts or toxicologist's
appearance by video. House Bill
105 15 having been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 106, introduced by
Representative Reed, an act
relating to driving under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
or drugs, admitting the
requirements for testing the
blood of a person suspected of
operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs,
providing that certain medical
professionals are authorized to
withdraw blood in the
performance of a chemical blood
test for driving a motor vehicle
or operating a motorboat under
the influence of intoxicating
liquor or drugs.
House Bill 106. House Bill 106
haven't been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 107 introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to crime, admitting the
sections of the controlled
substances Act, providing a
penalty for when the trafficking
of certain controlled
substances, controlled substance
analogs or counterfeit
substances results in the death
of a human being revising
penalties, prescribing fines.
House Bill 107. House Bill 107
having been read twice by titles
or printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee.
The the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 108 introduced by
Representative Ortiz, an act
relating to public health,
creating the statewide public
health and climate program,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 108.
House Bill 108 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 109 introduced by
Representative Ortiz, an act
relating to public health,
creating the extreme weather
resilience fund, making a
transfer from the general fund
to the extreme weather
resilience fund, making an
appropriation. House Bill 109.
House Bill 109 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
energy.
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 110 introduced by
Representative Sareana.
An act relating to education,
enacting the interstate teacher
mobility Compact, providing for
compact administration. House
Bill 110. 110 have been read
twice by title is printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 111 introduced for
Representative Matthews. An act
relating to animals requiring
first responders at emergency
situations who are made aware of
a missing qualified service
animal to make a reasonable
effort to search for the
qualified service animal. House
Bill 111. 111 having been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, the
the House Government Elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 112 introduced by
Representative Lujan. An act
relating to cannabis regulation,
providing for state criminal
history checks and national
criminal history background
checks as a condition of
eligibility for licensure.
Requiring that an application
for cannabis activity licensure
be signed by the applicant,
adding definitions to the
cannabis regulation Act. House
Bill 112. 112 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House of
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 113 introduced by
Representative Luhan, an act
relating to animals creating the
animal welfare program to
provide funding for projects
that support the welfare of
domestic cats and dogs, creating
the animal welfare Trust Fund
and animal welfare program fund,
making an appropriation,
providing for a transfer from
the general fund to the animal
welfare Trust Fund. House Bill
113. House Bill 113 have been
her twice by tilers or printed
and referred to.
How government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 114 introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
an act relating to real
property, prohibiting the
submission of a deed or other
instrument of writing to the
office of the county clerk that
has attached a discriminatory
restrictive covenant or
gender-specific language.
Declaring void unlawful
discriminatory restrictive
covenants.
Requiring the removal of
unlawful restrictive covenants,
restrictions and conditions from
the instruments affecting the
transfer of real property before
instruments can be recorded,
providing that a deed or other
instrument of writing may
include a statement that a
discriminatory restrictive
covenant is void as against
public policy. House Bill 114.
Is Bill 114 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 115 introduced by
Representative Ferrari.
An act relating to behavioral
health making an appropriation
to the healthcare authority to
provide funding for residential
treatment services. House Bill
115.
House Bill 115 haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
house. Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 116 introduced by
Representative Ferrari.
An act relating to health
requiring the Department of
Health to pay licensed boarding
homes for housing people
discharged from the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute at
Las Vegas, or the University of
New Mexico Adult Psychiatric
Center, making an appropriation.
House Bill 116. 116 been read
twice by title is sort of
printed and referred to the
house, Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 117 introduced by
Representative Ferrari, an act
relating to vital statistics,
allowing physician assistants to
certify the death of a patient.
House Bill 117.
House Bill 117 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee.
Thence to the House government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 118 introduced by
Representative Cates. An act
relating to finance, enacting
the professional recruitment and
retention Act, providing for a
program administration by the
New Mexico mortgage Finance
Authority, providing loans for
service to professionals for
expenses related to the purchase
of a home. Conditioning loans on
practice in New Mexico,
providing terms for repayment,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 118.
House Bill 118 have been read to
us by titles or printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 119 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to procurement,
amending the procurement code to
provide for contract adjustments
requiring the state to request
adjustments in reimbursement
rates for healthcare. House Bill
119.
As 119 have been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 120 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to disabilities,
enacting the accessibility Act
to require each state agency's
website, mobile application, and
physical facilities to comply
with digital and physical
accessibility standards,
creating the Office of
Accessibility to implement and
administer the Accessibility
Act, creating reporting
requirements for the Office of
Accessibility, creating a
private right of action, making
an appropriation. House Bill.
120.
House Bill 120 haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, House
Judiciary Committee, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 121 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to county
redistricting, enacting the
county redistricting Act
requiring counties to create a
county redistricting commission
establishing requirements for
creating county district plans
and public participation in the
process, providing procedures to
appeal a selected district plan.
House Bill 121. 121 haven't been
read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs.
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 122 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to property, requiring
that at least 55% of units of
condominiums created on or after
July 1st, 2025, our owner
occupied, requiring that at
least 35% of the members of the
governing body of associations
that manage a condominium
created on or after July 1st,
2025, own and occupy units
within that condominium. House
Bill 10.
22. House Bill 122 haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government election in
Indian Affairs Committee.
Thence the house, commerce and
economic development committee.
House Bill 123 introduced by
Representative Little.
An act relating to property
enacting the uniform cohabitants
economic remedies Act, providing
a right of action to cohabitants
for contractual and equitable
claims arising out of
contributions to the
relationship of the cohabitants,
establishing requirements of
cohabitants agreement, providing
a right to third parties to
enforce judgments against
cohabitants, providing remedies.
House Bill 123.
House Bill 123 haven't been read
to us by title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 124 introduced by
Representative Ferrari, an act
relating to protected persons,
amending the uniform Probate
Code to provide procedures upon
the death of a protected person,
guardian, or conservator. House
Bill 124.
House Bill 124. I haven't been
read by titles or the printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 125 introduced by
Representative Matthews, an act
relating to probate, allowing
liability waivers for
conservators. House Bill 125.
125 haven't been read to us by
title is or printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 126 introduced by
Representative Chatfield.
An act making an appropriation
to the New Mexico Department of
Agriculture for the operations
and programs of soil and water
conservation districts
statewide.
House Bill 126 126 haven't been
by titles or printed and
referred to the house.
Agricultural Is I guess and
Water Resources Committee,
that's the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 127 introduced by
Representative Chatfield, an act
making an appropriation to the
Department of Public Safety for
the purchase of license plate
readers. House Bill 127. Well,
there you have it. We have our
first license plate bill of the
session.
the 2nd 10, wait, this is a
different type of license plate.
House Bill 127 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Judiciary Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 128, introduced by
representatives Zappanski and
Royal Caballero.
An act relating to public
finance, creating the local
solar access fund in the New
Mexico Finance Authority,
providing grants for solar
energy systems requiring the New
Mexico Finance Authority to
establish rules making an
appropriation. House Bill 128.
House Bill 128 haven't been here
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Energy, Environment and Natural
Resources Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 129 introduced by
Representatives Zappansky and
Royal Caballero.
An act relating to public
employees, reducing the period
of employment probation for
public employees from one year
to 180 days prohibiting an
additional probationary period
if an employee elects to
transfer or move to a different
state service assignment. House
Bill 129.
Is Bill 129.
Haven't been there twice my
title is order printed and
referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, then the House
government and economic, uh, uh,
I'm sorry, how's government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee. How government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 130 introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to public
finance, enacting the public
Banking Act, creating the public
Bank of New Mexico, establishing
a board of directors and the
structure of the Public Bank of
New Mexico, providing duties,
permitting certain investments,
lending actions, purchases, and
property transactions,
prohibiting conflicts of
interest, creating the state
banking fund, providing
penalties, making
appropriations. House Bill 130.
I was 130 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house, commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 131, introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to public safety,
shifting responsibility for
overseeing caregiver background
checks from the Department of
Health to the Healthcare
Authority. Adding to the list of
disqualifying convictions for
caregivers, allowing the
healthcare authority to
promulgate rules to establish
additional disqualifying
convictions for caregivers,
providing for transfer of
functions, records, and
equipment. House Bill 131.
House Bill 131 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 132, introduced by
Representative Reed, an act
relating to wills, repealing
section 42-45-2-515 NMSA 1978
being laws 1993, chapter 174,
Section 38. House Bill 132.
House Bill 132 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 133 introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to children requiring
the children, youth and families
department to obtain
identification cards for certain
children 14 years of age or
older in the department's
custody for 30 or more
consecutive days. House Bill
133.
House Bill 133 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 134 introduced by
Representative Reeb.
An act relating to delinquency,
admitting the delinquency Act,
expanding the definitions for
serious youthful offender and
youthful offender, providing for
transport of a serious youthful
offender to a district court
when ordered, and for that
offender to be segregated from
adults, removing the requirement
that a children's court
attorney, consult probation
services before filing a
delinquency petition removing
the requirement that a detention
risk assessment be completed
before a child is placed in
detention.
Providing that a detained child
be transferred to an adult
facility if that child reaches
18 years of age, expanding the
court's discretion to hold a
detention hearing by means of an
electronic communication,
providing that a serious
youthful offender of 14 years of
age or older may waive the
serious youthful offender's
right to an amenability hearing,
providing the children, youth
and families department and the
corrections department with
discretion to prepare certain
predisposition reports.
Removing limitations on the
types of commitment a court may
order, providing that a court
may not weigh one amenability
factor more heavily than another
for sentencing purposes.
Providing a court with
discretion to extend a judgment
up to the date a child reaches
25 years of age, eliminating the
children, youth and family
department exclusive
jurisdiction and authority to
release an adjudicated
delinquent child, providing that
the standard of proof in a
Authorizing a party to reference
sealed juvenile records for the
purposes of a hearing regarding
pretrial detention.
Conditions of release or
sentencing, repealing section
32A-2-32.1 NMSA 1978, being laws
2007, chapter 96, Section 1,
making conforming amendments.
House Bill 134.
Drink of water.
House Bill 134 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 135, introduced by
Representative Ortiz. An act
relating to economic
development, amending the local
economic Development Act
requiring a qualifying entity to
conduct a housing study prior to
submitting an application for
public support, adding
definitions and binding
application and evaluation
requirements. House Bill 135.
but
How about 135 haven't been.
Read twice by title. His order
printed and referred.
House Bill 135 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House rural
government.
How's rural development, land
grants, and cultural affairs
Committee, then the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 136 introduced for
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to crime, adding the
exposure to the use of fentanyl
as evidence of abuse of a child.
House Bill 136.
That
How 136 haven't been there twice
by title is a reprinted and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 137 introduced by
Representative Herrera, an act
relating to water enacting the
strategic water supply Act,
creating the strategic water
supply program, authorizing the
Department of Environment, the
Energy, minerals, and Natural
Resources department and the
office of the State Engineer to
enter into contracts and award
grants for projects that reduce
the state's reliance on
freshwater resources or expand
water reuse opportunities.
Creating the strategic water
supply program fund, providing
requirements before a person
drills wells or recompletes
existing wills, wells to
appropriate waters, imposing a 5
cents fee on barrels of produced
water from oil or gas wells and
depositing money collected from
the fee into the strategic water
supply program fund, making
appropriations. House Bill
137137 haven't been read by
title is order printed and
referred to the House
Agricultural asset gas, Water
Resources Committee, the House
Energy Environment.
And Natural Resources Committee,
the the House of Recreations and
Finance Committee.
And lady from Bern Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I'm now move we go
to the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Uh, members, we have some and by
the way, thank you for your
patience. We started probably an
hour and 20 minutes later than
we were scheduled, so my
apologies for that.
Um
We have some guests here, uh,
Milin, Teacher of the Year
award, and these are folks on
the rostrum, please rise to be
recognized. We've got Rashinda
Billy, 2024 Milken educator and
Louise Billy, mother of Miss
Billie.
Ashley No, a 2023 Milken
educator.
Jonathan No, husband of Miss
Know.
Magali Gomez 2023 Milken
educator.
Chelsea Aguilera, daughter of
Magali Gomez.
Charles Turner, fiancee of Ms.
Gomez, as well as Beverly
Friedman and Connor Boyle from
the New Mexico Public Education
Department. Thank you for
joining us and congratulations.
We also have a couple of other
guests, and I don't know if
they're in the gallery or on the
rostrum, but we've got guests
of, uh, Ripente, Teacher of the
Year award, uh, Inver Leo Public
schools we have Laurie Chavez.
Welcome to the house, Laurie. I
don't see you, but welcome to
the house. Congratulations as
well as to your mother Pauline
Rose Chavez, um, thank you for
for joining us.
Announcements.
OK folks we've got.
Um
A change in a sponsor, primary
sponsor, this is House Bill 59,
the earned wage.
Access
Primary sponsor switch from
Luhan to Karena.
House Bill 59 primary sponsor
switch from Luhan to Cardena.
Right.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports objection, it is
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling
and engrossing committee to has
been referred House Bill 1 with
the emergency clause has had it
under consideration reports that
the same has been duly enrolled
and engrossed preparatory
designing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Anita Gonzalez, chair.
The record reflect that the duly
in.
Move adoption.
Uh,
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move
to adopt.
We
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report on
As
How's Bill one?
All those if they ever seen if I
was in a.
I suppose
That I have it committee report
adopted.
Re reflected duly enrolled and
engross copies of House Bill 1
were signed by the officers of
the House in open session.
Now you have to sing the song,
this is your first committee
report.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
clerk to read Message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker Mr. Speaker.
I'm directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled in a
girl's copies of House Bill 1
with the emergency clause have
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session and returned same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhansson a chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
free.
Do it again.
House Executive messages number
one.
The Honorable Speaker Martinez
and members of the House, I have
this day signed House Bill 1
with emergency clause enacted by
the fifty-seventh legislature,
first session 2025. Respectfully
yours, Michelle Lujan Grisham,
governor.
Message will be entered.
You lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements in miscellaneous
business.
Members I've got a, uh, a few
ranking member announcements to
make on committees. I'm gonna go
down the list, um, fairly
quickly.
House agriculture and Water
Resources ranking member Samora
House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources ranking member
Montoya has rural development
land grass and cultural affairs
ranking member Mason. House
Transportation, Public Works
Capital improvements ranking
member Brown, House Education
Committee ranking member BACA.
How's Health and Human Services
Committee ranking member Jones.
How
government election in the
affairs ranking member block.
How taxation revenue Committee
ranking member Duncan House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee ranking member
Chatfield.
House commerce and economic
development ranking member.
Joshua
And Hernandez.
Joshua Nathaniel Hernandez,
ranking member.
House Judiciary Committee
ranking member Ree House Labor
veterans, Military Affairs
Committee ranking member
Terazas.
House because the Republic
Affairs Committee ranking member
lowered.
You got them all
Uh, members also we are making a
uh change in committee, um, in
consultation with, uh, folks
from the minority party, uh,
representative Cullen moves from
the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee to the House
Education Committee.
Announcements.
Generated from
Bern Leo, not Donana Bern Leo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:30 in
room 307.
Members take note, announcements
generated from Taos. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Your house
agriculturalseia and Water
Resources Committee will meet
tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. in
room 315. No gentlemen from San
Juan.
Mr. Speaker, uh,
I'd like to read the citation
for the award that Rashinda
Billy received in that
education, sir?
Uh, repeat that, I'm sorry.
The, um
Citation for Rainabelli.
For the teacher of the Year
award, she got the milk in. Go
ahead.
Mr. Speaker, Rashinda Billy
Foster is a dynamic and engaging
learning environment at Kirtland
Elementary School, where she
currently teaches 5th grade.
Formerly a 4th grade teacher at
Kirtland Elementary is dedicated
to her students in her community
and shows through her creative
approach to education. The
school which serves a majority
Navajo student population.
is on the outskirts of the
Navajo Nation.
Billy, a member of the Navo
community herself believes fun
is the key to learning. Her
classroom is a vibrant hub of
energy, movement, conversation,
and discovery where Billy
actively seeks innovative ways
to captivate her students.
Creating experiences that
inspire enthusiasm and
curiosity. Billy's approach is
rooted in hands-on municipal
manipulative learning, providing
a strong foundation for students
while allowing them to build and
expand on their skills.
The natural leader.
Billy consistently demonstrates
generosity and collaboration
with her colleagues, resources
and innovative ideas.
Never content with status quo,
she actively seeks opportunities
for growth and improvement and
has played a key role on several
School committees, including the
Reading goal team, the math goal
team, and leading the
professional learning committee.
Additionally, she was selected
to attend professional
development sessions and share
her learnings with colleagues to
develop their collective
expertise.
Billy's positive influence and
leadership extend beyond her
classroom to the school and
community she serves as the math
chair, the grade level level
lead teacher assists with school
math.
Night and fall festival and
coaches girls cross country and
track at nearby Shiprock High
School.
She's also a graduate of Fort
Lewis College, where she earned
her Bachelor of Arts so that in
education in 2014 and her Master
of Arts and Culture and
linguistically diverse education
in 2024.
Thank you, gentlemen. Appreciate
it. And again, welcome to these
magnificent educators,
incredible work that you do.
Incredible public servants, we
appreciate your service.
And lady from Santa Fe.
You, Mr. Speaker. Um, my guest
was here in the, um, on the
floor earlier, Mr. Leon Howard
with the ACLU, um, the new
director there, you'll be seeing
him floating around on the
legislature. I just wanted to
introduce him and his incredible
work in our state. Um, he was
dedicated to the legal advocacy
in the landmark case that
allowed for human rights
protections in our public
schools for children, um,
through this case he
strengthened the rights of
children and protected classes,
ensuring that New Mexico's
public education system.
Remains free from discrimination
and aligned with the principles
of fairness and equality, um,
this case reaffirms the
commitment that we have that,
uh, commitment to justice in our
state, um, and again, this was
especially significant in the
ruling in how we shifted policy,
um, and seeing, you know, while
we're looking at protecting the
well-being and humanity of
indigenous immigrant and queer
and transgender students and
families, um, we are proud to
stand with the folks at ACLU,
affirming that everyone has the
right to.
safety and protection in our
schools and in our state. Um,
just hoping that you all get to
meet Mr. Howard as he floats
around, um, and would love to
make the introduction for him,
um, and his contribution in
advancing civil rights in New
Mexico and to all those who have
worked to ensure that human
rights, um, and the Human Rights
Act would be the law of the land
in New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentle lady,
gentle lady from Ber Les
representative Aornu. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Your commerce and
economic development Committee
will be meeting today at 1:30 in
room.
317.
take note and the announcements,
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move
that the House stand in recess
until 10:00 a.m. tomorrow
morning.
Thank you members for productive
morning, the House will send in
recess until 10:00 a.m. tomorrow
morning.
