Here, and I'm sure we have a
corn.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I, I apologize, I
was.
I got my 3 minutes to discuss
healthcare in New Mexico in
front of appropriations and I
wasn't gonna lose my 3 minutes,
so I'm sorry I'm late.
We're glad you're back. Thanks.
OK, um,
I will hand the.
Chairmanship over to my vice
chair and I'll present.
124.
Chairing committee members would
like to present House Bill 124,
the death of a protected person
or guardian.
And um.
I've been working uh in the past
few years with the um wings,
which has to do with
guardianship and different um
disabilities, um, issues and
this was all of these things are
recommended by the wings group,
which stands for.
Working in her disciplinary
networking guardianship.
And it's services
It's a great acronym, but hard
to remember what it stands for,
um, the this legislation, um,
amends a portion of the probate
code.
particular
Um
portion that deals with adult
guardianship and
conservativeship cases and in
2021, the legislature passed
House Bill 234, directing the
Supreme Court to establish the
working there it is. I didn't
even realize it working
intodisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders, not
services. So to provide ongoing
evaluation of New Mexico law
services and practices related
to adult guardianship and
conservativeship.
And the working
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders,
extensively reviewed and
discussed the issues that occur
in adult guardianship and
conservatorship cases when the
protected person dies.
And this legislation was
unanimously endorsed and
supported by Wings members to
address the following issues,
and I'll go through those pretty
fast. Continue the guardianship
and conservatorship after the
death of the protected person to
allow for burial, cremation, or
funeral arrangements and the
payment of those arrangements
from the protected person's
estate and authorized the
guardian and or conservator to
obtain a death certificate after
the death of the protected
person.
And 2, to allow the appointment.
Of a guardian as personal
representative of the estate of
a deceased protected person
similar to how the existing
probate code allows a point.
Appointment of the conservator
to serve as personal
representative.
And then
It clarifies the priority of the
appointment if both the guardian
and conservator scene 3, it
provides a formal process to
review a final report filed by a
guard upon the death of the
protected person.
And requires a final hearing
prior to termination of the
guardianship conservatorship and
the authority of and it ensures
the delivery of the estate of
the deceased to a duly appointed
person and I could go on, but
I'd like to introduce who uh my
expert who is online is Patricia
Galindo, and she is at the AOC.
Tricia, did you want to say a
few words?
Uh, thank you, our
representative for a, um,
Madam chair, members of the
committee. I am here just as a
technical expert in case there's
any questions representative
Ferrari does an amazing job on
wings. I am an attorney and
probably could answer some more
of the more uh legal questions
if there are any of the
committee, and I stand here for
any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Um
Do we have anyone in the
audience who is in support of
the legisla. OK, do we have any
opposition? Um, we'll start with
opposition and do we have
opposition online?
OK, well, um, if, if you're in
opposition online, if you could
please raise your hand and we'll
call on you shortly. Um, so
folks in the back, if you wanna
go ahead, we'll give you 2
minutes each.
Good afternoon, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name's Emily Darnell. I am a um
I am a family member of a person
who was in a guardianship, a
contested guardianship, a
horrible experience, just so you
know, I am not opposed to parts
of this bill and looking at
that, I think the state should
be looking at that if a
guardian, I mean, if a guardian
or a conservator passes away or
goes to jail. You have 100
people in caseloads. I want, I
mean, they need to be looked out
for and this is the group that
should be looking at that as to
what
happens to them. So it's very
important. However, the part
about the person, the protected
person, I am very opposed to um
our experience has been, and
many other families that have
guardianships that are contested
or guardianships with family,
and states and the fact that
this says that it supports
The estates or that the
conservator and the Guardians
would be paying for all of this
out of the estates. That means
they have money. If this is a uh
an action for people who don't
have money in our state or who
are, who passed away,
unfortunately, um, without
family around. I understand the
need for that and totally
reasonable about that. But for
family members, this is a
miserable time for them. It's
like the first time they get to
grieve their family and to have
a guardian's stay on or a
conservators stay on when it was
contested is not easy.
It's been 15 years since our
guardianship. We're still in
court because of a
Contested Guardianship and
because of a conservator that
stayed on.
15 years. My mom died 10 years
ago. We should be done grieving
and be able to move on and we're
not able to.
You can speculate all you want,
but I just wanted to give that
perspective that that part in
the middle, I feel like really
needs to be re-looked at, and I
was on the commission that was
appointed um back in 20017, and
I feel like
I feel like that was um part of
what the wings was going to do
is really look at all aspects.
Thank you.
Next, was there anybody else in
opposition that wanted to speak.
My name's Elizabeth Brown, and
I'm a family member of a
incapacitated person that was
declared so by your state when
he was evaluated without hearing
aids?
In and we went through an
absolute nightmare until his
death.
And to call them protected
person is wrong because the only
thing, only person who's being
protected or the guardians and
the conservators and also to
turn over the estate to the
guardian after their death is
wrong. Give the money to the
family and let them grieve.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
in opposition that would like to
speak?
Um, do we have anyone, nobody
online? OK, um, next for folks
who support, if you could please
raise your hand if you want to
speak.
And you have 2 minutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alice Lou McCoy. I'm the
executive director of the
Developmental disabilities
Council here in New Mexico. We
also house the Office of
Guardianship. Um, I'm also a
member of the Wings, the working
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders, a
mouthful. Um, with, uh, this
Glendo and with Representative
Ferrari.
Our sponsor. Uh, we went through
this bill very thoughtfully to
address the fact that guardians
have to be able to
Finish up a person's affairs at
the end of their life. So at the
office of guardianship, often
our guardians are serving people
who do not have family members
who do not have people there to
help them wrap up their final
affairs, and bad things happen
when there's nobody.
Ensuring that all of these
things are happening, and even
when our guardians do want to do
that work, they may not be
allowed to because they don't
have that authority under the
law after a person passes away.
And so this is a necessary piece
of legislation for us to ensure
that we're adequately taking
care of our clients.
At the end of their life. Thank
you.
Yes, good afternoon, Madam
Chair, ladies and gentlemen of
the committee, my name is Chris
LeRoy and I work for the Ark of
New Mexico. We represent people
with intellectual and
developmental disabilities. We
do have a guardianship program
at the Ark of New Mexico, where
we rep we have about 1011
guardians where we represent
about 150 to 200 individuals who
were on their guardianship, and
this is going to be extremely
beneficial for our guardians and
determining how to proceed when
a
person passes away, although we
don't have that concern with our
guardianship union it also was
beneficial in that it also
instructs under the law of the
proceed when the guardian passes
away and there is no one else to
step in for that individual, and
uh how to wrap up uh and proceed
with the guardianship. So, uh,
we are heavily in favor of this
and would like to thank the
Wings organization as well as
representative Ferrari for
carrying this bill. Thank you.
Anybody else?
Hi, good afternoon. Um, Madam
Vice Chair and members of the
committee, um, first of all, I
am also a member of Wings. Um,
could you state your name for
the record? I'm Veronica Chavez
Newman. I'm sorry. Um, I'm the
former, uh, CEO at the Ark of
New Mexico a few years ago, I
retired, uh, but I'm also a
parent and a guardian. So I sit
on the wings group as a family
guardian.
Um, I can understand some of
these, uh, family members here,
they're upset about uh the
guardianship process, it's a
little different, uh, about what
we're talking about here, I, I
believe, because uh we do know
in my experience at the ark was
that uh when a person passed
away.
The guardianship ends and
oftentimes there's nothing.
That we can do, um.
A person may have money, but it
ends up going into a pool of
funds for those that have passed
away, uh, on a personal side as
a guardian, we have our
guardianship set up to where
there's successor guardians.
So for us it's not necessarily a
problem, but I know that there,
that it is for a lot of people
that are in um.
Uh, corporate guardianship.
And possibly some family
members.
So I am
Uh, for this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jim Jackson,
uh, registered lobbyist for
disability rights in New Mexico.
Uh, we support this bill for the
reasons that have already been
stated, so I won't duplicate
that. I'll just note that this
bill itself doesn't change any
of the arrangements around um
around the estate who's
controlling it or anything like
this. This is really just about
those circumstances where one of
the parties passes away the
guardian or the protected person
and how all of that's going to
work, but it doesn't really
change any of the existing
arrangements. There are
provisions in state law already.
That allow for a review of
guardianship or a
conservatorship when that's
necessary, but this bill doesn't
do with that and we encourage
your support of the bill. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Do we have anyone online?
OK, great. Um, Madam Chair, did
you, did it?
Have any final thoughts before
we go to committee?
think you will just.
Answer questions. OK, great.
Anybody, um.
Uh, we'll start with a
representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Good to see both of you. Uh, so,
Madam Chair,
I guess, first of all, I'm just,
I'm just reading through your
bill here and I want to
understand.
On page 2.
B
says upon the death of the
protected person.
The guardian shall have
authority to obtain the death
certificate of the protected
person without the court order.
Madam Chair Representative, is
this currently only within the
purview of the family.
To obtain that and that would
just give the guardian.
A new right, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair I'd like to refer to
my.
Madam Chair, uh, representative
block, I believe your question
has to do with how someone
obtains the death certificate.
Um, so currently you are
correct, typically I the
department of health requires a
family member is really the
only, you know, they have a list
of the people that are allowed
to obtain a death certificate
with this portion of this bill
doesn't House Bill 124 is um.
There are many individuals under
guardianship that have uh a
corporate guardian appointed
that means family is either
unable or in some cases
unwilling to serve in that role
and so when it's a non-family
that it's serving as a guardian.
There is no provisions and the
way the statute currently reads
is upon the death of the
protected person, the guardian's
power to expire, which means
when they go to the Department
of Health, they don't have any
authority to obtain a death
certificate. The reason why this
is so important and I know that
our wings.
New Mexico and off the
guardianship has spoken about
this extensively is sometimes a
death certificate is required
even to arrange burial
arrangements or to close out a
small bank account that might
exist and so without being able
to access the death certificate.
It really makes that non-family
quarter appointed guardian,
unable to finalize um the estate
of that guardian, and that's
what helps the 124 attempt to do
so it's not to uh over uh.
come over or take precedence
over any existing family. This
is really for cases where there
is no family involved, doesn't
want to take steps, and that's
why the court had to appoint,
uh, corporate guardians to serve
in that role and without this
change in the bill, they don't
have the authority upon the
death of the protected person to
do anything related to a death
certificate.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. And then I
guess in the bill, I, I'm just
I've read it and I just want to
make sure I understand where in
the legislation does it say?
Well, in the new statute, if
it's approved, would it say that
the direct family.
As
Precedent over the guardian.
To obtain such information,
Madam Chair.
Representative.
Again, I'll refer to my expert.
So Madam Chair representative
block.
It doesn't specifically carve
that out. You are correct, um,
all it does say is that the
guardian.
Shall have the authority to
obtain it, uh, without a court
order again obtaining a death
certificate on its own doesn't
really give anybody the power to
do anything. It just clarified
that if, if needed, that
guardian, if they're not a
family member, would have the
ability to do that to be able
to, like I said, wrap up the,
the disease protected the
persons the state.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
expert.
That helps me a lot. And so,
Regarding the
Following things. I know in the
bill, it says.
An interested person may request
the court.
A hearing
For limited purposes to direct
burial cremation, etc. So Madam
Chair Representative, interested
person along with the Guardian
who, who could that be? And
Would that be family members
who, who's interested, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Glinda if you will answer that.
Of course, uh, man
representative block
in these adult guardianship
cases, the statute already
defines an interested person so
as you can tell individuals
regardship can be young adults.
A middle aged person or an
elderly person really runs the
rampant. So if um
If a family member, and just for
the knowledge of this committee,
um, we've run data in New Mexico
in these cases, about 75% of the
time, 75% of our cases do have
family members appointed as a
guardian conservator. The vast
majority of the time it is
family, um, but sometimes if
that family member, let's say
there's an adult that has a
development disability and they
pass away and they have an
elderly parent. That elderly
parent maybe doesn't get around
to doing these things or doesn't
have the ability to do.
To do things so it allows an
interested party in that
situation, um,
representative Medicare
Representative block could be a
sibling of of that adult
incapacitated person. It could
be any other family member in
some situations that there's no
family, it could be um somebody
the next door neighbor that
really knows that person it
could be any individual that has
an interest in ensuring that the
disease protected person, uh,
final burial, funeral
arrangement or state is wrapped.
and that's what that's
referencing so interested party
manager representative block
could be any of those
individuals specific to those
those different scenarios I just
described.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and representative and expert.
So then,
That's OK.
That helps me on that. And then
next page, page 5.
We're putting the word protected
instead of incapacitated.
Is there a legal definition
currently for incapacitated and
are we putting a definition for
protected, make sure we
understand.
What that individual's status
is, Madam Chair.
Miss
Sure, uh, Madam Chair
Representative block, that's a
great question, um.
This may have been before the
time that you learned, uh,
joined the legislature, but in
2018, the legislature did a
complete revamp of the adult
guardianship of conservship
process, um, the statute is
quite lengthy. What this bill
does cost the 124 is when we
were amending these sections,
the old term used to be
incapacitated person that has
been updated in the definitions
and so this is just clean up
throughout the bill we try to
replace the outdated term
incapacitated person which is no
longer even defined in this
portion of the program.
Code and update it to the more
correct current terminology it's
used throughout these statutes
of a protected the person.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that.
I didn't know that. I joined the
legislature in 2023, so a few
years after 2018, but good to
know that we're updating.
Language
So, OK, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm, I'm now
going to talk about the death of
the
Guardian
So Madam Chair Representative.
I guess I'm trying to find in
your, in your bill, and I know
it's in here.
But
If the guardian passes away,
does the state?
I mean somehow and appoint a new
guardian.
How is that going to be changed?
From the current language, Madam
Chair, Representative and
expert.
Madam Chair and Representative
Locke, yes, the.
Upon the death of the um.
Guardian's authority and
responsibility um.
For the protected person
terminates upon the guardian's
death, but the guardianship of
the protected person continues
and pending appointment.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative. So I
guess what, I just want to make
sure that the folks who had a
guardian who passed away.
are taken care of. I know a lot
of these folks are on Amiia and
the DD waiver, etc. So Madam
Chair Representative.
How are we ensuring that those
folks are
Getting those services in the
Interim, while we're waiting for
a new guardian to be appointed.
I don't know if that's current
law or if this changes it, but
I, I'm just wondering, Madam
Chair and representative.
uh, Miss.
To manager represent a block, I
believe your question is
currently as written the statute
talks about when it, it's not
really clear to be, to be honest
with you, and so, um, there was
some courts who were thinking um
of course it's the guardian
dies, then um there was some
situations where the courts are
saying, OK, the guardianship
terminates 100% and what that
would require happen manage
representative block is for a
new petition to be filed.
And the whole process to begin a
new well really that I don't
think what the intent is, but
the person under guardianship
the protected person still
requires assistance, which is I
think is what you're alluding to
for individuals that are in um
the facilities. It's not that
they're terminate. It's just
that temporarily there may not
be an official court appointed
uh guardian that is able to make
those decisions. So how's the
124 really clarify that the
guardianship doesn't terminate
upon the death of the.
Guardian, um, and it does
trigger in in in a lot of ways,
um, but the court to then
appoint a successor guardian so
that the that protected person
continues to receive services
continues to be able to to live
life as happened before the
death of their um guardian.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that, that answer
that did help me. I guess I'm
just wondering what is, cause I
know we changed something in
here regarding the best
interest.
I think it's on page 5, line 13.
16.
Maybe, maybe not, no.
I may be looking at the wrong
page.
But I'm just wondering best
interest, how do we, how do we
define that for the
Protected individual, Madam
Chair.
And so, and for example, if the
person had
Their guardian was their cousin.
And it was a family member
already.
Then
I guess if the cousin was living
with the mother.
Of the cousin, right, the aunt.
Then would the ant.
Be able to come in and and help
with that. I mean, if they're
not in a facility.
What does this do to clarify
that kind of language? And how
do we ensure that we're in the
best interest of that protected
person, Madam Chair and uh
expert.
Represent.
and representative block, I
don't recall uh looking in this
bill, uh, at the best interest.
I, I can't find it just by
looking at this. I believe that
the concluded with your
materials, it's because that
portion of the probate code um
required us to update
incapacitated persons the word,
uh, protective person, but to
answer that question more
generally in New Mexico, the
adult guardianship system really
does focus on the best interest,
uh, point of view. So in other
words.
um, sort of antiquated views of
this process would have a guard
conserver almost acting like a
parent, so having full authority
and you, the adults protected
person can't have a say so
that's some very antiquated um
kind of thought process well in
New Mexico happen especially in
2018 with the big rewrite is we
ensure that there is a lot of
references to the best interests
of the protected person and also
if that person's guardianship
does
Changing core right some ability
to make decisions, have input in
what they're doing, etc. and so
without you being point out
exactly where it is the best
interest is really an
overarching theme that is
applicable in our statutes here
in New Mexico when anybody under
guardianship, we should always,
uh, if you're, if you or I was
the guardian for somebody,
regardless of our relationship,
we need to look at what that
person's regarding what their
interests are an example that
could be, let's say that I'm one
religion and they are another
and I'm the guard.
That doesn't mean that I make
them come to my religious
services. The best interest is
asking them, would you like to
participate in any religious
services. Is there a place that
you'd like to go to worship that
type of scenario where do you
live, um, you know, where would
you like to live? Do you like
living here with your cousin?
Would you rather go somewhere
else, really ensuring that that
protected person that they're
their wants, needs and desires
are being taken into
consideration and the decisions
are made that are in their best
interest, not, not replacing a
guardians, uh.
Decision making over that
person's guardianship.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative,
and I, I'm still trying to find
it. I know it was in my analysis
somewhere and I apologize if, if
it wasn't in the actual bill, so
sorry about that, but it's good,
good information to know and I
I'm glad that we're, we have a
little clarity on that. So,
Madam Chair, Representative,
just a couple more questions.
So, I guess we're talking about
religious services, etc. when it
comes to the the burial and the
The
Closing out of the estate, how
do we ensure that that
individuals
Religious proclivities or
religious affiliations, etc. How
do we ensure that those are
protected within that? because I
know some cultures and different
different religions, etc. have
different.
Practics with that. How do we
ensure in the law that we're
we're recreating if they don't
have any family, they just had a
guardian and the individual, the
person passes away. How, how is
the state ensuring that that
religious
Um
Affiliation of that individual
is being protected in in that
process, Madam Chair, and
representative.
Madam Chair, and I'll refer to
my expert.
Manage representative block.
That's, that's a more complex
question. What I can say that
the 124 does is it ensures that
there is at least a burial or
funeral arrangement for that now
to be protected the person as it
currently uh with our with our
laws.
When it says the guardian's
authority terminate upon the
death of the protected person,
that guardian, even if they're
well meaning doesn't have the
authority to even arrange for
those.
Burrial, funeral arrangement. So
how's the 124 um provides for a
process allows for a court
process where they come in and
ask the court for permission to
go ahead and to essentially um
make sure that in a very
respectful manner which
hopefully if it's a corporate
guardian, typically what happens
is they have their own
standards, um, what they are
supposed to do while they're
serving in that role is to
ascertain somebody's final
wishes and and and get that and
so it.
See that guardian fiduciary duty
even after the death of the
protected person to follow their
wishes. That would be their
barrier which is like you said,
many religions have different
practices and custom and so that
guardian should have during that
protected person's life been
able to ascertain what those
wishes are, and it helps the 124
is modified, then this actually
clarifies there's a process
where they can uh notify the
court of the death and ensure
that they are able to then
execute those final wishes of
the
Now the protective person.
Madam Chair, and I'd also like
to ask um uh Miss Alice Lou
McCoy to just.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
actually wanted to, um,
to uh Ms. Gino's statement on
best interests and to address
representative block's a
question of best interest. Um,
in the guardianship statute for
adults, um, best interest is not
a legal standard that is stated
in the statutes, that is a child
guardianship, um, legal
standards. So in adult
guardianships, the legal
standard is least restrictive
option, and that's what uh Miss
Linda was describing when she
said we would consult with the.
person on what their wishes were
and things like that. I just
wanted to be very clear about
the language on best interested
it's not part of the adult
guardianship legal standard.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and thank you for that. And uh
That, that is helpful to know
the difference between those
two. So, OK, Madam Chair
representative, I, I still have
a few, I just had a few concerns
and I, I think they've been
Addressed. I, I still think
that.
Since there's not a specific
carve out for family members. I
think that that could lead to a
gray area.
But I'm gonna continue to listen
to the debate before I make a
decision on the bill, but I
really appreciate your time
today and thank you for your
expertise and uh your
legislation, Madam Chair, thank
you so much. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and experts,
all experts up there.
OK.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, what was the
reason why we're changing the
word incapacitated to protect
it. Does that have to do with
courts or?
Madam Chair, I think we
discussed that.
And representative
representative. I was.
Diligently reading this bill in
detail.
As uh Miss Galindo was saying
that it's uh mostly clean up
from years ago using that term
used protected.
So going through the bill, I
have some questions.
Um
On page 2 of your bill of the
new material.
Is there, when we're going
through this, we're, we have
upon the death of the guardian,
and it's actually easier to read
the analysis.
Um, after a person who is
incapacitated, what I was trying
to figure out the block was
asking questions.
How exactly do we know what that
person, they're incapacitated
what their will is after they're
gone because it talks about
having a will, talks about
having a funeral, how do we know
directly what those are that the
incapacitated person, Madam
Chair and Representative, we
don't refer to them as
incapacitated, but I will let um
represent.
answers that.
So Madam Chair, representative
Lord, um,
I think your question and I'm
sorry I just lost my train of
thought if you could just repeat
your question once again. Thank
you.
Sorry, thank you, experts that
time of the day where everybody
starts to lose a train of
thought.
So we're talking a lot about the
will of the person and I know
we're changing it to protected
person, but they are
incapacitated.
The purse incapacitated. How do
we know what their will is, what
it is that they want. Do they
want to be cremated, they want
to funeral, do they want
service? where is their stuff
going to, where's our money
going to? How do we know those
things if they are technically
incapacitated.
The man representative, uh,
Laura, thank you for, for
restating that what happens is
during somebody's lifetime when
you do have capacity and um
everyone should do this as an
adult is you do create an estate
plan and oftentimes in the state
plan includes a will you could
do that, you know, without even
if you don't have a lot of
money, so what this is
referencing is when that adult
had capacity and if they did it
well, um, later on, somebody
could have to go into garden.
and they because maybe they have
a traumatic brain injury. They
got a big accident or it could
be something more like um a
they, they get elderly, they
might have uh dementia. Um, at
those points of the traumatic
ranger injury or dementia, then
they may have uh had to have a
guardianship appointed for them,
which is why they have a
guardian so it's not uncommon
for individuals under
guardianship and conservatorship
so already having the state plan
or a will and so what this
references is
they did when they had capacity
execute a will, then that's what
would be referenced uh after
their death. Just because they
have the guardian while they're
alive. The guardian would make
decisions for them while they're
alive, but upon the protected
person's death, their, their,
their will and their wishes that
were made when they had capacity
should still be honored and
that's what House Bill 124 is
referencing.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative and expert. So if
there is no estate plan and
there is no will, what is the
next step?
Thank you, Madam Chair and um
expert if you would take that.
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
um, when you're looking at it,
then the next step is, as I
mentioned before, is it the
family oftentimes family will
know what those wishes of of the
protected person would be um but
if it's a corporate guardian as
I mentioned before, part of
their standards would be to
ascertain that, to ask those
questions, and to determine what
those wishes would be when that
protected person is deceased and
they would, the guardian was
it's family or a company that's
appointed a corporate guardian
would then um.
See to implement the protected
persons, uh, which is, um, now
that they're they have the
disease.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. The
reason I asked because there's a
motorcycle ride every year where
we take veterans to Santa Fe,
who sit on a shelf for 2 years,
and they have no family at all,
so we take them up to escort
them. So if there is no family
that comes forward.
What is it? I'm trying to get
to.
What
Is the plan for their burial or
cremation, if you have no idea
what they want. How does that
work or representative.
Madam Chair, go ahead, expert.
Uh, Madam chair arms on board
what you described is what
unfortunately currently can
occur with our statue. A person
under guardianship that has a
corporate guardian, non-family.
Actually they don't even have
family around.
Our laws right now say upon the
death of the protected the
guardianship for me.
That guardian has no authority
to bury that protected person
and so when there is no family
around and let me be really
clear, this bill is not going to
be a race to the courthouse to
to freeze out families. We are
really talking about scenarios
where family is not available or
hasn't been a part of that
person's life and that's why we
have a corporate guard in place.
I'll 124 of these changes would
then empower that guardian to be
able to petition the courts and
the authorized.
to be able to bear that person
so that they are not, their body
is not left.
Somewhere and maybe buried in by
the county um in a, you know, in
a service or services that you
described for veterans this how
the 124 drafted actually attempt
to fix that so that we can
respect that person the the the
deceased protected person and to
actually enable that guardian to
have the power to bury or
dispose uh crew remains a
funeral ranges, whatever that
is, make sure that that that
body of that person is properly
uh dealt with, um, after their
death.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative, expert, and my
other question is on page 3.
Um
I'm trying to think in my head
when we go through this.
How long do we look for next of
kin or anybody else that might
want to say, well, I have rights
over this person, and if there
was already a guardian.
And this goes into effect. How
long does that family member
have to appeal to say, no, no,
no, we.
Madam Chair, and I'll refer to
my to Miss Gin representative
board,
if I just take a step back so
with the big revisions that the
legislature made to this process
in 2018 when the guardship case
begins, there is um extensive
statutory requirement to ensure
that all family members are
identified that um.
That anybody that was important
in that that individual's life
is notified of the proceedings
and so all of that should have
taken place, um, manager
representative Lord when the
case was, was, was being um
making its way through the court
system, um, and then once the
judge determines that person is
incapacitated or the protected
person now, then the guardian
that guardian also will, will
have known because of a lot of
uh notice requirements in our
statute.
who those family members are and
then when a judge appoints a
guardian conservator, they also
indicate, you know, people that
are entitled to notice of future
proceedings so it it's pretty
well documented and I think it
all these super rare
circumstances. Maybe the
guardianship was brand new and
somebody passes away, but in
most circumstances that guardian
will already know and again if
that person made up made out a
will when they had capacity. The
will will talk about who their
next of kin are, etc. and the
guardian does have a fiduciary
duty. That's a very high legal
standard to make sure.
follow, you know, legal
documents like a will and notify
next of kin, etc. so the
situation that you kind of laid
out is more than likely not
gonna happen. A guardian also
should be notifying the family
member of the death of the
protected person, um, this, this
bill has the 124 does indicate a
time frame I'm looking at it on
page 2 upon the death of the
protected person, the guardian
shall notify the court within 3
days of learning of the death of
the protected person, so we're
trying to make sure that that
notice again.
When, when the guard would
notify the court, those family
members would get copies of that
notice if they hadn't already
been been been contacted and
then again it does lay out a
court process here. So when the
judge is having the court
process, um, to direct the, the
burial provided that that that
the protected person this is on
page 3 does not have next of kin
willing to make those
arrangements, um, the judge is
going to ask those questions to
the guardian, have you contacted
the family and maybe in that
scenario be yes, Your Honor, I.
the family indicated they don't
want anything to do. They
haven't had contact with this
person for the last 20 years.
All of that will be happening at
the court process, which is
completely carved out in this
statute and that would alleviate
any of those concerns, but I
think that you could.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative expert. So on
page 3, when we have the estate
to pay.
is her first a search done to
see if they are eligible for in
uh.
Indigent cremation or funeral,
or to make sure they're a
veteran before that happens. And
is there a cap?
Or is there, because we're
saying there's a reasonable
funeral funeral services. Is
there a cap to say, well, the
funeral expense will be more
than 1, I'm sure.
Madam Chair I referred to Miss
Galindo.
Machair Representative Lord. The
reason why I think it it says
that it's reasonable depends on
each person's estate there's
many people under guardianship
that don't have any assets have,
you know, don't even have a bank
account, um, maybe get some type
of benefits that that pay theirs
there is no money so in that
situation a reasonable, you
know, you don't range it could
we described in fun, but they're
also individuals that do have
more sizable estate and so the
reasonableness again I'll refer
back to a guardians.
fi du ci ary duty, a guardian is
going to know what those uh
those wishes are know what that
state has what funds they have
available and, and, and use a
reasonable determination to
determine what those costs are
so we don't outline that here
because it would be an
independent case by case phases
and we would refer that back to
the judges overseeing that case
to be able to authorize those
expenses, but it's important to
know that how the 124 does have
that in there because again if
you if you look at
What the statute currently says
that the guardian powers
terminate, so we wanted to be
really clear and say yes your
powers terminate you're not
making decisions because that
person see, but you do have the
power to to tap into the fund
the funds into those accounts
that you've opened up for the
benefit of of that protected
person to be able to execute
those uh final wishes and pay
for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representative expert, so on
page 5 when it talks about.
The guardianship all the final
report with the court. Does that
include everything that they did
during this whole.
Final process for them,
including how much they spent
on.
But not
The representative expert.
Um, Madam Chair, Miss Galindo.
Yes, manage care representative,
that's exactly what helps fill
124 attempts to do this actually
is a brand new section currently
our laws are silent. Currently
there's a requirement to file a
final report, but what I think
is really important with the
wings group really talked about
is um what happened when that
protected person was alive, so a
final report currently our laws
just allow for it to be uh filed
to the court and then nothing
else happened. How
124 would require the judge to
set a hearing and as I mentioned
before at the hearing that he's
notice to all the family
members. They get a copy of the
final report and there's
actually a hearing with the
judge would then listen to
testimony, look at what that
record was, what the expenses
were that were used, um, while
the protected person was alive
and be able to to oversee that
before formally closing it, but
that's an important change that
House Bill 124 would make.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative expert, um, on
the FIR there was some technical
issues that were listed on
there. I don't know if you had a
chance to see them. Did you want
to address those technical
issues and if that's something
that you feel needs to be
amended or if it passes, goes to
the next committee.
OK
Madam Chair, Miss Galindo, um,
if you could just um.
I think you had some highlights
on the FIR, but don't have much
time to go through all of.
Right Me representative Lord,
um, unfortunately I don't have
that FR in front of me. I did
take a look at it quickly online
before the committee started. I
do believe that there is a
reference about a term um that
is the definitions may not
relate, um, we will definitely
work with sponsor representative
Ferrari to see if that that's
necessary. The second
recommendation is, is my
recollection, there's
incorrectly it's talking about
the 45 days that help build 124
gives the guardian of the
conservator.
To the file with the final
report and I think part of that
was, well, what if they don't
find out until later again I, I
think that I understand where
that concern is coming from,
although the wing committee when
we looked at this, if you look
prior into how the 124 and I
talked about this. The guardian
of the conservator has to notify
the core of the protected
person's death within 3 days, so
they should know they should
know exactly what's happening
with that and this statue
actually kind of fine tuned that
so the 45 days for holding a
hearing.
really should not be an issue
because the guardian, whether
they're family or or corporate
guardian should be well aware,
uh, and checking up on that
person on a regular basis to be
able to ascertain relatively
quickly when they death occurred
and so um that recommendation of
changing that time frame, um,
really would not be necessary
statute because that guardian
should be made well aware of
what's happening with the person
that they're supposed to be
helping out on a daily basis and
so um that that recommendation.
And the FIR I don't believe it
is necessarily gonna cause an
issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative experts, um, I
think that's all the questions I
have and, and I always fall back
on this whether it's, it doesn't
matter who's presenting the bill
unless I know that bill inside
out and I have no further
questions, I usually vote yes, a
hard no or soft no. This one's
gonna be a soft note, but I want
to talk more to you and to your
representatives, some of the
people out here in the audience
to get a bigger picture on it,
um, but that's all the questions
I have right now. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative for
bringing this critical, uh,
clean up and for clarifying a
lot of the process, I just, I
think more so wanted to um to
some of the comments that were
made um in the um
During public comment, um, on
page 3, lines 1 through 6, talks
a lot about, um, protected
persons having the ability to
engage the next of kin to make
arrangements, um, for a
protected person that does pass
away, um.
Or have the uh illegally
executed document appointing
that person representative, um,
to that um service or duty, um,
upon the death of a protected
person, so I just wanted to
highlight that those protections
were in place, um.
For those in, in a situation
where um.
I know that if there's a
contested situation or um
You know, a, a challenge to the
guardianship overall that, that
hopefully is a protection in
that order, um.
The other situation that I
thought was um really thoughtful
with wings, um.
Is about the post administration
on page 4 lines 14 through 16
when we talk about after that
the estate may be distributed to
the decedent's successors
without prior retransfer to the
Guardian as personal
representative. Um, so I think.
Just thinking through
unfortunately, when folks are in
that situation where there isn't
a will, um, that there is a
consideration before a judge to
be able to determine some of
that. So, um, I'm hopeful that
as this moves through the
process that there is an
opportunity to um.
To think through how these
systems, um, take place and and
ensure that they're um our
mechanisms for folks to, to have
that presentation in court.
Um, again, I just want to think
wings for their thoughtfulness
and in this, and you learn
something every day in the
legislature about who is doing
this work, um, in the, in the
background to be able to present
this to us. So I learned a new
acronym today, Adam sure I
didn't know about this group,
um, but I appreciate their work
and appreciate the bill that you
brought for us today. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, um,
seeing that we have no one else,
I can entertain emotion.
Madam Cherry liked to move a do
pass.
Yeah, I get how second.
Um, and we'll take a roll.
Representative B block.
No
Representative Lord.
Uh, no.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Thompson.
Madam Boyer.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
On a vote of 3 to 2, you have a
due pass on House Bill 124.
And a chairing committee.
OK.
Um, thank you. Um, well, next
year, House Bill 101, firearm at
polling place for the law
enforcement, uh, Representative
Reed.
And chaps
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um.
Briefly, House Bill 10 1, we we
all probably remember this from
the last session, we had a big
argument on the floor on this,
and it passed. I'm not here to
argue anything about the the
bill that passed, um, you
probably remember that I tried
to pursue an amendment that
would allow a commissioned
officer to be exempt, um, from
this uh situation, um, and.
As I
kind of thought it would, it
became it has become a problem
in our district and so, um, I
know when we were on the floor,
we were, we were actually trying
to get it over to the Senate,
and so I think that may have
been some of the reason we
couldn't get this amendment
passed, but I have with me, um,
my sheriff from Curry County,
um, Sheriff Michael Brockett and
um I wanna kind of defer to him,
so but before that just all it
really does is add in a
commissioned officer. We have
certified peace officer, and
I'll let him explain the
difference between cert.
and commissioned and what the
problem has become in our our
county on this, um, Sheriff
Brockett, please.
Madam Chair, good afternoon.
Thank you for having me.
Uh, I think it's important to,
uh, for the clarification.
To talk about the, the
difference between the certified
and the commissioned officers.
The certified officers.
Go through the law enforcement
academy and in my office.
When I hire an officer to be a
patrol deputy.
He goes through an FTO program,
and then he.
The
Um, it can take
by statute that deputy can work
in the field for up to a year
before attending the academy and
becoming certified.
Where it becomes an issue for us
is.
Our county building or
administrative building and the
polling place are one in the
same building during election
time, our commission chambers is
converted over into the polling
place.
And within 100 ft of the polling
place is the county assessor,
the county treasurer and our HR
department.
Um, so our deputies have not yet
attended the academy.
But are on the track to become
certified, have a difficult
time.
Staying within the letter of the
law but also attending the
building and handling business.
For the county when they're on
duty.
I have a 2nd set of deputies
within my office there are court
deputies, and they're considered
to be commissioned in which they
take the oath and they're
commissioned, and they have the
responsibilities of enforcing
the law within the courthouse.
However, they do not attend the
academy. Their primary
responsibility is handling
security within the courthouse
and moving inmates about the
state doing extraditions, um,
but once again, they do not go
to the academy and they don't
ever become certified deputies
as a result of that they don't
take calls for service either,
they just they handle court
security.
Um, this statute, the way it's
currently written, again, it
prevents them from attending the
county HR building to deal with
HR issues as well as
Visiting the treasure, visiting
the, the, the county clerk.
Um, it also.
Created a third issue during
voting time and that we're very
small county, but we're also
very dispersed. We're very uh.
It's a, it's a big county for a
small amount of people to uh to
police.
Um, as a result of that.
During election time, especially
on election night or county
clerk relies upon us to gather
all the ballads and bring it
back to her, um, so our deputies
and court deputies.
Go about the county and they go
to the rural polling places and
collect the ballots and then
bring them to our county clerk
for her to start.
Her functions in regard to that.
This
Statute the way it's currently
written, doesn't allow for my
court deputies to help out.
And right now I'm very
shorthanded. I'm down 9 people
out of 30.
Two sworn personnel, and so it's
very difficult to maintain calls
for service and maintain public
peace at the same time.
Helping our county clerk collect
his ballots.
Um, thank you and madam chair,
one other thing I would um add
is that if there were to be a
situation at the polling place
where there was a threat, which
was the intent of the statute,
um.
His deputies that are
commissioned can respond
everywhere and make arrests and
do anything that needs to
happen, but they would be unable
to respond to the polling place
with the firearm and without
violating the law and be subject
to petty misdemeanor, I think it
was a petty misdemeanor, um,
what I, I just want to make sure
is if this ever does happen, um,
that the intent from the
legislature is clear and when we
do put certified peace officers
in there. I think that intent is
going to be clear that we didn't
want to include commission or.
weren't intending to include
commissioned officers, so I'm
really just trying to protect
law enforcement and with the
idea that if you can conceal
carry in there, um, and these
officers are all in uniform and
would be carrying firearms that
we would like to just make them
exempt to protect them from
being charged with a crime when
they're just trying to help in
these smaller communities. I
mean with that, Madam Chat stand
for any questions.
Thank you. Um, we'll go to.
Oh, I'm sorry.
If I'm
Jumping ahead, uh.
Are those, um,
In opposition.
Uh, in the audience, anyone in
opposition.
Is there
Yeah, OK. So we'll go to those
in support.
Anyone in the audience speak.
Go ahead.
Larry Sontag.
Very pleased unmute your mic.
Me
OK, um, representing Better
Together New Mexico.
hundreds of advocates across New
Mexico.
This, as the bill's sponsor
said, should have been addressed
in the original language, and we
fully support law enforcement
officers being able to be armed.
We encourage you to pass House
Bill 101. Thank you.
OK. OK. Now we'll go to the
committee.
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, I
don't have a whole lot of
questions on this.
Representative and when in the
bill that you're stating, which
makes sense because in Torrance
County.
You were
In Torrance County, when you
walk down the hallway to where
you vote.
You walk right down to the
sheriff's office. I think the
sheriff and the law, the police
departments.
Which would be in violation,
because you're walking right
past the polling place, which
was one of the issues that I
brought up before last time.
So it doesn't make sense because
our our law for putting our law
enforcement officers actually
violating law by walking into
work.
Uh, the question I did have.
Which was pert to me.
So we are doing commission law
enforcement. We're not doing
certified, so.
Are we exempting.
Uh, so elected sheriffs with
elected sheriffs with this, with
this fall for them that elected
sheriff can then carry out.
I'm not aware of any elected
sheriffs at this time that are
not certified. Oh yeah, Madam
Char moves in that's right, it's
a commissioning this and.
Sheriff that is not
commissioned.
But isn't elected.
that's how it goes in our.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
so does this include tribes and
pueblos.
Um, representative, I, I guess I
never really thought about that,
but I assume, I don't know
really how that would work, to
be honest with you, um, I'm just
taking the bill we all passed
last year and and trying to fix
something, but um.
The only reason I'm bringing up
Madam Chair.
I don't know. Hold on.
Thank you. Uh, the only reason
I'm bringing up, Madam Chair and
experts is because one of the
bills that I'm drafting.
I'm trying to make sure that
also include people um.
Because you got to be really
specific and right, and I think
that's the only thing I would
say moving forward with that
make sure you add the private
and pueblos.
Um, would it include or exclude
reserves and retired. Uh, and
I'm talking about specifically
retired. I have to go with the
Leosa and get your
recertification range every
year, would they be allowed to
carry in a only place.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think the, you know, obviously
we know that concealed carry is
OK and certified, all we're
doing is if they have a, if
they're commissioned officer,
then they would be, I guess, OK
to carry under this uh bill, but
they would have to be
commissioned and the commission
only lasts, I believe, one year.
Madam Chair represented the
commission is last for as long
as the that that head is in
office, so I took office last
year and when I run for
re-election, I don't don't win,
then my commission goes away and
the next sheriff comes in and he
can reissue the commission out
to deputies.
Chair expert representative.
Um, those are my main questions,
cause I know that.
My biggest
problem.
Was that I have law enforcement
officers are in violation every
time there's an election season,
because they are literally
walking right by and people are
standing outside waiting to like
vote and they're not.
Outside of 100 ft at that
polling place and there's
nothing that can change it can't
move the voting place, you can't
move the sheriff's out, can't
move the police officer.
Please
Police Department office. So I
think that this bill makes sense
so that we can keep those
people.
From actually violating the law
of a bill that we passed.
Madam Chair representative
expert, um.
I don't think I have any more
questions.
I do have many, I will talk.
Thank you, next representative.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
Yeah, the representative did ask
some of my questions, so that
helped me a lot.
On this. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering what
Have we seen any instances of
folks not being able to perform
their duties, such as a sheriff
picking up ballots, since this
legislation has been passed, and
do we know if there are how many
counties that we've spoken to
where this is an issue.
Madam to Representative.
s
Madam chair represented this
last election cycle. It was very
difficult for my office to
collect ballots as we have in
the past, uh, I've had plenty of
volunteers for my court security
to staff that were willing to do
it, and I had plenty of
non-certified.
Deputies that were in training
that were willing to do it, but
once again, since they weren't
certified, they weren't allowed
to collect this ballot, so it
did put a a strain on my office
to cover calls for service and
collect the balances.
Representative Black as far as
actual instances, uh, I, I think
this is a a common problem in
smaller counties where the
sheriff's offices as a
representative lord, uh, did
state our right next to polling
places, um, Madam Chair, so I
just really want to protect
these officers for, you know,
not picking up a charge, um, I
don't think anyone has picked up
a charge and I'm aware of, um,
because I don't know people are
being aggressive that way, uh,
but I just, I, I feel it's
something we need to do to.
Protect them from this
happening, I'm sure or
representative. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and I, I know in
my county it's.
They're not in the same building
as a polling place, but they're
very close.
And I know when this bill was
being debated, there was a talk
of.
That being an issue because I
know, Madam Chair, there, there
has to be a sheriff or somebody
present.
Oversee certain things,
especially at the clerk's
office. So, and that technically
is a polling place because
there's a
Dropbox right outside. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I'm sure
this, does this help address
that,
Madam Chair representative block
and
and it also addresses a
situation where they don't have
any officers on the street and
if something does happen at the
clerk's office, it is a serious
threat or at the polling place,
that officer can doesn't have to
leave his firearm in the vehicle
and actually can go in and and
assist and and do his his law
enforcement duties, Madam Chair.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. And
then my last
Big question on this is how, how
currently do they
Understand who certified versus
who is commissioned because do
they, do they interview each
individual officer at the door
because Madam Chair the
representative, I mean, that,
that sounds like it could
probably trigger leads.
to voter intimidation claims,
things like that. So Madam
representative currently since
there is there are exceptions
and there are vows.
I mean, I'm just wondering how
it's how it's done in practice
now. I don't want to be going
and interviewing each sheriff
deputy and say, I want to know
if you're certified or I want to
know if you are commissioned. So
how, how does that work
currently and would this just
tighten that up, Madam Chair and
representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm not sure it's probably
county to county what they're
doing. It's more so that our
deputies, I think, are afraid of
being in charge, so they're
trying to stay away from that
situation, which is just
causing, you know, lots of
problems, so yeah, I could see
it possibly coming to that, but
I, I don't know county to county
with they're doing, I can just
address what's happening in my
county.
I
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and that's, that's my question.
Thank you.
Um, next we have Representative
Thompson. Thank you.
Um, witness, thank you for
bringing this.
You said FTO and just so that
I'm learning, could you please
tell us what, what that is.
Medi, I apologize. FTO is field
training. It's what our new
deputies all have to go through
and.
I would have liked like to also
explain if I could, um.
An additional problem that this
poses when a deputy is in field
training with an FTO and is that
that FTO is dispatched to a
polling place to handle a
problem within the polling area,
the way it's curling, red in
order to conform to this law,
the FTO would be asking them to
drop the the trainee off.
And handle the call by himself
and then go back and pick the
trainie up later and that it
kind of goes against our
training, it's what we want to
do is we want to train our
deputies.
Any other question is, um,
Election law, election, all that
stuff has gotten really pulling
places, that really complicated.
Have you thought of
Of inserting in a requiring some
sort of training for the
certified officers to make sure
that they are up to speed on.
Not that any of us are up to
speed on what the latest is, but
it just that's just a suggestion
to think about maybe um they
know what what's what, and I'm
sure and um representative, um,
I don't think there's a required
training, but I appreciate the
the step you could take that
back to to his department and
discuss that.
Uh, represented Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Repre, I think, um,
this is great and explicitly
stating who's allowed. I know
there's confusion about.
You know, course, law
enforcement can come into any
situation where they're
required, and I know there's
specific, um.
You know, they're, um,
privileges obviously offered to
law enforcement, I think just
adding the clarity of that in
this bill is, is, is great, um,
as for what has already been
discussed in New Mexico, we call
um.
Or tri tribal law enforcement
officers, tribal law enforcement
officers, so if it's friendly to
add um.
A commission law enforcement
officer or tribal law
enforcement officer with the
power to arrest, I think is
would be, um, OK, great. And I
actually had an amendment
prepared
formally. This is why the chaos
has been in the background,
apologies. We've just been
trying to track it down since
before the meeting actually
started, um, just to be clear
because I think part of the
clarity that we would have with.
This, uh, amendment or this
amendment to the, the statute
overall Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I think when we
saw the original version of this
bill through the process and I
think we passed it in like the
11th hour, um.
Meaning like literally like at
11:30 a.m. before 12:00 p.m. and
seen
uh seen to die, like, uh, recall
the amendment on page 3 lines 2
through 5 being added in order
to get it through the process.
And so I did have a formal
amendment prepared. I don't
think we'll be able to introduce
it for this, but striking the
language between lines 2 through
5, which at this point, um,
allows a person carrying a
concealed firearm into a um,
polling place, and I don't think
that was the intent of the bill.
I think it was for those that
are um.
Law commissioned law officers.
Here's the amendment. If we want
to have a look at it, I don't
know if I could formally
introduce it now since it is
just a strike through, but um.
Nevertheless, I will be
introduced at a certain point we
didn't make the 24 hour. No, no,
I know I'm, I'm recommending.
OK, just so I'm understanding,
madam chair, so it is friendly
to for me to add the tribal
officer in there, but you're
proposing an amendment like for
down the road to take out
concealed carry.
OK, that that would not be
friendly by any means, um, but
that part, but the tribal
officer, I want all officers to.
So mountain Chair, I will be
introducing this amendment in,
um, a subsequent, I think it's
coming to my committee and
judiciary next. Um, I'd love to
talk to the sponsors about that
moving forward, um, considering,
I think the intent of this is
the.
Um
Understanding that we want
everyone to feel protected and,
um, having spoken to um
Folks that work with the
concealed handgun carry Act and
how it's enforced and what
they're trying to clean up right
now that was never the intent of
the bill to allow concealed
carry into a polling place. So,
um, madam chair with that, I'll
just leave my comments there. I,
uh, chair and representative, I
just I just kind of, I remember
being on the floor and that
amendment being introduced and
passed, um, as a 2nd Amendment
then to go over to the Senate,
but I could be wrong, but we, I
guess we can dress that at a a
different time.
Representative block. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And just a point of
Verification. So, your
legislation, as I, as I
understand it, is regarding
unlawful possession of a firearm
at a polling place for
commissioned law enforcement
officers. So, and I'm your
representative, it's my
understanding that amendment
cannot change the intent of the
bill as it's written. So I just
want to make sure that any
amendment that we're
entertaining or not
entertaining.
actually pertains to your bill,
the only amendment that I'm not
trying to change the original
intent of the bill and how it
passed, um.
At all, I'm only trying to
protect commission officers and
tribal officers, um, from not
picking up criminal charges, um,
I think the original intent of
the bill and the negotiations on
the floor, but I remember was
that concealed carry was an
amendment that went through and
then got passed on the Senate
side and um.
So that that'll, I guess have to
be coming at a different time,
but um.
You know, no, it's not to change
the original tent of the bill,
madam. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to make sure that everybody
understands if you are a law
enforcement officer and you have
your gun open carry and you put
a jacket on, it is now
considered a concealed carry.
OK, I have a question. Um,
Representative
um.
If, um, a person who is
commissioned officer, are they
always in uniform so that people
would understand that they are,
you know.
Law enforcement.
Ma'am, I, I can't speak for
other agencies within the state,
but within the Curry County
Sheriff's Office are
commissioned deputies that are
not certified are always in
uniform, Madam, I would think
they were this because I believe
they have to be on duty. It is
part of this bill if I'm
remembering, um, but yes, they
should, they should be in
uniform so that there's no.
There's no issue as to what
they're there lawfully to do.
OK, thank you.
Um, I'll entertain emotion.
OK.
We're talking about the bill,
not the amendment.
Correct. This is not our
committee.
2
We'll take, is there any
opposition?
You have um a due pass on House
Bill 101, uh, the vote was 6 to
0. Thank you very much.
unanimous.
Hey, you're still in the hot
seat, um, house Bill 102, um,
violent felonies for meritorious
deduction.
Deduction.
Representative Reed and Chavis
and Chavis. Thank you, um, Madam
Chair, House Bill 102, um.
Is a is a situation that we've
realized, um.
As prosecutors and and I have
with me uh Miss Johanna Cox, she
is a, a former prosecutor, also
a contract prosecutor and a
private attorney who's dealt
with this issue specifically
recently, um, a lot, but as just
as a little bit of background,
um, this deals with the serious
violent offenses and non-serious
violent offenses and the issue
for good time and you have per
se.
Serious violent offenses, um,
which are listed on page 7 of
the bill, which are
automatically means you're gonna
serve 85% of your time if you're
convicted under one of um those
crimes there, there is also a.
Section 0.
Which you can see has a listed a
bunch of other offenses, Madam
Chair, that are what we call, I
call the catch all section,
which is where the judge has to
make a finding, um, that the
nature of the fence, um, and the
resulting harm are such that the
court judges the crime to be a
serious violent offense, um, and
so that's your serious violent
offenses and your catch-all
section and then a a normal
crime like let's say uh not a
violent crime for let's say
drugs or something, you're gonna
get 50% day to day good time,
so.
this all deals with the good
time part of the statute.
Um, what we have realized, um.
And seeing case law on recently
is that um when I think it was
when the DWI law was actually
changed to increase the penalty
for um.
Homicide by vehicle, and there's
two ways you can, um.
Have homicide by vehicle. It's a
reckless homicide or a DWI, um,
and the reckless homicide is a
3rd degree felony, but when you
kill somebody in a vehicle with
a DWI, um, it's a second degree
fellow you are DWI and you cause
great bodily harm to somebody in
an accident, it is a, uh, it's
so, so that, well, let me just
strike that for a second. Those
are listed in the catch-all.
Um
The catch-all section of O
reckless as you can see, 3rd
degree homicide, um, and great
bodily harm by vehicle, which
could be DWI, but what happened
is.
I think the legislature
inadvertently left out homicide
by vehicle for DWI. It's
actually a higher crime than
reckless homicide, and it's
obviously you kill somebody
versus committing great bodily
harm. So you have these 22 lower
charges are in the catch-all
section, but you can't get, you
have a DWI where you actually
kill somebody and you hurt
somebody, it would be a serious
violent events, possibly just
for hurting somebody, but not
for killing somebody, and so
this is kind of to fix what's
happened and.
I want to defer to Miss Cox,
who's been trying cases that
this is actually happened in and
and the case law and how it's
describing that we really need
the legislative's intent on this
and since it wasn't listed in
the section, they don't believe
the legislatures intended to put
it in the section, I believe
just common sense ways, it was
probably just an inadvertent
mistake, um, but I would defer
to Miss Cox to kind of give you
a background on how she's had to
fix this issue.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
committee member. My name's
Johanna.
Attorney, I have served the
state of New Mexico as a
prosecutor and a defense
attorney now for almost 20
years.
Prior to that, I did defense
work in 4 other states and I
have a PhD in economics, so I
kind of really nerd out on this
law stuff. It makes me excited,
um, but to kind of echo the
sentiment from Representative
Reeb, one of the things I've
noticed, um, when the law went
into effect, this new law went
into effect in 2016. I looked
back at what the legislature
considered at that time. So in
2015 and 2016, there was a lot
of discussion about recklessness
and how the legislature and
lawyers then would treat
reckless homicide.
Prior to that in like 2003,
2006, 2009. Judges got to
consider and make a
discretionary determination on
whether a DWI vehicular
homicide. So if you're drunk and
you kill someone, whether that's
considered a violent offense. In
2016, we had a lot of law that
allowed judges to make that
decision, so I think when this
law passed in 2016 because we
already had a history of being
drunk and killing people, being
considered a violent offense,
they focused on the reckless
piece. So we ended up
then with two different types of
issues that have moved forward.
And as Representative Reed
indicated with the way the law
is written now being drunk and
killing someone is not
considered a serious violent
offense. You can see in the bill
that's in front of you, there's
some that are specifically
listed, but under that
discretionary part, it omits the
being drunk and killing someone,
and we, there's a couple of
cases where I've had where it's
been a challenge for me to allow
a person to be sentenced and
For a violent offense because of
the facts and the way the laws
currently written.
One case I had the individual,
the defendant, um, and I think
just for context purpose, it's
important to remember at the
time this act that you have in
front of you goes into effect,
the person is guilty. They've
either pled guilty or they've
gone through a trial and then
convicted. So they are guilty at
the time this act applies. One
of the individuals or one of the
cases I had the defendant had 5
prior DWIs on the day she killed
and hurt somebody, she was hung
over and still a little buzz.
And driving to go get more
alcohol in order to help her
hangover get better, that's what
she told the judge in the
pre-sentence report. He couldn't
consider those factors at all in
sentencing her because of the
way we had them split in 2016,
so she basically gets day for
day credit for killing someone,
even though she was drunk, and
knew she was drunk. She was on
her way to go get more alcohol
because she needed more alcohol
to take care of her hangover. So
that based on those facts, I
would argue.
would be a serious violent
offense. She had a lot more
intent to do what she did, how
she behaved, and the choices she
made at that time.
Contrast that with the public
defender's office I know has
done an analysis and I'm, I
would like to talk about that
here in a second, but on the
flip side, another type of case
I've seen a person doesn't have
any parking tickets, none at
all, not a parking ticket even
when they were a juvenile.
First time they got behind a
wheel and drank, they killed
somebody. There is no way for a
defense attorney to argue in the
alternative that that person
should be treated any
differently than the first
example I gave you or the person
had a DWI history, they intended
to drink and they were drunk
still when they drove that
morning, they end up getting
treated the same, so the judges
don't get a chance to weigh in
consent. I know one of the the
public defender's office
addressed whether or not these
types of increased penalties.
Provide a certainty for a
defendant or whether or not it
increases or affects recidivism
rates, and there's been two
different studies that
demonstrate that those are
non-issues when you have these
types of that representative
Reeve is attempting to do with
this bill. When you have this
type of information present at
the time somebody commits a
crime. The National Institute
for Justice did a study
evaluating Texas, Ohio, and
Montana statutes, and they found
that when a person goes to
prison and they go through.
such as we have here, we have
it's called RA. It's a program
within our jails and prisons
where they are allowed to do
some drug rehab or
alcohol-related rehab while
they're in prison. The
recidivism rate actually goes
down. So to allow somebody to go
and complete closer to 80% or
with amendment representative
Reeve is is proposing, they
would be then able to go through
that program and get the
rehabilitation that they want in
order to decrease recidivism
once they're released.
Um, Benjamin Hanson at the
University of Oregon had a very
similar type of study that he
did specifically with aggravated
DWI offenses, and it showed when
the penalties are more stringent
like this when they have the
ability to be treated as a
serious violent offense as
Representative Rivas seeking the
recidivism rate goes down
because they understand and in
both of those analyses, they
looked at the penalties for
regular just DUI cases and
they're very small. You get a
few days in jail even
under our laws, but when you
kill someone, if you get the
same day to day credit or it's
not considered a violent
offense, then we end up having
more repeat offenders with it.
So with those two studies and
the amendment, I would ask that
you pass, I will stand for
questions if you have any.
And yeah, the only thing I would
just add uh again, Madam Chars
it is still a discretionary
offense that the judge still has
to make those special findings,
it just uh would be more in line
with um.
Common sense, I think of what
this how this needs to be, um,
so we will stand for any
questions at this time, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Um, is there anyone in um.
Opposition.
OK. Is there um anyone in
support?
And would you like to speak?
You have 2 minutes missing.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bollington and I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, which
supports the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward in
the legislation. Last year, the
Supreme Court of New Mexico
ruled the current law can allow
those who are convicted of
homicide by vehicle to earn good
time credits that can result in
cutting their sentences in half.
And has been noted, this goes
back to 2016, when the
legislature changed vehicular
homicide by DWI or reckless
driving from a 3rd degree
felony, it increased the penalty
to a 2nd degree felony. However,
A companion section of statute
wasn't changed and therefore the
2nd degree.
A felon is no longer treated as
a serious violent offender,
which means
They're no longer required to
serve 85% of the Senates.
And we, the chamber considers
this an oversight that needs to
be remedied, second degree
felony is a 2nd degree felony, a
violent serious offense is a
violent serious offense in the
chamber believes the punishment
must fit the crime, and it urges
you a due pass to vote a do pass
on House Bill 102.
Afternoon, madam chair, uh, my
name is Mandy Gutierrez. I'm a
major with the New Mexico State
Police. Thank you for allowing
me a brief minute to make some
remarks on this, uh, the New
Mexico Department of Public
Safety believes that
reclassifying homicide by
vehicle and great bodily harm by
vehicle as serious violent
offenses may deter dangerous
striving behaviors.
This change will also reinforce
the state's strong stance
against such actions.
Thank you.
They went on, OK, we have
someone on Zoom.
Larry Sontag.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Larry Sontag representing the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
We support House Bill 102, which
classifies classifies homicide
by vehicle, and great bodily
harm by vehicle, a serious
violent offenses. This bill
addresses the critical need to
ensure that those who commit
these acts, serve sentences that
reflect the severity of their
crimes.
By limiting meritorious
deductions, House Bill 102
ensures that individuals who
cause death or severe injury
with the vehicle, spend more
time in prison, reducing the
risk they pose to public safety
upon release. New Mexico faces a
growing concern with vehicular
violence, and this bill is a
step towards rectifying that.
We urge you to support House
Bill 102 and vote yes for its
passage to make our roads and
neighborhoods safer for all New
Mexicans. Thank you.
That's all we'll go. Did you
want just anything else.
OK. Thank you. Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I had a
question, but I got it answered
in the analysis, so I'll just
move it to pass.
Representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
just to clarify, um, cuz I'm
trying to wrap my head around
the, I know we, um, when we
don't do things uniformly and
we.
Change our
3rd, 2nd degree and all across
the different statutes, we don't
know the effects of what happens
with certain situations like
this. Um, so just to clarify for
my, you know, how to wrap it,
wrap it around this, um, when
we're, we're changing the
opportunity to limit ourselves
to 3rd degree is 3rd degree and
higher offense, is that correct,
um, in the way the statute reads
currently.
I think, um, madam, all we're
trying to do is um get to the
page.
H 9.
Thank you. It's for 9 pages,
there's 1 strike through. I, I
see it, yeah so we what we
wanted to do is just take out
the 3rd degree homicide, um,
because it's that's already your
reckless homicide, um, and then
when you have homicide by
vehicle or great bodily harm,
that's going to cover your DWI,
um, or you're reckless.
With great bodily harm.
And I know Madam Chair, thank
you for the clarification in
certain circumstances.
DWI or DUI can be.
Um, a less severe penalty as a
second degree depending on the
situation, Madam Chair,
representative, is that correct?
Madam Chair, representative, it,
it can be 4th degree, not 2.
If you don't
Kill somebody.
mandatory penalties for.
Each one, madam chair.
And I think Madam Chair,
represented the protections of
always having to go before a
judge and and do that and giving
the, uh, you know, understanding
that the facts matter in any of
these circumstances, um, I think
just has that extra layer of, of
understanding and I wish there
was a uniform code or how we
address this, um, because I feel
like we might come back and need
to strike something else out
later, but I hope not. Um, we'd
love to save some trees from 9
pages of destruction. Um, so
that, Madam Chair, uh, with
that.
Cherry support. I just like to
add that I appreciate this, um,
a lot of times, um.
Victims of um.
Vehicular homicide are.
Always impacted because the
person didn't serve the time
that they were even, you know,
uh, sentenced to. So, um, I
think having this.
More clear and to the 85% of
some is forward, um.
Do I, do I have a, I made a
motion and I'll make one motion
to do pass. Yes, ma'am. It does
need a second. So we have a
representative block with the.
Motion making the motion and
Representative block, I mean,
uh, Lord.
2nd. OK.
Um, will take role. Is there
anyone in opposition?
OK. Um,
With the unanimous vote of 6 to
0, you have a due pass on House
Bill 102.
that.
Next we have House Bill 103
battery on peace officer
penalty.
Representative Reen Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. House
Bill 103, um, I think is a bill
that um many of you've heard
before, it did go all the way um
through the house side in the
last 60 day session, um.
And and was unanimous on the
floor, I just never got over to
the Senate side, um, what this
bill does, Madam Chair, is it
raises the penalty and it's, I
don't believe it's your typical
raise the penalty though type
bill from um a 33 year sentence
to a possibility of a nine-year
sentence. Again, it's an open,
it's an open argument type
sentence, it's not a mandatory
sentence, um, but what what um
is interesting if you look at
the statues and the structures
of the statutes.
Um
Everything that is in place for
a peace officer when there's a
crime against a peace officer,
it's basically raised the level.
So if you have an assault on a
regular person, you're gonna
have a a petty misdemeanor if
you're gonna have an assault on
a peace officer, it's gonna be a
higher degree, if you have a
battery on a regular person or
an aggravated battery
misdemeanor and a regular
person, you have a battery and a
peace officer that's a degree
felony. The interesting thing
about this is it's a 3rd degree
felony to
an officer and cause um injury
or use a deadly weapon, but it's
also a 3rd degree felony if I
were to do that to a regular
person, um, yet if you're an
officer and you get shot at and
you get and they miss, um, and
they don't actually hit you,
it's a second degree felony. So
there's actually a higher
penalty if somebody shoots at
you and or an officer and misses
the officer, then there is if
you actually shoot and hurt the
officer or use a deadly weapon.
Or cause great bodily injury,
which that aggravated battery is
the same as it is for a regular
person. So I have with me, um,
lots of officers, but at the
table, um, I don't want to say
your name wrong, but um, Lisa
McGahey.
I get it right? OK. And then
also, um, uh, you're with the
sheriff's office now, Joseph
Reto, um, who have some
experiences of their own that uh
they would like to share, um,
and so I would like to defer to
see if they could give you guys
a moment to tell you what what
their stories are.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, my name's
Lisa McGahey.
I'm currently assigned as a
detective, and I've been a
police officer with the
Farmington Police Department for
over 18 years.
I investigate violent crimes,
officer involved shootings and
other felonies.
18 years ago it wasn't uncommon
for many individuals to want to
become police officers, we
wanted to serve them. We have
seen a shortage of police
officers nationwide, and my
department with the current.
Knowledge and experience of this
job today, I don't know that I
would make the same decision to
become a police officer.
I am thankful for the
opportunity I've had to serve
the citizens of my community.
But people don't know and
understand about this job is
what police officers really
experience.
We leave for work each day, not
knowing if we will come home to
our loved ones.
Police officers see the worst of
society.
No one calls the police because
they're having a good day.
The trauma of what we experience
leads to sleepless nights, we
constantly judge ourselves and
our decisions.
The calls we go to often cause
long term trauma for us and will
affect us the rest of our lives.
Police officers are scrutinized
for every decision they make.
There's no way to prepare future
officers or individuals who want
to become police officers for
what they will experience.
We become entirely different
people after working in this
field.
We are battered, spit on, called
every name in the book.
We're expected to tolerate this
behavior and continue to do our
job.
In 2022, a Farmington police
officer was shot by a convicted
felon.
I was in assigned to investigate
the suspect's actions and charge
him.
Due to the current laws in place
of the state of New Mexico, the
suspect would only be charged
with an aggravated battery on a
police officer, which is a 3rd
degree felony.
He only faced 3 years for the
crime.
The officers here to speak to
you today about his experience.
He always wants to be strong,
but today he's gonna let his
guard down.
For the first time in his career
to tell you about his struggles.
After this officer was shot, I
went to his house regularly to
check on him.
I saw the fear in his wife's
eyes, not knowing what the
outcome of her husband's
injuries.
We're going to be in the future
of his career was.
He was the sole provider for his
family.
It was difficult to tell the
officer and his wife.
That I could only charge the
defendant with a 3rd degree
felony.
At work, he slammed my door
several times.
I watched him melt in her.
He sat in my office and he.
Demanding for me to explain to
him why the defendant was not
being charged charged with a
higher offense.
He wanted the suspect to go to
prison for what he did to him.
He wanted justice for the
lifetime of suffering. This
story doesn't get better, it
gets worse.
How do you tell the officer that
the chargers are going to be
dismissed. The defendant would
receive more time for possessing
a firearm and being charged by
the feds for that and shooting a
police officer.
The charges of aggravated
battery on a police officer were
ultimately dismissed.
And so that we could get the
defendants some real jail time.
The officer has not received
justice for being shot.
And we'll experience a lifetime
of injury.
The defendant has not had to
face the New Mexico legal
system.
Or shooting the officer. We're
still waiting for justice.
In May of 2023, my friend and
coworker was shot after
responding to an active shooter
call.
She responded to a call that
would forever change her life.
How the defendant lived in that
case, he would have been charged
with aggravated batter and a
police officer, a 3rd degree
felony.
I watched my friend be drug into
the emergency room by fellow
police officers.
The look I saw on her face that
day will never leave my mind. I
remember the fear I saw in her
eyes after she was shot.
Fear is real.
The thought of death is real,
and I saw it on her face.
She begged me to call her
husband.
And tell him that she was OK.
I called him
And at the time he was also an
officer and he was on the scene,
so he was unable to respond to
be there for his wife.
I've watched her struggle
physically and emotionally over
the past couple years.
She put her life on the line for
our community, and the pain she
will suffer will be a lifetime.
I sat with my friend in her
vehicle while she cried because
she was denied workman's comp
entry.
Benefits, pending a hearing so
she could continue to get care.
As law enforcement officers, we
do not view ourselves as heroes.
We wear a costume every day, but
the truth is we are not
superheroes, we are just human
beings.
Though the public and the
community may view us more, we
are spouses, parents, friends,
and coworkers at the end of the
day.
We wanna make our communities
safe and have dedicated our
lives.
Expecting no recognition.
On behalf of the law enforcement
officers within the state in
Mexico, I ask that you accept
the proposed changes to the
aggravated battery on a police
officer that are in house built
one of.
You were the individual.
law enforcement
Support them, care for them, and
recognize the work that they are
doing.
Your actions in supporting this.
We'll prove our selfless actions
are not unnoticed.
Hello, I'm Deputy Joseph Breto,
um.
Madam Chair, um,
Uh, the incident I'm going to
talk about happened when I was
employed with the Farmington
Police Department as an officer
with them.
Uh, good afternoon. I'm here
before you not only as a law
enforcement officer, as a
husband, a father, and a member
of this community.
What I'm about to share with you
is a story of how my life and
the life of those closest to me
have been forever changed by the
actions of one individual, sir.
Ah, on January 7th, 2022, I was
simply doing my job.
Trying to protect the community
as an officer with the
Farmington Police Department.
Little did I know that they
would change my life.
When I responded to a call that
evening, I had no idea that
minutes my world would be turned
upside down when I encountered
an individuallias Buck in a dirt
lot I saw potential danger.
And then within seconds he
proved my concerns were
justified.
He pulled a firearm and pointed
it directly at my face. The
muzzle was so close to me that
when he pulled the trigger, I
thought there was no way that he
could miss.
Uh, my vision went white from
the flash and the bullet firing,
and I couldn't see the world
around me.
I thought I had just been
killed.
I raised my arm instinctively.
As a bullet passed by my face.
And then when he shot at me a
second time, the bullet tore
through my elbow as I shielded
my face.
The pain, the shock, and the
fear was overwhelming.
I knew I had a tree and every
instinct told me to survive, and
somehow I did.
But not without the cost of
permanently altering my life.
The physical scars, the
lingering pain, and the
overwhelming loss and the loss
of motion in my arm will stay
with me forever.
And those are just physical
consequences.
The emotional mental toll has
taken on my family and the law
enforcement community. There are
no words for that.
What many don't understand is
that officer's family is also
forever impacted.
My wife, my children.
They live with the aftermath of
every single day.
Constant worry
nights and the fear of weather.
home.
Every time I hold my children or
try to do something, I once took
for granted.
Like picking them up.
I'm reminded of what was taken
from me.
This wasn't just an attack on
me, it was an attack on my
family, on law enforcement and
the community.
Mexico is close in that place,
especially in the law
enforcement community.
We don't see these kinds of
things happen often, but when
they do, it sends a ripple
effect through every single
person in the state.
No one is left untouched, not
even the men and women who
signed up to protect their
community and sometimes do what
seems to be an impossible job.
But it's truly disturbing and
what I need to speak to you
today is the fact that life's
fuck won't suffer the first will
not face the full consequences
of his actions.
Because of the current in New
Mexico State statute and the
penalties it carries. In my
case, the state charges of
aggravated battery on a peace
officer had been dismissed in
favor of the federal charges of
federal felon in possession of a
firearm do the stricter
penalties it carries.
And while I understand the
complexities of the legal
system, I don't feel that
justice is being served.
I know Elias's life is forever
altered, but what about mine?
What about the lives of my
family and the colleagues that
day.
3 years for shooting a police
officer for permanently altering
someone's life, for shattering
the sense of safety.
That's not enough. 3 years.
That's all Buck would have faced
under the state charges.
What I'm asking for is the full
weight of the crime to be
recognized, the pain, the fear,
and the lasting consequences of
my life deserve more than just 3
years of state time.
We live in a country where
justice should serve as a
reminder that actions have
consequences.
Real tangible consequences.
This isn't just about life,
books, actions, but it's about
sending a message that injuring
a police officer, putting
someone's life at risk is not
something that can be taken
lightly.
It's about ensuring that when
people make choices like this,
they understand that
repercussions will be far
reaching.
I will never again have full
range of motion in my arm. I'll
continue to fight for what's
right, for what's fair, and I
will continue to serve because
that's who I am.
But I also ask that we remember
that this is done to me, my
family and our state. I ask that
future justice be done by
increasing the penalties of
aggravated battery on a peace
officer from a 3rd degree felony
to a 2nd degree felony in
support of House Bill 103.
Not just for me, but for all
those who protect and serve
present and future.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. With
that will stand for questions.
Thank you.
Thank you for sharing your
experiences.
Um, we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition, Kim
Chavez Cook. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
This is Kim Chavez the public
defender, and I'm sorry I can't
be the person today. I want to
acknowledge the sponsors, um,
pointing out the apparentistency
with the approach for assault
which doctors more strictly, but
I don't believe that that is a
justification for increasing the
penalty for battery. I do
empathize deeply with what law
enforcement experience.
the job they bravely placed
themselves in danger to perform
their duties. But unlike the
average person, there is an
expectation that they may
counter batteries more
regularly, and the law protects
them equally, not less, as
civilians.
It is a crime to batter a peace
officer, and it's actually
prosecuted very frequently, but
increasing the penalty will not
have a deterrent because charges
often arise in the heat of a
moment during an arrest and are
not planned. And I understand
also that deterrence is not the
only goal of the bill.
There has been a little a lot of
discussion about shooting an
officer is the example of
aggravated battery, and that
carrying only 3 years, and I do
just as a matter of law to push
back on that a little.
First of all, if you shoot an
officer and the evidence
supports it, that conduct could
be charged to attempted murder,
and it also would qualify for
sentencing aggravation and
firearm enhance enhancements
that would make that much more
than 3 years. There's also no
requirement of the battery
charge needs to be dismissed to
pursue federal charges, so I
don't, I, I can't explain why
that happened. And it is also um
can be designated as a serious
violent offense so that people
have to deserve the whole.
time
By the same token, as I do
believe it can carry much more
than 3 years in scenarios. This
statute addresses a lot of
different situations and not all
aggravated batteries involve
shooting.
So the legislation, I believe,
overlooks the complex sentencing
scheme that allows that
flexibility,
but it's also important to
understand that aggravated
battery can include situations
where there's no harm at all. If
a deadly weapon and quote
unquote is used which can
include a shoe under our
her tea.
It doesn't matter if any injury
occurs if it's used in a
dangerous manner. And so we want
to make sure that we're not
painting all aggravated matters
with one brush because of these
very serious situation. We rely
on judges to use the tools that
they have in the complex
sentencing scheme we have to
treat lesser batteries, more
leniently and to really punish
those folks who do the more
serious crime. I don't know why
I always dropped in the case.
being discussed today, but the
tools are there in the statute,
and the law doesn't need to
change to address it. So we do
ask the committee to oppose Hale
103 and um keep people the laws
that we have in place as the
tools we have available. Thank
you so much.
Thank you.
Go to the audience and those in
support, go ahead.
We do 10 people.
And
You can
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Manna Gutierrez. I'm a
major with uh New Mexico State
police. Again, thank you for
allowing me some time to make
some remarks in support of this
legislation. DPS supports these
critical changes to New Mexico's
criminal code.
This builds a vital step in
enhancing protections for peace
officers who face significant
risks while serving our
communities.
By increasing the penalty for
aggravated battery popes
officers to a 2nd degree felony,
and cases involving grape bo
bodily harm, the use of a deadly
weapon, or actions likely to
cause death, we send a clear
message that such violent acts
will not be tolerated.
The current penalty for
aggravated battery upon a peace
officer is the same as for any
other member of the public.
Which is not consistent.
of the law that
Which normally include
Penalty when committed against a
police officer. DPS believes it
is critical for crimes against
officers to have an enhancement
because individuals who commit
those offenses are showing the
highest level of disregard.
And often pose the most
significant threats of safety to
the general public.
The stricter penalties,
including the longer statute of
limitations, a heightened basic
sentence, and an increased fine
reflect the gravity of these
events in line with the severity
of harm inflicted.
Um, Madam Chair, members of
committee, thank you for your
time.
Madam Chair, it's
we're gonna keep it one minute
since we have so many people.
Madam of the JD Bullington with
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. Uh, you just heard
that a common slogan of law
enforcement is to serve and
protect, and that's exactly what
our law enforcement officers do
every day. They run towards
danger in order to protect us.
The least we can do is provide
them the maximum support and
protection under the law.
Practical terms of this bill is
that
statute of limitations for
prosecution has increased from 5
to 6 years. The basics and and
the potential fine is raised
from 5000 to $10,000 and we need
to send a signal that assaulting
a police officer is a serious
offense. It should be a punished
accordingly. I also want to make
up just a personal comment.
There are hundreds of videos on
YouTube now.
Of encounters with law
enforcement officers. They're
bitten, they're kicked, spit on,
and a lot of times these
situations start off slowly,
they continue to escalate.
These videos are disturbing,
they're shocking, and they're
absolutely unbelievable.
And in most of these instances
that you can see a law
enforcement officers are
constantly giving the citizen
that they're detaining warnings
not to escalate the situation
that happens anyway. The chamber
strongly supports this bill.
Thank you. My name is Sergeant
Rachel Desenza Smith of the
Farmington Police Department. I
stand for you today as a mother,
a daughter, a sister, a wife,
and a police officer. On the
morning of May 15, 2023, I
responded to an active shooter
call. I immediately knew there
was active killing taking place.
As I rushed to the scene, I
mentally prepared myself to face
the threat and the threat, and
my son to lose his mother the
day after Mother's Day. Without
hesitation, I and 4 other
officers ran towards danger to
protect our community.
We ran past to disease and in
community members to face the
cause of the carnage. There were
plenty of regular citizens on
the scene standing in their
doorways with firearms that did
not engage this subject.
I was shot twice by 2 rounds,
which had already fragmented
because they had struck a chain
link fence and the pavement
before they struck me.
I know this because I now have
hundreds of pieces of metal and
rocks permanently embedded in
both my thighs, buttocks, and
pelvis. I initially fell when I
was struck.
As my officers continue to
advance forward, I attempted to
rise to run forward and fell
hard again onto the pavement. I
had suffered a fracture in my
pelvis and could not hold my own
weight.
That day changed my life. I
suffered a fractured pubic bone,
a left knee sprain, a torn
rotator cuff, and I was covered
in shrapnel from my knees to my
pelvis. The carnage was so bad
the ER staff thought I had been
shot with a shotgun. As a result
of this incident, I began long
frustrating battle with
workman's comp to receive needed
medical care, and I now live
with lifelong gynecological
complications, severe nerve
pain, hearing loss, tinnitus,
PTSD, anxiety and depression. I
was unable to walk unassisted
for months. The physical,
emotional
and financial toll this has
been, has been overwhelming, and
this has been a life sentence. I
will serve indefinitely.
Despite these challenges, I
continue to serve as a patrol
sergeant. This is not just my
job, it is my calling. I am not
alone in this dedication across
New Mexico, approximately 3000
sworn officers share this
unwavering commitment to protect
and serve our communities,
regardless of the personal risk
involved. Every officer who is
seriously injured in the line of
duty endures a life altering
long sentence. It is only just
that those who commit such acts
face appropriately extended
sentences. The individuals who
harm officers do not only affect
us, they impact our families and
our communities.
I did not hesitate to face
danger for the safety of others.
I ask you now, please do not
hesitate to pass this bill.
Stand with those who stand
before you, protect those who
protect you, passing HB 103 will
demonstrate the sacrifices made
by men and women behind the
badge are recognized and valued.
Thank you.
Madam Chair Representatives, my
name is Miguel Timman. I'm the
president of IFF Local 244,
proud firefighter. Uh, I want to
thank the sponsor, the
co-sponsors, I want to thank,
uh, my brothers in blue, um,
for, for their, their testimony,
the courage to tell their story.
Um, there's just a lack of rep
uh respect amongst civilians
with people in uniform. So as a
firefighter, I share this. We
see it every single day. I think
this is an excellent bill that
just helps put a little bit more
weight, uh, into the
public's eye on, on how to treat
people in uniform. So for those
reasons, we urge your support
for House 103. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation.
40,000.
In every corner of the state and
private public sector, uh,
including those uh of our state
and municipal workers who
represent uh corrections
officers. Uh, we very much thank
the sponsors for bringing this
forward. This is a serious
issue, and you've heard um some
really powerful stories today.
So all I could say is is that we
all stand united in our uh in
our own wavering support of this
bill, and we hope that you will
as well. Thank you.
Next
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is uh Deputy
Chief Ben Valdez with the Slice
Department. I want to thank you
for this opportunity to address
this House bill that we're
requesting that you do pass.
Just based on the testimony from
the two officers today that were
injured in the line of duty, and
from my perspective on how we're
trying to recruit and retain
talented, dedicated public
servants in our profession.
We're not only recruiting them
or recruiting their family as
well.
And what did we tell their
family when they ask us, are
they going to be protected?
Some folks may not think that
this legislation will send a
clear message, but I do.
They'll let folks know that if
you commit aggravated battery on
a police officer, there will be
consequences.
And that word will get around to
folks when they have to do real
time and be accountable for
their actions.
I ask that you support this, and
again.
We just have to show that we
appreciate and we're willing to
protect those that protect us.
When we make that call for help.
These are the folks that are
stepping up, no matter what that
call is.
Members of the public are not
required to do so.
But the 5 men and women in law
enforcement are required to do
so. Thank you.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, my name is Benjamin
Baker. I have the privilege of
working for our governor, and
I'm going to spend my time today
thanking the sponsors, thanking
the brave men and women who have
offered their testimony, and I'm
gonna spend it reminding this
committee, um, as it deliberates
it's very important work related
to this, but I spent a couple of
years being the de facto curator
at the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academies, uh,
campus, which is where we we
house the memorial to New Mexico
law enforcement officers.
Killed in the line of duty. It's
significant and sobering because
at that responsibility, I get to
host the induction of the names
and inscribing the brave men and
women's names on the walls who
have paid the ultimate price.
During that time, I had the
privilege of hosting over 100
dignitaries via the State
Department.
Judges and legislators from all
over the planet.
And they asked me, Ben, why are
there so many names, 220 men's
and women's names are inscribed
upon that wall. The vast
majority of them have been
murdered in the line of duty.
Um, one of those people on that
wall is one of my family
members. Um, many of you have
visited many members of the
committee have visited that
place. Please keep the memory of
your visualization of our
memorial to these men and women,
uh, in your mind while you're
deliberating and debating this
important piece of legislation
and think about
What would New Mexico's
aggravated battery against a
police officer wall need to
encompass in the way of acreage
by way of comparison. Please, we
urge your support on House Bill
103, and thank you very much for
your time.
Madam Chair committee uh
Christopher Williams, the chief
of police in Portales, and I
mean, really, I'll keep it
short.
I get the echo everyone's
sentiments.
Years ago I had the.
Unfortunate opportunity to be.
That supervisor going to a house
to tell someone that their loved
one had been shot.
We had an officer engaged in a
foot pursuit.
Ambushed as he comes around the
corner by the subject he's
fleeing from with brass knuckles
in his hands.
Putting scars on his head that
he still has today and disarms
him and shoots his.
Chattering his femur.
With his own firearm.
Few years later he's paroled
last year commits a homicide.
In our community, they're not
going to respect law
enforcement. They're not going
to respect anyone else we would
absolutely support.
Thank you. Is there anyone on
Zoom?
OK
Larry Santa.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members, Larry Sontag
here representing the New Mexico
Business Coalition. We stand in
strong support of HD 103, which
seeks to enhance penalties for
battery on a peace officer.
Beyond that, this is personal
for me, having served 20 years
with the Albuquerque Police
Department and treated at the
hospital several times myself,
for the line of duty injuries.
The role of police officer has
become increasingly perilous.
The fact underscored by our
annual heroes banquet where we
honor law enforcement officers
and first responders who have
tragically lost their lives in
service.
The shortage of police officers
in Albuquerque and statewide is
alarming. Recruiting and
retention have become more
complicated by legislation
removing qualified immunity,
leading officers vulnerable for
personal liability. While HP 103
doesn't fix that. It does send a
crucial message of support to
our officers.
On a personal note, I want to
say how offensive it is to know
that my tax dollars are being
used to fund a public defender
lobbyists who relays a presumed
occurrence of officers going to
be battered more often than
others, and that laws applying
to everyone are good enough.
Officers who run towards the
bullets are not average.
I urge this committee to vote
yes on House Bill 103 to show
our officers that they are
valued and to deter those who
would harm them with the promise
of serious legal consequences.
Thank you.
Did you wish to say anything
else? I'll stand for questions.
OK, thank you. Um, we'll go
first to the committee,
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you.
It was a very emotional
testimony.
Very interesting in my life. I
was just minding my own
business.
Activist
No intention to run for office.
And I find myself here.
And some of my very best friends
have law enforcement officers.
Matter of fact, I have a retired
APD that works on my campaign.
Just bought a German shepherd
from uh Farmington.
Deputy sheriff out there stayed
at his house.
I have hung out at the FOP. I've
heard all of your stories.
Repeatedly
And
The story that I hear most often
is that.
You know, we're just trying to
do our job.
We like the legislation.
I heard that repeatedly.
Um
My friend, I brought this up for
my friend Jeremy Vaughan was
shot in the neck and went to
Justin's hair's funeral, so you
guys have envelope my life in
such a way that when you tell
these stories, it's nothing new.
Sadly
I've heard these stories.
I've heard the stories of
The people that do aggravated
assault.
Against law enforcement.
Officers have no respect for
life.
They have no respect for anyone.
I've heard what they have done.
I've heard how they have beaten
up police officers. I've heard
how they've.
Attack them
With no regard whatsoever to
their lives.
I've heard them say that.
Some of them you they can tell
that their intent is to kill
them, to kill you, you can get.
special type of person.
A day to day person that you're
pulling over and.
You're giving them a ticket or
you question them. These are
people who
Have the intent.
To harm you if not kill you.
See you shaking your head
because you know that what I'm
saying is it's from the stories
that I echo from all of the law
enforcement. My friends are now
sheriffs and deputy sheriffs.
Police officers.
State police and Pueblo police.
And I hear them repeatedly.
So I think it's time for us to.
Give back and say we're gonna
pass something that is no,
that's not punishing law
enforcement officers, but saying
we respect and we understand.
What you go through.
And we will, uh, the only other
thing I have to say is I, I
looked up. I want to see what
other states.
Have 2nd degree for assault in
Colorado, our neighbor that we
often mimic.
And a lot of bills that they
passed Colorado is one of those.
States that has 2nd degree.
assault. So I believe that we
should honor you.
Say we hear you.
As this bill forward. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we had
represented block but.
Well
Oh, great.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
saw a constituent right outside
and I apologize for that. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
first of all just want to say.
How I completely support your
legislation.
At least in my county, and my
community, we've had many
instances of law enforcement
officers who've been targeted.
And I've attended too many
funerals of law enforcement
officers.
And I do not want that to ever
happen again.
And I do want to at least make a
point.
In state statute, Madam Chair
and Representative.
And experts
That New Mexico
Gives
A message to bad actors.
That there are consequences,
your actions.
And I don't think that's a
radical position. I don't think
that that's something that's off
the wall, because we have men
and women who leave their
families every day.
And every day their family is
praying that they hear that
Velcro at the end of the day.
That they know that their
mother.
Their father
Your uncle.
Their aunt, whoever it is, is
coming back home.
Safely.
And so in in Ottawa County, we,
we worked very hard to honor.
Our law enforcement officers
every year we have a banquet
with the local law enforcement
officer association, and we
support every single branch,
everywhere.
Local county
We even have border patrol there
because every single law
enforcer.
They put their life on the line
and I'm sick and darn tired of.
Our state statutes.
Being on the side of these
lawless hooligans.
Who do not care.
About the safety of you guys,
they don't care about their,
their own safety, to be honest
with you.
A lot of these people, they,
they are revolving door in our
justice system and it just, oh,
it just, just triggers me, so,
so heavily, Madam Chair and
representative, because I love
so many law enforcement officers
that I've, I have some that are
in my family.
I have some that are very good
friends of mine. And that
includes folks here in the
capital who protect us every
single day from people who, who
want to kill myself and other
people because, because there's
just crazy, horrible people out
there. And I feel like.
This is the least we could do
and it's aggravated battery.
We're not talking about, you
know, throwing, throwing a piece
of gum on the, on the ground or
something. This is aggravated
battery toward a police officer
that's going to inevitably.
Kill people or
Armed them irreparably for the
rest of their life. So,
I guess I don't really have any
questions, but I'm very
passionate about this bill and
I, I keep on going. I, I
probably will say something I
shouldn't, so.
Well I have dear. Thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
representative uh Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
sponsors and to all of the
testimony that was provided
today by our law enforcement
around the state. I really
appreciate you being here. It's
Extremely powerful, um.
Your stories and what you do,
um.
As a sister of a law
enforcement, um,
agent, it's it I something you
said, um, sergeant really
resonated with me of the
constant worry and sleepless
nights, it's uh.
Absolutely, um, what you are
endeavoring to every single day.
We thank you for your service
and for your work, um.
And what you enter into and what
we ask you to do to serve and
protect us. Um, I'm sorry that
Madam Chair Representative,
we've, I think, had to address
this numerous times, it's passed
through this committee numerous
times, this statute specifically
to try to get it in line with um
other statutes, um, and we have
failed to pass it as a
legislature. Um.
So I, I hope that this is the
year, Madam Chair
Representative, um, that.
You know, gives the due cause
and respect to what we're trying
to do here. Um, and I know this
house has supported that year
after year after year.
Um, so I hope that as we
continue to make progress with
this, that you feel protected by
the folks that serve you in this
legislature, um, and that we
stand together to, to try to
make this make sense for you as
well.
Um, so, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you again for those that
provided testimony and for your
ongoing service and um we thank
you, Madam Chairman, you pass.
We have
Ocean for do pass and a second.
Take roll call Representative
Block.
Yes. Representative Lord, yes.
Representative Ramiro.
Representative Thompson, Madam
Boyer.
Yeah. Yes.
Madam.
Yes.
Um, on a vote of 6 to 0, you
have a due pass for House Bill
103.
That's a record.
