Thank you for this day for being
our shield in our battle against
all the evil in the address in
this world lord help us to let
To love others as you love us in
your son Jesus name we pray
amen.
It will Representative Jones
please leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Representative little leaders in
the pledge The New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Good morning Mr speaker.
Good morning.
Good to see all of the working
with the reading this morning
committee reports other
and Bentley you Representative
Lord thank you Mr speaker and
good morning Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial twenty five be removed
from the speakers table will be
final passage has been taken it
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the
memorial thank you Mr speaker
Sir today's foster care day
members who work tirelessly day
after day to improve outcomes
for states most vulnerable
individuals the children
involved in abuse and neglect
proceedings I want to take a
moment to think economic
for children and families and
lawyers who work tirelessly to
provide quality legal
representation specially the
frontline workers who work day
in and day out to support our
children and families all of us
families we often like to say it
takes a village to raise our
kids and I would like to
introduce our guest today on the
floor if you would stand to
It is to do.
And their teacher miss Lin
Vasco.
involved in the student council
and they're also all four
involved in the northern New
Mexico student council this
group of young leaders have
taken on improving foster care
New Mexico as our senior project
and provided a host to foster
items that I've worked so hard
to collect and let's give them a
round of applause please.
Thank you can be seated and we
yes Representative Lord CYFD
representatives foster family so
that you can be recognized.
takes a village list of our
families we're proud to honor
their work and without a stand
for questions thank you ladies
are debate on house memorial
twenty five.
Please read the memorial that is
right thank you to lady click to
read.
care day in the house of
representatives were as hundreds
of New Mexicans service state
and its children as resource
families to traditional foster
opportunities stability and in
many instances the opportunity
to be children without the
burden of adulterous
possibilities and whereas
children in foster care rely on
their futures and to believe in
the power of their dreams Anne's
whereas.
Resource families open their
homes hearts and lives to
adopted by the resource families
that have offered those children
love support and nurturing and
we're as resource families
advocates and providers find a
whereas resource families
advocates and providers
selflessly Bisto opportunities
for educational emotional mental
and physical growth to the
children in their care so that
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
Wednesday March first two
thousand twenty three be
declared foster care day in the
for the children of New Mexico
be treated with dignity and
respect and be appreciated for
the great service they provide
to their altruism and love.
present voted in the affirmative
it's been a motion to show all
members of the house present and
voting in the affirmative seeing
no objection it is so ordered
will final passage of house
A vote.
Of.
By a vote of seven in the
affirmative during the negative
house memorial twenty five has
duly passed this house.
Is the gentleman from of that
memorial seventy six be removed
from the speakers table and Be
made the next order of business
no objection it is so ordered
that the record reflect that
elections are for placing House
memorial seventy six on final
to pro claim March first as the
Irish American day at the house
of representatives and I know
I've gotten the question a lot
that where we doing this on
March first in on March
seventeenth which is St
little history of this days so
March is the first time in
nineteen ninety one the
president of the United States
declared in March as Irish
American heritage month ever
descent in our great state and
those include folks that are
both famous and infamous
including Billy the kid and
Georgia o'keefe who are of Irish
American descent so we've been
look forward to the debate Mr
speaker right would you like to
memorial regional in yes please
block Duncan Martinez lord and
Mason correction of
Representative Allen Martinez a
memorial declaring March first
States and where as the story of
Irish Americans has always been
one of strength and perseverance
through adversity and where as
many Irish immigrants arrived on
of New Mexico residents claim
Irish heritage and where as many
Irish Americans have made
impacts on New Mexico culture
And whereas Henry McCarty also
known as Billy the kid also born
to Irish parents has roots in
Lincoln and Chavis counties and
was later buried at fort Sumner
and orphanage and St Elizabeth
shelter for the homeless both
still in service today and
whereas Georgia o'keefe the
mother of American modernism was
three be declared Irish American
day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that this state
be a celebration of all Irish
Americans and their
contributions to the nation's
Is there debate on the memorial
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Duncan thank you
Mr speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman.
I'm sure I got a lot of other
things as well and I know I did
from our but I under that part
of my heritage thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen this
for the debate generated from
tourism but only here
for adoption and you find your
do and it's very interesting to
find out the things I thought it
was more Irish but section more
Scottish but do a little bit of
sprinkling Irish and there so I
appreciate that on on St
Patrick's day we're gonna do
Thank you Mr speaker of my court
does not extend only nor will
the the gentleman yield speaker
I yield to the gentle lady from
am my mother a mother's father
my grandfather's from his first
generation
Irishman a who met my
grandmother who is a native of
Santa Fe Santa Fe and they met
have a a national Irish caucus
and we will be inviting you and
all others to join as well so I
stand in and rise in support of
bringing this forward is the
gentle person from Bernalillo
and Sandoval Representative
Kate's thank you very much Mr
speaker does the gentle person
from whatever yield I yield
Kathleen Mary ever asked to put
on this bill.
Mr speaker thank you it was such
late notice I try to get to as
many folks as I could but I had
no idea you were you were of
the Jennifer Terry yield I
certainly you thank you Mr
chairman for bringing this
forward
my wife her family's all from
processes and and and a dominant
genes and you you know you do
that'll experiments and you
figure out you know there's
essentially twenty five percent
of the turnout recessive so one
and gentleman thank you for
bringing this to four there's a
gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell Mr speaker
will the gentleman from of
terror yield please I yield to
the gentle lady from Chavis.
out and it's inherited my dad
was known whenever the CB radios
were all the rage and for many
Elizabeth I believe it was in
the list of merry's goes on and
on and on we're also from a long
line of priest and nuns that
little bit of Scottish and day
nation native American mixed in
there but like I said the red
here does come out and it is
true about the temper part of
that Mr speaker thank you very
going Katrin to debate the
memorial.
Mr speaker was a standing but
since you called me out this may
he Connell has have the.
see leprechauns running the of
Meredith on I saw the New River
turned green I saw green beer I
I think some green beer it was a
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield I yield.
Mr speaker I did one just rise
and support of of this bill
little bit of everything run
around here and.
By heritage I don't know we're
all afraid to look to see where
we came from with that I might
Developing the western lands of
they were the workers.
For the railroad and for
everything they they truly came
to America.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
to stand up I'm part Irish but
my husband is mostly Irish and I
can be married to him because
both came to America raised a
huge family and I just have to
say what of his daughter's just
died she was a hundred and ten
country until she died this last
December so I just want to pay a
little tribute to that very
special Irish woman thank you.
Santos sorry about my life but I
did so the doing from countries
had a score of an in service and
once wrote thank you Mr speaker
will the gentleman yield a yield
back far into the land now I
married in Armstrong which is
very Irish as well so proud to
be an American proud to be here
and none of us can control how
we were born where we were born
or what we're born into but I I
stand in support of your
memorial as I stood in support
of several other so thank you Mr
yield thank you I had to stand
in support because I do have
some Irish in my blood and and
and it shows and I am along with
the representative of from Santa
was born with red hair but I
have several red heads in my
family so it definitely runs in
the family and it is something
I'm very partial to red heads
what I but I wanted to stand and
Representative well he's not
anymore they don't really over
there they don't really unless
you're in Dublin the smaller
towns we went they don't do the
Yeah so in celebration for you
as I stand in celebration thank
you Gillian I think I can tell
the story of my wife now I
believe her great great
grandmother was Irish in New
there is a great brigade of US
soldiers that defected fought
with the Mexicans because of the
shared Catholic faith in the rid
of the cell but these very grade
close thank you Mr speaker
before I close I just wanted to
tell everybody I brought all the
members some cookies some St
Patrick's day kind of cookies
are in the the lounge and we
allowance and so Mister speaker
without that I now move that
house memorial seventy six do
now pass and I now ask unanimous
consent of the house of the
record show that the role has
been called in all members
present voted in the
affirmative.
open.
remind everybody that it is
higher education day and adult
education and literacy day and
in honor of the state I have to
students of the year are
stand Leah.
And
Leah Ellis came from hard
backgrounds she had every
opportunity to be success
half the half is on its way by
pursuing her high school
equivalency she broke through
the fear that bound her she has
learned that no one can take
Kerr Education away from her
a teacher we can give a round of
applause.
General Services departments
although shortly have to depart
and go back to his job he is co
enrolled at Santa Fe community
college in the ace program and
justice if we can.
And standing next to me R. two
teachers who nominated them
Claudia Lopez if you can stand
who's a literacy volunteer here
in Santa Fe.
And Mr speaker if you can
introduce our honorees of
partners in the gallery
We have Leah Ellis's fiance Troy
Lujan.
Troilo on.
Welcome to the house.
four H. youth development
students from what that'll
County Kelly knight and Kaylee
Gillespie please rise to be
recognized.
joining Representative Vincent
on this day.
Any other announcements
gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker I go to that or we go
it to pass an answer for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair.
Well as opposed may because of a
committee reported opted.
Mr speaker your consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill four thirty two
federal committee putting House
Energy Environment natural
resources committee substrate
for House before thirty two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye those opposed a the eyes
referred Senate bill sixty four
as amended has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation of do pass and
then for to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Well the supposedly the as of a
committee report opted.
Mr speaker consumer Public
Affairs Committee too much been
referred Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
health of public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four as amended.
production we are not option of
a federal committee report of
the Senate Judiciary Committee
subset percent health and public
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill eighty four as
house bill two sixty seven has
had it under consideration point
of recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
directly and the chair.
Yes CENIC reported I'm sorry.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to is been
referred house bill three sixty
six has had it under
consideration of our state with
recommendation that do pass
Yes I'm a committee board opted.
Mr speaker taxation revenue
committee to is been referred
house bill three eighty nine has
house with three eighty nine of
the severity of this.
Posibles may be as of a good
productive.
respectfully submitted directly
at the chair Mr speaker
production.
It optimal to reporters of the
bill Senate bill forty seven as
She gently go back to
announcements please Mr speaker
I move we go to that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous business
innovation is so ordered folks
you got a few more guest to
introduce in the gallery we've
right and leading a great please
rise to be recognized.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of Business third reading
of legislation to no objection
it is so ordered is a gentle
lady from belly here
Representative about the way it
already an item number twelve.
record reflect that election is
replacing house with three sixty
five as amended on final passage
has been taken it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the ability to
explain the bill thank you very
much Mr speaker I'm excited to
resource which the department of
energy rates New Mexico as
number six in this resource
potential we believe that while
the sun does not always shine
renewable power to back the more
intermittent sources of solar
and wind and with that Mr
speaker we stand for questions
related to close yes Mr speaker
amended the vote is now open.
Was about to close.
like not a problem.
All right.
and colleagues the gentleman
from been a usable in the
committee supporters eleven is
here Representative that C. R.
has been taken and it is now
subject to debate amendment for
substitution the gentleman to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker related to the driver's
license required the motor
Renewals with that Mr speaker I
would like to yield to Michael
sponsor Representative Harper
elevens.
Thank you Mr speaker so what
this bill does is a risk brings
Driver's license.
Information from this clearing
house
and this is to make sure that
folks that have a CDL are are
meeting the requirements of that
in federal funds to the state
and with that we stand for
questions there is a delay from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
our standards in line because of
the extreme penalty that the was
just described I had I I just
lot all those prescribed
medication.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think of commercial driver's
license it's a federal law that
you could not have drugs in your
Mr speaker and gentleman but
what about I wasn't even going
very at what what about
Other.
Of the lady will refer to my
actual witness Jennifer was on
the one thank you Mr speaker and
I miss you all on mention of a
B. T. Mrs Ollis and the time.
This bill does not actually
change any of that all this does
is say that we have to reference
Mr speaker and both general and
I appreciate the information I I
just hope at some point we have
enough
Evidence.
That people can use that and Dr
I knew I had a client in one
case who was
commercial driver's license and
it was an issue for him to fire
his doctors to use some other
alternatives so that you know it
really a big deal because that's
a fairly
Good way to support your family
both gentleman seen for the
debate the gentleman to close
gentlemen to close thank you Mr
speaker I move I now move that
house bill construction that is
answer in the negative house
bill two sixty nine as amended
has only passes house.
Is a gentleman from Colfax
wanted any of us and again
amendment or substitution the
gentleman to explain the bill
thank you Mr speaker.
Currently crashes that resulted
injury or the death of a person
or damage to property of five
thousand dollars on average
there are about forty four
thousand motor vehicle crash
report submitted by law
enforcement to the DOT.
These include property damage
personal injury and fatality
recommends the following special
for all professionals to be set
at a thousand dollars more.
Mr speaker I'm ready for
questions if there are any
billing would you be so kind as
Thank you guys.
Thank you for being here today
gentleman closed sorry Mr
speaker I thought everyone was
Franklin but a
Mr speaker I move that hospital
Is.
affirmative there in the native
house bill two seventy one has
duly passed this house gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Gentleman from Santa Clarita and
San Juan Representative thank
you Mr speaker thank you members
of the House good afternoon have
a special announcement today
this act he's very special day
Andrea Romero it is her birthday
today.
And I'll be happy to lead us
and Happy Birthday song.
In the from Santa Fe and the
gentleman from the road to
saying.
The year chairwoman.
Elite from Bernalillo Mr speaker
point of personal privilege.
I I don't think the Happy
Birthday song should be sung
like a dirge.
Representative Townsend Mr
speaker at a point of personal
privilege teacher point I'm
asking that the speaker set up a
committee to find the people who
could sing it only let them
sing.
Announcements prime members so
there is one provided by
andpercent of the day it was
announced that a house commerce
will meet at one thirty in room
one thirty in room three oh nine
members to consult.
Gentleman from Indiana thank you
Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at one
thirty in room three zero seven
second committee dinner since I
was six the first time because
we may be on the floor just give
your orders to us and you can
take the food and bring it back
announcements delay from Thomas
Mr speaker your house rural
development and land grants and
cultural first we will be
meeting tomorrow morning at nine
AM number signal delay from
Santa Fe thank you speaker we
those that are planning to
participate please join us thank
you members techno super
important that we keep the
trophy in this chamber members
Mr speaker I move house stand in
recess until five PM today March
first twenty twenty three
present March members will see
