Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rest for today's
invocation led by
The gentle lady from.
Sandoval and percent of kids.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Let's take a moment and just be
able to reflect upon our
gratitude today. Heavenly
Father, thank you so much for
giving us this opportunity to be
able to serve our community and
our constituents.
Please help us in making our
decision.
That will support our community,
protect.
Our first responders.
In our military amen from
Burresentative Nicole Chavez
with the Pledge of Allegiance.
Young lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lujan with the
pledge to New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Well.
lady from Santa Fe. Happy
Monday, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. So no objection. It is
so order happy Monday everybody.
Happy Monday, everybody.
Oh. There you go. Thank you,
gentlemen.
You know what's up
Any announcements, gentle lady
from Berlio. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I'd like the house to
help me welcome James Hernandez.
He's a student at UNM, um,
pursuing business administration
and tech kind of things, um, in
addition, he's the president of
the UNM College Democrats as
well as the National Committee
man for the Young Democrats of
New Mexico. He is currently a
student data analyst at UNM
Center for Geospatial and
Population studies where he
does.
data analysis aimed at informing
public safety officials,
legislators, and state agencies.
He hopes to pursue a career in
technology and cybersecurity and
plans to get a master's degree
in cybersecurity and he's also a
constituent, so can we please
welcome James? He'll be with me
all week.
Welcome to the house.
Remembers, I failed to think our
distinguished guest on the floor
who helped us lead the Pledge of
Allegiance. These are young
people, young scholars from the
Albuquerque Sign Language
Academy, thank you all for
providing us with that beautiful
rendition of the Pledge.
And welcome to the house.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Rio Reba, Sandoval.
And
All those other beautiful
counties.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I'm
so happy to tell the house not
only is it Happy Monday, it's
Espanola day at the Capitol.
And
For those of you who don't know,
I thought you might like a
little history about Espanol.
It's pretty amazing. I just want
you to know the Espinola Valley
lies along the Rio Grande and
has been settled for nearly 1000
years, beginning with the Towa
people who lived there hundreds
of years before the arrival of
Spanish in 1598, the Espinola
Valley encompasses the centuries
old pueblos of Santa Clara and
Okeow Winge, whose people
nurtured the land long before.
the arrival of the European
settlers.
Following
The 1882 arrival of the Denver
and Rio Grande Western Railroad
affectionately known to those
locals as the chili line, the
area was replaited and organized
under the name La Espinola.
The city of Espinola was
incorporated in 1925 and this
year they're celebrating their
100th anniversary as a city.
Diversity is honored and
supported in the Espignola
Valley where the strong roots of
Native American and Hispanic
societies contribute to the rich
cultural history found
throughout New Mexico today, the
city of Espanola and the
counties of Rio Reed in Santa Fe
represents significant
contributions to the cultural
linguistic and religious
diversity of the Southwestern
United States and in the 1980s
and we can't exactly pinpoint
the date. It was declared the
low rider.
capital of the world.
And Mr. Speaker.
I would like to uh introduce
some guests we have on the
platform and I would like to
introduce each of them and hold
your applause and then we'll
give them all a round of
applause after I'm done, OK?
First of all, Mayor John Ramon
V. Hill.
And we have Mayor Pro Tem Peggy
Sue Martinez.
We have counselor Felicia
Archuleta Toya. We have
councilor Pedro Valdez. We have
counselor Aaron Salazar,
counselor Nanette Rodriguez and
counselor Sam Lee.
Also joining us today on the
platform are fire chief Johnny
Martinez and our chief of
police, um, Michel Garcia.
And I'd like the body to know
these are really a hard gripping
work of counselors and city
councilors and mayor and all the
people we have a great city in
Espinola. They work hard to do
whatever they can to develop the
economic development of the
region and to serve their
citizens as as well as they can
and thank you Mr. Speaker, with
that, I, I stand.
Thank you, gentlemen from
Colfax Mota Rio Riva, San Miguel
Dealospresentative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also
stand in excitement for today.
I think uh it's well known that,
and I'm proud to be uh from the
Espanola Valley born and raised,
I graduated from Espanola Valley
High School. I just, uh, I wanna
welcome my friends who are on
the rostrum myself and uh just
how proud I am to be from that
area. There's a lot of culture,
a lot of talented people, and,
uh, people with the biggest
heart hearts in the state, so,
uh, I just wanna say today is an
exciting day. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen,
generally from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I would like
to echo those sentiments and,
and stand in support of.
our uh wonderful days to
celebrate Espanola. My family
also heralds from the beautiful
valley and I want to say thank
you for all the work that you do
there to all of our local
government and officials and I
just wanna say I'm proud, uh,
proud family that I have there
and also a special mention,
although he's not here on the
rostrum today is my brother. He
is the city manager of Espinola
Eric Lujan, and he's uh over at
the Senate in the Senate chamber
right now, and I want to say I'm
just very proud of.
the work that he's doing and the
work that Espinola is doing and
working with all of us here
thank you and happy Espinola
Day.
Gentle lady from Vernon Lee,
Senator Borego.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
Representatives, um, I too want
to acknowledge the uh people
from Espinola that are sitting
up on the rostrum and just
welcome the mayor and the
councilors and everyone that's
here today, um, as, um, you
know, I spent much of my
childhood in Espanol until I was
about 17 years old and when I
moved to Albuquerque and I was
still a child when I moved, but
um I will say that Espinola is.
very near and dear to my heart,
kind of my second home, even
though it's really still my
home, um.
A lot of people don't know that
Espanola is served by Ria Riva
County and also Santa Fe County,
um, and what does the term
espanola mean it actually means
uh.
little Spain or Spain, um, or
depending on how you say it,
espanolita, um, which would be
Little Spain, um, and that's
because it was founded many,
many years ago.
First founded by our native uh
brothers and sisters, but then
when the Spanish arrived, they
also um imposed their flag on
there and so that's why it's
referred to as Little Spain.
Um, in growing up, Mr. Speaker,
and, and representatives. I
attended McCurdy Mission, which
was a Methodist school in
Espanola.
But there was a diverse
population and I think probably
what we call multicultural, um.
Anglo, black, native Spanish,
all of us living all together
and being perfectly happy, um,
and, you know, getting along.
Well, you know, has Rodney
Dangerfield used to say, why
can't we all just get along. Um,
but we were surrounded by our
native uh Pueblo, um, brothers
and sisters, and we all went to
school together and played
together and just enjoyed our
lives, um, Mr. Speaker, I will
just, um, also say that right
now there's some things that are
happening in Espinola that are
very concerning, and I'm gonna
just put them out there is um we
have a huge population.
of of drugs that have
infiltrated our small little
town and also um people that are
in need of behavioral health and
I just put that out there
because I, I, it worries me a
lot. My mom lives out there and,
um, you know, I see people
coming from, from other places
that we've never seen before
that are walking the streets and
so whatever helped this
legislature can give Espinola. I
ask for that. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Gentlemen from Sandoval
representative Martinez. Thank
you Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to
echo the sentiments
uh for my people from Espanola.
Um, I'm sure some of you know
that I grew up there, so I am a
product.
Of the West side.
I grew up right next to the
Lucero Center.
Um, but when I was younger and
uh people from my generation,
when they tell me they're from
Espanola, I always ask them one
thing, do you know where Curuco
town is?
Who knows about Cuco town?
Ruotan is the very west, the
south, south southwestern part
of Espanola.
And you had to be there to know
what was called Curuo Town.
There's dirt roads, sandy,
dusty, but boy we had fun
growing up.
Um, but I, I, I do have most of
my family that still lives
there, um, and they love it. I
go see my dad as often as I can.
Uh, lives right next to McCurdy
High School.
Although I went to the good
school Espanola Valley High.
I do want to congratulate
The people from New Mexico from
Espanola.
Because you're here because you
have a heart for Espanola.
I grew up with the chief.
I'm glad to see the chief there
because he has a heart and he
has ideas and he's gonna work
hard and he's building up that
police department and I'm very
proud to say that the chief is
my friend, so I'd like to
welcome everybody and anybody
here from Kuruco.
Here we go.
Hey, the chief, the chief has
some stories that he's gonna
share with me a little later.
Mr. Speaker, I, is there such
thing as plausible deniability?
You can always please the 5th, I
guess.
Gen lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Caviva
Espana
That's right. Um, I also am a
child of the beautiful Espanola
Valley. It's such an honor to
have you all here today, and
it's such an honor to represent
our beautiful valley. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, I grew up in Spana. Um,
it was really cool when we got
the 2nd Sonic so we could cruise
from one to the other.
That was like the life when I
was a kid and now Espanola has
had such beautiful growth
economically. My grandma and I
still go up to Freddie's to get
a burger,
um, on the weekends, um, there's
just so much going on there now
and it's been such a vibrancy
and a continued commitment to
seeing what children grow up in
and how our elders age well and
of course, just building a
beautiful workforce that people
so dedicated, um, that drive up
to the lab, that come to Santa
Fe, that have incredible
businesses in the valley.
that serve everyone in the
region as well, Mr. Speaker, and
of course with our gorgeous
pueblos all integrated into the
the beautiful city, um, it's
amazing to see how vibrant the
culture is, um, every single,
every single day, and everyone
in Espanola, I don't know, I
still wave to everybody on the
road. It's something that I've
been doing since I was a kid,
which I think is a bit stifling
to some, they're like, whoa,
she's waving at everybody and
that's just something I grew up
with in the Espanola Valley. I
love how friendly it is. It will
always
be the core of my heart and one
of the best reasons to serve
here in this, in this in this uh
building, Mr. Speaker, so thank
you and thank you to our
beautiful guests. I really
appreciate you and uh
Cavivasmana spana.
On this topic, gentle lady from
Donana Sierrasco representative
Dow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
just wanted to rise in support
of Espanola Day as well. Um, I
sat next to, I sit next to
Representative Herrera in uh
appropriations, and we talk a
lot about the small water
districts and the Esequiass, and
I, I just have to brag on Marcus
Valdez and all the team at the
Eastern Aribasarm Water
Conservation District, the
important work that they do with
the Ezequiass, the work that
they do on noxious weeds. I
don't know if anybody, any of
the supervisors or any, or
anyone is here from there.
Um, but also they're just a
model. If you're wanting to see
what a, a vibrant, healthy, um,
very high functioning sewer and
water district looks like, you
know, we have 47 in our state.
Uh, that's the one to go. They
leverage uh YCC and WIOA and
every, every pool of money that
we offer, they leverage and they
get work done and it's really
cool to see kids come in from
the community, work on an Ezea,
start working at the and Water
District become contractors, get
their.
degrees become range
managements, go to work at NRCS
or or um at NMDA and now their
leaders, you know, managing the
healthy soil projects and it
started with the very vibrant
salwa District at Eastern Rita.
So I enjoy having those
conversations with you and
having an area of strong
agreement, um, so thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
gentlemen from Valencia.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also
rise in support of Espanola Day,
uh, much of my dad's family
actually hails from Espanola, so
I spent many a week in the
summer visiting my great
grandparents, uh, which usually
ended up with us going to
Caliente and the race tracks out
here, Santa Fe Downs, and so,
uh, but more importantly, Mr.
Speaker, I welcome the uh the
guests on the rostrum, but I
have met the smartest group of
elementary schools, uh, students
since I've been here for 4
years, and the reason I kind of
it's so sad, Mr. Speaker, is
Just like with every group that
I meet, I asked him a little
civic lesson. I asked them if
they knew how many
representatives were in this
chamber and without hesitation
every single one said 70.
I asked him about the Senate and
they had no idea. So Mr.
Speaker, they, they know who
does the work in New Mexico, so
I recognize a few of them up
there in the chamber, so I
wanna, I wanna recognize that
bright uh group of, I think
they're 5th graders from, uh,
elementary school in Espanol.
Very good. Welcome to the house.
And I'll to add my uh gratitude
to, to this celebration mayor
and councilors and, uh, first
responders, thank you for being
here and for all the good work
that you do, uh, Espanola and
the Espanola Valley are uh truly
some of the most beautiful uh
land in, in the world, and I
think that the people reflect
that beauty, um, so thank you
and and I'm glad that you guys
are here and uh stay with the
house. Don't go to the Senate.
This is way funner, uh, but.
In any event, welcome to the
house, gentlemen from Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, like
I always like to say,
All roads lead to Espanola.
And so my granddad is from
Espanola. My great granddad was
from Santa Cruz and my cousin is
the mayor of Espanola.
And so I got a lot of family up
in Espaniola and I love all of
them, so God bless Espanola, Mr.
Speaker. Espana.
Anyone else?
Alright. Thank you guys for
being here. Welcome to the
house. Announcements.
gentle lady from Bernillo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, so
today is, as I like to say, my
favorite day at the legislature.
Why? Because it is aerospace Day
at the Roundhouse. So, thank
you.
There are a lot of great
aerospace folks and people and
corporations up in the rotunda,
um, all of you should have some
cool little aviation division
bags from DOT, um, I also wanted
to give a shout out to the
National Aerospace State
Association are very lieutenant
Governor Haley Morales is a part
of that, um, association.
They're having a dinner this
evening, come hang out with all
the aerospace, egghead nerds
like me and um we always have.
a great time and we tell some
pretty good space jokes. Um, so
that's the first announcement I
had. 2nd announcement, um, Mr.
Speaker, many of you may have
seen, um, all of these wonderful
kids and folks over here on the
left on the bench, they are from
the um Albuquerque Sign Language
Academy.
Thank you. Yeah.
And they were helping uh sign
the um Pledge of Allegiance
today. So just a little bit
about them. The ASL provides an
innovative dual language,
non-residential educational
model, which is inclusive of all
children and respectful of the
family unit.
They welcome and encourage and
educate all kids in an accepting
and compassionate environment
and use ASL as a key component
to learning and engaging with
one another. So thank you ASL
for being here and um go enjoy
space stuff today, people, it's,
it's a fun day to be in the in
the roundhouse.
Thank you gentle lady and thank
you to the Albuquerque Sign
Language Academy once again for
joining us, uh, incredible,
incredible treasure here in our
state. Uh, gentle lady from
Donana Sierra and Socorro
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and I also want to
rise just to acknowledge
Aviation Day and District 38 is
home of the New Mexico
Spaceport. and so we're happy to
see the director of the
Spaceport here and other members
from the new aerospace industry,
uh, which is one of the fastest
growing industries in New
Mexico. We have over 250.
Uh, folks who work in and do
projects with the space industry
and new space industry and one
of my guests on the rostrum
today, if you would please Dan,
this is Dan Shotzman. I read his
bio for the first time. He's
super impressive. Um, in
addition to being a US Army
reserves and rose to the rank of
chaplain of captain, um, he has
his undergrad from New Mexico
State University and his
executive MBA from Dartmouth. He
is the senior managing partner
at Space Fund, a role that he
resumed.
Shortly after joining the board
of directors, where they've
served over, where he served
over 3 years. So more than 5
years of involvement in the
space fund, he initially joined
as a limited partner in Fund One
before transitioning to a
general partner, showcasing his
deepening commitment to the
space investment sector. Beyond
the state's fund, he is the
owner of JPM and, and Mr.
Speaker, I believe that's in
your district. It's a
manufacturing company integral
to the space industry. Um they
produce critical components for
satellites, innovative space
startups. He's contributed to.
the Department of Defense and
Energy projects, including
working on Mars rover. His
leadership, he has had
leadership roles at Fortune 500
companies, including Montanzo,
Emerson, Electric and Resilient
Steel and these positions, he
led numerous international
companies across diverse
industries responsible for P&Ls
and strategic plans and global
business enterprising. So he,
um, he did his first startup,
uh, when he was an undergrad and
it's just, he's been just as a,
a serial entrepreneur ever
since. Now I
know him because he's my
neighbor and uh Sierra County on
Riverside Drive, and he's where
I go to get my chicken duck,
turkey, and guinea eggs. Um, so
I don't, I don't have a shortage
of eggs, and I believe he's even
contributed to um representative
uh Kadina. She also gets her,
her, uh, fowl from this very
esteemed member who's visiting
us today. So, Dan, oh my gosh,
it's so cool. I get to go just
have a cup of coffee with you on
our back decks. Um, thank you
for being here today.
Right, and
I have to stay standing and just
acknowledge the Albuquerque Sign
Language cavity. I'm so glad
that they're here today and
grateful for the work that they
do. They're fully inclusive, so
people who have hearings,
siblings, friends, and family
members attend as well. And so
it's so great to see graduates
from their programs serving in
social work and, and different
key uh jobs in healthcare
industry, and they learned, uh,
became proficient at sign
language at the, at the charter
school.
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I just
need to announce Wednesday is
New Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts and the
New Mexicoil and Water
Conservation Districts will be
celebrating Sweil and Water Day.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady members
take note. Any other
announcements?
lady from Santa Fe.
Oh, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen from Bernaino.
Gentleman from Berlio with Mr.
Speaker, um, before we go to the
next item of business, I would
like to introduce my shadow for
today. This is Chris Rayner. He
is a 4th year student at UNM in
political science department
also majoring in philosophy, um,
who aspires to continue learning
about the legislative process.
So if we could, um, acknowledge
Chris coming to the house. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Welcome to the house.
I know that uh they're they are
not here yet, uh, but
Representative Mirabal Moya had
or will have some guests on the
in the gallery.
And even though I don't think
they're here, um, I still want
to introduce them that way they
can maybe even watch the webcast
later. These are folks from uh
La Promesa Elementary student
government accompanied by
General Salas, Mrs. Sala, and
Jana Adams, uh, at some point
you'll be here but we'll welcome
you to the house right now.
Welcome to the house.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I
apologize, uh, one other thing
that I failed to leave out, um,
I do have a guest also on the
rostrum joining us today. This
is um Fred Gao. He is from the
Albuquerque Sunport Advisory
Board. He is, um, invaluable to
us and the advisory board. He's
retired from American Airlines
and um one of the reasons why
the sun port continues to get
more awesome each day. I don't
know if you guys have seen
what's been going on in the
Sunport, but it's really
exciting stuff. So thanks for
being here. Welcome to the
house.
Albuquerque Sunport uh best
airport in the country.
Mr. Speaker, I would, uh, I
would venture to say it might be
one of the best in the world.
OK.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m. will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon session. so.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that that records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
Business Committee.
Happy legislative day 12.
Almost done.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 5 as amended
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message from the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the House that the Senate
has passed Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 137.
And request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message from the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, I'm directed to
inform the House that the Senate
has passed Senate Finance
Committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 11 as amended.
Senate Bill 199 and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansson a chief clerk.
Message will be and gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
So no objection. It is so
ordered.
Senate Bill 41, introduced by
Senator Charlie and others, an
act relating to endangered
persons, mandating that the
Department of Public Safety
create and maintain a turquoise
alert system for the rapid
dissemination of information
relating to missing American
Indians. Senate Bill 41.
Senate Bill 41 have been read to
us by title is referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 5 as amended.
Introduced by Senator Campos and
others. An act relating to the
state gaming commission,
reforming the state Game
commission appointment process
setting term limits for
commissioners adding
requirements for appointment and
removal of commissioners,
creating the state wildlife
Commission nominating committee,
renaming the Department of Game
and Fish as the Department of
Wildlife, renaming the state
game commission as a state
wildlife commission, amending
statutory policy, expanding the
management of wildlife.
definitions, providing reporting
requirements, amending licensing
fees, providing for fee
adjustments to account for
inflation, providing discounts
for residents who receive
supplemental nutrition
assistance program benefits,
providing transfers, repealing
section 17-2-2 NMSA 1978, B Wa's
1937, chapter 23, section 1.
Senate Bill 5 as amended. Senate
Bill 5 as amended have been
written by title is referred to
the House Energy, Environment
and Natural Resources Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 137.
An act relating to
communications, renaming the
enhanced 911 Act as the 9/11
Act, renaming the enhanced 911
fund as the 911 emergency
Service Fund.
Renaming the enhanced 911 Bond
Act as a 911 Bond Act, updating
definitions, increasing the 911
surcharge, updating the uses of
the 911 surcharge, expanding
grant funding, repealing a
section of the NMSA 1978. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 137.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 137
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House
Judiciary Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 as
amended.
An act relating to public
education, requiring that each
school district and charter
school adopt and implement a
policy for the use of wireless
communication devices by
students in public schools
requiring the public education
department to provide policy
guidelines. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 11 as amended.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 as
amended have been read twice by
title is referred to the House
Education Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Bill 199 introduced by
Senator Jaramillo, an act
relating to alcohol, increasing
the amount of the local DWI
grant fund that may be used for
administration of the local DWI
grant program, Senate Bill 199.
Senate Bill 199 haven't been
read to us by title is referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Memorial 49 introduced by
Representative Brown, a memorial
requesting the consideration and
study of establishing a
performance-based and low
interest loan program to finance
upgrades to end the development
of new electric transmission,
distribution and generation
infrastructure and facilities.
House Memorial 49.
House Memorial 49 have been read
twice by title is referred to
the House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements. We're going to do
a little bit of 3rd reading this
morning into the afternoon and
then break 4.
Hopefully, break for afternoon
committees.
Um
Just as a heads up to the body,
there is no plan to come back
after committee to do 3rd
reading in the evening at this
point. Uh, we continue to just
Do it as a long Dave floor
session and then give committees
an opportunity to work
afterwards, um, so that
continues to be the plan and we
will continue to monitor and be
in touch with the respective
leaders to make sure their
respective caucuses know this.
Um, with that, and seeing no
further announcements, I will go
to the gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
It is so ordered.
Gentle lady from Sandoval and
Bernard Leo, are you ready on
item 24. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Would you get me to that point
action as necessary for placing
House Bill 41 on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate, amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill. thank you
Mr. Speaker and members, HP 41
is the New Mexico Finance
Authority's public project
revolving fund appropriations
bill. I'm carrying this
legislation on behalf of the
NMFA's interim legislative
Oversight Committee, which
voted unanimously to endorse
this bill. The bill appropriates
a total of 13.25 million from
the PPRF in 3 identified funds
in the drinking water state
revolving fund, local government
planning fund and the cultural
affairs facilities. This
appropriation contained in HB 41
does not impact our state
general fund.
And
And
Uh, and I've explained the bill,
Mr. Speaker.
There is a debate, gentlemen
from Montero Representative
Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentle lady from Sandoval
and Bernalillo, please yield. I
yield to, uh, my kind colleague
from Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so I sit on NMFA
oversight and I completely
forgot that we voted on this.
Can you tell me a little bit
about why we need to add 6.2
million to the fund.
I
The fund is for, uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, and, and thank you,
uh, it, the fund is for 13, the
appropriation is for 13.25
million, 6.25 is to the drinking
water state revolving fund, loan
fund. Is that what you were
asking about, Mr. Speaker?
Yes, uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Yeah, that's,
that's exactly what I was
referring to. I see the 6.5,
6.25 for drinking water.
2, for local government planning
and then 5 for.
Cultural affairs facilities
fund. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm asking about that
specifically about the last one,
because in my district we have
the space space museum.
So I'm just wondering how much
of that 5 million.
Could potentially go to uh to
the space.
New Mexico Museum of Space
History Museum.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you kind colleague. Um, I
love that museum as well and so
I have my expert witness here,
uh, Marquita Russell from NMFA.
Let me ask her specifically how
much that is going to just
understand that that fund is for
cultural affairs to make sure
that as we are asking
individuals to um uh to, to
spend money and to visit our
great state that we have
appropriate water and sewage. So
just one moment.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and thank you kind colleague. Um
no, we do not know at this
point. It's the cultural affairs
has that appropriations list and
so we don't have that at this
time. I'm so sorry.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And so I was just
asking because I know that in
the
Capital outlay requests. I did
see something, I think it
actually might have been for
Something to do with facility
infrastructure at the museum. So
I just wanted to make sure that
this was, was maybe helping with
that as well, because I know we
fully funded that in the capital
outlay. Hopefully it gets
through, but I just wanted to
make sure that that was
something that was considered.
So that's all I had, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you so much,
gentle lady, for bringing this
forward and, and, uh, I'll see
you in the interim, I'm sure.
Thank you. There's further
debate, young lady from Bert
Leon Torres, Representative
Lord. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
the gentle lady from multiple
counties, please yield.
I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So can you
explain to me so what looks like
there was a total fund of
13,250, but this is specifically
carved out for 6200 for Water
state revolving loan fund. Can
you tell me how that fund works
and what that money goes to, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
thank you. I'm not familiar with
the numbers that you're talking
about.
Mr. Speaker John Lean, let's
just focus on the, on the amount
that you have on uh House Bill
41. Can you tell me what that
revolving fund is for how it
works and what exactly that's
going to, Mr. Speaker and young
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As
I stated, it's a 13.25 million.
Um, uh, fund that this
appropriation task is is
something that we ask for every
year based on the RFPs approved
infrastructure and water
projects around the state. Um,
this particular request is in 3
different categories, the
drinking water state revolving
fund, the local governmental
planning fund as well as the
cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's the number I just had
given you. It is 13.
The total appropriation is
13,250 for 2026 and then on this
bill, House Bill 41.
Uh, they're specifically 6.25
that I was asking about the
drinking water, and then there's
$2 million for local government
planning for expenditure fiscal
years. Can you tell me a little
bit more, more about that, Mr.
Speaker Speaker,
um, Julie, I believe you, you
keep seeing 13,000 and I'm just
not clear. It's a million and
that's why I am, uh, needing
clarification, Mr. Speaker.
Um, this fund is the 20% match
so that we can uh be able to
access federal funds to be able
to take care of our water
infrastructure across the state.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady with
the 13 million, which I keep
saying 132, meaning million. Can
you tell me what's the criteria
for the projects, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
and he gentlemen, there are two
vast to be able to go through,
but they are on the website for
NMFA and they are um uh reviewed
yearly as the specific
appropriation for the approved
funds are brought to this
legislature every year.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Will Burnley County, Donna
County, Santa Fe County,
Sandoval County all get receive
part of this funding, Mr.
Speaker, and general lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you gentle. I wanted to
say that um those projects are
still be under review, so I
don't know all the counties that
they're covered, but they are,
it's still under review for
under the NMFA.
And thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and I appreciate if
you call me gentle lady, not
gentle person, because I do
identify as female. That's all I
have. Thank thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
So, you know, for the debate,
generally close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I move that HB 41 do
now pass. We are on final
passage of House Bill 41, the
vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 41 has
duly passed this house. General
lady from Ber Leoson of Hochman
B. Hill. Are you ready? On item
number 38.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
take me to that point? the
record reflect that placing
House Bill 145 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment, or substitution, the
general lady to explain the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
House Bill 145 is amended would
authorize the Department of
Transportation to take out up to
$1.5 billion in transportation
bonds. With that, I stand for
questions. There is debate
generally from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, will
the gentle lady from Berna Leo,
please yield.
I yield, Mr. Speaker, to my
friend from Lee County.
Thank you gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, um,
So, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I did, uh, co-sponsored
this bill, uh, for the obvious
reason that we really do need
to.
Uh, improve our um roads here in
New Mexico and gentle lady,
would you please start off by
telling us, um, if, if this
bonding occurs, um, would any of
the proceeds from the bonding be
used for maintenance projects in
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker lady, no, it would
not.
So gentle lady, uh, Mr. Speaker,
could you tell us how the money
would be spent.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, so
the this these bonds
specifically be spent on
projects identified on the state
transportation infrastructure
improvement plan, the STIP, uh,
all those projects have been
appropriately vetted through the
State Transportation Commission,
and so, uh, whatever priorities
are identified through that um
process that bonding money would
be used to complete those
projects.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
did this bill start off
mentioning that projects would
be uh taken from the tip the
state transportation improvement
program.
Mr. Speaker Jelani, it did not
start out that way. There was an
amendment that was put on, um, I
believe in house transportation
our committee.
Yes, thank you for that, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so I think
the amendment was actually
pretty crucial to the bill
because uh it was pretty open
ended and what we really wanted
to know is what are we getting
uh for our money here if we do
it, so, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is there any assurance
that the proceeds will be used
in each of the 6 transportation
districts, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, lady, um, sets the
beauty of the going through
the State Transportation
commission through this bill, so
a lot of people unless they're
doing transportation work in
this body don't know what the
state transportation commission
is and essentially what it is is
a commission made up of
representatives from each of the
6 transportation districts
throughout the state. Those
representatives come together
and form the commission. They
bring all of their projects,
they vet and by virtue of
sitting on that commission, um,
and having representatives from
each of the six districts, we
guarantee that those projects
that are.
and included in the sip are
representative of all 6 of the
transportation districts
throughout the state.
Thank you, gentle lady. I know
that's something that was very
important for me to have, uh,
specified in the bill, uh, now
amended to say that.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
would you mind, uh, just
describing to the body.
How much, uh, the state
transportation commission could
bond up to what amount and, um,
would that be all a one time,
uh, letting a bonds or would it
be a parceled out over time, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Jelani, so the
total amount of bonding is 1.5
billion, um, but there is a uh
mechanism built in to uh also
take into account that that
service payments that remain. So
at no point in time, the
department would be able to take
on a debt service payment higher
than what they're already used
to accounting for in their
budget, um, and all of the
bonding again would need to go
through the commission, so they
would identify projects.
And a time frame for those
projects so they would be able
to take out bonding, um, a
little bit here, a little bit
there, depending on what the
project's identified for those
years would be, but um they
would not be able to take out
the entire total amount at once.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, thank you for that, um, it
may be difficult if, if it were
the full amount to actually put
that to work, so, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I note
that you have the state, um, uh,
Department of Transportation
secretary with you. Would you
mind asking him what we or if
you know the answer, gentle
lady, what the state already
owes on transportation bonding
here in fiscal year 2025, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, General
Lee, thank you for giving me the
opportunity to
um, the gentleman to my left.
This is New Mexico Department of
Transportation, Cabinet
secretary Ricky Serna, um, and I
will ask him to give me that
figure since I don't have it at
the top of my mind.
Mr. Speaker to the lady for
fiscal year 26 will be 550
million.
Thank you very much for that
information, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I think it's
important for us to understand
that we do already have debt
that we must pay off for
transportation projects, but,
um, House Bill 145 is amended
does set that limit on how much
we can be in debt at any one
time and so I think that's a
safeguard in in the bill, um Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, there
was um amendment also covered um
something here it's uh.
Um, it's in the amendment I'm
sure you have a copy of it, uh,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, but it
talks about priorities and if
you could just explain what the
amendment did in terms of that
subject matter, please, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker Delina, give me a
second, um, to identify that
amendment. I, that's.
Do you have the page number or
line.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it's um it's in the amendment to
the committee, um, in the TO2
number is 231098.3 and it's um
looking at um section P.
Um, subsection one of the
amendment, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
if, if this is the amendment, I
think you're referring to, um,
this was the reporting
requirements, so the amendment I
would require the Department of
Transportation to issue a report
to the legislature on a yearly
basis on um various factors and
justifications and numbers for
each of these projects, um, how
far along they're going, uh,
whether or not completion will
be on time. There, I think, are
one.
Four different factors that
would need to be in those
reports, um, I could read them
off to you, but I, I doubt we
want to take that much time.
Mr. Speaker, generally, so I, I
agree with you about that, but I
just want everybody to know that
there is a reporting requirement
that's been added into the bill
and that part of that involves
the priority ranking of projects
and I think it's important that
we have that information.
It gives us a sense of um how
things will be moving along in
terms of projects, uh, with the
money that's raised through
bonding.
So, um, Mr. Speaker, generally,
that's about what I have here,
um, I'll just close with a
comment, and that is Mr.
Speaker, that when we have so
much extra revenue and we've had
that for several years in a row
now and the billions of dollars,
$3 billion plus that you know I
hesitated at first to say we
should be borrowing any money at
all, but the reality is, uh,
road projects must be done. We
have some urgent needs there and
um.
The
bonding would allow us to move
forward with some of those, I
would say high priority projects
that just don't have an
identified funding source yet,
so.
We're currently um paying off
debt, um, it's been stated in
committee by the secretary that
we were already doing this now
we can continue into the future
and just so the body knows Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, this
is a 25 year horizon for uh the
letting of the bonds, the
spending of the money on
projects, so, um, again I, I
have a little hesitation about
borrowing money when we have so
much more to deal with.
Terms of uh all this extra
revenue, but um I'm also a
realist, Mr. Speaker, and I, I
just definitely think we need to
move forward with these needed
projects, so I thank you, gentle
lady for your work on this bill,
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the
body to support it. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady. We have
further debate, gentle lady from
McKinley, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady, uh, please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
general lady from McKinley
County. Oh thank you. uh thank
you uh.
Gentle lady, I would like to
rise in support of this bill,
Mr. Speaker and members, um, one
of the issues that was raised
recently was the idea that that
because we have so much cash on
hand that maybe we don't need to
go into debt, but wouldn't you
agree, gentle lady, that it's
not unusual, it's not an unusual
business practice to use debt as
a funding mechanism for large
capital projects.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
no, it's not unusual at all.
That's correct, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, and it also, um,
just to add a couple of other
comments regarding that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it also
provides a clear financing
pattern that can be adjusted,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, should
the economy change, wouldn't you
agree?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
agree wholeheartedly.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, wouldn't you agree that now
with the amendment and using the
state transportation improvement
planning document as the guide
and the guard rails for how
money is spent also assures that
we're going to have major due
diligence when it comes to this
kind of spending.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think it is um one of the best
improvements that we put in that
bill in this amendment, and I
think it made it a much better
bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady. I too would
also ask the body to please vote
for this bill.
Thank you gentle lady. There's
further debate, gentlemen from
Lee, Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield, Mr. Speaker,
I yelled to my friend from Lee
County.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
I struggle with this.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady is as your professional
Uh, witness behind you can tell
you we've had several.
Good positive debates over this.
The reality with this piece of
legislation, what we will do is
we will guarantee road work for
the next 10 years, but pay debt
for 25.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we're not at the prefaces of
where we are on our bonding
level right now. In other words,
with where we're at, we're still
increasing our payments and it
does not start to just decrease
for another 3 years, but we're
gonna add.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand that that it stays at
a pretty consistent.
Slope
But
My issue is last year in 2023,
we started.
Our budget session.
With a goose egg for rebuilding
roads.
And it took a lot of work.
To get the money and the funding
for last year.
And then to have the Senate turn
around and put two year
requirements on those projects,
which is almost impossible.
To accomplish
For road building
We have had
Under this administration, the
70% increase in our budget.
When you combine
Recurring and non-recurring
together.
With a 0.9%.
Population change.
We had the opportunity.
To put money aside and the trust
funds going into a road fund.
To, to do this and each year
we've chosen not to do that this
year, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, we've chosen to spend
almost $3.6 billion in
non-reoccurring funding.
With a very minimal amount in
Section 11 for transportation.
With that
We had the opportunities with
the excess that we've had from
the oil and gas revenues.
For the last several years.
To create this without going
into debt to do this.
And it is frustrating for me
that now, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that we're gonna go for
bonds.
To accomplish
What we've all said.
Needs to happen.
Since I've been in.
This body
Unfortunately, I, for me, I have
to support this because we need
this.
The other unfortunate side is
that we didn't need to do it
this way, and we chose not to.
We chose to increase spending,
we chose to
Spend money in other programs.
Instead of in road safety and in
roads.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
roads that this fund will.
Pay for
Will not be designed for the new
weights.
And met for the new weights of
the vehicles that that we are.
Pushing for New Mexico.
We, none of these roads that are
in the queue right now inside
the step inside the trip and and
based on the tamp reports, none
of these roads are designed, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady for the
EV vehicles that weigh 2.5 to 3
times more than the vehicles
they're currently designed for.
Um
This is a very frustrating point
for me as a road engineer.
That knows the importance of
what we need to do to have to
support a piece of legislation,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady that
this body did not have to do.
I appreciate, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
My opportunity just to vent a
little bit with the poor
decision making we're making.
Thank you.
There's for the debate.
And I will not read the list.
The gentleman from
Curry Colfax, quay Harding, San
Miguel and Union Representative
Chatfield.
Awesome, Mr. Speaker.
There's a gentle lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman, I am not remembering
all those counties though.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That,
all those counties works for me.
Uh
Gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
Many years ago we had lots.
Of construction highway
construction companies in this
state. We put in I-25, 540.
Uh
And, and there were many, many
construction companies. There
were a lot of engineers working
on it and, uh, we have a kind of
a boom and bust economy here in
this state and, and during some
of the busts, we begin to lose
some of those companies.
Uh, right now today,
If I were wanting to put in a
road construction company.
It cost a lot of dollars to go
and borrow the money to put in
the
To have the equipment and the
engineers, uh, these guys need
the engineers. I would need the
equipment. If I didn't know that
I had a job next year.
I would be very reluctant to
borrow that kind of money.
So one of the problems that we
have today is a shortage.
Of construction companies and
engineers.
Uh
Even on our years when the, when
we're on the boom, uh, people
are a little, a little reluctant
to borrow money, knowing that
next year, they might not have a
job.
We have some great companies
working here, uh, currently,
some of them are from in-state.
Some of them are from out of
state.
Uh, but I, I think
This bonding.
Is you might smooth out some of
the bumps. Maybe it would let me
know that I would have
The ability to bid on jobs for
the next 25 years. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, do you believe
that's true?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I do
believe that's true and um my
expert witness just reminded me
that for every $1 spent on road
transportation projects we see
$3 generated as a result of the
economic development from those
projects, so uh this is a way to
um ensure that New Mexico,
Mexicans transportation and
infrastructure needs will be met
throughout the next 25 years.
and it will encourage those
construction companies and road
engineers and everybody that we
need to make all of these things
work for everyday New Mexicans,
um, will be funded because of
your vote for this bill today,
so I agree.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Uh, we've covered the
construction companies. Now, if
I were wanting to go to school
and be a road engineer, would it
encourage me to know that I
would have
Maybe some work in the future,
maybe for the next 25 years,
there would be funding out there
to build roads.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yeah, if
you, if you really wanna get
into it, you can crack open
thatI report and I'll show you
all the roads that we intend to
build over the next few years
and I'd get pretty excited about
it, so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I hope
some of those roads are in my
part of the world, I can tell
you that I do have a little
restaurant, and there are people
come by there and they, many of
them are from Houston and
they're from all over the, the
world east of us mostly. Most of
them are come come from points
east and they come into our
mountains in New Mexico to go
skiing, camping, a variety of
things. They love New Mexico's
mountains, but, uh,
If some of what that road is is
getting fixed right now, but it
has been over a period of time
so rough that people started to
avoid it and when they did, they
went around and they went up a
little bit north, which took
them to the ski ski areas in
Colorado.
And that's an enormous amount of
funding that's lost to New
Mexico. We lose the money, money
for the gas stations where they
stop and get gas. We, the little
convenience stores where they
stop and then we lose the, the
hotel, motel, uh, skier, ski
pass, uh, ski rental, all that
stuff in Red River and the in
points, uh, west up in the
mountains, so that's something
that we often don't know about
or think about. So, uh, those
uh, those are highways.
Or just little arteries that
bring
Outside money into our state.
And if we want that money to
come in,
We need to keep them in good
shape. And then to keep them in
good shape, we need consistent
funding.
It also is the artery that
carries our produce, my calves.
Uh, our chilly, the vari various
things that we produce, it
carries them to points outside
of our state. That is, so we
have 22 kinds of income, our
exports.
And in tourism and a variety of
other things that bring money
into our state.
Good highways are what make
people do business with our
state. It's enormously
economically.
Important
That we keep our roads in good
shape.
I believe this bonding issue
will smooth out the bumps in our
otherwise highly fluctuating
income, and I believe that it
will be make a lot of money for
New Mexico. I urged the body to
vote for this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you gentlemen
see no further debate and to
close. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
now move that House Bill 145, as
amended do now pass. We are on
final passage of House Bill 145
as amended the vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 65 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 1, 45
as amended, has duly passed this
house.
lady, gentle lady from McKinley,
are you ready on item number 42.
Mr. Speaker, if you can get me
to that point, that action
necessary for placing house
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 19 has
been taken, and it is not
subject to debate. Amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. The House taxation
and revenue Committee substitute
substitute for House Bill 19 is
an economic development bill
which focuses on existing
infrastructure assets we often
talk, Mr. Speaker.
About looking at diversification
with economic development.
And in this case we have a
golden opportunity with existing
infrastructure throughout our
state and gives us an
opportunity, Mr. Speaker and
members to start looking at
things like trade, reshoring,
onshoring, and primarily helping
the US government provide um
some support for elimination of
supply chain problems with that,
I'd stand for questions before
we continue,
can you please introduce your
expert?
Uh, my expert today, Mr.
Speaker, is me, gentle lady from
Eddie Lee, Representative Brown.
Mr. Speaker, I would agree with
that, um, labeling, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, could you
just tell us a little bit about
which areas in the state would
benefit if this bill passes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, uh, generally
this is, um, flexible enough,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady that a
community or a county that is
interested in getting into this
kind of um.
Program, particularly if you've
got an interstate, a state
highway, rail service, or
airport service you have the
opportunity then to start
looking at how you could develop
the trade port concept. So I
would say, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, most areas in the
state of New Mexico could take
advantage of this because we're
already doing a lot of this
work, particularly Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady in your part of
the world.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
so could you just, you, you did
mention uh connection to an
interstate. Could you just give
us maybe 5 communities that you
think would be most interested
in pursuing this, Mr. Speaker.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they're going to be communities
that generally are on a major
interstate that have rail
service, airport service, or on
a major state road, uh,
communities that come to mind
and in full disclosure, Gallup
would be one of them. I think
there are, uh, there's a lot of
work currently being done in
Bernalo County, uh, in terms of
a trade port I know they have a
federal accelerator program now
there's a federal accelerator
program also in Donana County.
Particularly with their work and
relationship with with border
development in your area, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady in the
Carlsbad area because of the
amount of frack sound that you
move, the amount of trucking
that happens in that area is
also um something that would be
eligible and then if you take a
community such as Farmington
where now they're starting to
look at um revamping their
airport and getting passenger
service back into that
community.
That opens up the opportunity
for a foreign trade zone.
Thank you very much for that
information, gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker, uh, so my, um, my
district does not have any
interstate running through it,
but um, as you stated, we do
have a lot of truck traffic and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
heard you basically say that
this could be intermodal,
meaning not just vehicles on on
highways and roads but also
aviation.
And so I think it's important
for us to realize this is, um,
prone to some real good
development, uh, not just on
roads but also uh aviation and
and rail, um.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
um, could you just tell us, um,
Mr. Speaker, what the price tag
is on on this legislation.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Currently, uh, this
legislation and the original um
appropriation amount has been
included in House Bill 2. It is,
uh, included in section 5 of the
bill and it has an appropriation
amount of $90 million.
For, for this project or this
program.
Um, it can also be, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, used in conjunction
with other economic development
programs which I think is the
heart of the bill. He come
together as a community, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
you, you meet all the criteria
to become a trade port. You've
got a good business plan, you've
got a good, uh, project in mind.
The idea is, is that there would
then be a committee of various
cabinet secretaries that would
meet with the economic
development cabinet secretary
for the purpose then of actually
leveraging other dollars.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, as
you know, being on the
appropriations committee for
many years there are dollars
that are sitting in certain
budgets that are hard to move.
You think about, uh, dollars
that are in the environment
department as an example.
In my community we need
wastewater and water lines, that
kind of thing. That would be a
perfect kind of project that
trade port dollars could
leverage against those dollars
that are in another department.
Thank you so much for that, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
is there a prevailing wage
requirement in this bill, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes.
OK, Mr. Speaker, um, and gentle
lady, I, um, could you just tell
us what the difference might be
in terms of say average wage
versus prevailing if you could
just uh edify us on that,
please, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, what
we have in this bill is, is, um.
Restatement of prevailing wage.
It's already in statute, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so, uh,
constituents had come to me and
said we just like we'd like to
have that amended in the first
committee, which we did in, in
the commerce Committee just to
make sure that it is in there
and that there would be no
question that we wouldn't be
using prevailing wage, uh, in
terms of the actual dollar
difference. I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I don't
know.
Thank you gentle lady, um, so,
you know, obviously that is a
bit of a sticking point for, for
some people here in the chamber,
but, uh, be that as it may, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so a $90
million price tag and what kind
of return on investment do you
envision, uh, if this all comes
to fruition, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Just
like the last presentation we
heard on the bonding there is a
multiplier effect of $3.
40 cents for every $1 that we
invest in transportation
infrastructure with a lot of
these projects, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it's going to be
additional infrastructure that
goes into these trade port areas
so that alone is a major
economic driver.
When you look at that kind of
multiplier and of course all the
uh uh new employment growth.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, my
final question, uh, we know that
we now have electronic logs for
um for truckers and um there are
certain intervals during which
they are required to stop and
rest and and not be driving. Do
you believe Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that the people who will
make some decisions here about
where to locate these trade
ports will take into account.
The electronic log requirement
in the intervals we, we know
there are some places that could
actually probably use a truck
stop that has a lot of amenities
to it, uh, maybe grocery
shopping, movie theater,
whatever, so these drivers have
a place to to rest and uh.
You know, get off the road for a
little while, um, so do you
anticipate that would be a
factor in the decision making,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Um,
Madam Speaker, I do, I
absolutely think it will be a
factor in part of the decision
making, depending on the kind of
trade port design and what, what
kind of services are being
provided as an example, Madam
Speaker, in Gallup we get 7000
trucks a day.
That you know we see that as an
asset for a trade port
development out there so it's
important to us to look at the
11 hour rule. It's important to
us to look at trucking and rail
as a transloading operation and
plus, uh, we now have passenger
service in our community for
foreign trade zone, uh,
development.
But I would say that you're
gonna have similar opportunities
like that in Deming.
Because they also have the 11
hour rule, uh, in where the on
I-10 from and I'm talking about
from the port of Long Beach, so
if that's the origin into New
Mexico, there's a couple of
communities that are right on
that, on that uh route.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
you just bring up, uh, the, the
thought of Long Beach being a
port area where a lot of things
come into the states and um I
think that's important to know.
Are there any other areas, say,
on the West Coast, uh, that you
know of gentle lady, Madam
Speaker, where um we have a lot
of things of freight coming in.
Yes, Madam Speaker, gentle lady
for New Mexico, there's actually
more than just the West Coast.
We have the port of Long Beach
and we have the Port of LA. We
also have the Port of Houston.
We have the, believe it or not,
the port of New Orleans, uh, so
there's several different, uh,
trade routes that go right
through the heart of New Mexico
if we can get this up and
running as a trade port
development program. I think
what you'll see is New Mexico
being no longer just a bridge
state.
For transportation traffic, but
actually a place to stop and do
business.
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so
thank you for that. I, I, I
agree with you. We don't just
have the West Coast, we have
kind of the southern area and
and so forth and all of these
things must be taken into
account, so gentle lady, thank
you for the answers. I so
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from Curry debaca,
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, will
the gentle lady yield, Madam
Speaker, I'd be happy to yield.
So, uh, Madam Speaker and, and
gentle lady, I hadn't seen this
bill before and I was reading
through it real quickly, and it
says that, uh,
That this is gonna be modifying
infrastructure.
For the construction of
buildings, other facilities and
support functions for trade port
so.
Can you kind of give me an
example is this money?
I, I, from what I'm reading and
understanding, we're gonna this
this money is not only gonna be
used for buildings but for roads
and infrastructure like that,
Madam Chair.
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
and it's also uh eligible to be
used toward P3 development, uh,
there's a section in this
committee substitute that talks
about public-private
partnerships, uh, so it can be
used for that purpose also.
And, and that's why we're having
to change the procurement code
is that did I get that right,
Madam, uh, Madam Speaker, Madam
Speaker, yes, gentlemen, that's
the piece that ties back to the
procurement code.
OK, and, and Mr. Speaker.
Uh
And gentle ladies, so then some
of these monies will go in, in
maybe forms of, of, uh.
Different forms to maybe the
private sector where if they
want to
Uh, put in a, a, uh, trade port.
In, uh, and maybe even, it's
gonna be a private business.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Generally, what will happen is
that we'll take the county would
make application once they've
got their design and their
program, uh, uh, developed to
the Secretary of Economic
Development.
The Secretary of uh economic
development would have rules and
regulations and an application
process in place.
Um
It would then be evaluated as to
whether or not it makes sense.
Does this really have a business
component to it? Do we really
see that this is going to
function as as we say in the
application.
If it is determined, uh, Mr.
Speaker, that it makes sense,
then there is this committee
that's pulled together that will
review the application and help
leverage additional dollars into
your application.
Uh, the Department of Economic
Development will have 90 if if
this holds in the budget we'd
have $90 million to work with to
start with this first year as an
initial investment.
But I suspect there'll be much
higher than that because you're
bringing in other departments
that have other funds that they
could put toward the project,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in your
case in the Clovis area, that's
a perfect example of an
opportunity.
I happen to know what your what
your area looks like and your
logistics piece there that that
would be a perfect example of
where something could be done
for logistics, uh, distribution
warehousing and logistics.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so some of this money could go
to the industrial park we have
there in Clovis.
To, to, to help somebody set up
a business in the industrial
park and, and I kind of get that
and, and Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, but will this.
Infrastructure that we create.
Well they
Well this state still own it or
a private individual could take
it over, Mr. Speaker Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this is a
public activity, it would, I
would assume it's gonna be your
county. I, I assume it would be
the county.
OK, Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, thank you for those, for
those answers and, and educating
me a little bit on this. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. That concludes
my questions. Thank you,
gentlemen. There's further
debate. The gentleman from
Colfax, Curry Qua Harding, San
Miguel and Union representative
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. You get good.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, does a gentle
lady yield to yield, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady out in
my part of the world, we have a
thing called Ports to Plains.
And that's a highway system
that, uh,
Seeks to connect Mexico to
Canada.
And it comes right up through
our area and it's got a little
spur that runs off the main
thing over by Amarillo and comes
in the Ratone.
Be a big deal for, for some of
our folks and, and it might,
might cause traffic to bypass
others, but, uh, I think in for
the state and as a whole, it'd
be a great thing and it would
increase trade, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I
Will this affect that?
Mr. Speaker, I think what it
would do is enhance what you're
already doing and that's what,
what one of the reasons uh that
helped initiate this bill is
that there's so many independent
activities happening throughout
the state, whether it's in your
county or mine or in Donana or
in Bernal Leo County, there's a
lot of activity that is
happening. This helps to
coordinate it. This helps to
look at it and so we actually
have some some uh major
marketing activity that we could
do together.
as a state as opposed to
everyone being siloed.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I agree, and, and, uh,
I look forward to supporting
your bill.
See no further debate.
Generally close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you everyone
for the great questions. I now
move that house taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 19 to now pass. We
have a final passage of taxation
and Revenue Committee substitute
What about clothes.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 56 in the affirmative, 4 in
the negative house taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
All 19 has duly passed this
house.
lady from Santa Fe, Romero, are
you ready on item number 16.
I am Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point? necessary for
placing House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 291 as a not as amended.
Has been taken. It is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. This allows New Mexico
to spur economic development
through market-driven recycling
programs, modernizing, um, and
modernizing our program and the
RAID Act and fostering a more
circular economy. With that, I
stand for questions.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentle lady from Santa Fe,
please yield. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
I'll gladly yield and here with
me is um our expert Shirlene
Sitton with the um economic or
environmental.
The Department of the
environment, Mr. Speaker.
Environment Department, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
I like the acronym MED, right?
Isn't that it or no, it's it's
environment department. It's
what and um.
NMED, Mr. Speaker. I know it was
one of those. We have so many
acronyms around here, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. It is hard
to keep up and especially not
within, without your cup of
coffee. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, on page 3, I do have some
questions. I know I asked some
of these in committee, but we
kind of rushed through
committee. So I just wanted to
make sure that we all kind of
understand what we're trying to
do here when it comes to.
Circular economy.
The definition for me seems a
little.
Broad and confusing. Could you
just tell me a little bit about
what, what the goal of a
circular economy is, and from my
understanding with the
legislation, it's just aiming
for certain things, then I'm
trying to figure out what the
point really of the legislation
is to do if it's not necessarily
mandated.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
answers are the same as they
were in committee, um, the
circular economy essentially
closes the loop on waste
products that are generated from
as they get to market to as they
um become essentially
dilapidated or unusable. This
provides an opportunity for
within the RAD Act fund, um, to
have local communities have the
funding needed to set up, um,
the, the setting for being able
to recycle these and
essentially, potentially put
them back into the market as
well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So,
Then does this mandate anything
regarding these circular
economies. There's no mandate,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
then I'm, I guess my question,
I'll ask it again, what is the
purpose of the bill.
If it's not requiring anything.
Is it asking things? Is it
saying, can we please do more
circular economy.
Um, activities like how, how is
this actually going to be
applied in law or rule or
somewhere else.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again,
Same answers in committee. This
allows us to be able to create
the impetus for a circular
economy within our local
governments and also provide the
funding so that they can set up
these programs to provide the
wherewithal to have this
opportunity.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So are we
currently banned from getting
toward a circular economy,
Mister Speaker, gentlemen, we
are not, but in the RAID Act,
currently, the funding for these
mechanisms are solely for tire
recycling. And so what we're
doing is broadening the
opportunity for what we call the
circular economy as defined
here, and we allow that funding
to now go to different programs,
um, that may have that want to
have a recycling component for
that, that aren't just tires,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. OK, so then what
I'm looking at the definition of
circular economy, this kind of
pops out at me. It says aim for
illumination of waste through
superior design of materials,
products and systems. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, how do we
expect that to be the case with
implementing this, are we trying
to get more businesses in the
state to recycle and make
products more efficient and with
that, I know.
You said there was an
appropriation or maybe there was
some kind of dollar amount.
Are there any specific programs
that we're seeking to implement
and are we trying to mirror
other states with these.
Yes, and Mr. Speaker, we're not
only trying to update our
statute currently that doesn't
essentially incentivize these
types of programs or the type of
packaging, the type of product,
um, design that would be looking
at end of life for some of these
different products, Mr. Speaker,
so we put it into statute how
that may take place and again
back to the funding mechanisms
for these in local governments,
um, unfortunately, we were
hamstringing ourselves on some
of this innovation.
the funding could only go to
1/3, some of this innovation and
2/3 to tires. So now we're
looking at all of the different
projects, um, as opportunities
for innovation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then when it
comes to the actual recycling
portion of it. Do we know how
many recycling plants our state
has currently.
OK
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so we
have one, large company that
does recycling in McKinley, um,
that's one of the largest, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
McKinley paper, um, that, that
is the largest privately owned,
and then, of course, we have
recycle facilities all across
the state.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So then,
The recycling facilities, are
they for everything, glass,
paper, plastics, what do we have
in our state and then what are
we shipping out of the state
when it comes to trying to
recycle those, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that doesn't really
touch on what's in the bill at
this point. Can you ask me about
what's in the bill? Sure, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so your
goal is a circular economy and
so the way to get to a circular
economy is by recycling. If we
don't have the facilities in New
Mexico to recycle, then how are
we going to recycle?
That's a great question, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. So, um,
again, with the modernizing of
this language and being able to
bring it back to the bill. The
funding mechanisms are now
broadened, so this will help
local governments, local
entities to have the funding
necessary to perhaps expand
their recycling programs, um, to
put different, um, you know,
mechanisms in place to do that
recycling if they're not
currently doing it, um, it has,
it has the funding available for
that now, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there's.
$2.9 million in this fund and it
never gets fully spent because
we've only limited 2/3 to tires
in the past, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, this modernizes that.
OK, so thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So as you
mentioned tires, and I did see
it in the bill so I'm gonna
stick as closely as possible to
the bill.
How many tire recycling
facilities do we have in the
state?
No, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
we said currently the bill
allowed for 2/3 for tires, so
that money is just sitting here
since there's no recycling of
tires in the state or is that
2/3 going out of state to
recycle tires.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
that's for mostly for tire
abatement and being able to um
manage their tire waste, um, and
then, of course, the recycling
does go out of state, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, currently.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So I'm guessing
that recycling is it shipped out
of state on trucks, uh, how
trains, I'm just wondering how
this work, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, sounds good, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, so I guess the,
I kind of understand now a
little, a little more about the
bill. So we're trying to open
new facilities in New Mexico to
recycle, so we do not push it
out of state. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, can you tell me
more about composting operations
in our state. Do we have any
large scale composting
operations in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
indeed, we do have composting
across the state, both public
and private, um, in operation.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then does your bill
specifically say how much of
this fund goes to whichever one,
so tires or recycled bottles or
tin cans. No, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's actually one
of the innovations here is that
we open that up to all recycling
circular economy endeavors, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then with the
appropriation, I believe I saw
something on page 8 about the
positions we're going to be
trying to, to start. So one is
this recycling and waste
reduction coordinator. The other
one is a circular economy
coordinator.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
how many other staffers are we
going to be creating with this?
And will they beer?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, so
there are the two, mentioned in
the bill again funded by the
bill, um, already currently in
practice, um, as far as the
funding goes, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and of course, just
the supportive folks locally,
whoever they are, that's not in
the bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and are they Para?
They would be Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, perfect. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So, and
then also when it comes to the,
the, is it an office that we're
creating or is it just a couple
of people that they're
overseeing. I'm just trying to
figure out what kind of
Structure this would have, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, these are
just two positions within the
solid waste bureau that
currently exists.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
can you tell me a little bit
about what they do? What is the
recycling and waste reduction
coordinator coordinate.
And where did they go all across
the state? Are they looking in
different dumps? Are they
looking at specific localities
are they meeting with mayors,
city councils, commissions.
What, what is their job, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that would
be great in the job description
that would be later created um
by again the Waste Bureau.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but it was my understanding that
it was already created. So what
are they doing now? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, again, these
positions are too new, um,
that's new language within the
bill that are already funded,
but new language.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
there, there's no one currently
working here.
In this capacity in these
position, Mr. Speaker.
OK, that helps a little bit on
that. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, can you just turn with me
to page 11 now, and I'm looking
on K, it's a new language, says
requirement and procedures for a
person to submit proposed rules
to the board for adoption. It
says the board shall determine
whether the, whether to hold a
hearing within 60 days of
submission of a proposed role.
Rule, rather, Mr. Speaker, can
you tell me a little bit about
That and what that means when it
comes to rulemaking.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, when we're talking about
this funding that's now being
expanded to all innovative ideas
and recycling in the circular
economy. These rules are just
about what we would be able to
fund, what innovations we're
looking at and essentially
expand that opportunity clearly
in in rule.
All right, OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. And
then can you tell me a little
bit about other than the
appropriation, do we know what
this is gonna cost, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, again, this is
already funded. There's $2.9
million in the budget.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do
we know how much it costs to
open a new recycling facility. I
don't have that information, Mr.
Speaker.
OK, I'm just trying to figure
out what this would cost because
a new facility sounds like a
very big.
Investment and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is this too.
2 million some odd dollar amount
is this recurring?
Yes, it is, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so since we don't really
know how much it costs to build
a recycling plant. I don't, I
can't really say if this will be
enough or it'll be too much. And
so, Mr. Speaker, generally do
your experts have any?
idea of what that could cost to,
to lure somebody over here in
New Mexico, build a facility for
recycling and then would that
facility be all inclusive, got
glass has a aluminum, etc. or
would they have to be specific
to their kind of recycled
content because I know we
already have paper.
Uh, yes, and Mr. Speaker, so
again, one of the great things
about this bill is I've received
a lot of really interest in
folks looking to locate their
facilities within local areas,
having this funding available to
potentially match private
funding, other funding from
local government, etc. leverages
those funds fully and so this
would provide that sort of, um,
anchor potentially investment or
other funds that would help
these entrepreneurs do that
business in local areas, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then regarding circular
economy, I, I see it very, very
broad, so what about?
The regulations currently on the
books when it comes to the
environment department, will
this help reduce requirements
and environmental requirements
for.
People, for example, uh
manufacturer who wants to just
reuse.
plastic or
Let's just say glass bottles and
would, is there any kind of red
tape that they could
Eliminate with this new position
or a couple positions and how
could that work? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, again, this is just
when we're looking at some of
the innovation within the
circular economy, that will go
into a rulemaking again and the
allowances of how the funding
will be spent, but looking at
all of those different
opportunities, I think is part
of that, um, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, as far as just being
able to open up the, the, the
wherewithal for folks to come
in. That's what this does.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so, OK, I'm, I'm
getting a little bit of a, of
some more information on this,
and I feel like
I don't really know for certain
what, what I think about this
bill. I know I voted against it
in committee because I had many
questions and I still have some
questions. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, can you tell me a
little bit about how we will
ensure that these recycling
plants will not in any way deter
the state from its ambitious ETA
goals, which I disagree with,
but how, how will that work with
them because I know, I know that
recycling does create a lot of
mission s
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
this will help with waste
reduction more than anything
else, and we know that the more
that you can use an item, um,
the less its footprint is worth,
and we've heard that in
committee, I think as well, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lee. I must have
forgotten that and I think in
the rules you can't really.
Opine on what happened in
committee, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, you would know. so
as I'm saying here on this bill.
How can we, are we, are we
ensuring, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that this would not in any
way increase emissions in the
state of New Mexico with these
new.
Dollars going to new facilities.
Can we promise that today?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
this isn't too new development
per se, like it's helping the
local governments do what they
need to manage this waste, so
we're gonna obviously look at
what it is that we can do to
mitigate across the board in any
industry, this being one that's
literally trying to take waste
out of the waste stream and
reduce that footprint, that
carbon footprint, I think is
helping that cause, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
because I've looked online and
I've looked at studies that show
that recycling plants,
especially regarding plastics.
They have a lot of pe fists,
PFAS, PFOS, and so, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it comes to
eliminating this.
Forever substance.
My concern, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is instead of just leaving
a bottle in a landfill to to
just.
Not decomposed because it's a
bottle, but
It sits there versus.
Putting that in a facility,
let's just say it's plastic.
And recycling it, there is a lot
of PFOS included in that
recycling process. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I just
want to understand how we will
mitigate any of that forever
chemical from being released
back into products such as
polyester clothing or other
bottles or anything that we make
and recycle.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. I'm glad you
recognize the life cycle, the
long life cycle of a plastic
bottle that is part of what
we're trying to mitigate here,
however, local governments will
be able to put their plan
together when they're applying
for this fund and put the
parameters in place should they
be able to receive the funding
for a specific purpose.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And do we envision
having enough energy potential
in the state of New Mexico to
achieve these goals to open
these plants because I know that
a lot of these plants, they take
a massive amount of energy to
recycle products like
Aluminum or
plastics or glass. So how are we
going to ensure that that will
not strain the energy.
Cycle and the
energy needs of the state when
it comes to residential use and
business use.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
again, we're recycling, so it
always takes less energy to
create use the use of an
embodied energy. And so with
this, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we're not creating new plants,
we're providing the funding for
folks to be able to deal with
their recycling locally.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
well, I guess I kind of don't
understand and maybe I'm just
belaboring this point, but I
don't understand how you can
recycle locally if you don't
have a plant to recycle that
locally, so the way that the
bill is currently it's trying to
bring that to the state. So if
you don't have a facility to
recycle that at all, how are we
going to recycle locally when
the locals need to start doing
this.
Uh, was there a question, Mr.
Speaker? Yeah, I'm wondering how
how we expect people to recycle
locally when there's not a
plant.
That recycles those products
locally.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's,
that's really the point, right,
is being able to allow local
governments to figure out what's
needed, understand their
volumes, figure out what they
could possibly do to repurpose
or reuse that again in the
circular economy. So this really
gives them the opportunity and
the wherewithal to talk to
entrepreneurs about what they
might be dealing with. We've
talked about tires being an
issue. They're now may be an
opportunity to really look at
that and putting it back into
the market, uh, with this type
of grant opportunity or
With this type of funding
opportunity for local
governments, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady and then.
I, I kind of understand, but I
kind of don't understand, but
that's OK. So circular economy,
we're saying systems focused
approach, can you tell me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, systems,
which systems are we going to be
focusing on when it comes to
this?
It's on page 3 line 9. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think
that's the plain language we're
talking about the circular
economy. We're looking at the
entirety of a system. So
starting with its first use all
the way to its end use and
encouraging the fact that if
you're building a new product to
think about how it actually
closes the loop. How is it going
to be recycled or reused or put
into a landfill, that that's
part of that entire system of
thinking when we're developing
new products and ideas.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And then does this
have any kind of educational
component to it because Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I know a
lot of products you, you can use
them a couple times, but they
may be packaged in products that
are
plastic or how are we going to
tell people, here's some
information on how you can
reduce your use of plastics or
aluminum or glass, and then how
are we going to utilize these
funds to harness this kind of
circular economy and local
communities. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we pointed that out
to you on page 8, the positions
of recycling and waste reduction
coordinator and circular economy
coordinator will do exactly
that.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I understand, but two people
cannot really jump around at 33
entire counties, so I mean
that's great that we say oh
these people are gonna do the
job and I have no doubt that
it's going to be a fun and very
stressful job, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I just don't really
see that in the bill. I don't
see anything specific in the
bill, and it seems very vague,
no real metrics that we're
citing and so for that reason, I
just cannot support your
legislation. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. There is further
debate, but before I get there,
there's been a request for
members to remove their coats.
You may do so at this time,
gentlemen from Chavez Ed and
Otero Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Santa Feio
kindly yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I've just got a couple of
quick questions for you. I know
during uh when it was on the
energy, we were talking a little
bit about it.
Can you tell me a little bit
more and I know you talked with
Representative Block somewhat
about this, but can you tell me
how the existing program works
and who's eligible for grants
for the fund?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So again, in the RAID
Act currently is stated 2/3 of
the funding is appropriated
specifically to tire mitigation,
um, and only 1/3 for everything
else. And as we've gone through
this and we haven't updated it,
I believe, for probably the last
few, or we've never updated it
since we put it into statute,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, we
know that it's there's a
broader, um, dealing when it
comes to uh the recycling that
we have today. And so what we're
doing is being able
to not only purpose for the
tires that we're still dealing
with today, but open up the fund
for, for everything else.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, one of the questions I
have with that money that's
already set aside for tires. I,
I, I think you said in the in
the debate with Representative
Block.
Currently, um, there's not any
recycling centers, so can you
tell me how the, the money's
being used to recycle tires?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, we're not able to, we're
able to meet the demand of all
of the tire needs in the state,
um, and the there's still a lot
of funding left over and that's
why we're here today, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, but that
funding is going to tire
abatement and illegal dumping
for the most part.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
general lady, and that's
something I'm really concerned
about when I was in 80 County
commissioner, that was one of
our biggest projects was tires,
um, mainly because so many folks
want to, want to recycle, um,
we've got a lot of rural
agriculture and they want to get
those recycled properly, so we
try to come up with every
possible solution to make it
easier so that they were able to
do that. So with this new
legislation, what guardrails do
you have on programs to ensure
that tire recycling and dumping
remains a priority.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so this
will remain a priority. There's
actually a position fully
dedicated to tire dealing with
tires around the state that will
continue. Um, and again, as we
understand what needs are being
met or not met, we'll continue
to to watch as this continues to
move forward, we have no reason
to believe that the current
situation and the current needs
will continue to be met.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady with that I'm
hoping.
This is my first one so I'm
hoping we have a friendly
amendment, but I do have an
amendment if I could.
Right, let's, uh, walk.
And can I have a roll call
please call and we'll wait,
we'll.
Gentlemen, will you kindly read
the bottom on the the the number
on the bottom left. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, it is 0.231611.1.
Fantastic. So this will get
passed out to the membership and
post it online, stand by.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Alright gentlemen, I believe the
amendment is posted online and
has been passed out. Gentlemen,
to explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, in
this amendment, all I'm asking
is on page 17, lines 11 through
13, uh, remove the bracket and
the line through the first
priority for funding shall be
abatement of illegal scrap tire,
uh, du dump sites.
And the recycling of scrap tires
and online 14 insert an opening
bracket before the subsection
designation B.
gentle lady, is this a friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker, it's
friendly.
We care about mitigating tire
waste in the state. All the
same, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Fantastic. Is there an objection
to adopting the amendment?
See none, we have an amended
bill.
Gentlemen, you sell the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. That's, that's
really important to us, um, down
in, in my area, so, uh,
appreciate you accepting the
amendment.
My pleasure. Thank you
gentlemen. There's further
debate. The general leader from
Santa Fe, Representative Lujan.
There's further debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan. I was
about to stand up, Mr. Speaker.
Oh, you know, your name came
off. Um, my apologies. I was
taking it off for you, Mr.
Speaker. Uh, sorry. Yeah, no,
don't do that. These guys will
take the name off otherwise it
looks like you don't want to
debate. I'll come back to you
gentlemen. We'll go first to the
gentator from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, um, with the
gentle lady from, uh, Santa Fe,
um yield. I yield to my
neighbor. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, uh, gentle
lady, um, I too have signed on,
I've signed on to this bill.
This is a, a subject matter that
I am very, very.
Um, interested in, I've been
working on actually uh quite um.
Quite a lot on, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and
Can you, um, clarify the, the
regenerative economic.
Um, advancements we could make
by implementing this law, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's one of the most exciting
things about this bill is that a
lot of entrepreneurs are really
thrilled to do business in New
Mexico. Um, there's, of course,
working with local governments
to be able to meet the needs of
local communities. Some of that
means thinking about new
packaging. Some of that means
thinking about current waste
streams that can be upcycled
into something new, um, that
could then supply folks, uh, a
new and innovative product, uh,
very exciting opportunities all
around the state. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I think that this is one of
the best things that we can be
doing for our states and really
putting the funding in the
economic advantages in place for
this. I feel like this is an
economic, um,
Development opportunities that
we are, we are.
I would think we are kind of
behind on, but I think we're
getting ahead of with something
like this, and I wanted to say
and take this opportunity to say
how much I really do support
this bill and, and everything
that it does, there is a, there
is an opportunity here for us to
really be innovative in our
states and really take the
opportunity as a.
Energy states to say we are
going to to step back and look
at all the opportunities and,
and the waste management that
can be inclusive through through
everything we do in our state,
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
um.
One of the things that
That I really like is that it's
system focused approach the
restorative and generative
regenerative, um, economy that
we can build through this, so I
wanted to say thank you for
building the uh bringing this
bill forward and for all the the
opportunity that this is gonna
bring our state. I think that we
are in a prime time with our
budget and with the the funding
that we have um for our state
that this is these are this is
the best uh foot forward if you
will, and if you wanted to add
to any of that, I.
I'd be happy to hear anything
else.
I fully agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Speaker, thank you
gentlemen thank you for the
opportunity.
There's further from San Juan,
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield? I will yield
to my friend Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was
going to offer a friendly
amendment that we uh publicly
flog people who go out to our
state lands and our federal
lands and drop off tires and
everything, but I, I don't know
if you'd accept another uh
friendly amendment. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'm anti-violence, so
the flogging is the part that I
may have some, you know,
problems with, but otherwise, I
agree on principle what we're
trying to do here, Mr. Speaker,
General. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. Just, just one
quick question. I'm, I'm always
Turned about our, our, um,
municipalities in our counties.
This does not mandate anything
to any one of them, but if they
choose and if they have
something in place, this will
help them to even achieve better
outcomes in there right now.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
precisely that, um, no, no
mandate to do so. However, what
we've learned in the many years
of not having amended this is
that local governments have been
applying for years and being
denied the opportunity to
upgrade.
local, um, recycling or uh
mitigate their local, um,
situations, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to the tune of
millions of dollars that have
been asked for and requested for
that have been in the budget,
but because we hadn't um allowed
for the ability to, to fund it,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, these
local, uh, governments have not
been getting the funding that
they need.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, that wraps it up for
me.
Thank you, gentlemen. There's
further debate, gentlemen from
Lincoln and Otero Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is
gentle lady Yield, Mr. Speaker,
to my friends.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So I, uh, I never,
I have, I've been sitting back
listening to the bait and I
haven't heard how, how does this
program, how does it get
measured? How do we know we're
doing good things.
As with our current mechanism,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
hazardous waste bureau, the
Waste Bureau generally, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, puts out
reports every single year. NMED
has an annual review. Um, we
look at all the different
aspects and that's why we know
what's being underfunded
currently with what folks have
been applying for, um, so we'll
be able to continue to look at
that and also what new programs
may be up and coming that come
through this bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and I know it might not
pertaining exactly to the bill,
but as far as the tire
abatement, what programs are we
looking at, uh, you know, as far
as, and I, I know you have your,
your experts there. Are we
grinding them? Are we bailing
them? Are we making fences? What
do we, what are we doing with
those tires?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so, um,
I know that in my community,
some folks make flower pots out
of them, but it's up to you
really what you want to do
personally, but Mr. Speaker
General and systematically they
mostly go to Texas, um, and
locally what they're done,
what's being done is they are
being ground up and they are
being reused for a specific
purpose. We may have expansion
opportunities to be able to do
that recycling here as well, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and the reason I
bring that up is I, in my
community, uh, we have Green
Tree solid waste, and they
bailed a lot of tires and they
built a fence and they put
stucco all the way around it and
you would never know that
they're tires and, you know, I
was just bringing that up to
see, you know, I know we talked
about the affordability, and I
know it costs a lot of money to
grind tires. When they grind
those tires, Mr. Speaker.
Are we putting them into like
tracks for high schools, where,
where does that stuff go?
Yeah
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so when
they get, when it does get
ground up and repurposed, it
goes into the open market, so we
are not tracking if it's staying
locally at this point or just
out into
The broader market.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for that answer,
gentle lady. And what safeguards
exist to prevent, uh, misuse and
mismanagement of funds, who, who
oversees that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
again, the statewide, of course,
finance mechanisms will be
looking at this, but there's
also, which I love the title,
the Raid Alliance.
Which comes in an oversees
everything that's being spent,
how the programs are being run
and oversees what's going on in
order to make sure that our
funds are being spent to the
best of their abilities, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I always like to
see good oversight for our
money, you know, we want to make
sure that it stretches as, as
far as we can get it to stretch.
So when you were bringing this
bill forward, were you looking
at other states and, and, uh,
are there other states doing
this and are they, are they
presenting good yields.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so the
RAD Act that we do have here in
New Mexico is pretty unique to
New Mexico, but that said, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, the
programs that we're seeing are
happening all across red and
blue states, all across the
country, um, and seeing great
returns on investment and, and
again, the opportunity to talk
to industry about closing that
loop on waste and, and really
being able to be innovative
about how to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. And you know,
the last conversation we just
had on the alliance. How's that
alliance made up? Who makes that
alliance up.
I
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
they're um in the RAID Act,
which is not in this bill today,
is already current law, um,
there it lays out all the
different folks that will be
appointed to that at whatever
times, and then of course, the
governor appoints as well. So
that's unfortunately just not in
front of us today.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. And I would be
remiss if I didn't bring up at
least one tax question. So does
this, could this possibly, um,
Could our constituency be
burdened with any kind of taxes
on this. Nothing like that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. no further
debate later. I now move that
House government and economic,
please get me to the end of
that, Mr. Speaker.
The motion would be, I now move
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 291 as
amended
now.
We are a final passage of House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 291 as amended. The
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 60 in the affirmative, 2 in
the negative. House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 291 as amended has duly
passed this house.
Gentlemen from Rio Ariba
Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Lente. Are you
ready on item number 31. Yes,
Mr. Speaker, would you please
give me to that point, sir?
necessary for placing House Bill
199 on final passage has been
taken, and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Bill 199 allows
the taxation and revenue
Department to share certain tax
data with the legislative
finance committee for use in
their evaluations with that I
now for questions. There is a
debate, gentlemen from.
Juan, Representative Montoya.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Does the gentleman yield, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Um
This is needed um.
Maybe you could describe to the
body a little bit about some of
the issues that we have between
uh the different reports that
come to us maybe from TRD and
maybe there's a discrepancy that
we get from LS LFC staff. Could
you walk through that just a
little bit for the body.
Sure, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
in body what happens is that we
rely a lot on the legislative
finance committee to provide FIR
or fiscal impact reports for
anyone bill that has impact in
any one of our of our committees
and so periodically when it
relates to financial matters,
um, there's a discrepancy
between sometimes data that
comes from the taxation and
revenue department and that
information that the legislative
finance committee has, uh, in
their database so when this
happens uh in that.
discrepancy takes place it's
simply because.
There's not a, a, a direct
sharing of information between
the taxation and and revenue
Department and the legislative
Finance Committee, so it's not
to say that either of them have
bad data. It's a matter of that
through this bill, uh, the
legislative finance Committee
and their staff would then have
better access to the data that
the taxation and revenue
department have uh in their
database.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, however, in
getting this data, um, no, uh,
taxpayers, uh.
Uh, private information would be
shared with LFC, is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
the way that this would work is
that there would be no personal
tax, uh, information shared
other than maybe an aggregate of
of the personal taxation data on
a statewide basis as well as
some business tax data but uh it
would also require that data
shared be based on an MOU or a
strict, uh, agreement between
the taxation and revenue
department and the LFC.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I just wanted to make
sure that the body understood
why we're doing this and that no
taxpayers' information be
compromised. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker further debate,
gentlemen to close Speaker I
move that House Bill 199 did not
pass. We're our final passage of
House Bill 199. The vote is now
open.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 199 has
duly passed this house.
lady from Ber Leo Representative
Dixon, are you ready on item
number 33.
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point? reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 20 as amended on
final passage has been taken,
and it is not subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution the
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 20 establishes the
technology and innovation
division within the New Mexico
Economic Development Department.
In addition, it creates the.
Research, development, and
deployment fund.
And sets up a new uh technology
innovation prize program. These
efforts are geared toward.
Supporting our emerging sectors
like artificial intelligence
quantum, clean energy, water,
biosciences, aerospace and
space.
These high tech industries are
projected to grow by over 30%
over the coming years and New
Mexico needs to be at the
forefront in this, uh, so Mr.
Speaker, I will stand for
questions. There is debate from
Caine Sierra Socorro Valencia,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, kind
lady from Burnley, please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I will yield.
Uh, thank you, kind lady. Um, as
you know, I'm a huge supporter
of bioscience and, and creating
diversity in New Mexico for
sure, especially when it comes
to growing our economy, um, in
committee, I just found a, a
little piece that I would, I
would really like to add and um
uh and when that is in the area
of um.
The board and who's going to be
sitting and helping make these
decisions, so, um, with that,
Mr. Speaker, I have an
amendment.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left, please.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's
231-616.1. OK, let's get that
And I believe the amendment's
been passed out and it is posted
on
Line it it's about to go online,
but young lady, while we do
that, why don't you go ahead and
explain the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, on this amendment, uh, you
know, with all of these that
we're putting together to to um
to have all these people at the
table making, helping make these
decisions. I just thought it
would be good to basically, um,
under F, uh, on page 8 between
lines 8 and 9 insert, one
representative from the private
sector who owns a business and
who on account of the person's
previous vocation, employment,
or affiliation cannot be
classified as a representative
of employers or employees.
We just want as many people, uh,
at the table as possible from
every entity from Leo is it's a
friendly amendment.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is.
Is there an objection to
adopting the amendment?
see none. You have an amended
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank
the kind lady for, um, always
being able to, uh, sit down and
work through this. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Seeing no further
debate generally to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do now
move that House commerce,
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 20 as
twice amended, do now pass. We
are on final passage of Commerce
and Economic Development
Committee substitute for House
Bill 20 is twice amended. The
vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The vote was not closed by about
a 54 in the affirmative, 3 in
the negative House commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 20 is
twice amended. Hauli passed his
house.
Gentle lady from Catherine
Sierrascordo Valencia leader
Armstrong, are you ready? On
item number 9.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point. Let the record
reflect that action is replacing
House Bill 174 and final passage
has been taken, and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. House Bill 174
ensures fair reimbursement for
the over 60 community
pharmacies, and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I stand for questions.
Uh, I now move that House Bill
174 do now passage of House Bill
174. The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The vote's not closed by a vote
of 61 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 174 has
duly passed this house.
The lady from gentleman from
Donana, are you ready on item
number 15.
I am, Mr. Speaker, would you get
me to that point for placing 181
on final passage has been taken
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentlemen to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, this
bill requires state agencies to
submit an accountability and
evaluation plan for programs and
projects that receive grow
funding that I stand for
questions
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Bill 181 do now pass. We are our
final passage of House Bill 181.
The vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative 3 in
the negative. House Bill 181 has
passed his house.
Joey from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business
announcements.
Committee meetings, gentle lady
from Santa Fe Los Alamos,
Sandoval Representative
Chandler, thank you very much,
Mr. Speaker. Your House
Judiciary Committee will meet 15
minutes after the close of the
floor session. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. gentlemen from San
Juan.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
not sure if uh the body is
aware, but uh one of our
sergeant at arms had a new baby
over the weekend.
So
Sergeant Andrew Valencia.
Had a brand new daughter named
Soraya May.
Gentlemen to sing.
Happy birthday.
Uh, day 2, you.
Members take note.
Go look at the baby pictures.
Jet lady from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
House commerce will meet at 1:35
today, 1:35.
It's 157.
I was really sure about that
time there for a while.
15 minutes after the floor,
let's go with that.
Member note.
Gent lady from Taos, Mr.
Speaker, agriculture and Water
Resources Committee will meet
tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock
a.m.
One morning at 9 a.m., but don't
run out the room because we
still have to do committee
reports just heads up.
Gentlemen from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after the conclusion of the
floor in room 307.
Members take note in the
announcements, gentle lady from
Santa Fe. Mr. Speaker, you're a
rural development, uh, land
grants and cultural Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning at 9:00 a.m. in room
305. Members.
Any, any other announcements?
Generally the from
Santa Fe with the announcement?
Members, there is a basketball
game this Thursday.
At
6 o'clock I think. I don't know.
I'm asking for help here phoning
a friend. There's a basketball
game that you all should be
playing in and representing as
well.
gentle lady from
Bri Leibodo Maquili San Juano
Coto Valencia. How is practice
going? Representative of Beta.
You you're the team captain, I
heard.
Very good. We have a lot of
promise and we're still open for
anyone who wants to come out, we
will be practicing shooting,
passing, no look passing
6 a.m. tomorrow morning at Fort
Marcy. Please join us. You only
have 2 more days to get into a
practice, uh, but work on your
shot at any other court that's
open and we are ready to rumble
in the words of Representative
Lord.
All those in favor of allowing
our chief of staff Alisa Mazano
to play in the basketball game.
Say, aye.
I suppose.
The I have it. She shall play in
the game.
And the other announcements.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, uh, Alicia,
tomorrow morning at 6 a.m. we'll
see you there.
Members say no, gentlemen from
No
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports. Clerk to
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 110 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted G Andres from Mr.
Speaker, adoption of a favorable
report for House Bill 110. All
those in favor by say 9.
Alpone, the SAE committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 395 has had
it under consideration reports
saying with recommendation that
it do pass as amended and it's
referred to the taxation revenue
Committee respectfully submitted
Ganra Saro chair, Mr. Speaker,
we adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report for
our Bill 395. All those in favor
75 would say no.
I suppose
the ISI that committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 449 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Gans from chair Mr.
Speaker, movedoption of a
favorable report for Asville
449. All those in favor signify
but say nay.
I suppose
the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
team has been referred Senate
Bill 82 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Gander Smur adoption
of a favorable committee report
for our Senate Bill 82. All
those in favor of saying public
say no.
I suppose nay, the IAic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 386 has had
it under consideration report
and with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption. We
are adoption of a favorable
report for House Bill 386. All
those in favor say a.
All the supposed name, the SAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 493 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and it's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Dowana Johnson, chair?
And.
For an adoption of a favorable
committee report for As Bill
493. All those in favor and if I
say no.
I suppose the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 16 as amended, has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass and he's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
16 as amended. All those in
favor signified by saying a.
I suppose nay.
The eyes have a community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 36 as amended, has
had under consideration report,
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair? Dobson. We're an adoption
of a favorable committee report
for Senate Bill 3636 as amended.
All those in favor of saying I
would say 9.
I suppose.
The ISI, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 124 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson chair.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
124 as amended. All those in
favor say a.
I suppose nay.
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 163 as amended has
had it under consideration
reports seen with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted to Johnson, chair.
Move adoption. We are on
adoption of a favorable
committee report for Senate Bill
163 as amended. All those in
favor and if I say no.
Elio's name.
Yeah I have a committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Final call for announcements.
Final call. All right, folks,
that will conclude our 3rd
reading for today. Enjoy
afternoon committees, but before
we break, gentlemen from San
Juan.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. I hope
you'll indulge me for two today.
One's a bad dad joke. What's the
most ordered thing and, and I
have to say this is in honor of
Representative De Hochmanvi
Aviation Day. What's the most
ordered thing by pilots in a
restaurant.
Gentlemen, you've stumped us.
Hot wings.
Um
Mr. Speaker,
pilots flying along, and he
comes on the intercom and he
says, ladies and gentlemen, of
good news and bad news.
Bad news is we're lost.
The good news is we're making
great time.
Uh
And with that folks, we
concluded the day lady from
Berlio. Well, young lady from
Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, um, in the interest
of, uh, notoriety. I thought I
would compete with
Representative Duncan, um, what
did the two oceans say to each
other?
What did they say to each other,
gentle lady?
No they just waved.
Oh, you've got competition,
General Juan. You better step up
your game.
lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I move the house
stand in recess until 10:30
tomorrow morning.
The recess until 10:30 tomorrow
morning.
Members, I'll direct your
attention to the screen for some
cute baby pictures.
Congratulations once again
beautiful.
