Mexicans whereas transparency
related to the expenditures in
the junior bill allows for a
better assessment of their
marriage.
And whereas it is necessary for
the New Mexico state legislature
to convene at the state capitol
building to reassess the
expenditures in Senate bill
forty eight and provided relief
and provide relief from rising
costs now therefore I Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor the state
in New Mexico by virtue of the
authority vested in me by
article four section six of the
New Mexico constitution do
hereby issue this proclamation
and called the fifty fifth
legislature of the state of New
Mexico into a special session at
nine o'clock A. M. on Tuesday
April fifth twenty twenty two at
the state capitol building in
Santa Fe.
In accordance with article four
section six of the New Mexico
constitution this special
session is called for the
purpose of considering and
enacting legislation concerning
the falling objects and no
others.
Item one implementing measures
to alleviate economic pressure
due to rising cost to
reassessing the expenditures
listed in Senate finance
committees up to percent of bill
forty as amended enacted by the
fifty fifth legislature second
session twenty twenty two and
making appropriations and
transparent manner that fully
funds projects and complies with
article nine section fourteen of
the New Mexico constitution and
item three appropriating
provided cash balances for the
expenses of the fifty fifty
provided third special session
twenty twenty two.
Witness my hand increases to New
Mexico Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor the speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
ask unanimous consent that the
house of representatives for
seed subject to revision under
the rules adopted by the second
session of the fifty fourth
legislature and amended by the
second session of the fifty
fifth legislature no objection
it is so ordered speaker the
generals really I ask unanimous
consent that the members of the
house of representatives elected
or appointed to serve in the
second session of the fifty
fifth legislative constant the
house of representatives for the
third special session section is
ordered Mr speaker.
Jennifer really if the speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
officers of the house of
representatives elected at the
second session of the fifty
fifth legislature be designated
the officers of the third
special session no objections
order.
Mr speaker.
The gentleman for earlier I ask
unanimous consent that the house
proceed to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered
morning everyone.
Just I thought I was getting out
you keep calling me back in.
Stacey everyone hear.
we I want to give folks a sense
of what's going to happen today
I think
we are going to have introduced
in this chamber house bill one
which will be the legislation
providing for the costs of this
special session and a few other
items we will have house bill
two that is primarily the tax
rebate bill
both bills will be heard in the
Appropriations Committee then
house bill two will be heard in
the tax committee then we will
proceed to third reading on
those pieces of legislation we
also have guests Representative
Maestas who will be with this at
some point athletes from volcano
Vista high school that will be
here rule welcome them on the
floor when they arrive and
congratulate them on their
championships.
And we will then consider the so
called junior bill that is being
considered first in the Senate
but we Senate bill I presume
Senate bill one.
And that will be it.
Okay the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker
Just the one to ask a question
of the state of the chair and
that is in the governor's
proclamation she referred to of
certain items that were in the
junior bill that violated the
anti donation clause in that
same proclamation Mr speaker
she is asking for what we will
be hearing today a tax rebate
bill which I would assume would
be checks that would be given
directly to individuals
is there and I know that's going
to bring the questions up so I
just have a question how how are
we going to handle this bill in
a way that the state treasurer
doesn't challenge I believe
a year ago in the first regular
session we try to introduce a
bill that would have given pay
for for for
staff working in the building
during the pandemic we wanted to
give them a little
something for their being here
and supporting our efforts and
the treasurer threatened a
lawsuit because of the anti
donation clause I'm just
wondering Mr speaker how how we
gonna have the handling this tax
rebate bill in a way that it
will not violate the anti
donation clause.
Gentleman.
We will get into this detail in
the tax committee
so you can answer questions
there in the meantime it was the
state auditor not the treasure
those were not tax rebates and
the payments for maybe not with
the auditor's concerns
notwithstanding and what we're
talking about the tax bill are
rebates so that's sort of a
summary of the answers but I'm
sure we can get into further
detail the tax committee thank
you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I will go to the next
order of business introduction
of legislation hearing no
objections so ordered.
Clear to read.
House bill one introduced by
Representative have yet Martinez
an act relating to legislative
expenditures making
appropriation for necessary
expenses of the third special
session of the fifty fifth
legislature and for State
Capitol Building system upgrades
and renovations declaring an
emergency house bill one
introduced by Representative
Martinez house bill one having
been read twice by title.
I refer pursuant to article four
section six of the constitution
to the appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill to introduced by
representatives Chandler Herndon
Martinez and Senator Gonzales an
act relating to household relief
creating supplemental twenty
twenty one income tax rebates
providing relief payments to
state residents not eligible for
the rebates authorizing a
transfer from the tax
stabilization weaver reserve if
revenues and transfers are not
sufficient to meet
appropriations due to the cost
of the rebates and relief
payments making appropriations
declaring an emergency House
Bill to.
Bill two having been read twice
by title.
Pursuant to article four section
six of the constitution I refer
to the appropriations and
finance committee events
taxation and revenue.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I will go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Your objections ordered.
Thank you.
Really okay now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until till one PM no objections
so ordered.
The funding and second the
motion.
Really.
The grant unanimous consent that
the rules be suspended in the
the journal show that all those
president morning session are
present in the afternoon
session.
No objections so ordered.
Ten eight million Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended of the
wreckage showed that the journal
has been read in full and
approved subject to revision and
approval of the rules and order
of business committee objection
it is so ordered.
The generally Representative
mass this do we have an ETA on
for the gentle lady from
Bernalillo do we have an ETA on
the athletes thank you Mr
speaker members they think
should be here within five
minutes.
Five ten minutes they're just
they're just pulling up.
Okay so they will do is we will
ask them to I don't imagine
we'll have more than an hour in
the for priest Committee us just
go ahead and add up to committee
and then will welcome them when
we come back to the floor okay
the gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan thank you Mr
speaker good morning everyone
I'd like to announce that house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet immediately
thank you Mr speaker.
Ten three oh seven our committee
room.
Members take note the gentle
lady from Los Alamos.
Mr chair Mr speaker we house
taxation and revenue will be
meeting at the conclusion of the
Appropriations Committee.
Yes and will have to come down
to the weight workers will come
down to the floor we will
consider the committee reports
if any from the appropriations
and finance committee and then
we'll go up to the tax committee
okay.
The gentle lady from grant
Hidalgo and Sierra thank you
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the committee I
just wanted to note we had a lot
to celebrate across the state as
we watch the governor's spends
the entire weekend promoting it
legalize recreational marijuana
I am calling in and asking that
she would spend as much time
talking about how dangerous it
is for minors the brain damage
that occurs the the illnesses
that can result from minors
consuming marijuana.
Mr speaker we know that just
yesterday and I will go down as
a lemon tree fourteen students
consumed edibles and I hope the
governor will put some effort
into promoting and and
preventing this as well thank
you.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I've introduced house
bill three and house bill four
and they are to address a
problem that this state has now
and when we look at last Friday
we
allow recreational marijuana.
In twenty seventeen the U. S.
Supreme Court.
The New Burchfield verses North
Dakota said that if you will if
you are rested for DWI and you
are to be tested it has to be
done by a search warrant.
New Mexico does not allow a
search warrant for misdemeanor
DWI.
That is D. W. I. one two and
three.
And
Most of the D. W. I. legislation
that we were taking blood tests
from or in the hospital because
of a traffic crash.
I have introduced legislation
previously to go ahead and
follow what other states did
with our recreational more of
marijuana that five nanograms
would be considered a per se
meaning point quality would be
similar to point zero eight.
Remember that they had to be
under arrest for DWI to begin
with.
We saw on the news last week
reported on channel four where
they were talking about
Colorado experienced a hundred
and seventy five percent
increase hundred seventy four
percent increase in marijuana
impaired drivers after of
legalization.
We would be naive to.
Think that we won't see similar
results.
The last time our scientific
lab.
In New Mexico.
Tested blood for DWI was twenty
eighteen.
After that point there's no
misdemeanor search warrants for
DWI arrest and so the only way
to test for marijuana is by
blood.
In in twenty eighteen what they
reported and you can find this
in my FIR for twenty twenty one
house bill one seven one eighty
seven drugged driving is that
approximately ninety percent.
Please say that again ninety
percent.
Of those individual blood tests
that they did were positive for
a controlled substance other
than alcohol.
I think it's imperative that we
take this legislation up.
House Bill three million deals
with the blood draw and house
bill four yield with the per se
amount.
For a cannabis.
Anyway Mr speaker I I'd like for
us to consider that thank you.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
They were speaker I move that
the house stand in recess
subject to the call of the
chair.
House will be back that would
save let's stay close no go too
far maybe we'll be back in about
an hour at ten thirty.
House in recess subject to the
call the chair.
