Here.
Chair for already here.
Sure we have a quorum thank you
now we will go to house bill one
thirty eight thank you
Representative yeah.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I am
humbled to be here with you
today and protecting house bill
one thirty eight I'm especially
humbled because over my years of
getting to do advocacy in New
Mexico and leaning into criminal
legal reform I went into the New
Mexico sentencing commission and
the commission which you'll hear
more about shortly is a group of
stakeholders that have a deep
bench reflective of their
expertise in professional
positions but really represent a
bipartisan effort
to learn study and consider
policies that come back to New
Mexico's criminal legal system
so through their research arm
and their bipartisan advocacy I
found the sentencing commission
to be a trusted body in New
Mexico also before I pass it to
my experts here today.
H. B. one thirty eight is
amending statutes related to the
assessment and collection of
court fees fines and costs I
will say out loud I have
a companion bill of sorts that's
also moving through the
legislative process that
addresses fees directly but I
want to share about and have it
on the record that these
important conversations we're
having today are because of the
years and leadership and vision
of the collective sentencing
commission to the center these
issues and name how important it
is that we address the
collateral consequences of these
fees and that we have honest
conversations about the impacts
of fines and fees on New Mexican
families every day so again just
a shout out to Douglas cover
here to Linda Freeman to the
entirety of the sentencing
commission the conversations
were having on this bill and on
the companion bill one thirty
nine are because of their
leadership in efforts and they
need to be commended for that
for that for that and and thank
you offered for bringing us to
this conversation today that
with the field please explain.
thank you Representative and
thank you for saying the nice
things about the commission
madam chair my name is Douglas
Carter I am the deputy director
of the New Mexico sentencing
commission and for the
committees so the committee
knows our executive director
Linda Freeman and our director
of research Nancy Shane are also
in the audience if this
questions you might have that I
can't answer the sentencing
commission I just remind you
really quickly because I know
you're on a tight schedule is
are made up of twenty seven
members their members appointed
from both parties and both
chambers the dust a
Representative victim advocates
are representative of the PED's
a representative Representative
DPS is corrections department
the state office of the courts
this magistrate judges it's on
the commission's district judges
so it really is actually also
education and behavior health
services division so it really
is the spectrum of who might
touch criminal justice issues in
the state of New Mexico counties
also as a share for the
commission so it's pretty much
everyone that the legislature in
its wisdom could think of who
might touch pro justice issues
is representative on the
commission this bill it's the
thirty of this bill is coming
before the legislature it came
in front of this committee
passed out of this committee
last year madam chair.
hit just the highlights because
again I know you have to be back
on the four four thirty I
believe.
but this bill is as the title
says it provides flexibility for
the payment of fines fees and
costs it looks at standardising
some practices when payment
plans are created in the courts
it provides some additional
flexibility and options for
community service options it
increases conversion rates when
you have to be incarcerated
whether in jail or prison and do
of payment of your financial
burden
And it allows for and this is
going to be one change from the
base all last year it allows for
indigenous people it says that.
for costs and fees on should not
be assessed on indigent persons
in the last section of the bill
last year that bill right court
costs fees or fines due to some
of the discussions and part of
the compromise
the commission process and in
the debate in the legislature
remove fines from the bill
that's that one where changes
the only difference between the
bill we saw last year madam
chair the bill you have before
you I'm happy to go into any
details Madam chair for the
members of the committee but
since this is a piece of
legislation the committee is
pretty familiar with
able stand for questions thank
you madam chair.
No thank you madam chair.
I'll go to the audience those in
opposition.
Thank you okay would you like to
come up and.
There.
This.
Yeah
we're trying to do L. S. sixty
and ninety three hours so I will
be very quick thank you madam
chair Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyists for the city of I'm
sorry.
City City of Bloomfield in the
city of Farmington and I visited
with the representative
weeks respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill we
appreciate all the work that
she's done but the city
Bloomfield court really needs
the fees that they that the
apply and larger courts like the
city Farmington we feel we the
the court deals with local
ordinances local programs and
things like that and and losing
these fees would be a hardship
to those two courts so for those
reasons we we respectfully
oppose the bill thank you madam.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition.
Okay is there anyone in on C..
It is in opposition.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is ed Gillis
my company help that LFC is
contracted by the New Mexico
Human Services Department to
provide additional in year
services to the ranger program
in past years I worked as a case
manager for this program and
have served in this program for
more than twenty years I'm also
a certified brain injury
specialist trainer because the
brain injury program receives
its funding stream from port
fees people served by this
program people living with brain
injury are directly impacted
it's important to understand
that the brain you injury
program is a pair of last resort
we knew that it will only pay
for services when no one else
will without fully funding this
program people living with brain
injury will have nowhere else to
turn for services they need as
you consider this bill please
consider the lives of people
that are supported by the
funding source that comes from
these court fees and ask
yourself.
If any funding is lost for these
people where we make it up.
That's all I have thank you for
your time and consideration.
Thank you.
At.
It worked.
Table start on this side in the
back.
Yeah they.
Or if you just want to come up
and then you can.
Be ready to speak.
Okay on this side your right
side anyone here in support.
If you would like to speak on
it.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Jason Clark with the.
my name is Clark with the
administrative office of the
courts and we do support the
majority of this bill and the
intent of this bill in the
conversation
that we've had with the
sentencing commission and
sponsor to reduce the impact of
these funds and fees on
Court customers of less means we
do have some concerns about the
administrative impact that this
bill would have if the funding
is not eliminated and replaced
with general funding but
otherwise we do support the
intent and purpose of this bill
thank you thank you at.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is my call to I'm a former
public defender in the current
state director of the fines and
fees justice center we've had
the privilege to work with the
sentencing commission and the
courts over the last three years
on various efforts to eliminate
fees in the state of New Mexico
and we feel
extremely lucky that we have so
many administrators that are
willing to put New Mexicans
first in their families and also
look for steady funds steady
streams of revenue so that we
can fully fund all the programs
that are important to us thank
you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am satellite
Jodhi community engagement
specialist New Mexico you of New
Mexico speaking on behalf of
them today it will support this
bill it's always a good time to
make progressive change that
makes addresses system better
more equitable but is especially
now that New Mexico families are
struggling with inflation and
recovering from the pandemic a
twenty twenty one survey found
that sixty percent of New Mexico
families have less than one
thousand dollars in savings for
financial emergencies at thirty
five percent had less than a
hundred dollars state board
financial emergencies so
providing more options for
repayment of court that I would
bring much needed relief to
thousands of New Mexico families
so once again I urge you to pass
bills thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
legislative coordinator for the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association we
appreciate the work of the
sponsors and the sentencing
commission on this bill we know
that fines and fees plays a part
in recidivism and anything we
can do to address the collateral
consequences of those who find
themselves in the criminal legal
system is going to help lesson
in the amount of people that are
in that system as we all work
and we appreciate this bodies
work to make our state a safer
place thank you very much for
your support.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Weaks are
registered lobbyists for
Burleigh county really okay as
student support of these types
of measures for a long time
really it's about fundamental
fairness and figuring out of put
people back in a good position
once they get out of jail
obviously there's some people
who go to do you see that this
really is about them this is
about people who are facing
shorter periods of time coming
out of county jails when they
get out if they have significant
court that makes it just that
much harder to get back on their
sheep which leads to recidivism
so for the points that were
previously made as well as those
this is also an economy issued
less people in jail the more the
state and the counties can save
for just resources another more
beneficial things than just
incarcerating somebody pending
at trial so for those reasons
and others we stand in support
of this thank you.
Anyone on the side.
Hi everyone.
There.
It one minute.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for house bill one
three eight with flexibility in
fines and fees as a brain injury
survivor I stand in support of
this bill would house bill one
thirty nine which removes the
fees for the Brady tree service
fund of five dollars and a
moving violation conviction that
maybe presented the difficulty.
The US social justice issues I
completely agree with and stand
in support of the burden would
be lessened on those who cannot
afford it I have paid the five
dollar fee on a moving violation
where I was not at fault but I
did utilize the systems of the
court and I have been of a
recipient of social security
disability income which
considers me to be low income
thank you very much sponsor
Cadena madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you.
Others.
Go ahead Diane.
Thank you madam chair I don't
know if your microphone is
working because I can hear other
people but I hear you very well
do you hear me OK.
Yes we can hear you.
Okay thank you
my screen with my comments just
went blank and I just want to
say that as I read through the
bill I was just struck with
wonder pragmatic in common
sensibility is I really like
that it's it's jail time is an
option that it's paid or you get
credit for an hour every hour of
the twenty four hour day I think
that is really good thing and I
love the way it is makes things
more equitable for people and
Thank you so very much.
Thank you.
Go ahead with a look.
Thank you I also I just want to
thank everybody for being here
today and listening to us I also
involved with those that have
brain injuries and that utilize
a brain injury service one of
the coordinators and so I just
wanted to say that I wanted to
ensure that the funding is kept
in place for those that have
brain injuries that utilize
brain injury service fund
because it is definitely much
needed service for them they
benefit in so many different
ways without that funding it
would be very challenging for
them so I also want to stand in
support in saying that we want
to just ensure that that funding
is definitely there for those
that are receiving services or
brain injury service fund thank
you.
Go ahead you have one minute.
Madam chair Deborah Condit with
that New Mexico voices for
children actually funding we
stand a strong part of house
bill one thirty eight I like to
think the sponsor for her
continued championship on this
bill over the last few years.
These are burden on the poor in
those who are indigent have a
greater likelihood this payments
which means they'll be more
likely to get failure to pay
summons or warrants and this is
that it this is an inequity
issue in New Mexico and and we
need to find ways to help those
without money get through the
season and more so we stand in
strong support of this bill and
and thank you for hearing us.
Students.
I will.
Go ahead well.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is fourth bomb
Gardner internet Center on Law
and the we stand in support of
this bill
relying on these fines and fees
is unreliable and unfair
collection fees fission and
expensive of New Mexico spends
good money after bad going after
just collecting a single dollar
of these finds these fees are
not meant to be punitive and
exist only to raise money for
state and local governments but
the end of totaling in the
hundreds of dollars and can be
unaffordable for somebody with a
low wages.
Easily to increase incarceration
while undermining community
health and safety eliminating
fees will free up law
enforcement in courts to focus
on public safety and provide
much needed relief to struggling
families for these reasons and
many other reasons given here
today we support this bill thank
you.
You.
Right do you have any closing
remarks the thank you madam
chair.
Thanks committee.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative this sounds
like a great idea my only
concern is like bringing to
provide some of those I know
that the county speaking became
more to get money.
What we could but the other GOP
why those things is there a plan
to make sure that those talks
don't act like.
Thank you madam chair
representative Thompson this
continues to be a certain for
myself and countless advocates
that have considered this policy
in front of us it is a real that
by eliminating fees or in the
case of this bill and acting and
ability to pay assessment that
there will be these these what
would not be continue to be
collected in New Mexico when I
first got into this effort
because I've heard and now
learned so much from those that
use the right injury trust in
other programs that these
programs seem to be well founded
they seem to be evidence based
and they seem to be of critical
service an important to New
Mexicans and for me that makes
my commitment to this policy
even deeper these funding
sources these programs deserve
clear and consistent revenue
every year no matter what the
problem with the funding is that
it's unreliable and inconsistent
the overwhelming majority of New
Mexicans can't afford to pay
anyway so these programs are
waiting on cents on the dollar
hoping and not being able to
plan our programmer budget that
they might get enough for their
for their service is not here
my conversation in front of
other committees and when I
eventually get to House
Appropriations Committee is that
we need to make significant
investment in these programs
Madam chair representative
Representative I've committed
you and others that have used to
renewable dollars to send money
where it's desperately needed
that should not be how we fund
vital services it's
inappropriate it's irresponsible
and I am on many I think that
these programs need real funny
it is a real that they will lose
funding with this and I think it
the onus is on all of us as
legislators to turn and how
those hard conversations with
appropriators as we often do
about really putting money where
New Mexicans need it on one last
piece I had assumed hearing
about the more of these programs
that these.
Ms must be bringing in millions
of dollars because that's how
desperate these are if I
remember correctly with my pilot
the folder in front of me
unfurnished fortunately the
brain injury fund brings in
about three hundred thousand
dollars a year we hear about how
critical it is to New Mexicans
well yes we are implicating that
source of funding that they have
currently this is out of an
agency HSD that has a budget
about the size of New Mexicos
billions and billions of dollars
so I frankly think the onus is
on us on the the cabinet the
agency and others to make sure
we make meaningful investments
in these programs because New
Mexicans do depend and rely on
them and I will stand next to
you in that effort thank you
madam chair thank you for.
Representative long.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative could not get to
meet you in person finally.
And so I just have questions
regarding your bill.
So
Can you tell me how how these
defendants.
They got these bees in the first
place Madam chair
representative.
Yes madam chair representative
block I've I've only been the
star of your blog so I also am
excited person.
This bill addresses both fines
and fees on the side with your
question this point at we're
looking at postage Education
fees so that means someone
either to traffic court because
New Mexico.
Different than many many states
has a track record that's
connected to our criminal legal
system he then traffic court or
in a criminal court someone has
received a conviction and then
these fees automatically are put
on top of that conviction and
the the person is obligated to
pay well provide the different
kinds of
intended to be part of the
punishment these are not fees
are funding the operations of
the Courts for someone with the
commitment to the constitution
that I've heard you talk about I
understand madam chair and
representative that the courts
are branch of government an
aspect is my fundamental belief
that we as the state should be
funding that branch of
government and not putting the
onus of those court operations
on the backs of New Mexicans
they can't afford to pay them at
this point you'll see that in
this legislation the courts do
not have the capacity to waive
fees they just are stuck on
their after the education
happens after the conviction
comes along.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and you know I
agree with you I think that.
Probably the better way to fund
these through our system I think
that these are important funds
that are funding that so
I'm just reading through your
bill and I'm.
I'm wondering what this require
a indigenous that's meant for
everybody who would get saying I
think it's speeding traffic
tickets accidents Madam chair
representative.
Yes Madam chair representative
I'm gonna let Douglas answer
that question but yes this bill
does connected to parts of New
Mexico system both the the part
concerning traffic violations
and The New Mexico's full on an
expansive criminal legal system
thank you representative madam
chair Representative black this
would require an assessment but
to bicker these assessments are
formal presentation of evidence
and whatnot and that's there's
been some confusion in past
years but this legislation that
might require a full homes many
trial on the person's income by
understanding not practice
myself but my understanding from
practitioners is that often
these are
can be rather quick and dirty
you have the money yes so if you
roll up or.
Someone knows that you came to
court
our state is in you know maybe
you know you might all of the
might be some question there
but.
Generally people take it on good
faith whether someone has the
ability to pay or not so would
require their would be possibly
that extra step in traffic court
so again I was having some
conversations and my
understanding is that people
might just wait and they might
just want to pay what they have
to pay thank you know not go
through the steps of the
indigenous assessment so this
possible action administrative
part.
But we expect that would be
minimal and in the larger scheme
offset by the
the monies that court spent
chasing down
these are payable very often I'm
able I fees as you might have in
your materials studies show
Bernalillo county actually
spends more chasing down fines
and fees and it gets returned to
the money loser for that okay
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative but I believe
your bills is that.
It's not section one FC seven
point.
Madam chair representative lock
it sounded like it questions or
if we did just on the traffic
safety but the section here
Representative referencing we
also have new material on page
fourteen of the bill so courts
already do you.
assessments they're already
required because of the.
The indigent population in New
Mexico and across the country of
the Courts already connect them
we are allowing more capacity
for the way that happens and
then some in some ways to
streamline that process like we
see on page fourteen if there's
already an assessments a person
has been deemed needy under the
indigent defense act and then
they are also convicted of a
criminal offense after the
conclusion of that proceedings
they should not be a cap
assessed court costs costs or
fees so again we're trying to
streamline the process connect
the dots between things they
already are part of the Courts
capacity and and practice and
making sure that folks that
don't have the ability to the
pay are paying these.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative but regarding
like this traffic.
I don't think it's currently.
Mandated that there must be a
hearing for indigent see
currently that correct enter.
Madam chair representative the
bill also doesn't require
hearing it's about an assessment
around ability to play and
there's multiple options for how
the assessment may happen
depending on what court you're
in front of.
Madam chair representative I
believe you're right is that
there's not a formalized
requirement at present if it's
a.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative I just need from
some advocates you sent me these
pictures they said it would
probably require the course to
conduct approximately thirty
thousand more traffic hearings a
year and you know I that seems
like a big number to me some
wondering if that's what the
administrative costs of the you
know is it I mean hearing is a
ten minute you're in what would
be regarding that specific
hearing how much time effort
resources we need to go into
that Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
black I don't have a figure.
The cost of those things would
be but again would say there are
multiple mechanisms in which the
some kind of ability to
assessment ability assessment
could be levels depending on the
court depending on top parts of
the process that are already
standardized depending on
whether someone else because
of eligibility requirements
elsewhere so.
Thank you madam chair
representative my understanding
again speak with practitioners
is that these are pretty
informal so it's not again it's
not a mini trial people bring
bank statements etcetera
etcetera that is it can be
Yeah pretty pretty quick and so
it's it's might be thirty
thousand additional questions
asked that I'm not sure the
numbers from but that doesn't
mean full blown sure and we're
anticipating administrative
costs be reduced as well as part
of the anticipated in criminal
cases again looking at the big
picture I'm sorry determination
and agency in the public
defender goes through their
whole process of determining
that fact that you can just roll
that over the course considering
these questions is a an
administrative savings on the
courts so there's this kind of a
give and take but we think in
the balance the courts but
actually coming out ahead both
on a cost basis and an
administrative basis Madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
by our hope that they're easy
painless hearings but you never
know with your our state courts
right but waiting so I'm gonna
go into announces that I see
here it says the the
administrative office of the
courts reports that thirty have
process he's doing with
defendants who are indigent how
would this work with those madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative black
again there's a distinction
between what we're talking about
traffic or criminal courts
because criminal courts are
where you become eligible for a
public defender and so if you're
needs have already been assessed
and you've been determined to
have the eligibility than.
You would also be assumed to not
have the ability to pay when
we're talking about traffic and
you don't have representation in
that same way then
again it does not have to be a
full honor official hearing but
it might be something like you
provide proof that you're a ton
of recipient that your Medicaid
eligible that you would
start a conversation and come to
the courts indicating that you
you don't have the ability to
pay those fines or fees thank
you madam chair representative
so currently regarding traffic
that's not currently under the
AOC.
Plan that helps people who are
you to is that what I'm
understanding the it's my
understanding madam chair and
representative that the indigent
CD comes into play on in
criminal court and it's part of
assessing whether or not that
defendants are given their
constitutional right to
representation would have access
to a public defender in their
case okay thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I think
you're I'm guessing this is
criminal regarding the.
Community service rather than
paying a fine I'm guessing that
probably both as an
administrative cost as well as
some other costs regarding that
so could you just tell me more
about that renewable energy so
right now folks that are facing
these situations I don't have
the ability to pay again option
one and for people that have the
means to do that it's certainly
the option when I've had
capacity so that you to that you
pay your done and done you don't
look back but for folks that
don't have the financial means
to pull that off they have two
options they currently could
elect to do community service
that we have expanded and
clarified the list of what kind
of programming would be eligible
for community service and we've
also expanded the rate at which
your community service hours
would translate into a deduction
up that date you will the other
thing that happens it's still
part of the process here in New
Mexico is that some people
either they haven't had the
opportunity to do community
service.
need to to get this done out of
the way you can also serve a
term of incarceration so go to
jail basically to work down the
debt you owe back to the courts
this is ironic in problematic to
me in a couple of ways mostly
because our counties are bearing
the cost in the burden of
incarcerating someone because
this is not free and those
counties have their daily rates
across the board but they're
pretty expensive right there is
they're stopping their security
there's a lot that of cost that
goes into cars waiting someone
so if that comes to be the
county is paying to lock someone
up and then in turn that person
is working down their debt
ironically they because they're
locked up on a temporary basis
this is not present they don't
have room to get a job so
they're not earning income for
themselves they're not creating
revenue for that County they're
just sitting in a cell as a way
of I guess morally and
potentially paying the money
they open back to the state of
New Mexico by sitting in a cell
so at this bill also does is
change the account of that right
previously in it and current law
you get
Credit for eight hours of
sitting in a jail cell even
though you're obviously locked
up for twenty four we've
extended that time period so
that you would be paid basically
per every hour Peter how do did
that Roose reduced per every
hour I actually think this is
cost savings for the county
because that means you don't
have to lock someone up for as
long as they stay in jail
reducing that at Madam chair
representative
The counties were brought in on
this discussion is that on the
sentencing commission we first
started talking about this bill
three years ago on the counties
expressed support our meetings
at it's a money loser for them
that people come and say to pay
off debt and so they approved it
is to get your question on the
administrative burden and
community service note that the
community service options exist
to present law so all we're
doing is expanding the window
and that's at the same all the
things of the bills that have
the least discussion it was full
support across the board at the
commission so we don't
anticipated additional
administrative burden because
they're just have more options
that judges can give someone and
frankly more useful options that
judges can give someone to help
prevent them from receiving in
the future madam chair thank you
madam chair thank you
representative like to remind.
At hi Sanchez thank you.
As.
Yes because we're already.
Half hours have I.
The committee is quick as I can
so last question so regarding
let's just say there's a person
who.
Is convicted and they're ordered
to pay a fine let's just say
they they're like I'm not to
paid finder's fees to do
community service when the court
and be compelled to incarcerate
them or to to jail them rather.
In that instance madam chair
representative and then when the
cost of finding that individual
in procuring them to get to
where we also carry a burden
madam chair.
Just to clarify first insisting
we madam chair representative
locked there is a distinction
between fines and fees I believe
you just about fines and the
courts already have the ability
to waive fines but not fees so
it would depend on the finer
featuring fees that first of all
yes so that these
if someone refused to pay a fee
and then refuse to do community
service for feet and yes
Representative Mr cover Madam
chair representative is actually
an existing all look on the bill
it's page three it's been
remembered readers.
Subsection D. S. discusses
And if you go down to one twenty
three doing for if the
defendants default was
consummation so basically eight
exactly the situation you just
described
that we've changed in that is
that the conversion rate is
higher for people to say that
I'm just not going to pay so
there is that option existing
law we just change the
conversion rate for the reasons
we are experts Representative so
that conversion rate would go
from eight hours for twenty four
hours to the full twenty four
hours that for a fact the madam
chair representative okay thank
you that's all the questions I
have not checked thank.
Thank you madam chair.
I have some questions on this I
do after member this is going no
sounds familiar over this last
time so Madam chair
representative I want to make
sure I understand so their
fees and tribal court which we
got we went from how they would
go through that with the
assessment which would be kind
of a separate assessment the
criminal court makes sense if
there's like that public
defender that would need to come
with the county there's that I
do agree with
What I do have a little issue
with is
the loss of the fees for the
rural areas is there any
compensation for that for if
they had like I've towards
county very rural area is any
compensation for them in the
percentage of fees that they
would be losing out on or they
just at a loss that's just it
for them Madam chair
representative.
madam chair and representative
this bill does not make any
effort to replace the fees but
as legislators we are committed
to moving those conversations
the reason.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative twenty County
has.
It's not a very prosperous area
and so they do rely on certain
things to make their budgets
the only question same question
I had last time are there any
exceptions for who would be
eligible this of somebody did a
specific requirement may be
eligible somebody was a kind of
fallen right somebody with the
the except for this or would
they still be allowed to have
this
discount are getting discount
would be eligible for not paying
their fees.
Madam chair representative as as
last year it remains that this
is based on ability to pay and
does not late someone's
conviction thank you mentors are
just the same as last time I I
understand exactly we're going
to get it but I don't want to be
breaks path files so I will not
be supported a bill issue
somewhere along the lines of the
make exceptions for that that
they don't get this discount
that they don't get any better
treatment because of the two
separate that that I don't feel
that they should have the
correct some thank you madam
chair representative on
questions that.
Anyone else in the committee.
As all second.
I just like to say that.
We do have other things that
would generate funding for a lot
of these.
Domestic violence and were on.
Injury and also did you live
groups throughout the country
throughout history throughout
the state if we passed things
like the liquor excise.
Contribute to that.
Programs so we have to do
but for to pass in the second
round certainty objection yes
okay we take all.
Representative excuse me
Representative Lara no ma'am
Representative Lord no.
Representative Romero yes.
Senator Thompson yes vice chair
review yes.
Ferrary yes madam chair.
Passes for you to.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Next I didn't so in order okay
so then I guess I'm there yes I
forgot to let.
being no.
She text me I said I'll take it
okay great.
It will your house bill one
seventy seven representative
Thompson will be presenting.
Percent of the act at some point
next door.
You know.
I'm last on the agenda so I
don't know how.
But this is gonna let me and let
me know.
Representative thank you madam
chair members of the committee
this is at my expert witnesses
still Tinker most of you have
been around for awhile know who
he is and he will be my
technical expert essentially
what this bill does is say that
what what happens is that
insurance companies change
what's called there for years
which is that the prescription
drugs that they will cover so if
you've been on a drug for awhile
and then your your plan chooses
to just continue that one it
would be fully out of pocket so
what this bill does is says that
the pharmacist can make a
substitution in order for it to
be covered under insurance or
for it to be less costly if it's
out of pocket page there is a
a place where physicians could
check well prescribers I want to
positions prescribers can check
that says do not substitute and
so are our pharmacists are all
pretty much pharmacies who are
graduating doctors of pharmacy
and they obviously know the
medications very well so this is
just an attempt one more attempt
to try and let people actually
prescriptions don't work if you
can't take if you can't afford
so this is to try and help New
Mexicans four of their
prescriptions and did you have.
I I just like to say that the
intent of this is to make it
easier for the.
Patients to get their
medications when the drug is not
only important so if it's not on
there this would allow
pharmacists to substitute
another drive unless the
positions as do not subject to.
In which case the position is
still in charge physicians hello
can determine what medication
yes it just means that it would
be a little bit.
More difficult to get.
A determination of what manner
or it may make the patient have
to pay cash for the net if the
physician doesn't want to be
substituted plans not gonna pay
for it so there has to be some
decisions if the if the
physician says do not substitute
thank most likely what will
happen is the pharmacist will
call a position asked what they
wanted to use if they want to
see to change that Dr or
leave it as it is so anyway this
is intended to smooth out the
process so patients can get
their medications quicker
and when you're not on the
formulary can delay getting meds
for days and sometimes.
A week or more so the current
need to pass this bill and madam
chair it's the patient always
has the right to say no that
they don't want to substitution
but I'm sure all of probably
everybody in this room has been
frustrated trying to reach
either their doctor's office or
the pharmacy because they're
playing telephone tag to take
care of these that kind of thing
so we want to give the
prescribers and and their
offices and the pharmacists more
time to do their jobs and less
time to chase papers and and
things like that so for that
with that we stand for for
questions.
we'll go to the audience and are
there any
people in opposition.
Hey will start on the side in.
The money.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Barbara
may academic cancer doctor and I
run New Mexico cancer center and
with great trepidation I speak
in opposition to one of
Representative Thomson spills
because I know she shares my
passion for delivering health
care at a lower cost to New
Mexicans that is quality my
concern is that it's better to
be right than fast and as a
cancer doctor sometimes I have
to spend three four weeks
convincing insurance company who
took something off of four
military that this is the right
drug for this patient with these
problems of this cancer if the
pharmacist decides that they're
not going to take the time to
call me the change the drug to
something else in that class of
drugs.
This could be a disaster for my
patients and it's not just
cancer it's multiple sclerosis
any serious illnesses yes there
is a box and I found it
yesterday when I was E.
prescribing a medicine or I can
say do not substitute but that
often doesn't work in for
refills that box often does not
appear so the re feel could be
substituted.
Thank you very much everyone
it's one minute.
Every.
Good afternoon members of the
committee madam chair Debbie my
S. as trainer representing
pharma.
Barbara respectively stands in
opposition to house bill one
seventy seven this bill would
permit therapeutic substitution
a provider prescribed drugs with
drugs in the same therapeutic
class but with different
chemical make ups farming is
concerned that this bill could
be harmful to patient health at
costs to the health care system
and undermine the prescriber
patient relationship these
concerns are only magnified by
the changes to the physician
notification requirements for
biologics solutions in this bill
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you madam chair damage are
representing loveless health
systems and we respectfully
oppose this bill for the reasons
stated by doctor Mack in any I
would add that we would make one
suggestion which is that rather
than notifying the provider five
days after the substitution is
being made we believe the
provider should be notified
prior to making the substitution
so that the position is in a
position to agree or disagree
and not forced to simply check
that box that says no
substitution thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Kerry robin brindar
registered lobbyists the New
Mexico Medical Society many of
our individual physicians have
notified us about this bill
telling us that they have great
concerns we echo a lot of the
sentiments of our on
practitioners here today so we
stand opposed.
Madam chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel
representing the New Mexico
nurse practitioners who also are
very prolific prescribers and
the greater Albuquerque medical
association and for all the
reasons we oppose this bill.
Thank you madam chair members
committee Jason Weaks I
represent Mexico hospital
association and noted or sick
about my clients in a respectful
opposition to the bill not going
to run over territory that's
already been covered we stand in
opposition echo those points and
respectfully oppose thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my
names are called a lobbyist for
G. S. K..
We oppose this bill for the
reasons previously stated at
think we should take into
account the fact that a lot of
people use a number of different
pharmacies when they're filling
their prescriptions and in off
in many cases the pharmacists
may not have the intimate
details of what's going on with
that patient and could
accidentally prescribe something
that could have serious long
term effects it also double the
cost of them needing taking more
prescriptions than what the
appropriate prescription is so
for these reasons we
respectfully stand in opposition
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is TJ tree on
a registered lobbyist for the
bio technology innovation
organization and we respectfully
oppose H. B. one seventy seven I
won't go into the there is a
pretty C. span is busted by the
good doctor of our our sound I
will also testify on behalf of
myself I am on a biologic I will
tell you I got dropped from four
I've been trying to get back on
it was one of the most difficult
situation I've ever faced I
continue to face I can imagine a
pharmacist tell me something
and and interchanging the drug
and I will tell you that it is
difficult with these drugs the
law we put in place when I was a
part of the the lot of women
employers that needs to remain.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you very much.
Anyone else.
Okay.
Okay and those in support of.
Okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen Canaday with the
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter we
stand in strong support of this
bill.
We believe that we believe that
anything we can do to help
people afford their
prescriptions.
Is is good and we so waste we
therefore stand and support
thank you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee I'm Jacque for drugs
I'm at thirty five of of
practice pharmacy for thirty
five years what we're talking
about here is not biologics per
se we're talking about the nuts
and bolts things of everyday
prescribing such as blood
pressure medication such as
things as antibiotics in right
now with page supply chain
issues that we have right now
these things have become
increasingly problematic where
we could probably solve these
things in five minutes as far as
substituting somebody's blood
pressure medication most these
are generic items that I deal
with on a day to day basis these
are things that people need
rapid need to get on rapidly and
not be delayed there but there
therapy thank you very much.
What what what okay.
that.
Okay go ahead Amy you have one
minute.
Madam chair members of the at
the committee thanks for letting
me speak I agree with Mr Delgado
this is not about biologics
cancer drugs this is about the
inhaler medications that.
Formula Aries and big pharma
doesn't let me substitute and so
trying to get patients their
inhaler medications that's what
we're trying to do we're not
trying to practice medicine or
change prescriptions just trying
to get people their medications
that that they need that are not
on formula airy thank you.
Thank you.
Okay would you like to say
anything else and we.
Madam chair by could respond to
one of the comments about
biologics and that is that
Many years ago in this
legislature passed the
legislation to authorize
biosimilars they included the
ability for pharmacists to
substitute biosimilars which is
what down.
T. J. was talking about.
she was part of that process it
was one of the as built I
supported helped with that it
authorize pharmacists to
substitute and I think there.
A lot more dangerous category of
drugs and we're talking about in
this bill we're talking about
day to day drugs that patients
might not be able to access to
take care of their their daily
medication concerns and problems
we're trying to help them get
better access that's a whole
intent of this bill
and I will say I kind of feel
surrounded by that's not new
for.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes Representative no the
committee.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of everything of
this bill came through in hello
health yes thank you.
Using ramps okay so I do have
some questions insurance as a
lesson six hundred is the
signature thing that's supposed
to be this phone box what
happens if the doctor
accidentally didn't check that
do not substitute are there was
a computer error and let's just
say somebody gave some of the
medication that there don't do
well on who would be responsible
for that chair representative.
Madam chair representative work.
I would say.
Of course the pharmacist is
always response you know there's
always when patients.
Have a problem one of the most
recent person pharmacists do
have professional liability that
is required for them to carry
they're not part of the medical
malpractice insurance pool the
next Representative because that
will so richly burdensome on
providers that we maintain
pharmacists liability insurance
so they have a three hundred
million three million dollar
coverage so that for for that
kind of detection the pharmacist
definitely is.
Well I I think generally when
when somebody's gonna be sued
they go on up the chain issue
everybody lives.
Out of pocket.
That farmers again be the first
in the.
Thank you so I got something
handed to me Sir about that
chair representative so Dennison
is a three is that three million
like the average of what
pharmacies get or does that vary
on their maximum.
Madam chair representative war
that that's the insurance policy
maximum limit.
Three million.
So madam chair representative
what happens if let's say there
was multiple times were
medication was given at a
certain pharmacy let's say maybe
five percent Dr and there ended
up being a lot of plans with
that mean that their insurance
would go up for that day maybe
selling not be also for
insurance Madam chair
representative madam chair in
Representative Lord so that the
prescriber is notified within
five days up there's been a
mistake that's ongoing that's a
problem and it shouldn't happen
so.
Madam chair representative so
one of my concern to have last
time would be in the form of
late because my degrees in
psychology and it's I was trying
to revert back to drugs to
psychology so somebody could
So the doctors and patients of a
very very very intimate
relationship.
And what's concerning to me is
that if somebody was on.
listeners all often can't get it
and some of them up you turn and
sorry I suppose I'm not taking
it once happened that let's just
say well the other doesn't
matter
because the the homicidal which
again can be when the side
effects of these drives Tom
Selleck suicidal so my concern
is how do we make sure because I
know we said before there's no
database to rely on there's not
gonna be anything that says yes
you can but don't give them yes
so how do we how do we stop this
from.
If there is a lot of doctors to
pharmacists as well will be
turned works it's also you know
it's in the affirmative it's
going to work with depression
but the side effects or suicide
or.
Homicide and let's say that
doctor does it catch it have how
do we stop that we stop that
process manager.
Madam chair Representative Lord
I don't think solve every
problem I do think that
pharmacists are trained to know
those those issues are they.
Those issues every day and they
deal with them every day they
deal with improper prescribing
every day.
They feel with improper.
Medications one of the things
they do is check for side
effects.
Make sure that the medication is
appropriate for the patient.
Thank you that every day on
every that prescribes so I don't
think that's a.
A new issue.
I.
Everybody in the healthcare
field has engaged drive as and.
So pharmacists have that issue
as well.
And madam chair
it on page three find.
Lines one through six.
Lays out what is not included in
this so if the drug product is
not a biological product a
compounded preparation a
controlled substance and their
therapeutic index drugs I think
a tropic drugs or the subject of
a risk evaluation and mitigation
strategy.
Thank you madam chair
representative we still have
this the problem of I'm looking
at because I've said this before
and I've always that one with
this is the one percent alert
medication that's being every
single time I would drive the
prescribes that needed says I'm
extremely rare conditions that's
me I will always have those and
it's a balancing act between me
and my drive to get to that
point but I've also had not.
I have a word with all to tell
the pharmacist that document is
going to be people that don't
have especially come to certain
medications so how we gonna make
sure that.
The doctor has this intimate
relationship with the person
with whom they know them they
they've gone I mean and I also
did insurance bill and it's also
very first you're going on that
too but how do you how do we
make sure that that person is
going to be given some of the
doctors out of.
She don't and talk about it more
the check box on talk about a
doctor that forgot to check the
check box you think that that's
a green light to go ahead switch
something how would you know
that all of this person is like
me the one percent is going to
work with that Representative
from changing something within
the formulaic Madam chair
representative madam chair
representative.
We can't account for people
making mistakes that's just
that's going to happen if the
doctor forgets to check it's not
really though the bills fault
it's not the pharmacists fault
and as you said if you are one
of those rare people generally
you know that and and I you know
I also will say you talked about
the direct personal relationship
with the health care provider I
bet half the people in here
don't have a health care
provider that they have any sort
of relationship with right now
because there's so much turnover
and then I don't have a a person
who knows me in in small
particularly in small rural
communities the pharmacist may
know that patient way better
than the physician may make go
to you know go to Gallup to see
a position but that the
pharmacist and at no no place
office has a pharmacy so that
was a bad example but a small
local pharmacy will definitely
know the patient much better
than than a medical practice.
Thank you madam chair
representative like that in some
places except if you want to
like about Walmart or CVS where
there is high turnover.
Right down the street for their
what depends actually built
around trying to find the
cheapest one from
pharmaceuticals madam chairman
there also was a big called
synchronous and in full
disclosure I serve on their
board and it is the medical
record
basically having all everyone's
medical records available no
matter where they go and it was
a slow start but it's picking up
the state has funded it so that
there is a central place where a
pharmacist or physician can go
and look at the at what tests
have been done what
prescriptions maybe happened
failed up a lot of information
and it's not a hundred percent
there yet but it's it's moving
along quickly okay madam chair
representative of the other
question I have so having build
insurance and understanding that
and tired nightmare it is very
hard within a position to Parker
body when you say this treatment
is best for the patient or this
prescription is best with
patient you got to go to bat
sometimes to get that specific
description.
And there's a couple things I'm
looking at the capitol one that
doctor put a lot of time in
because of the very
interrelationship to get that
medication.
And again if there was a
computer error or the drive for
about that one time to check
that off.
We don't want that to happen and
I can see the scenarios where
the doctor spent this time and
insurance companies will look
just at home this doctor wanted
this prescription we don't want
to do it because it's very
expensive start right we're
going to see one and that kind
of bills or database I see this
be problematic as.
We're trying to do is best for
the patient okay well this one
over here is less money that's
what the insurance company won
first place nestled one drive
one of how we can avoid that
situation talk about computer
air I'm talking about a doctor
forgets to to check that out
Madam chair representative lord
there's a lot of things the
doctor can do and make a mistake
that would be fatal I mean at
the state was supposed to be
point two five milligrams of
something and they forgot to put
the point and so they gave them
twenty five milligrams that that
is part of medicine is that you
have to be precise and and not
make sure and I mean you know I
probably a pharmacist or
somewhere what would say that's
probably not it and but we the
the physicians offices the
pharmacy spend so much time
trying to contact each other
trying to contact insurance
companies and that's why you
have to wait for in line for two
hours to pick up your
prescription because there's so
much
underlying I won't use the word
I want to use staff.
New
if I could respond as well
Representative Lord I think in
the circumstances described the
doctors would have been
proactive and started on that we
set a time because then they
most likely to do that
Representative was not going to
be a foreigner and so they
started trying to deal with that
with prior authorizations and
other mechanisms that exist so I
I think that the options are
there and and I understand when
mistakes are made
that that's definitely a concern
but pharmacists are trained to
look for those and I think
generally they are able to watch
for those and madam chair
representative so is there any
way for the page let so the
doctor has the option of saying
don't change those does the
patient have the option and work
with how does how does a patient
do that with the Madam chair
representative lard with the
pharmacist the pharmacist says
okay you know you this
medication is in on the formal
areas so I'm going to give you
this the patient and say no.
Okay so that leaves many
questions unanswered
Representative are they going
to.
Because I've always had a bad
reaction to medication are they
going to sit down with them and
literally pull out the whole
things that happen.
Consultations and they never do
that will be some side effects
are they going to this pharmacy
would then go through a complete
consultation with the patient
and say okay these are all the
things and are you taking this
does this interact with that and
do you understand this could
happen if you take this and it's
gonna take a couple weeks to
balance out all this other stuff
but they could go through that
and very comprehensive let X.
basically consultation like a
like a long constitution I just
a couple minutes madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative the pharmacist
have discretion on those things
we don't want to put into law
that you must have a twenty
minute consultation with every
patient who you substituted drug
for that work.
The practice of medicine is
complex and the insurance.
But it makes it at least a
hundred times more complex that
we don't want to Laki and and
say oh you have to do this
because each case is individual.
I thank you madam chair
I can pay you the same question
kind of thing this bill covers
that there is a provision in
this bill that requires a
pharmacist develop above and
beyond their normal patients
canceling.
If they're gonna do this.
W. kind of substitution and that
is in the works at at page three
line twelve patients opt in to
the drug products substitution
and the pharmacist clearly
informs the patient of the
differences in the drug products
and specifies that the patient
may refuse the substitution and
madam chair representative will
they be signing anything to that
effect but they signed a
document that said I had a
consultation I completely agree
I understand when I'm signing in
that going to file somewhere
then go back to the doctor chair
representative.
Madam chair I would say we don't
have that right now I think the
beginning to think more
pharmacists for.
Interject is it up to have a
five day notification yes we do
yes that way there there's
electronic records that they
have done that consultation I
don't.
Forms.
That's not required at this time
coming up on a half hour to
complete please it will belong
to one more question and the I
know but as far as page twenty
after that point I know that we
spoke in the lord that is just a
guy is not rules no it's not
madam chair on the point we
spoke to I spoke to my minority
leader sorry and I don't care to
this I ask for thirty minutes
for each one we're coming up
okay can we call your speaker to
happen come down because you
were the citizens be to all of
you that we are allowed to ask
as many questions as you want as
long standpoint I'm sorry I am
the chair and we have to get
through more bills before we go
as we want to stay here till
midnight yeah I do actually I'm
sorry I missed the night because
our constituents I'm sorry if
you would like to continue with
what I have done that no I have
more questions I'm here nope
madam chair and no you cannot do
that as far as regulations are
we have this discussion with my
more minority leader analysts
are with respect to your speaker
we have the rule that we are the
chair and we are that is it hi
and I already asked for us to be
able to get through the bills
before we go back on the floor
this process I don't care I am
the chairman and I decided
Senator constituents will know
that she doesn't care Madam
chair and Mr sponsor
Representative so in the five
days where that is that going to
be sent back electronically to
the doctor and then or nursing
started New Mexico difference as
that going to have like an alert
for you to see whether they had
noted or not the doctor saw
that.
Madam chair I'm not sure how
that electronic works.
Maybe Mr well I can answer that
he is a pharmacist.
Yes we yes we have what we
usually do is all.
Or if there is some reason their
offices closed.
Back to the state will be laid
out.
That came from usually the same
day we we don't I.
Quicker that are.
Most aspects thank you.
It is repairable nope I still
have some madam madam chair I I
do have a text from the speaker
and Regar and I will read the
whole thing the committee
handbook is intended to be used
as a guide and working tool for
committee chairs vice chairs
members and staff the practices
and procedures outlined in it
are based upon Senate and house
rules practicing custom
parliamentary Law and material
contained in such recognized
authorities as Mason's manual of
legislative procedure Robert's
rules of order Sturgis standard
part of parliamentary procedure
and the council of state
governments handbook for
legislative committees it should
be noted that the rules of both
the Senate and house find that
Mason's manual of legislative
procedure governs when not
inconsistent with the rule of
the legislative body that is
straight from the committee
handbook in further consultation
with Raul the handbook is indeed
simply guide nothing more
nothing less and the chair
retains authority to run their
committee in a manner that is
most effective and efficient.
Important questions but
constituents or have more
questions about this bill to
make a poor decision I guess
there's no point in you hear and
see back in March so your order
sorry thank you this is really
out of order.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you just
have a few questions on some of
the definitions mostly because
this is not my wheel house and I
just want to be clear and
because the eight that I'm
looking at this to is just to
prevent any malpractice any
impropriety any ability for us
to wrap our hands around that
and
so madam chair page three
When we get to the first that
drug product that it's not on
biological product I tried to
find a definition for that and
since that was the concerns
brought up by the opposition to
this bill I'm just curious how
how do we define that since I
can't find it in statute Madam
chair in Representative Romero
it is in statute I'm not sure
where and our health care
rules are regulations are crazy.
Madam chair representative yeah
I've looked specifically for
biological product in statute
and I cannot.
Find it so I think that might
help me and maybe we need to
just redirect in the bill.
To just make it clear since that
is the one one sort of I think
Miss number that we're trying to
pin down for for this so madam
chair Representative Romero
would you be happy if at eight
F. after product I just a
parentheses with that a
description of what that is or
where.
Or in the definitions okay very
and where we okay alright
purposes of this section that is
the that terminology would be
super helpful okay just to
clarify what we're talking about
again from a legal perspective I
have no clue what that means and
then Madam chair representative
I think the same thing goes with
Controlled substance and some of
the other and I know we have
their P. class I don't know and
we we have controls controlled
substances one of those funny
ones I know and in statute were.
Where we're talking about
Specific drugs
that are illegal and sometimes
those that are legal and so I
just want to be able to
We were talking about criminal
statutes versus civil and so I
don't know if we need to bring
that into this but I just
What we would have in there but
most more than anything madam
chair I just want to clarify the
biological product because I
think when we talk about formula
airy compliance later in the
bill and what we're talking
about overall it would help wrap
this around what that
compliances and those that are
accepted clearly but other than
that I think this is an
excellent way to to try to
figure out how we can make this
process more simplified for
those that just need every day
medicine that is really
challenging I totally understand
the purpose of the bill and I'm
with you on that I just want to
make sure that we can get that
right over the Representative
Romero we will have the the
pharmacy brains fix those things
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair I
committee chair I have a
question Senator according to
Mrs rules six thirty eight eight
Senator laughed I raise my you
madam chair I believe.
I'm sorry terribly sorry thank
you.
Thank you madam chair
representative I just had a few
questions one of them was
regarding cancer drugs.
And I know the doctor Mack needs
here as one if I could ask a
question manager really quickly.
It's up to the sponsor but you
are madam chair I think we have
madam chair and representative
block I think we have explained
and and and actually as a cancer
survivor I'm I didn't go to a
pharmacy and get my
prescriptions I got my
prescriptions from the oncology
and.
So I prefer we we get through
the bill you madam chair
representative will ensure that
there are many other people have
had cancer with different
circumstances I'm sure we would
not want to discount it sent
here and so I I will keep and
continue thank you madam chair
so I know that there's a narrow
therapeutic window sometimes
cancer patients cancer treatment
and I certainly would not want
this to you know if if you if
there's even a milligram of
difference or any kind of
substitution of a drug
difference even that same amount
of.
Milligrams per se and Drug it
could really mean life or death
that these Madam chair
representative so you know I I
just think that this is super
important to not you know if we
just steps to without the
consent of the doctor and
there's a check box but.
I think maybe we should have a.
Maybe a more robust approach to
including the doctor beforehand
instead of five days afterwards
what do you think that would
Adam chair and representative
block pharmacists are the
experts on medications.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative nice I certainly
agree with you but I also think
that that doctor probably knows
their patients well as well I
know I live in rural New Mexico
and I have a doctor relationship
my doctor right I've been going
there for a while now and she's
very good and she knows me as a
patient so I I just would think
that that doctor could make
those decisions Madam chair
representative.
You too but I will I will go on
in the state to time regarding
people the different pharmacies
Madam chair representative I
know that certain people go to
different pharmacies for
different reasons I think that
concerns brought up by somebody
today could you just a.
Tell me.
How does how does pharmacies can
communicate with each other if
there is some kind of
substitution and that maybe that
information was lost at between
for the doctor but the check box
that one pharmacy to another
pharmacy maybe that drug that
they're describing it does not
that check box maybe that would.
Inflame the situation after do
you think that would be a
possibility that the command
chair and representative block
we we can't look at everything
you know what might happen if a
meteor hits tomorrow we can't we
can't forecast the position
knows what they're doing the
pharmacist knows what they're
doing we had a pharmacist as an
expert in health and he said I
know the doctors I know who
wants what and if I have any
question whatsoever I will
contact the doctor we have to
act like these are professionals
not preschoolers thank you madam
chair thank you Representative I
certainly am not saying that.
These individuals are
preschoolers but maybe the
information that they have.
Could potentially be harmful to
this individual patient if they
don't have all the information
such as the checkbox but if the
two prescriptions one
prescriptions as a check box the
other does not Madam chair
representative and the
substitute that one that does
not Madam chair representative
that that's on the position we
can't save you know with the
process we cannot predict any
mistakes by the position and we
could not prevent them but I
will tell you positions are
pretty darn careful about what
they're doing because they they
know that the cop the risks.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes they do know
the rest but I think if if let's
just say it's something that's a
different.
Let's just say it's a different
recommendation that the
individual has friends let's
just say that individual has.
Let's see that again cancer and
cancer treatment both drugs are
being with one pharmacy there's
another thing provided us with
the same time enter
Representative what if the
asthma drug may may conflict
with the cancer.
Drugs that they're getting a
different pharmacy and it may
not be like your situation but
maybe they to go to a pharmacy
more rural areas do you think
that that would be something
that you would want to consider
in this bill because Madam chair
representative block we cannot
fix every issue on every bill I
mean there's a billion moving
parts and so to see if we lay
out every single thing that
everybody have to do or to can't
do or must do our must do on
Tuesdays working that we're
going to take away the
professional judgment of the
pharmacist and the position
thank you madam chair thank
Representative well I I think
what you said earlier you know.
Things can be fatal and people
could die and I believe you
said.
We need to be precise.
In Madison I agree with that
assessment but I think that if
there could be even a
possibility.
Someone's that one information
one piece of information could
not be transferred to another I
don't want people to die as a
result of the passage of the
legislation Madam chair
representative madam chair and
representative there's a chance
that they could die on anything
on any whether this bill passes
are not wrong prescription can I
mean we as I said I am not
taking on the world to make sure
that no one ever gets the wrong
prescription or the wrong amount
or anything like that we are
trying to make it so that New
Mexicans can get medicines that
they need at a price that they
can afford thank you madam chair
thank representative I'm sure we
all agree sure we definitely
want people to.
Good care and affordable
medicine but I certainly would
not want to put anyone at
greater risk with this
legislation I see the point of
your legislation I agree with.
The theory behind it but I I
certainly don't think that this
is this after thank you.
Thank you.
What is the will of the
committee.
Madam chair conference with the
sponsor right I I really do
passed in and we'll look forward
to the amendment just to clarify
the statue thank you madam
chair.
Thank you
for all.
Representative block no ma'am
Representative worked with the
explanation.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative check to see
chair for our.
Madam chair we have those.
We need to do.
Representative four sharks
explanation yes madam chair
resemble the nose multiple
reasons and lots lots of
questions and Mason rules six
thirty eight says no motion to
close or limit debate are
allowed.
At three two thank you thank
you.
Did okay next we have
House forty one.
Six.
Committees.
I'm so sorry you want to wait
yes.
a motion for discussion on.
Chair thank.
That second.
well the committee says.
just give us a minute okay.
Yeah.
Percent.
More.
We like to go ahead and explain
your and your contact.
Committee substitute.
Thank you very much madam chair
and committee members my name is
Representative Kathleen Cates
and I'm also a licensed realtor
so we all know we've been
spending many times and the
legislative session talking
about our housing crisis not
across the country most
certainly in New Mexico there is
not one answer to this housing
crisis there are probably five
hundred and this is our line
item home ownership is key to
stability financial security and
wealth building
the easiest entry level kind of
properties that can be purchased
by either first time home buyers
of people with no money down
which are veterans for people on
fixed income who are looking for
low maintenance property they
can be be able to purchase
property that are diet defined
in this as condominiums
condominiums can be condominiums
they can be townhouses for
how do you homes but what
defines them as condominiums is
they have to shared walls were
common property like common
goals and common walkways they
are managed by associations
currently there is a list of
rules in which federal backed
loan such as FHA loans which
will allow you to purchase
property with only three or
three and a half percent down or
trained VA loans which allow you
to purchase property with zero
money down and then as well as a
variety of New Mexico state's
MFA programs that help with
assistance first timing none of
these qualify for condominium
properties that have less than
fifty percent owner occupancy so
we have we were we are going to
invest.
this bill starts July first
twenty twenty three on in after
we're going to be investing in
conversion converting properties
and condominiums or building
what you called multi family
dwellings for sale these are not
rentals these are sale by deed
and I in this bill is requiring
that women the association
papers are filed with the tax
assessor's that there will be a
permanent covenant within the
association papers stating that
the association will maintain
fifty five percent owner
occupancy they also will this
bill also requires that thirty
percent or more of the governing
body of the association of
voting members are owner
occupied as well you can imagine
that properties that are owned
they do not have the owner
occupancy have less oversight in
financial investments which need
to make sure that you can
replace that roof for the common
areas.
this will still out investors or
the associations to make the
rules in which they want to make
depending on individual
properties of whether or not
they want short term Airbnb
rentals are only long term
rentals are no rentals those are
up to the association and he
still have forty five percent in
which they can be able to offer
that with this bill.
you stand for questions.
is there anyone in the audience
who is in junction.
I'm sorry yes and many more
discussion on it.
Madam chair I I move that we
adopt the.
The amendment or substances
okay.
Is a yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative kids can you just
tell me that the big differences
between your seventy regional
bills if you want everything
everything yes I will I
obviously they're both fifty
five percent there was a lot of
confusion between the tractor
and myself.
And the original is not the
intent.
so the sub is the intent they
both address trying to create
properties that are eligible for
federally backed loans.
Representative K. when did you
deliver the the asset building
this was submitted to the
committee believe Sunday night's
and and was available for
distribution of back time.
We have a motion to chairman
with options.
Also.
Very is there any objection to
drive adoption of the committees
that.
Okay.
Substitute
will go to the audience sorry
about that
and I think it was.
Do do do you have junction.
Thank you.
Check to.
Check thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is JD Bullington and I'm
speaking today to you on behalf
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce which is
respectfully opposed to house
bill two forty one up according
to the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce in their
analysis they believe that this
bill is a detriment to the
development of affordable rental
housing in New Mexico and it's
not clear to the chamber that
there's any legitimate rationale
to support a change in that
policy course fact the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
believes we should be making it
easier to construct affordable
housing units I believe that
rental properties are an
essential piece of a diverse
housing mix in any city or state
and so for those reasons that
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce as opposed to house
bill two forty one thank you.
Anyone else in opposition.
Is there any opposition on to
what one okay.
Mr.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chairman is our
behalf The New Mexico municipal
league we respectfully oppose
this bill for three reasons.
First this bill infringes on
local permitting decisions
permitting decision should
remain at the local level this
is particularly true given the
significant differences in
housing markets needs and local
approaches across the state.
Second local governments
currently in Act ordinances and
have local planning and zoning
boards to manage their local
housing needs we believe these
decisions are most properly left
to individual local governments
and lastly similar to what Mr
Clinton mentioned
owner occupancy requirements may
result your units available to
renters we already have a
shortage of affordable rental
properties in this bill could
further exacerbate that shortage
so for those reasons we
respectfully oppose.
Thank you.
Okay and those in support.
It's only ones support up to.
Okay
did you want to have any of the
closing yes yes please madam
chair and and committee members
I would like to respectfully
address the opposition first
they have not had opportunity to
review myself
any possible representation in
the last week or two has reached
out to me and I have been able
to
let them know really what the
intent is to opposing comments
have I haven't had that
opportunity both of them are
concerned about rentals this
proposed bill has nothing to do
with rentals this is only.
What is it was referred in real
estate as real property which
means profits can be sold
through indeed it is not a
rental.
Are there any questions
Representative Romero the
committee.
Thank you madam chair
I'm trying to wrap my head
around this and have different
housing advocacy battles that
have made the end succeeded so
this is you know we've had some
pretty creative ways of trying
to
improve housing in our state
right byrd  we've been in a
crisis for COVID we've been
trying to build affordable
housing and I think we're still
recovering after ten years not
having sufficient housing
since I think our housing crisis
two thousand eight so that said
I actually agree with the
greater Albuquerque chamber for
the first time I think out of
the
because they do I am concerned
about about how it does affect
windows and I'll just explain
why madam chair because if we're
saying that they have to be
owner occupied and we talk about
our rental pool in New Mexico
which is over fifty percent of
renters are over fifty percent
of
the house today in our state are
renters and so if we're going to
limit the pool of of available
at.
Wellings then we're we're and
and limiting them to owner
occupied that does the fact
those who are seeking a rental
and so that's why I'm you know
for any in any way that we're
going to limit that opportunity
for folks to both decide what to
do with their home whether they
want to rents whether they want
to purchased something new it it
unfortunately I think has that
Externality of potentially doing
something that we're not
intending to do because I
understand the intent of wanting
to not have Airbnb is running
New Mexico not have you know we
are vios running New Mexico
hundred percent and trying to
looking at how we can fix that
problem but I think this might
create an adverse effect as we
can see from the FY are in
some of the different agencies
that have spoken out so I don't
know if you want to respond to
that but I I would looking at
thank you madam chair
representative and thank you
you very much I myself as a
business woman and personally I
am a big supporter of the error
being bees actually this has
nothing to do with it so this is
from twenty twenty three so
first thing it will do nothing
with the current condominiums
that are being rented and we
need about five hundred
different answers for our
housing issue if we are
if we are approving we being
counties municipalities
approving building permits to
build multi family dwellings for
rentals this has nothing to do
with it this is about the
individual investor so it is
still allows forty five percent
of the the units to be to be
eligible for the individual
investor if that's what the
association wants.
It won't have anything to do
with the rental market and it
will not change the current
condominiums that are in place
these are only for new builds.
My problem is that we're going
to be we are currently looking
at large investments in building
housing throughout the state so
who's going to own it.
Are they going to be out of
state investors where are they
going to be New Mexicans and
this is a price point between
eighty seven thousand three
hundred thousand or the average
condominiums those are people on
fixed income you don't want to
know the line or you know have
low maintenance veterans which
it's a the eight loans they have
no money down or first time home
buyers which are FHA loans which
are three three and a half
percent I do agree I have been
advised that.
This is a very interesting bill
from my advice but complex and
difficult to be able to talk
through so I understand and
the the original was no help so
I will say that the FY are was
based on the original bill which
was misinterpreted as dealing
with rentals because they use
the term multi family dwelling.
And that's what made the
confusion with the chamber and
well with with many and with
that with F. I. R..
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative K. so let's just
go with what I reading in the
bill so if a new.
apartment building is built
today
or after this bill passes we're
building a new apartment
building up our new condo it's a
very different okay.
Your condominium.
that facility.
We are setting aside fifty five
percent of that for owner
occupiers
That the rest of it can be
rented the rest of it can be
Sublimated etcetera however that
HOAs potentially.
Income for that place
we're still limiting that fifty
five percent to say some owner
has to come in and occupied that
there by we can't have a renter
come in and and rent that is
that not so madam chair
representative I'm so sorry but
so a condominium is down to
every unit is sold it's not that
summer rentals answer every
single unit is sold in you so
ciation does not own it it
manages it.
So every single unit what is
happening right now is I'm I buy
that units and then I can rent
it I can rent it out thank and
some Association papers today I
can't have a short term rental
which means I only can do here
rental or six months some will
allow me to do error being bees
and and this bill doesn't hamper
that association can make that
business decision how they want
to but every single unit is sold
it's just that right now they
can also be rented out to not
qualify for federally backed
loans and as we are looking for
housing investments we want to
make sure that they qualify for
federally backed loans.
Thank you madam chair so madam
chair representative keeps.
What are the folks I guess
I'm still trying to figure out
how we protect our interests
is up because we're not just
talking about people who are
accessing loans were just
talking about folks who already
have capital who come in who by
condominiums whether they be in
state or out of state and
then in order to be able to pay
their mortgage or however they
got their lone or whoever
they're paying for it there two
they're going to rent out the
unit the condominium unit is
that.
Today if that's the case madam
chair you could do a hundred
percent of that right now is
that no.
Madam chair representative I'm
so sorry I'm not sure if I
understand but Ludlum I was
thinking of bringing in help me
we can get this fast I'm
bringing like pieces of paper
that I could once again maybe
it's a more visual so
condominiums are a hundred
percent sold.
Every unit is sold.
And.
Currently is.
The association says they can be
rented then you as a landlord do
you own your one unit you can
rent it out you can still rent
out this bill forty five percent
of them so here would be the
difference is that if I owned a
condo and I wanted to sell it
I'd have to call my association
say is there any investor slot
opened we're only owner occupied
open slides and if they said
only owner occupied slots and I
would have to sell it to an
owner occupied that reduces my
seller pool but I just increased
my solar pool by making them
federally qualified for
federally backed loans I will
tell you there are lots of
rentals there are more expensive
than your mortgage payment
especially if you're in a
federally backed loans and
trying to get individuals there
the the the we don't have homes
that are two hundred thousand
dollars but we do have
condominiums Madam chair
representative do immigrants
qualify for these loans to yet
yeah if they if they I mean I
can't tell you that's a big
general question sorry madam
chair representative says I'm so
sorry that's a that's a broad
question but I have a ton of
immigrant of clients in the fall
they've all of it so it's it's a
do you have the same the their
their citizenship is night
Their citizenship is not a
of requirements to qualify for
federally backed loans I more
Madam chair representative.
We need to sell their property
our federal government holds
their proceeds for awhile to
make sure that our federal
government gets their taxes but
date they don't care who by the.
Madam chair representative I
yeah I am I I understand the
intent I am.
I'm here in Santa Fe where we
are definitely in a very
expensive housing market the I
per capita the most expensive in
the state
and we are trying to.
Multiply every unit that we have
available and I think this
limitation on even for just
strictly condominiums and
wanting I understand the want to
have the owner occupier there
I just I I just don't see how
that in practice and that being
the case.
Even if we enacted this
legislation it would limit the
pool of folks who had access at
twelve eight even if they could
get an FHA loan
so I'm very concerned that this
does has an adverse effect and
fortunately on on folks being
able to
both.
Commit to.
Twelve a living in that space
but also building it and so for
that reason and for I would love
to be able to try to understand
it at the front of perhaps not
getting right now but I can't
see it in my with my
understanding of the bill at
present thank you madam.
Comment that
I can see where this will open
it up for more people to have
opportunities rather than people
coming in and buying to rent but
also make it so people can
afford to to purchase the condo
in my understanding is that it's
only for the condominiums it's
not for a single family
dwellings things like that so
when you have a developer come
in all they have to do is make
sure that they're sold that
half of them are available for
people who will live in now and
not just come in and
charging exorbitant rent to
people so I think it is more of
an equity issue and make sure
that people.
Have the opportunity and to
reduce our homelessness in our
state.
are there any other questions
from the committee.
What is did you want to say
anything else in closing.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative thank you
I
I very much appreciate your
comments because absolutely that
that is the intent of this bill
is to create more equity and
more opportunity for individuals
to be able and ownership of that
individual so that they can have
investment in where they live
and so
I.
Have not heard any comments
today at the committee to work
on an amendment.
and so I I stand.
Madam chair I I will do not pass
on house bill two forty one but
if you passed on C. packed
substitute for House Bill to.
Your second.
I'll seconded
the table.
Representative walked since.
The board no.
Representative Romero no.
Representative Thomson yes.
Last year were you know.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
The past.
Your no okay the no he passed so
you have to go back to okay
sorry.
Representative walked yup.
For.
Two to four.
To.
we have.
To.
In favor for no on a.
Do not pass.
House Bill.
Two forty one but I do pass.
I have two forty eight community
at.
Substitute.
I'm sorry.
Not be.
Action you take action.
Representative come back I'm
sorry.
Well no because it failed
Casteel it'll still move on with
the do not pass recommendation.
Why don't I just well just
because of students in the table
a second.
So we we have a.
Motioned to table
Representative.
Representative Lord yes table.
Yes ma'am less order
Representative Representative
block yes even.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Vice chair Rubio yes to table.
Chair for.
Yes to table.
The your bill.
Table sixty.
Thank you very much.
Limits the speech.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
We have a lot of sure.
Okay that's that it acts.
If we
were at.
happy committees to.
I'm sorry amendment to your bill
you madam chair.
Tion for discussion on the
amendment.
Thank you.
Representative I think a big I
thank you for this hearing.
That
didn't bring up legal.
Madam chair.
Thank hi my experts.
Madam chair.
I have with me today members of
the.
Gaming control board.
And then the three members and
all let them produce themselves
and then I have also.
Mr bill Jennings here to my
right and he's a he's a
representative veterans paternal
non it's of New Mexico.
And and I'll start here on my
left with with that Mr Patrick
here let him introduce and so
madam chair members but in this
particular chairman again
control work.
Madam chair members my name is
states that the audit and
compliance director for the
gaming control board.
I.
Mexico.
If you like to explain here and
then.
Thank you madam chair and.
Eight four nine three we strike
thirty in into in the answer in
lieu of their twenty.
So we're changing that thirty.
Thirty to twenty.
And then on page four line for
we strive and and insert Lou
there of a COVID.
In on line.
On page four line five after
taxes we insert the allowable
payment expense.
If you
a discussion on the amendment.
Madam chair does this mean that.
The the winnings that are less
favorable to a player is that
what I'm reading chair
representative and madam chair.
Will make a statement to that
this this is the this is about
keeping on profits in the state
of New Mexico a lot
the direction we're headed right
now.
Is that nonprofits don't have
enough money to operate.
So.
What this does and and we'll
learn as we go as we debate the
bill in our exhorts the COVID is
that.
If we don't do anything now we
we will have on profits in the
future so that they can donate
monies to needs of of certain
causes throughout the state.
Thank you madam chair of the
amendment Senator I have a
question on the agency well
maybe it's on all of it so what
kind of nonprofit use gaming to
fund their operations.
you madam chair it's it's a lot
of the like the VFW is a
paternal orders and.
And nonprofits like that.
American Legion and and there's
just.
Do you have a do you have a list
of your profits are them chair
representative it's an oil
produced moose the fraternal
vehicle as the this benevolent
order of Elks the veterans of
foreign wars and American
legions we used to have the
American and acts but they're
not operating this time thank
you madam chair.
Check have a motion on the
amendment second.
Do it somebody no
I'm sorry I didn't hear you
okay.
is there any objection to the
admission be accepted okay you
have.
Thank you go ahead and.
Introduce your bills right at.
In the bill.
The changing it changes the
operating hours for a nonprofit
organization.
And in the discussion will learn
exactly what that means and
then.
It changes the net take
percentage for nonprofit
organizations.
Gaming operator licensing.
What that was for questions
chair.
Thank you.
There any questions.
I'm sorry go to the audience is
there anyone here in opposition.
This bill.
And to.
Eight out any.
Anyone in support.
That we can.
Madam chair before we start we
do have a chart numbers if we
could pass those up.
it'll help the discussion as of
as we debate.
Madam chair while we're waiting
I just wanted to I really one of
our panelists to have changes
time from ten mind thank not to
be.
That that that.
Because it is.
I went down a rabbit hole to
fill.
Let's.
I was like I just didn't.
Know a lot about.
Representative did you want to
explain the analysis or what
this chart.
Madam chair I do a good job
confused so let my expert
witness to explain the whole
thing Madam chair representative
apologies I'm to finance a
larger spreadsheet so I try to
simplify this but ask questions
if I lose you
insert sections
you're going to hear me talk
about net revenue for gaming and
that's just the queen into the
machine less to point out so you
put a twenty in any cash out at
ten the net revenues have so
that's net revenue and all these
will just use just basic numbers
for example is that different
examples of one thousand two
thousand five thousand just as a
you know show you how it and
grow ten percent is the current
gaming taxed just not being
discussed at this point so all
these examples you have the
third line down is called net
revenue after tax and currently
the.
Chair role in education
contribution is identified as
sixty percent as you see the
first example as five hundred
forty dollars is distributed
mission this the gaming machine
distributors are about forty
percent of the net revenue after
tax per rule so we need to track
that out that leaves the non
nonprofit's inverter there is a
organizations zero to operate on
that is zero four zero zero four
insurance zero four gaming
license fees etcetera.
I'm going to skip the second
second section because that was
based on the original unamended
Act number thirty but then I'll
go to the third section on the
top of the the second page it
has a twenty percent on.
Of the of revise charitable
and education account of twenty
percent you'll see there's a
breakdown is only three places
the money goes in gaming after
the tax because the charity it
goes to the distributor for the
machines and it goes to the
licensees operating expense so
you'll see if twenty percent.
The break down and
It allows the the for Charles
pay the payroll the expenses
everything and the very bottom
section to shows you that if
this is pass it has a very
minimal impact on anybody taxes
the same the gaming machine
eight percent stays the same and
is just a minor change in the
amount that goes into the
charitable count versus what
goes into the licensees
operating account and is just
nine thousand nine dollars for
every thousand dollars in net
revenue after tax so it's a
small change but is to guarantee
that the the nonprofits I have
the opportunity continue gaming
support the charities within the
state because they currently are
on twenty twenty two figures
they contributed one point eight
million approximately four chair
will education costs.
Anything else.
No I think that's it Madam.
Thank you.
But the questions from the
committee.
Germany yes Representative like.
thank you madam chair estate is
a member of the American Legion
auxiliary I understand right
wing parties money is to be used
to sustain those buildings and
during the COVID we lost.
No we we lost my building had to
be sold they moved to another
building in Los that building
and I know quite a few American
legions have lost their
buildings all together and it's
been incredibly difficult and
challenging because we have
people that are so used to going
there that's their based when
they can talk to other veterans
that have issues that they do
with connectivity.
It's a very integral part of who
they are and their recovery so I
I appreciate you bringing this
forward because anything you can
do especially for American
Legion and VFW that also closing
to keep them open as this
greatly appreciate thank you
madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair may
respond to that a little bit yes
and madam chair and members of
the committee in Clovis we lost
the building to the knights of
Columbus they want up selling
that building and and they now
work under the roof of the red
arrow to to have their building
goes and we're seeing quite a
bit of the nonprofit's going to
that one building trying to make
things work.
And this bill is to is to help
fix that.
And given the nonprofits a
chance and and like
Like Steve just.
Testified awhile ago is it if we
don't do something nonprofits
with existing and not only do
they committee chair table
Different charitable things
donate to charities but they
also.
It's also a place for veterans
to go.
And and top with people of their
own.
Hi and and and people that have
had their own the same
experiences and and I think
there's some camaraderie there
come up.
Marjorie is this Maradi that
anyway.
There that that we had a respect
for these veterans of foreign
wars and.
And the they need a little help
right now and here's a here's
something to help on
further on in the bill you'll
see the and and and and and the
title of the bill you saw the
changing of ours and and that
doesn't.
It changes where they can move
the hours in the scope of the
twenty four hour day.
It doesn't change the hours like
from less hours or more hours it
gives them a to a twelve hour
window to move where they want
and the reason for that is that.
Some of these.
People are elderly and and they
don't stay up till midnight they
don't start so that so they
might want to start earlier in
the morning and finished earlier
tonight with the functions and
in the opening of their place so
that's what the the change ours
is about.
And and with that madam chair.
With that
several more questions thank you
anyone else.
Questions the past also.
Have a motion.
The second to the past is there
any objection.
You have a.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you for all you do an
issue.
Yes we have the possibility of
seventy three.
This is.
I was.
This is really one of these.
You
can set off to the.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I am
pleased to be here my first bill
that I am kept ringing forward
and
I am so pleased to be caring
this bill this afternoon I am
joined by Senator Kernan.
A an attorney and family law
specialist of over forty years.
And a current seated member of
the commission on the
commissioner on the uniforms
lost commission.
Also to my left is Jack Burton
and internet a seasoned attorney
as well and current commissioner
on the uniform laws commission
as well.
And we are bringing forward
today.
Bill at two seventy three which
relates to property.
Enacts the uniformed cohabitants
economic remedies act.
Finding the right of action to
co habitants for contractual and
equitable king claims arising
out of contributions to the
relationships of the cohabitants
it also establishes a
requirement of a cohabitants
agreement and provides provides
a right to third parties to
enforce judgments begins
cohabitants and providing
remedies.
I'd like to offer.
Madam chair and members of the
committee would like to offer my
expert witnesses a moment to
introduce themselves.
It provides if you'd like.
I'm Sarah Bennett.
an attorney in Santa Fe are
practiced family law for decades
but I'm also a commissioner on
the uniform laws commission I'm
excited to support this
uniformed law which has been
drafted in prepared by the
uniform laws commission to
address something which I've
long noticed as an in equity.
In New Mexico laws governing
division property taxes.
Your one major Jack.
Hi a uniform law commissioners
that Mr for twenty five years or
more I am just here to answer
any questions you might have
about who or what the U. formal
commission is up and how we
Hartranft uniform laws and who
are commissioners are in New
Mexico thank you.
And with that madam chair we
stand for questions.
You too much.
I think.
Okay.
On the on.
All of that.
Members.
Okay and
Is there anybody in the audience
and support.
Right it did you just say
anything else forget the
committee.
I was ready to answer questions
chair okay great.
Go ahead Representative yeah.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative good to see
you and good luck today
I just I just had a question and
more of.
To see if you could find maybe a
scenario around how how this
works and why this is because
why this is an issue.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Rubio I will
defer to the expert witness
thank you.
Can you hear me Madam chair and
representative
in the course of of
My divorce practice over many
years.
There was a small group of
people who would come to me who
I would have to say there's no
remedy for you and it the the
scenarios in comes up in many
ways people who got together
when they were very they didn't
understand the significance of
flies up perhaps one of them was
pregnant they had you know they
lived together for a long period
of time never actually got
married and so we have laws that
govern child custody child
support all of those things but
for the person who
relied on promises and devoted a
great deal of labor to up a
relationship in a community that
permitted perhaps the other
partner to work and earn money
while and I think she or he it
is happen both ways
provided domestic services that
don't have monetary value that's
easily removed
To find out after twenty years
when they're splitting up that
they have absolutely no plans
which is what happens in family
court with those relationships
that's one scenario another very
common scenario is people who
live together for fifteen twenty
years and then get married
and married for two years
perhaps before they realize that
what they plan to do is get
divorced and so they come to me
we've been together for twenty
three years
surely all these things should
be divided up in accordance with
community property law the
answer is no and this does not
propose a division in accordance
with community property laws it
it provides some remedies for
people who find themselves
suddenly and surprisingly the
rest of any resources after
having.
Done their share of the work.
Thank you madam chair
representative and I know that
some of the I think it was in
the FIR where it talks about how
there might be issues beyond
sort of your traditional
But.
Coupling up or whatever whether
it be with roommates and things
like that does this address
issues that and like it that way
or is it are there strict
guidelines as to who can
actually pursue this Avenue
madam chair and representative
the guideline is people who are
living as a couple.
That means to me that you've
agreed to share resources or
pool resources or share the work
load or in some way to manage
your business so that you were
doing that a roommate who.
By its own food.
You know lives there.
A renter is not one of those but
it would be determined by the
judge whether the couple was
eligible.
All right great well thank you
so much for that clarification
thank you thanks madam chair.
Madam chair thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
and congratulations on your
first bill this is exciting
stuff right.
so I just have a few questions
Regarding.
Sir.
Page three.
Section three think it's online
team.
It's just the help me understand
what and equitable claim.
Just in layman's terms eight.
Madam chairman and
representative.
In
In the equitable means give me
something fair.
That's how the court to deal
with it when when a court is
able to rule or provide
equitable remedies that means
both put in this amount of time
you ought to be compensated at
least in the division of
property something like that is
how it means in the context of
this bill but those equities
will be taken into account the
fairness of it will be
considered I thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
an expert so then
Just like domestic services with
no monetary value really how
does the court.
As the court quantify what that
is madam chair representative
Madam chair representative.
I think that
of course.
Judges will be deciding each
case on its own facts so I can
give you a couple of examples of
what I as a lawyer would argue
to a judge would be
Representative if there were no
agreements that can be enforced
and the court is at looking at
the equities of the situation
you could look at what it would
cost to have somebody come in
and prepare all those meals or
chair for your mother with
dementia well you went to work
and the other partner stayed
home and cared for that person
those kinds of things over a
period of many years add up to
significant contributions to our
relationship.
that
are otherwise not quantified and
if you're married of course
that's why we have community
property laws because we take
into account the same sex.
Thank you madam chair
representative yeah I just
stepped I agree with that I'm
just I guess maybe I'm not a
lawyer just right you don't get
it but a.
Thank I guess someone to argue
on the other side of that well
he says that he or she is making
five meals a week or something
but you could make the case that
that is not correct how would
that stand up in court one
person said well that's not true
Madam chair representative.
Thank you differ in tourist.
Madam chair and representative
blocked up that's what judges
do.
That's how it is especially in
family court and family court
judges are very accustomed to
hearing those things they hear
them of those arguments about
who took care of the kids who
took them to school all of those
kinds of things in the in the
child custody issues this is
another area where that kind of
testimony on both sides would be
judged by the judge and and
decided.
Okay so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative good to
know.
So one of the things in my house
it's it's it's on married
couples then turned private
contracts regarding property
etcetera and this is why is this
bill necessary if that's the
case could you just.
Right on that chair
representative thank you madam
chair Representative Dale for
Madam chair representative block
When you're young and in love
you don't necessarily make
contracts in the same way that
adults doing making business
decisions would do
so often times there are no
agreements that are
express if it's sort of a
assumed or implied agreement it
can be it it's addressed in this
bill it would not be otherwise
addressed in court.
family law judges and I've
spoken with some family law
judges about this issue would be
glad to have some other avenues
for awarding equities in these
kinds of cases and
so.
They don't have that option of
looking at implied agreements as
A routine and in addition the
equitable arguments up the
ability to make claims based on
your contributions for domestic
services all those other things
you do in the family are really
not addressed in family court in
New Mexico just at this point
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so then two more
questions or problems so what is
the statute of limitations.
On these claims.
Madam chair representative.
The duration of the relationship
with that person or is that is
there some kind of years number
here is it has to be.
You madam chair thank you
representative madam chair.
Up.
Madam chair and Representative
blocked the statue limitations
would be the same statute of
limitations applies for other
causes of action there's a whole
statutory scheme I think it's
a specific there's a general
statute limitations I think it's
four years up there's a
contractual statue limitations
if you have reached written
contract
but the the cause of action
arises.
At any time during the
relationship or within the
period of time what it's
terminated if you get marriage
to co habitation terminates or
the split up the co habitation
terminates and the statue
limitations runs from that day
okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I appreciate
all the clarifications I just
trying to figure out what this
is about so my last question is
a uniform law commission to date
suggest this piece of
legislation are today endorsed
anyway madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair Representative I will
defer to
The expert witness.
Madam chair representative block
yes the uniform law commission
includes a asked recommends this
legislation Ford Act went by the
stage
so trust manages your question
it sure does thank you so much
mentor.
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I have some
questions it just discovered so
we don't have domestic
partnership in the state.
Thank you madam chair
representative Ford.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord of I think that the state
government has a form of
domestic partnership at I'm I'm
not familiar with the terms of
it I think it's for purposes of
insurance you could manage
written agreements that could be
enforced between two adults
this provides for other remedies
and a domestic partnership but
because it's it's more inclusive
at madam chair it I looked it up
I was very because in Oregon one
of the state to have to Mr
partnership was also a lot of
issues because it goes into
property rights in all kinds of
things are returning a list of
the top official marriage so I I
just looked it looks like they
don't recognize in New Mexico so
I just have to be very
interesting and we Madam chair
of that we do not have a common
law marriage in New Mexico.
Senator Representative.
Madam chair representative Lori
we do not have a common law
marriage in New Mexico it is
long established by case or it
used to be illegal to live
together.
that law has been repealed and
the practice of cohabitation
without marriage has grown
significantly but this is.
A different form of remedy that
marriage would be.
I think that I've just learned
these two things that I without
a New Mexico that would have to
send this message to my
partnerships because other
states or someone New Mexico
have them and that the only
other question I had on this
what is this what we're looking
at this time frame.
How does that apply if the
spouse is incarcerated during
that.
Transaction.
Thank you madam chair
representative Ford.
For madam chair Representative
Lord.
You know if a person is
incarcerated and there still
cohabitating in their minds
perhaps the co habitation has
not terminated I would leave
that to a judge's wise
discretion if one of them said
it had terminated it might have
terminated but if both of them
say they're co habiting that I
don't know that that
imprisonment for a period of
time would that terminated co
habitation thank you madam chair
representative would start thing
I think we need some rules about
common law marriage I think we
need to include domestic
partnerships because there's
quite a lot of people that don't
want the marriage but they want
the benefit of some of things
going on with that some quite
surprised it's not your New
Mexico but this is a start.
Thank you.
For questions to the.
Sure.
Okay we have a motion for two
passed.
Well.
Representative blocks.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Romero.
No I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Thompson yes.
Vice chair Rubio yes.
Chair for our yes sure we have
I.
Thank and Representative you're.
Madam chair
There's just a lot of and I'm
gonna see the cemex committees.
I hope that
There's a lot of conflict with
I think the confusion on
roommates and then talking about
the idea of this contributions
to the relationship that
When we when you look at.
I trust the state law we look at
wills and trusts and that sort
of idea of what it is that we're
trying to perhaps give giver
intends to give to one another
and and the surrounding law I
think there's a lot of conflicts
with that intent verses we're
trying to sexually built into
the Las protection it may end
up.
too broad and so I look forward
to sort of having happy to have
a conversation with you offline
before it gets there because I
know we're going to ask
questions because it's
there's just a lot of I think
complexity there and confusion
and how might be administered
moving forward especially we
think about how it goes through
the court system so with that
Madam look forward to having a
conversation things.
Thank you so
Both have I want to have a.
Thank you.
The committee
thank you madam chair thank you.
Okay.
Next in not least house bill two
seven nine.
Representative Browning kerning.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
House bill two seventy nine
poses to I have just put in
statute that of students
graduating from high school in
New Mexico are required to have
half the unit.
The
personal finance.
To to graduate.
I have with me this afternoon
Mandy torrez who is the teacher
of the year for New Mexico from
twenty twenty and she is also
the education reform director at
bank New Mexico and so I just
think if you comments and then
I'll turn this over to her so
madam chair and members.
State treasurer Laura more my
Toyota.
has made the statement quote we
need to make financial literacy
requirement for graduation.
She said this about a year ago I
need twenty twenty and that the
P. did this issue days ago Lara
house appropriations and finance
committee hearing from her state
agency.
she yes
She is doing what she can to
bring financial literacy
in her agencies so children who
were your foster care or
actually getting some
instruction through her
department in financial literacy
because it is so important.
There been many efforts in the
past madam chair to pass this
requirement I think this is the
fourth time now I've sponsored a
bill to to achieve the
requirement for personal finance
work money management or
financial literacy whatever term
you prefer.
So I made that effort in twenty
twenty one most read recently
and we also had that your bills
that were sponsored by
Representative my S. is now
senator Munoz to Representative
Madrid Representative Stansbury
when she was here at the
legislature Representative Dixon
also and this year we have two
bills.
That are of this field house
bill two seventy nine and one
it's starting in the Senate in
that is being co sponsored by
and I am Representative senator
Michael Padilla and senator
Munoz.
So our bills are really trying
to achieve a much the same thing
all the way we go about is the
big difference on house bill two
seventy nine and your numbers of
the proposal is to take half a
unit out of the electors
category which under current law
is it seven point five credits
or units and shift one of those
over into the mandatory
requirement for personal finance
I think the the
the transfer of one credit out
of you want to call me is not
going to create a lot of.
Dissension
so anyway I also would like to
bring to your attention madam
chair and members that a poll
was taken by teach plus in
twenty eighteen and that report
says that nearly nine out of ten
teachers do not believe students
have a basic understanding of
financial literacy or the skills
to make financial decisions in
the real world more recent hold
I think it's very instructive
was done in September of twenty
twenty two so it's just a few
months ago that this was done
and I just want to read quickly
madam chair to questions in that
poll that really to summarize it
so the question was posed and
this was done by public policy
polling quote how important do
you think it it is that high
school students are taught about
personal finance topics like
borrowing credit cards and
credit ratings saving and
investing budgeting retirement
plans and taxadvantaged
investing.
I do think it's very important
somewhat important or not that
important eighty four percent of
the people who responded to the
poll said it's very important
that another question was posed
to you thank all high school
students should be guaranteed to
take a basic course in personal
finance covering topics like
investing budgeting taxes and
savings were not as seventy
eight percent of the respondents
said that that should be
guaranteed to the students.
So madam chair and members of
the committee.
We had a meeting in Hobbs.
In September of twenty twenty
two so again just a few months
ago and we we heard testimony
from two people to our interim
committee
one of them was a lady named
I think her name was miss Ortega
she was on the zoom when we we
heard from her she started a
company called my money my
future.
As she did because she wanted to
address the racial wealth gaps
she if there are many statistics
showing that minority students
are are trying to get their
knowledge of how to handle money
and so she created a program to
address how do we saw interest
inter generational cycles of
poverty.
So madam chair she also raised a
concern about the trap of
predatory lending so that was
what motivated her to start her
program.
And then let me just mention
that we heard also from timber
and set up as a national we
recognized experts he founded a
nonprofit called next Gen
personal finance.
And use pretty fascinating
person to listen to but he said
there are a couple of key points
for legislators to keep in mind
madam chair and members he said
that this course must be a
standalone one semester course I
support to concentrate focus on
this subject and all the various
facets of it.
He also said that it is
important to be flexible about
who may teach the course.
And other point made was that
professional development for
teachers is a must that a lot of
teachers may not feel qualified
to teach the subject but they
can't hear professional training
in those hours are already built
into our our schools.
So he offers through his
nonprofit a nine hour online
instruction course for teachers
they take a one hour exam and so
for use trace sixty eight
thousand teachers in this he
doesn't it and no charge so
again nonprofit work he also
pointed out there are many
grants available for teaching
financial literacy and that this
was one that really caught my
attention madam chair he said
don't buy textbooks they're
obsolete.
What the students really want is
real time exercises to learn the
concepts.
And then he did also say that it
is important to have a champion
in state government to make sure
that students are guaranteed
this force.
And I believe that champion
might be secretary treasurer of
one twenty.
At this point so I'm gonna turn
it over now to my experts and
let her you just that is with
the committee sure.
Excuse my voice and chair
members of the committee so I as
you mentioned I'm a former
teacher I spent ten years in the
classroom elementary classrooms
and also a parent and I'll start
by telling you that my daughter
is in the flamingo class in
downtown Albuquerque
it's it's a flamingo studio but
they offer financial literacy
courses to their older students
they see that there is a need
and they are trying to fill that
gap within their communities
because they don't feel like
they're getting it and our
public education system we are
and Mr Representative Brown has
been such a good job of just add
a couple of things we already
have credit of health in our in
our standards so having half
credit and financial literacy
makes sense because these are
about life skills right we have
a health class to learn about
nutrition to learn about mental
health all of these things to
help our children grow up to
that have happy healthy state I
and I would argue that financial
literacy is part of that
understanding to have had we are
money is is a big part of being
able to have a happy and
prosperous life and so it feels
very much related to that help
credit what we need to give our
students and as you will see can
be read in the media more and
more of our parents want to see
from our public education system
is really meeting those basic
needs of our kids making sure
that they are getting those
practical skills making sure
that they do have
You know these life skills and
more and more parents are saying
that this is what they want from
our public education system and
then I will just mention
I I don't know of how much you
know about house bill twenty six
currently in statute school
districts are required to offer
financial literacy is an
elective so there's another bill
moving through the takes that
out and that and the argument is
that they're putting that into
economics however financial
literacy is not mentioned in the
economics piece of it or is it
your government the you know
they mentioned they act exciting
civics into their but they say
well financial literacy is going
to be offered with an economics
class and and they and currently
it's if you look at the new
social studies standards there
are forty six standards within
the economics class thirty three
of them there are economics and
thirteen of them are financial
literacy and so they say well
you know supporters of that bill
C. we're gonna get those
standards with an H. B. one
twenty six they're going to be
there but I can tell you is my
experience from a teacher when
you're teaching standards in a
class things happen you get
behind because you have a lot of
students who are absent and so
you kind of have to pick and
choose at some points like what
am I going to focus on more and
so some standards might get more
attention than others and it
would be really unfortunate if
and teachers in that situation
and has to rush through the
financial literacy content
because they're running out of
time and of course it's just it
happens affect what happens in
the classroom and well the
standards in here
are good there's a lot of things
that are left out Representative
Brown talked about learning
about how how do we get our
income our income gaps in our
wealth can't tie to those
happened and how do families end
up in the situations they are in
in order to to you know start
working on a generational
poverty students have to
understand those things and and
those are not anywhere in the
standards
Like I said it's a great attempt
at some basic things but there
are a lot of things that
contracts taxes assessing ways
that workers are compensated
those things are not in the
standards I would also say
cultural aspects we talk a lot
about the our culture in our in
our state but we don't we don't
there's nothing about how to
different cultures view well we
don't know if you will the
statement I think those are
important things to consider to
so there's a lot of things that
aren't being standards but if
you have a standalone courses a
semester long have more time to
hit those and make sure making
sure that our students actually
get all of that content.
And madam chair I just like to
expand on something that moves
towards just said I have an
article from the vice president
of the Navajo Nation Mr Myron
wiser
he points out that financial
literacy is absolutely essential
from a cultural standpoint as
well so Mexico has a hundred and
sixty traditional high schools
and thirty five public charter
high schools but only to have
been recognized for guaranteeing
financial literacy learning and
one of that is on the
reservation it's Navajo pine
high school and he does say that
that that the cultural aspect it
really needs to be emphasized
and I agree with that thank you
I I look back at my.
My experience learning about
finances and it was just
basically from having parent
they didn't actually really
teach me directly but they're
simple save money don't spend
everything you have all those
things so that was the culture
of my family but a lot of
parents are not equipped to
teacher even find the example
for their children because you
can't teach what you don't know
yourself so it's important that
the schools.
Find this education.
Because it is just something by
feel that people use everyday of
their lives going forward and we
need our graduates to be
prepared so madam chair will
stand for questions.
Is there any opposition.
Of that support.
Hey.
Committee my name is Elaine so
open and the board chair of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity and we stand in line
to see us support for this bill
because it has so much to do
with economic prosperity for New
Mexicans starting with the life
skills that you mentioned when I
think about young people who may
not understand whether they can
afford a loan or not and they
take out that loan and then they
are vulnerable to predatory
lending that might not be
happening as much they have this
financial literacy as they move
into adulthood and grant want to
be an entrepreneur that would be
more likely to be able to
develop a solid business plan
and have a successful business
and we all benefit from there
and for family stability and
financial security this would be
the start that takes this
subject very seriously and
brings it into all aspects of.
Thank you stand in support.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington I'm speaking to here
today on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
which strongly supports house
bill two seventy nine financial
literacy is a vital skill for
our young people and as
necessary for a student and a
college track as it is for
someone who will be learning a
trade and my one day manage or
run a business that can stifle a
young person's dream and basic
sound investing can change
entire families trajectories
helping young people to produce
intergenerational wealth where
there have been not previously
if we want to be a state that's
as we take our property poverty
problem seriously we must
require our young people to
understand at an early age how
to manage money and set
themselves and their families up
for financial stability and
success thank you.
Hi Representative
Representative so madam chair
Fred Nathan I'm with thank you
Mexico we strongly support this
bill make three quick points the
first is what we learned from
other states that have done this
is this isn't just an education
reform it's also an anti poverty
strategy because what these kids
will learn in the classroom many
times they'll bring home to
their parents and their
grandparents that's number one
number two is I know all of you
on this committee have worked
very hard to try to work to
diversify our economy and to
build a more entrepreneurial
culture this is a critical
building block for that and then
the final thing I would point
out is these polling numbers are
remarkable in the state and the
country that so divided to see
an issue like this we're seventy
eight percent of New Mexicans
support this only nine percent
oppose that suggest that this is
something whose time has come
thank you very much.
Anyone else.
Thank you.
Yeah.
We'll just have a question thank
you.
Yeah like.
Or
It is that there is a lot thank
you madam chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward I think this is
something that we certainly see
do I said there's twenty seven
states in the country that offer
this about fifteen minute
requirement so I would love to
join those fifteen and being you
know pushing the envelope to
ensure that our kids can have
that stability and I think what
the gentleman here status right
they will bring those principles
right back.
And that's going to lift people
out of this at the end of any
kind of situation they're in so
I think this certainly would be
good requirement and I I
certainly support this thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you for
and you're on twenty twenty
teacher of the year
I just I I will I supported I
support the bill I I did want to
say I when I left to grad school
to I was in Los Angeles for six
years and actually did financial
literacy I was a trainer for
affordable housing
organization and it was at the
height of the housing crisis the
one we just had I mean two
thousand and eight and
And.
I quickly learned that and and I
think this is a really important
piece around what I wanted to
say today is that you mentioned
earlier about addressing multi
multi generational poverty that
this could be real good tool and
I know that there's other
legislation is being introduced
in in in in the legislature this
year
talking about things being a
little bit looking at it from a
more comprehensive approach and
I think all of it is it's very
good to have this debate because
I'm at the end of the day and
this is what I've learned
through my work in this area is
that we can't budget are we out
of poverty there has to be other
ways that we also address this
issue and so I'm I I support
this this bill I will I will
take possible for today and and
and just I just wanted to put it
on the record that it's it's
just important to not only look
at this issue from teaching
young people how to manage their
money but also that we also have
to be able to address a system
that that really does sustained
poverty in in many cases around
especially here in New Mexico
and that we really do have to
trust it from a very systemic in
a very systematic way and so I
again I appreciate you
representative representing this
legislation and and just wanted
to to to make those remarks
thank you.
Okay I just like to ask.
having been on the interim is
advisory for the education study
committee yeah we talked about
you know why this is so
necessary to have the financial
literacy but it's already.
Since it's already being
included in the K. through
twelve.
Standards which is going to be
rolled out in the upcoming year
school year twenty three twenty
four why do we need this bill.
Madam chair I appreciate that
question I I to and aware that
about a year from now the
incoming class school this will
be built into certain levels of
K. to twelfth I think it's very
important that we address these
issues while children are young
even kindergarten is not too
early to start.
but as my expert pointed out a
lot of times what we think is
going to be talk doesn't get
I
tried factors or whatever it
might be that I think we owe it
to our state is to ensure
through passing a law that they
are going to get this education
and we don't know in terms of
other legislation what's going
to pass and move through this
session until we get to the end
of this and so I would like this
bill to move to the next
committee and keep the keep
alive so would you know at the
end if we have any conflicts
those will get resolved with
legislation we all know we get a
booklet on conflicts but I I
agree to with is torrez there is
not madam chair
and up of the material that they
could be taught it as a
standalone class it is chock
full of very helpful information
and exercises for students and I
just want to point out to that
uninsured committee that there
are many sources of free
curriculum curricula that
That for us and groups like FDIC
has a program called money make
a money smart Fund side
financial football credit unions
have student run branches they
call them and there's another
group called Ramsey solutions
and you can by starting to
disable any of it ma'am shared
committee members and find out
that there is a lot here just
that's available but the point
is it needs to be.
Something that I think perhaps
the gentleman who she spoke to
was it Hobbs said that committee
meeting he has the most up to
date information on what needs
to be taught and it's built into
all of his materials are updated
constantly and that seems to be
the most dynamic curriculum and
we want to make sure students
get the very best that we can
get them on this subject and
that really is a full semester
course some of what a child is
taught state in fourth grade may
not be remembered when that
students ready to step out of
high school.
And I can give you one example
chair I have a daughter who but
she was in fourth grade we
explained to her what banks are
and how they work.
She started her own probate and
header siblings to deposit their
birthday and Christmas money in
her bank.
And then we found out she was
charging them a fee to take
money out.
So we had to shut that operation
of the past but at whatever age
the word the point is we wanted
to keep learning but really high
schoolers focus.
Graduations coming soon and
that's what really matters to
them where they're paying
attention the best so I think
that is critical timing.
Chair thank you Representative
and if
This word to pass and go to the
schools
This seems like a they would is
it true that they wouldn't get
credit it this week and parents
we know that there's.
High school graduation you know
I would qualify because they
have to have a credit less.
What they had expected so madam
chair that is tors touched on
that a little bit about the half
unit for help I think you
there's a good parent there
naturally.
But I am not certain I would
like to fact check of that
statement that they would not
receive credit I think there are
ways to work this out.
I'm sure.
But Representative is not the
bill right now.
That that would happen.
Madam chair with this with this
bill but it passes in the side
of the law would simply
guarantee that students get of
course for high school
graduation that is a
concentrated course all those
aspects of financial literacy
enrollment management.
Thank you anyone else in the
committee.
Madam chair I moved to pass.
All right.
Is an option for due process a
second.
Well.
Representative drive yes ma'am
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Romero yes.
This.
I'm sorry.
