Opportunity to spend time
together outside of our
committee leaders so also we
are.
I was referred our kind of not
really the analysts are hoping
that we're gonna be out here a
lot quicker than that the only
have to bills and I think that
the committee will be able to
deal with them fairly quickly
shortly so let's get into it at
this time our call
Representative Mentzer Lundstrom
depend on four twenty eight.
The.
Correct.
We're all rural I'm call the
roll thing
for this is that it is.
Found here Representative.
Here Representative cross here.
Representative Jones here
Representative Lundstrom your
Representative Madrid.
Representative editor here
Representative Romero.
Presented Garcia your I share
this.
I was used.
Okay now madam chair thank you
all for.
House Bill to work twenty eight
is bringing up fourth did
understand is all the committee
members signed on to which is
really great what this does it
ask rates the transportation
trust fund.
is structured in ways we
structures the early childhood.
Fund
and what it does is it makes and
distributions to the state road
for certain projects.
Thank you do this I think about
the kinds of projects would be
funded it ties back to the state
report and the truth report we
can also of last four or five
million dollars the rate was
identified under stricter for
the six of districts so what
this does is it creates an on
non returning fund in the state
treasury.
Consists of distributions
I think that we're going to have
to make some of them madam chair
bill because currently
I think this is a timing issue.
Our committee didn't work on
this early in a to get a dance
house bill two in terms of the
funding.
I have the amendment prepared to
I think you get a chance to to
talk about couple days ago with
that and then I was going to do
was to take two hundred million
dollars of the severance tax
portion of the appropriations
act number re investment in the
probation activate hundred fifty
nine.
The cleanest thing we want to do
what do reduce that down to six
hundred fifty in and take two
hundred and put into the spot.
Just with the amendment was
going to do so I'll have to do
now is couple of other things to
make this bill viable which
structure now it talks about
having an appropriation which is
not a house bill two now.
So what I'm going to suggest to
six we need to talk about it is
that the appropriation be
removed not in this committee
the naps definitely this
committee I think we need to
change the effective date the
date as.
I am twenty four.
Well we already know that.
Possible.
I wonder if we should put this
in January twenty twenty four
a lot of people that work on
these bills in the past.
Appreciate that.
I have our fingers crossed the
Senate finance committee will
take this up members of the
check.
Of the the Senate finance
committee decides they're going
to take two hundred million
dollars in to put into this in
house bill two we're going to
say that currently exist us to
proficiency many the weights
drafted without those changes a
person
no one is currently in the
budget for.
So that so something that we can
all talk about that manager this
is a great idea when we.
I'm in the office.
A couple weeks ago there is no
other way that I can see that we
can get those projects
completed.
It's all because of the way I
see budget works there is a.
Fund managers with the federal
funds it's a six year planning
arises projects from the to the
to the wanted to and they get
programs program again.
so the money's basically already
earmarked so to speak.
This new funding source helps to
move the project forward
and getting everything off the
step because right now we don't
have enough money to complete
this project is.
And when we see that growth
that's half of the early
childhood when that the right
is the same thing with
transportation.
That matter of a couple of years
is more than.
What we put into it maybe one
more I think the last projection
I've stayed within two years
early childhood fund will be
bigger than what we put into the
public education budget that's
how quickly it's grown.
So with that manager I'd be
happy to answer any questions or
anybody here on earth.
State it's a great idea I love
this will sign up.
Thank you madam chair who wants
to go first.
Funds sorry.
I'm sorry that it is anybody in
the audience in favor of this
bill.
Does anybody want to talk about
how great this bill it
Thank you madam chair members of
also a little bit but anyway I
think it's very important for
the like this because I think it
was move this to a.
Where we can system level.
Four DOT.
All these projects of different
sizes and require long short
term and long term I think is
this bill would offer
consistency of funding for field
to see parenteral more money
this year take it away from next
year it doesn't work so this
bill would really be helpful I
think for you'll see an
undermined everybody we have
less than an hour in here so if
you'd be incredibly quick or
even just shown in the it will
not be fantastic recruiting
manager numbers of the community
healthcare on behalf of the New
Mexico chamber of commerce thank
you all for supporting this this
chamber supports ensuring the
state road fund has sustained
funding to support adequate
transportation infrastructure
that injured supports economic
economic development Hooters air
quality.
Twenty twenty three chamber
survey over fifty percent New
Mexico orders three options the
budget surplus invested term
prior restraint The New Mexico.
Our transamerican Division
Mexico's for assistance for.
The this is the word support
this is my time to
make note of what I think there
are caught in this call it that
we should discussed is to ensure
that the bill and achieve what
we will achieve and that is that
percent distribution annually
and whether or not we can yield
from earnings this the sum of
thirty million so that we don't
deplete the farm over six or
eight years so I think just look
at that and running some
scenarios would help us to
ensure that school stays intact
and we can yield enough so that
those distributions cover as
expected thank you all for doing
this.
The very office.
The body it in opposition to
this bill.
Okay to the committee on the
cruise thank you madam chair of.
This is such a natural good idea
I'm just curious why this hasn't
come forward before madam chair
representative I think part of
that is because we do not have
that kind of money and
nonrecurring the state we have
the very lean years we just
started to grow the nonrecurring
piece of the budget in the last
three years and tell you that in
the past.
With the appropriations process
there is resistance to having
these funds set up because it
takes away the appropriations
authority of the committee.
Once you get these funds set up
it's the staff.
And the committee under mine
under my leadership always felt
like I needed to have these
things come back so we can
review and make sure that they
work.
Well madam chair.
That to me seems like a also
another naturalist aspect or.
Do you have the funds and then
you have the oversight which is
critical to ensure that the
funds are being targeted with
the need to be.
I just hope we can get this
going after.
Next.
Representative Harper thank you
madam chair and chair Lundstrom
self wonderful idea I am very
happy to be part of this just a
couple quick observations yes so
this is not part of house bill
two I know that often you will
set up funds as for procreation
and have the fun exists that one
option is there we can just
funded and that's the plan yes
that's what I'm suggesting
representative madam chair
and if I may.
If we get the money to solve the
cabinet secretaries concerned
you might set distribution
portion of two years out that
way it's not drained in here
once of state but it's from.
That might solve that problem
that going back and trying to
change those percentages that
come up.
Hello Sir yes that's that's
actually you fat and what in
right to my next college which
was.
The five percent distribution I
think it's probably okay maybe
four point five would be better
but I struggle Kate but I
recommend we take help that
creator of yes and and and that
more lines with our other
permanent funds deplete.
This is way too is that we take
it out for us for we not set the
distribution to start for a
couple years.
Yeah.
Make a motion.
Or I.
I mean we could of that a chair
or Representative Lundstrom or
because of and also finding this
out and then we just work with
the sponsor to amend for
procreation.
So I think there's probably two
or three things that we need to
change and madam chair I think
the more we can change here the
better than we know you're going
to get what you really want okay
I think.
Take this to another committee
they get what they want and I
just really feel like we do it.
So I'm looking on page two madam
chair.
You have a sense of that.
Yeah so Madam chair was from
what I would.
Pose is that we just stick with
the five percent distribution.
And we struck the the.
The twenty million in the thirty
million.
District.
and that way.
We never end up at a point where
the corpus is.
Thank you madam chair line
eighteen on page two.
Yes so so I guess I would
proposed an amendment where.
paragraph T. would now read on
July first twenty.
Twenty five we can do this out
to July first.
Twenty
twenty six what state
distribution showing made from
the transportation trust fund to
the state road fund.
In an amount equal to five
percent of the average of the
year and market values.
For the five.
The meeting the person to three
calendar years thank you.
The four.
Okay.
One more time July first twenty
twenty six distribution shopping
made for the transportation
trust fund in the amount to the
state road fund to the state in
the amount of.
After five percent.
Dried of twenty million all the
way through line eighteen.
Beginning of the.
That we need to keep that and on
each July first there after.
Well.
Note.
He called to.
Five percent.
The average of the year and
market values of the fund in the
preceding three years.
End of sentence.
All right I discussion on the
amendment chair on the floor to
make that change your
just section to now this spans
three or.
To the.
I think many secretary of
Representative is asking for us
to do them separately which is
easier for from the
administrative.
Perspective Representative
Brown.
Chair representative so I'm
looking on page two of one
thirteen and so here's what I've
scribbled in on July first
twenty twenty six a distribution
Shelby from the transportation
trust fund to the state road
fund in I would say an amount
equal to.
I think.
Five percent of the average of
the year and market values of
the funds for the immediately
preceding three calendar years
period instruction rest of that
lines of the dollar figure over
the next slide is that what we
what we do always
only addition to that is the key
part of eight fifteen sixteen
recess on the July first if you
need to keep that part okay yes
the staff at.
That's perfect.
Just for everybody's to
Switzerland's fears we will get
together the committee secretary
make sure that the language that
we want to be when through
through this process so.
After
aluminum in the to date on the
back of the twenty twenty three
six one one second
Representative.
Okay no.
And I think this is a good
change overall because it gets
is that three year period or
otherwise would come up with.
Three years okay thank you.
You want to deplete the fund for
me.
Right.
Anyone else Representative
Senator do you have anything
else.
Okay do you want to move on to
the next section here's what's
the vote on that.
Next one is what I recommend
you have a special on this
ammendment.
Have a motion to adopt the
minutes said.
The then in opposition.
Thank goodness then for the
next.
So the next with the.
Propose the strength the
appropriation.
So.
Madam chair of.
To sedition strike section to
complete yes needs to.
Second.
That.
Drafters.
Well that.
So madam chair I within the
strike section to.
Twenty.
Alright the more discussion on
that.
The motion.
He made most of us.
To adopt an opposition and even
very good we're done with that
thanks amended our recommended
itself in additional discussion
Representative we still need to
do section three.
Yeah last question last amended
madam chair and chair.
I don't know if we need to
change section three of the
changes to section two now but.
Yes my question is is that it
works is long as Senate finance
puts the money in.
This year yes so so that's.
this right now.
Doesn't have any money in it
this just to establish in the
fund as of July first year this
year the staff wishes on we also
what they'll do is they put the
money into the house bill two.
We're gonna have to have them.
This appropriation the staff
and.
they'll have to do that so.
Okay.
House with.
Right yes of the session to out
what I'm saying is the effective
date of this bill now do we need
to change noting you don't
because it's just setting up a
fund.
Sure to set up the fund that
we're what we.
Is that.
The Senate finance in the budget
that peace has to be added back
in incentive I don't and it's
perfect.
I don't think we need to change
the effective date thank you
very much any other discussion.
I have is.
The.
Making the.
But it.
My question is because this
funds the state money for many
years.
This is kind of a sneaky we got
into the Appropriations
Committee.
We could take money out of
provided cash balances to start
to start this.
If you.
Leave appropriation and there.
And asked legislative passed out
of state two hundred thousand
dollars to smaller.
This is the it's got money and
then
we've also stuff in.
Okay Representative Lundstrom so
if we wanted to do that when we
create a new section and the
section to.
And when we would then request
the Legislative cash balances
and using either provided cash
balances or we severance tax
funds severance tax funds.
Candidly on that point
Representative Lundstrom the
severance tax funds for that
conversations that I've been
hearing.
I was going to be the exact
source if this bill were to be
funded.
This and that way.
Of what we're talking about is
not dating distribution for a
couple of years.
I think they're just bills after
on that because my family is
this we can still keep.
We could use provided cash
balances to start.
You're not gonna like that the
bloody.
The impact of a lot easier
percent finance them I have to
do because it's already
established money and.
Otero appointment system house
bill one we've got more provided
cash balances that we know what
to do with right now I think
that's a proper legislative
approach is proper I think from
the debate we have a floor
hospital to doing anything right
now on the house with respect to
the severance tax funds can be.
There are no force back later
going on.
She just want to create the fund
would go through appropriations
and we make all the tinkering on
the Senate side if you trust the
process the pandemic my question
madam chair Representative
Lundstrom is how how much trust
do we do we have I mean I think
that's for this committee we
have two things working against
us right now first being time
funding is off the out and the
second being trashed in our
where we are with the process so
I'm if we are going to ask if
the doctor to come in and help
us add that additional provided
cash balances language in the
bill we're probably gonna have
to rule it today Yellowstone to
the amendment but it is a source
what we've done is we've backed
up we've backed up the start
time I say we making
appropriation and there.
There's no money in it yes but
when you came from the state
that conversations the Senate
finance are.
Interested in doing this.
Representative Harper is it
possible to treat the language
so that it it gives
consideration to a particular
fund but should that not be
palatable the Senate side
soldiers even off.
Could you work language to that
effect.
I think thank you for this what
I see is that we're setting up a
fund.
we know if the purposes.
We know that we got friends on
the Senate side that would put
money into it.
By setting up the fund we get it
out of the house.
That creates the framework for
the Senate finance committee to
put money into it the songs it
makes they make tweaks to the
authorizing legislation.
Madam chair will only be my
thinking was that if the doctor
that funding is it still could
go through.
We're not funding and with and
it would be in in the
established so the next year you
could.
Money and gets into washes of
sorts mmhm we like to do it now
this was the first start date
back a couple years want to
start rolling now where when we
see these amazing
From.
That's that's the reason we try
to give this year thank.
Thank you madam chair
representative so
If if the language making
appropriation appears and this
is just going to appropriations
and finance as soon as that one
which is noted
It will be tabled eminence in
that little process that we
don't really very much control
so by not having that there the
bills through appropriations
I've been thinking that
actually.
It happened use the chair go to
the speaker and have not
referred agency is not
appropriating any money.
When that's the thing I mean you
can work with your chairman and
see these approval so that.
And I've done it many many times
with the Sanchez share I would
just say we don't need to see
the new agency now because the
general fund out so if you take
making appropriation alpha one
forty.
The.
After the chair to ask Miss
moved out.
Positional money not spending
in general fund spending.
This.
Madam chair members of was I
think that will really I think
it would be well received.
Thank you they will get it to
pass their
Madam chair wanted to
It says here in the bill that
in section one that the five
consists of.
Appropriations gifts donations
if I wrote a check for a hundred
dollars earmarked for this with
that not that somebody in the it
is up and down.
What has been done in the past
and what's what's really neat
about this is that there have
been.
district twelve there have been
issues with other kinds of funds
have not seen any for
transportation service for other
times this is that is not
established yet so you wouldn't
have a place to send the check
we have to get the authorizing
language into law first of
governor to sign in and then
they set it up.
To their offices and the
treasury.
But yeah I mean I would get the
ball rolling.
I just think that if you take
making appropriation awful
sailed through the house it
should.
I have one of Representative yes
Madam
honestly willing to commit some
family funds to this.
State and I've with the course
of timing would matter on that
but if they just to be able to
say truthfully we have money on.
Maybe that's a little spark
thank you I agree with you
Representative whenever it takes
so Representative Parker.
Madam chair of.
Representative if we took making
appropriation
To.
We have that conversation chair
of HDFC and just had it and by a
vote on the house floor have
full from a J. of see for
automatic vote on the house
floor.
To learn more the only hostages
agree that is here that's the
power of the chair with the
chair says I don't need to hear
this it automatically goes to
the floor he just sent a note to
the speaker decided we're not
spending any general fund.
Madam chair and representative I
hear what you're saying I'm just
wondering if we can motivate
this process by.
On the to the speakers table for
our consideration.
I think I think you just you
need to have the chairman of
appropriations state doesn't
need to see it if you think if
you think so chairman and run
the utility for sure I think you
just need to just talk to him I
can't see any reason in the
world I mean you've got several
HSC members of this committee
all you all would have to
speak up and say if we don't
exceed that schedule that we
need to schedule and then come
down to the floor.
Representative I mean yeah I
don't think I don't think we
need to we need to wait any
surfing jobs not waiting and if
we just trust the process if I
can and I'm I've been having
conversations with the chairman
of appropriations is very well
aware of this bill what we're
trying to do and Health every
member on this committee has
signed on to it so I I don't
want to over promise and under
deliver but I will have that
conversation and I will do my
very best to insure that we get
that exact outcome that we're.
Asking for if not we there's
always options right that's the
beauty of the legislative
process I have one other
additional questions
Representative so also in the
fiscal impact maybe it was the
house now says.
Stated that it's probably a
better idea to have the
secretary of transportation set
on the controlling board of this
trust rather than the state
treasurer does how does the
committee to about making that
amendment.
You can also the person I think
the state treasures are.
this is on all of these kinds of
on board I think this is to ask
the secretary.
I think that amendment.
The other one I.
Consultation.
Tensions.
In opposition.
Thank.
Any other discussion.
Interesting Fishel madam chair
that we also.
I strike on white fourteen.
Appropriation.
Thank you Representative Harper
I was just confused as to what
is already done that the now
officially as we have seen.
motion yes seven anybody in
opposition.
Okay we now have a stress
amended the.
are we ready to.
Question on the amended bill.
Yes Representative.
My questions and listening to
the discussion.
Is that this was set up exactly
the same as the CDC and tied to
the step of the term before and
don't read some of that in here
and my biggest concern.
Is that this money is.
This insured that this money is
going to grow I just.
Of the manager when you look at
each of the title on the line
twelve.
The annual distributions state
road for certain projects
prioritized by the department
transportation so it can't be
siphoned off.
The.
I understand Madam chair
representative of that can be
respect not from somebody else
but.
There's no language in here that
says that it's directed.
The distance cpas specifically
that way to the state of New.
So if I'm the only one that has
a concern that we can of
students for the bill.
The end of the day I want to
make sure the money is.
One hundred percent guaranteed.
Projects were not building
In the state government anything
like that we're building roads.
Representative.
Some insurers was just look at
this language Afaria here on
page to see if this is.
Ladies work we need to change
this and actually so I started
my twenty one it's is money
distributed pursuant to this
section subsection.
Show expended only for projects
for ties by the cooperative
comments process part of
transportation.
Thank corporations federally
required performance measures
and national planning goals want
to start departments long range
plans and addresses the multiple
ways Mexico transportation
customers so I don't know if
that covers tomatoes and food
doesn't that's prior we put it
in.
Hello.
Must be a road project at this
point I would actually like to
ask.
DOT to connect opine on that if
you may Mr secretary.
Madam chair representative it's
a good point I think you want to
use predefined perpetuity you
want to be sure that fifteen
years down the road that there's
no confusion about the its
original intent so when we look
at it we believe the language is
flexible but to be sure we have
federal performance measures
related to radiation okay which
you know may not be the true
spirit and intent of this
committee right here right now
so to be quite clear Hernandez
we have for performance measures
that could
with this money would allow the
agency to focus in on areas
outside of rules in the nation
with the records.
So if it's of the committees you
know really provided intend to
hone in on those things you
could refer to plans by ofsted
the trip report in our town
reporter.
Measures Madam what about adding
some prohibited language.
Symptoms.
Now so.
Senator I could I think it could
be as simple as online twenty
two no swimmer state money
pursuant to this subsection
shall be expended only for.
Road projects.
Four step projects.
You just need to consider that
one word there are yes so I
Representative says a simple fix
so my twenty one years to say
money distribute pursuant to
subsection shall be extended
for.
Road projects our projects and
Sir one of those two roads were
treacherous.
That takes care of.
Representative Brown thank you
madam chair representative.
I I kind of think we better off
if we abbreviated the something
I'm a little nervous about this
national planning goals I'm I'm
looking into Mexico.
So I would appreciate it to say
on one twenty.
twenty distributed pursuant to
this subsection shall be
expended only for projects
prioritized by incorporated
comprehensive process of the
department of transportation Sen
Clemente eight.
The next of the the rest of the
wide and much of the next slide
and so
because we transportation to
that aligns with so that that
lines with the department's long
range plans.
And addresses the multi modal
keep out there.
I'm.
I may ask the question
representatives we already had
to do we want to keep maybe that
additional languages road or
step projects in addition to
making your donation of tax that
might give us the greatest
security Mr chair I think that's
fine to see and I agree no sure
the HSA programs step projects
because of the for profit.
Madam chair of the the list of
the world's that on page three
multi modal solutions.
As a representative just give me
your minimum more times so we
are limiting factors so many
distribute money to serve the
subsection shall be expended
only for rural road in order in
order step projects trying to
prioritize by properly talk to
this process the department of
transportation strike.
All the rest of money twenty
four.
First for twenty five Intel.
Transportation that aligns the
department's long range plans
the dresses the multimodal needs
New Mexico's transportation
costs.
Mr.
Is to inform the if we need to
throw Center for make.
it just says skip what Bill
Clinton on maintenance for
substance from.
And.
Okay and I I like what you what
you just read off for the rest
of that I I don't want to lose
small.
I agree with you.
This is the land of our.
The the the the.
I think we need news from my
perspective would
help with logistics as an
example.
From rose to.
Four of
the road to the airport would
include also slide please one
act yes yes were and I think
with multi modal
there's some pretty pretty major
needs on that road to that to
that the districts as an
example.
So anyway I like what you put in
there madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Okay so that's my commitment
that I moved to the who
seconded.
Any opposition over three
without the.
Hold the mode these but I am not
in this office the.
yes ma'am.
A change that was discussed in
terms of that and secretary of
the department to develop the
staff accomplished.
Let's vote on that just in case.
Second and that would be at some
of the.
I.
Yeah we're treasurer insert
the secretary of I guess to
Mexico.
Action
secretary or secretary.
The amount of.
The thing is that.
Okay are are ready.
Cherries in for ready I think we
have enough changes here is
probably gonna do it committee
sub this.
If.
I think we're good.
Talk to us.
So so madam chair I would move a
do not pass the hospital for
twenty eight and a do pass.
House transportation public
works.
And travel Pruitt's Committee
substitute for House Bill for
twenty eight.
The opposition.
Thank you everyone.
For that they the representative
from making sure to
transportation so a nomination.
Thank you thank you thank you
very much.
We've thank twelve forty one so.
For.
Should we.
Here.
Committee.
House Bill three twenty.
Visibility.
Here and talk for a long time
this is another tool.
Is to excise tax.
First one was.
In right now the last major
just go straight Division of.
If you look at the school have
a.
Current.
Hello Fund.
All of this last.
We have one that is rising with
inflation.
I know that the price of rules.
What tax wise with.
With other reporters in the
White and for other hand off
members.
This is the.
Well certain.
And if you go to page two of
three history of the mortgage
process that is what is charted
ninety three.
Point five percent.
Year two general fund and then
in the nineteen fifty five we've
actually got our first mortgage
taxes tax one percent.
We see that goes to the general
fund.
Until nineteen seventy nine.
When general fund for good.
Restorative so roll for the
general fund continue to trade
surplus.
Six four eighty one all of which
will.
Senator Steinborn survival is so
great to drive very fast.
So the whole point of that is.
Right she says the rules.
And if there is some future fall
out you can always.
So this.
All of the
Reports just asked said fifty
percent of the state reform and
fifty percent of the to the
local transportation projects
you were one of the locals like.
The second issues with regards
to what excise tax.
Most prevention when that taxes
started the industry came
support it because they were
told I was going to go to I
will sector industries created.
And.
Roger Costner promised to dieted
always go to and now most of it
goes to the general fund we've
been slowly putting some more of
it more towards the county DWI
treatment programs I think madam
chair for health.
This will take it across the
finish line sixty percent go to
the local due to.
Are invested programs to County
ten percent of our drug courts
thirty percent want to Medicaid.
And because of that you know
three four wanted to match
actually generates more money to
the general fund with that also.
anybody in the audience in
support of.
It's.
Madam is the warranty after and
after.
The bill if you.
Representative Harper talked
about this for quite awhile
appreciate it and I'm and my
ears thank you for the next.
Madam chair members of the
committee
Mexico chamber of commerce
quickly this bill makes several
significant redistribution that
would or sound public policy
decisions using revenue from
certain activities to support
the impacts of thank you.
Yes so a CNM for a favor of this
also for the reasons stated
thank you.
Madam chair members thank you
very much as you all may know
sensibility for centered and
solace is is introducing
something very similar the forty
sixty distribution of the very
consequential so we appreciate
the consideration of this is
these are long term solutions
for those days when general fund
on repairing is a yes vote so
thank you very much thank you Mr
secretary and even in opposition
to the bill.
Committee members Representative
Lara.
Representative I just wanted to
quickly ask Representative
Nibert is there a reason it's
like to HSD generally and not
directed to a particular
Division Department HSD.
Thank you just Medicaid spent
yes so madam chair and versus
right question I tried to honor.
Legislation to restrict.
We understand that there are
impacts to the drug courts that
there there.
Your call is that also
participate in that activity
health concerns.
And hello half the members of
the state are in the sense that
and.
In this money to help with the
rest of those health issues
arise chair Madam chair
of Representative some of which
is that medicine has different
setting different priorities
we're just trusting HSD in the
director's chair will decide
what will does have that in
there I monies to use to exactly
so chair representative last
year secretary espy was first
part of this great ratings
leverage.
Here is what they asked for.
