John Turnstall by a posse
deputized by Sheriff William
Brady and subsequent revenge
killing of Sheriff Brady on
April 1st, 1878, began the
infamous Lincoln County War.
And whereas Lincoln County war
was conducted by men with
colorful names such as Buckshot
Roberts, Dash Waite, Big Jim,
French, and Billy the Kid. And
by groups known as the Seven
Rivers Warriors and the Jesse
Evans gangs and the regulators,
and whereas many of the
individuals in the Lincoln
County war were known
alternatively to have worn a
sheriff's badge or to have been
cattle rustlers and murderers at
various points in their careers.
And whereas during the Capitan
Gap fire in the spring of 1950,
a bear cub was rescued by
firefighters and became known as
Smokey Bear, Lincoln County's
most famous native son.
And whereas Smokey Bear became a
national symbol for forest fire
prevention and the subject of
the popular song Smokey the
Bear.
And whereas Smokey Bear lived in
at the National Zoo in
Washington DC for 26 years, was
visited by thousands of
schoolchildren and received so
much fan mail that the United
States Postal Service gave
Smokey his own zip code, and he
is now buried at Smokey Bear
Historical Park in Capitan.
And whereas Lincoln County
offers numerous opportunities
for hiking, backpacking, and
skiing but then dramatic
mountain landscapes typified by
Capitan Peak and Sierra Blanca
Mountain.
And whereas Rudoso Downs in
Lincoln County is a hub for both
thoroughbred and quarter horse
racing, including the
all-American futurity, the
richest race in American quarter
horse racing, which attracts
thousands of attendees each year
from across the country.
Generating significant economic
activity supporting local
businesses and creating jobs,
making horse racing a vital
economic driver for the county.
And whereas, Lincoln County's
tourism industry extends far
beyond horse racing with its
beautiful landscapes, historical
landmarks and recreational
opportunities drawing visitors
year-round and contributing
millions of dollars annually to
the local economy and supporting
a wide array of businesses, from
lodging and dining to outdoor
outfitters and cultural
attractions, and whereas farming
and ranching remains vital to
Lincoln County's economy today
with rattle with cattle ranching
playing a significant role in
Sustaining local livelihoods and
contributing to the agricultural
output of the area.
Where I and whereas despite
facing significant challenges in
the summer of 2024, including
natural disasters that tested
the resilience and strength of
the community. The people of
Lincoln County came together
with determination, grit, and
unity, demonstrating their
ability to rebuild and thrive in
the face of adversity.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
Lincoln County be recognized as
a cornerstone of New Mexico's
heritage and a shining example
of its cultural and economic
vitality, be celebrated for its
rich and colorful history, its
pivotal role in shaping the
legend of the wild west and its
enduring contributions to the
state's economy through tourism,
agriculture, and ranching and be
recognized as a beautiful and
inspiring place to live, work,
and visit.
And be it for the resolve that
February 5, 2025 be proclaimed
Lincoln County Day in the House
of Representatives.
Thank you and welcome Lincoln
County to your House of
Representatives.
the work that you all did, uh,
this summer again from our
perspective was, was a
tremendous lift and, and uh I
was glad along with your
representative and your senator
and, and this entire body to
come together in July and make
sure that you had what you
needed to to get out of that um.
That disaster.
For the announcements, the
gentleman from Bernalillo Cruz,
Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to support
the gentleman's certificate and
all our
And Stephen guests today on the
rostrum.
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you don't
know, I married a Linley County
girl by the name of Annette
Chavez now de la Cruz, and I
promise Mr. Speaker, she did not
threaten to sock me if I didn't
stand up and say something.
Gentlemen, I've probably spent
about 1/3 of my life in Lincoln
County and have a deep love and
appreciation for that particular
county.
And so having been a former
county commissioner, I know much
of the challenges and
difficulties that it takes to to
be in a in a government that is
where the rubber meets the road,
but one of the good things,
gentlemen and Mr. Speaker, is
that I have been assured by the
Lincoln County assessor that,
uh, Mr. Leway Zamora is indeed
the best assessor of the 33
counties.
The Bernalillo County assessor
may have wanna have a word for
you later Mr. Speaker, I keep
getting myself in trouble.
Uh, I just want to close by
saying that I have this deep
appreciation for Lean County and
God blessed Lincoln County and
thank you for bringing this
certificate, gentlemen. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
lady from Valencia.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, and,
um, unfortunately I'm not rising
for Lincoln County, although I
do appreciate you and I love it,
um, myself, but I, I do have to
say that if you look, uh, uh,
representatives, if you look on
your, on your desk, you have a
bag that says Agfest. So what
that means is that Agfest is
tonight.
So, um, make sure that you are
have cleared your schedules of
after you've taken some time to
go to Lincoln County day over
there. Uh, so, but, um, New
Mexico Farm and Ranch, uh farm
and livestock bureau along with
their sponsors are proud to
invite everyone to Agfest this
evening. Join us at Santa Fe
Community uh uh convention
center and this evening at 6
p.m. legislators and their
families get VIP access and are
allowed um in 30 minutes early
at 5.
30, no ticket required for
legislators your badge, so bring
your badge with you. Uh, we'll
get you into the door.
Um, with, uh, New Mexico farm
and Livestock Bureau and all um
the backing of their sponsors,
you'll get firsthand look of how
agricultural uh powers uh our
local markets creates jobs,
fuels innovations that matter.
It's more than just a casual
meetup. It's a celebration of
our ag roots that sustain us,
pump dollars into our economy
and keep New Mexico's culture
and community strong so I hope
to see you all there.
Right. Be there or be.
Square.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from uh.
You're not a gentle lady, sir.
Gentle lady, there we go, gentle
lady from Donana Hidalgo and
Luna. I believe you have some
guests that are gonna be making
their way into the chambers. I
don't know if they're all here
yet. We can come back to you if
you'd like. No, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. We have a few of the
guests left, but before I go to
um that I would like to
introduce my shadow today, um,
this is Caden Viramontes. Caden,
please stand.
Um, Caden Viramontes is the son
of Cole and Jamie Vermontez.
He's a 9 year old born and
raised on their family farm in
Deming and Cadden is currently a
3rd grade student in Chaparral
Elementary School. His favorite
subject in school is science.
Caden is also starting his first
year in 4H and is excited to
show animals at the fair. When
he grows up, Cayden wants to
work for NASA because he loves
space and um also an important
thing to note is that he is the
great great nephew.
you to the late Representative
Larry Larranaga.
And so I'd like for you to give
a warm welcome to my shadow
Caden Vermontes. Welcome, Caden.
And, uh, gentle lady, before you
continue, funny side story.
My boy plays baseball.
In the same league as
Representative Laranaga's great.
nephew.
Who must be your cousin.
Cadden, so I'll say hi to him
when I see him this year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think
the more we visit with each
other, the more we realize that
we all have these connections
and more than likely we're all
related.
So I appreciate that, um, Caden
is also related to Debbie Ortiz,
who works in our leadership
office, um, he is her great
nephew, so great, great nephew
anyway, we're all related, but
thank you so much. Um, do I, do,
do I have, um, the floor to
continue and you have some
guests to introduce, right?
I do such a great day. We have a
lot going on, um, today is also,
uh, the silver spikes.
in the house, so I do have a
certificate and I would like
for.
Someone to read it, but first
let me just say a few words
about the silver spikes, um, I'm
really, really proud to
represent you all. I'm glad to
have you here. The Silver
Spikes, um, I need, um, to
recognize that they are from
Deming Luna County. They
represent a nonpartisan group of
dedicated community leaders
representing every aspect of
life in Luna County as you'll
see when I introduced them,
they're faithfully arrived in
Santa Fe every year during the
session to advocate for for the
county but.
Also they put on that lovely
reception that we had last night
and without fail they bring us
each a bottle of wine.
And uh
That reminds us that District 32
is, you know, an agricultural
district. It is the heartbeat of
our wine industry here in New
Mexico, so I'd like to share
with you just a few things, not
an exhaustive list, but a very
few things about Luna County and
the area that the silver spikes
represent.
Um, one would be our, our rugged
desert mountains that attract
hunters and hikers from all over
the country and are home to the
Persian mountain goat, the ibex,
introduced in the 1970s and they
continue to thrive there.
The wonderful Rockho State Park
where Rock counters are invited
to collect semi precious stones
and take them home. I think
that's the only part that does
such a thing. Luna County is the
gateway to old Mexico. Columbus
is the only border community.
On our international border and
we enjoy great relationships
with our neighbors in Mexico. We
have a, a beautiful unique
border culture. Thank you for
the incredible work you do, um,
The people of Deming and Luna
County and for being our voice
of our communities. I, I'm
extremely proud to represent you
all, and I want to introduce
you, um, since you're already
standing.
OK.
I was gonna have you stand, but
Mr. Speaker, I will, um, I'll
try to go from left to right we
have city councilor Irma
Rodriguez.
Thank you Irma. Yeah, we have um
a county commissioner, newly
elected county commissioner
Christian Anne Harvey. Thank
you, Christiane.
We have silver spikes member nim
Enriquez.
My name.
And in the back we have uh
Colette Chandler. She's the
county commissioner for Luna
County.
Thank you for being here and her
husband, Judge Scott Chandler,
he's the magistrate judge in
LUNA.
And our president of the Luna
County Silver Spikes is David
Baesa. Thank you guys so much.
I really appreciate you staying.
They have a long drive, but they
stayed because um they knew how
important it was to me to honor
them today and I really truly
appreciate all you do for us.
Thank you for being here. You
guys have a safe trip home um
here welcome to your house.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker, would,
could somebody read the
certificate, please?
Certainly, generally.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes February 5, 2025.
Demming Luna County Silver
Spikes Day.
Whereas in the in the mid 1970s,
several business people from the
city of Deming and Luna County
formed a local nonpartisan group
to greet visiting dignitaries
and support prospective new
businesses and industries.
And whereas a small rural
community area benefited from
the opportunities provided by
the organization, which became
known as a dimming Luna County
silver spikes, and whereas the
Demming Luna County silver
spikes derives its name from the
ceremony held when in March
1881, a silver spike was driven
into the railroad at Demming to
mark the completion of the 2nd
transcontinental railroad, which
united the Santa Fe and Southern
Pacific Railroads.
And whereas with the completion
of the railroad, Demming and
Luna County began to experience
growth and whereas dimming has
always been known for its
hospitality, beginning with its
famous Harvey House Restaurant
and its female employees known
as Harvey girls, making Demming
a must stop for rail travelers
in the early 20th century. And
whereas, the Harvey girls are
considered the predecessors of
the Demming Luna County Silver
spikes, and whereas the Demming
Luna County silver spikes are
called
upon to greet new members of the
community and whereas in the
1980s, the community leaders
realized the Demmingunna County
Silver Spikes could serve a
valuable role by meeting with
the governor and other elected
officials each year to discuss
the needs of the Deming Luna
County area and whereas during
the legislative session, the
Demming Luna County Silver
Spikes host a reception for
elected officials and invited
guests. And whereas the Demming
Luna County silver spikes have
provided a
valuable venue to promote the
needs of the Demminguna County
area and bring together the
elected officials and
administrators of Luna County,
the Luna County school
districts, the city of Deming,
and the village of Columbus and
assist, support, and promote the
creation of new businesses and
industries.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to the
Demming Luna County silver
spikes by proclaiming February
5, 2025 as Demming Luna County
Silver Spike's Day in the House
of Representatives, signed and
sealed at the Capitol in the
city of Santa Fe.
Welcome to the Silver Spikes.
gentle lady from Burnley or said
Thompson with a memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point?
Would you like to move that we
take House Memorial 13 off the
speaker's table and make it the
next order of business trying to
cheat for time, Mr. Speaker. I
move that we, that House
Memorial 13 be now removed from
the speaker's table and be made
the next order of business
objection is ordered that the
election has served for placing
House memorial 13 on final
passage has been taken. It is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the general
lady to explain the memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So today
is Public Health Day in the
house in the.
Legislature and I'm not gonna
have the memorial read because
um we need to do some actual
work, but I do want to state how
how important public health is
in New Mexico and to remind
folks that in most states, um,
public health is a county, a
countywide, um.
Each county has its own public
health department in New Mexico
it is a state which is why we
have the county and tribal
health councils which need
funding primary care is
important to all of us. We know
there's a shortage of all kinds
of providers and Mr. Chair, I
just asked the body to, to
recognize that public health is
very important and we need to
support it. Thank you.
Is there a debate on the
memorial.
See none, the gentle lady to
close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Memorial do now pass and that
it.
All, all members are present in
voting in the affirmative.
We are on final passage of House
Memorial 13. The vote is now
open.
Bors are closed by a vote of 69
in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. Has 13 has duly passed
his house. Congratulations.
We're still in announcements.
Folks, there is, um, as the
gentle lady stated today's
Mexico Public Health Day at the
legislature in the Rotunda from
8 to 3. Also there's an
invitation only reception with
growing up in New Mexico at the
Rio Chama at 5 o'clock. League
of Women voters, uh, legislative
reception at La Fonda at 5:30
and as was stated earlier that
Rioso Valley Chamber of
Commerce, Lincoln County Da
Legislative reception, as well
as Agfest.
At the convention center.
See,
gentle lady from Achilles with
an announcement. Yes, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to
take just to uh an opportunity
this morning to remind everybody
that tomorrow is Gallant
McKinley Day at the legislature
and that's the day we get great
pins, have a lot of fun at the
La Fonda tomorrow night and look
forward to all of your
participation. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentle lady.
Can you give us a sneak peek as
to the pin.
Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen them
yet, but they're always cool and
they're always nice.
It's the most closely guarded
secret in the legislature. Can't
wait to see it.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee to who has
been referred House Bill 35 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that a
house energy, environment and
natural resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 35 is
reported without recommendation
and then referred to the Health
and Human Services Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen, chair.
of adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 35, but a report with
recommendation.
Do pass on house energy,
environment, Resources Committee
substitute for housing 35. All
those in favor 85 I.
Was Nate.
Yeah, I have it can be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment and natural
Resources Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 128 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
he referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen, chair.
I adoption. We are an adoption
of a favorable community report
in House Bill 128. All those in
favor signified by say 9.
name the uh CAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 172
has had it under consideration
in reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Union
Affairs Committee, respectfully
submitted Linda Sarato chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption of a
favorable report in House Bill
172. All those in favor.
Opposed name
Yeah, committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
assegas and water resources
committee to whom has been
referred House Bill 92 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended and he
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Christina
Ortez, chair,
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report in House Bill 92.
All those in favor 759.
Well the supposed name. I have a
committee report after.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick, and water resources
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 150 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christina as chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report in House
Bill 150. All those in favor,
and if I was say I.
I was supposed,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 73
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted to Anne
J. Ferrari, chair Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 73. All those in
favor say aye.
Boney. Yeah, I saw a report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, the consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 86
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair.
Move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
'86. All those in favor, I would
say 9.
I suppose the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 87
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J Ferrari, chair. Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report for House Bill
87, all those in favor, I say I.
Al Bona, the SSI that can be
reported up to.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to has
been referred House Bill 89 has
had it under consideration in
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the education committee
respectfully submitted to Anne J
Ferrari chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
89. All those in favor signified
by saying 9.
I suppose nay, the eyes have it
for me to report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 22 has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted Patricia
Roybalt Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 22. All those in
favor signified by saying I.
Of the supposed nay, the eyes
have a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 129 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted Patricia Royal
Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report
favorable committee report in
House Bill 129. All those in
favor signified by saying I.
I suppose nay.
Yeah, I have it come to report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 138 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the Health
and Human Services Committee
respectfully submitted Patricia
Roel Caballeroche.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report favorable
report in House Bill 138. All
those in favor signified by say
a.
I don't suppose.
Yeah, I saw it be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 146 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
transportation, public works and
capital Improvements Committee
respectfully submitted Patricia
Roel Caballero chair. Mr.
Speaker, I move adoption of the
committee report favorable
report in House Bill 146, all
those in favor, and probably
saying aye.
I suppose nay.
You guys have a report adopted.
Gentle lady from
Sun
No.
Mr. Speaker, now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m.
will come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session.
It is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of
Business Committee.
If there's an objection, it is
so ordered.
Good morning members.
Happy Tuesday morning.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
see no objection. It is so
ordered.
clerk to read.
House Bill 14 introduced by
Representative Linte and Javier
Martinez, an act relating to
taxation, repealing the working
families tax credit and enacting
the earned income tax credit,
House Bill 14.
I was 14. I haven't been read by
title order printed and referred
to the House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
the the house taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 16, introduced by
Representative Little, an act
relating to criminal sentencing,
providing for the alteration of
a basic sentence for trafficking
certain amounts of fentanyl.
House Bill 16.
I was 16, I been read to us by
titles or reprinted and referred
to the House government election
and Indian Affairs Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 272, introduced by
Representatives Brown and
Montoya, an act relating to
education, enacting the trade
Education Assistance Act,
creating the Trade Education
Assistance Fund, making an
appropriation, House Bill 272.
House Bill 272 have been by
title is order printed and
refers to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 273 introduced by
Representative Pettigrew.
Murphy and Henry.
An act relating to renewable
energy, amending the rural
Electric Cooperative Act and the
renewable Energy Act to include
natural gas using combined cycle
technology in the definition of
renewable energy resource. House
Bill 273 273 haven't been
written by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Rural Development Land
Grants and Cultural Affairs
Committee then the House Energy
environment and Natural
Resources Committee.
House Bill 274 introduced by
Representatives Senna Cortez Blo
Montoya.
Senator Block and Representative
Alan Martinez, an act relating
to crime, making the trafficking
of fentanyl, a first degree
felony with a sentence of life
in prison, House Bill 274.
House Bill 274.
Sponsored in part by the block
caucus.
So they're printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 275 introduced by
representatives Senna Cortez,
Murphy.
Montoya block, and Senator
Block.
An act relating to taxation,
creating a flat individual
income tax rate of 0%, providing
that personal income tax returns
are not required but may be
filed. House Bill 275.
As with 275 haven't been read to
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the House Taxation
Revenue Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 276 introduced by
Representatives Garrett,
Lundstrom, Brown, Senator
Padilla, and Representative de
la Cruz. An act relating to
public private partnerships
creating the public-private
partnership fund and the
public-private partnership
program, acquiring the local
government division of the
Department of Finance and
Administration in consultation
with the New Mexico Finance
Authority to provide grants to
public partners to complete
broadband projects and
transportation.
projects, requiring rulemaking,
providing that appropriations
from the public project
revolving fund may be made to
the public, private partnership
fund, exempting public-private
partnership agreements from the
procurement code, making an
appropriation. House Bill 276.
Oswell 276. I've been red twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 277 introduced by
Representatives Mirabel Moya,
Doo, Latta, Vincent, and
Chatfield. An act relating to
public school capital outlay,
decreasing the mileage, milage
apologies required for school
districts with insufficient
bonding capacity. House Bill
277.
House Bill 277 haven't been
written by title is or printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, the the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 278 introduced by
Representative Nicole Chavez, an
act relating to crime, excluding
from the crime of voluntary
manslaughter killings committed
during the escape from the
commission of a felony and while
res resisting lawful arrest.
House Bill 278.
278, haven't been there twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 279 introduced by
Representative Nicole Chavez
Armstrong and Senna Cortez, an
act relating to healthcare,
creating an optional process for
actuarial reviews of proposed
legislation that may change the
coverage requirements for health
insurers, requiring the
Legislative council service to
retain contractors who perform
actuarial reviews of legislative
proposals, making an
appropriation. House Bill 279.
House Bill 279 is, haven't been
to by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 280, introduced by
representatives Nicole Chavez,
Reeb, and Vincent, an act
relating to criminal sentencing,
expanding the definition of
violent felony, providing 3
strikes for violent felons for
the purpose of life
imprisonment, eliminating the
possibility of parole, except
geriatric or medical parole for
a defendant with 3 felony
strikes and sentenced to life
imprisonment, providing that
certain convictions incurred by
a defendant before the age of
18.
shall constitute violent
felonies, providing penalties.
House Bill 280. House Bill 280
haven't been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 281 introduced by
representatives Anya Arnu,
Herndon, and Senator Pope.
An act relating to licensure
exempting hair braiding from
provisions of the barbers and
cosmetologists Act prohibiting
disciplinary action for hair
braiding without being licensed
pursuant to the barbers and
cosmetologists act. House Bill
281.
House Bill 281 haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 282 introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez
and Gurola, an act relating to
education requiring employee
rights in the workplace to be
taught to high school students.
House Bill 282.
I was 282 haven't been read to
us by title is or reprinted and
referred to the House Labor,
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, the House Education
Committee.
House Bill 283 introduced by
Representative Chandler.
An act relating to public
records requiring a law
enforcement records requester to
certify that the law enforcement
record will not be used to
solicit victims, providing a
definition of commercial purpose
and making exceptions, requiring
a record requester who intends
to use the record for a
commercial purpose to certify
that the record will be used for
a commercial purpose, allowing a
public body to charge an hourly
fee to requesters who intend to
use a record for a commercial
purpose, requiring a public
body.
to provide an estimated fee to
requester who intends to use a
record for a commercial purpose,
allowing a public body to waive
the commercial purpose fee
requiring a record requester who
has been denied a request to
provide a public body with a
notice of a claimed violation
and allowing the public body 15
calendar days to remedy the
violation before an enforcement
action can be brought, limiting
actions to enforce the
inspection of public Records Act
to within 2 years of the date.
That the public body received
notice of a claimed violation,
creating an inspection of public
records task force, making
technical changes. House Bill
283.
House Bill 283 haven't been read
to us by title is order printed
and referred to the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee. The the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 284 introduced by
Representative McQueen.
An act relating to animals
amending definitions in the
livestock code allowing
fertility control, relocation
and adoption of free roaming
horses under certain
circumstances, allowing a free
roaming horse expert to control
the population of free roaming
horses on certain land
throughout certain methods
requiring the New Mexico
Livestock Board to approve the
qualifications of a free roaming
horse expert, allowing the New
Mexico Livestock Board to make
rules regarding the approval of
the qualifications of a free
roaming.
expert prohibiting the slaughter
or export for slaughter of free
roaming horses, providing a
penalty. House Bill 284.
House Bill 284 I mean it was by
title is or printed and referred
to the House Agriculture assecas
and Water Resources Committee.
The the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 285 introduced by
Representative Silva, an act
relating to consumer protection,
making it an unfair or deceptive
trade practice to use dynamic
pricing to change the price of a
good or service sold by a
grocery or retail store in
certain circumstances. House
Bill 285.
House Bill 285 haven't been
written twice by title is
ordered, printed and referred to
the House, Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Thence the house judiciary
committee.
House Bill 286 introduced by
Representative Dixon, an act
relating to criminal procedure,
admitting the purposes for which
a crime reduction grant
application may be made. House
Bill 286.
I was 286. I haven't been there
2 as my title is or printed and
referred to the House government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
Then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 287 introduced by
Representative Reeb, an act
relating to crime admitting the
crime of the use of a telephone
to terrify, intimidate,
threaten, harass, annoy, or
offend to include text messages
and social media. House Bill
287. 287 have been read to us by
Talis auto, printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 288, introduced by
Representative Silva, an act
making an appropriation to
conduct a feasibility study of
options for local governance and
chaparral. House Bill 288288 by
title is order printed and
referred to the House of Rural
Development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 289 introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to geothermal
resources, amending the
provisions of the geothermal
projects Development Fund,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 28989 by title is or
printed and referred to the
house, energy, environment and
natural Resources Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 290 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero,
Chandler, and Kates, an act
relating to public finance,
enacting the vibrant Communities
Act, creating the vibrant
Communities program, providing
public assistance to qualifying
entities for the completion of
public purpose projects upon
appropriations by the
legislature, requiring the
Department of Finance and
Administration to administer the
program, specifying contractual
terms requiring reporting,
providing a contingent.
of date. House Bill 290.
House Bill 290 that was by
title, is ordered, printed and
referred to the House government
election and Indian Affairs
Committee. There's the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 291 introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero, an
act relating to the environment
amending the recycling and
illegal Dumping Act to promote
the state's circular economy,
requiring the environmental
improvement board to adopt
requirements and procedures for
a person to submit rules to the
board for adoption, requiring
the board to determine whether
to hold a hearing within 60
days. House Bill 291.
House Bill 291. I haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed.
And referred to the House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee, then the
House government election in
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 292 introduced by
representatives Senna Cortez,
Henry Murphy, Senator Block, and
Representative Block. An act
relating to taxation, creating
the all cities and counties
funds to transfer a portion of
gross receipts tax revenue to
municipalities and counties,
distributing a portion of gross
receipts tax revenue to the all
cities and counties fund. House
Bill 292. House Bill 292 Here by
titles or printed and referred
to the House government.
Election in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the house
taxation and revenue Committee.
House Bill 293 introduced by
Representatives Senna Cortez,
Murphy, Senator Block,
Representatives Montoya and
Block.
An act relating to taxation
removing the income cap for the
Social Security income exemption
pursuant to the Income Tax Act.
House Bill 293.
I was 293. I've been there twice
by title is ordered printed.
And referred to the House
government election in Indian
Affairs Committee, Denz our
taxation and Revenue Committee.
House Bill 294 introduced by
Representative Cates, and act
relating to property taxation,
providing that certain land
within a conservation easement
shall be valued as agricultural
land for the purposes of
property taxation. House Bill
294.
Is Bill 294.
Have been to us by title is or
the printed and referred to the
house agriculture are gas and
Water Resources Committee. The
the House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 295 introduced by
Representative Small.
An act relating to taxation
making improvements on land
owned by the New Mexico
Renewable Energy Authority
exempt from property tax for so
long as the authority holds
title to the property. House
Bill 295.
House Bill 295 had been by
toddlers or a printed and
referred to the house, energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee, the the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 296, introduced by
Representative Parajon.
An act relating to the 1999
Public Accountancy Act, amending
definitions, changing
qualifications for certification
requiring practitioners from
other states and jurisdictions
to have license requirements
that are comparable to or exceed
New Mexico's requirements. House
Bill 296.
House Bill 296.
Haven't been to us by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
There's the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 297 introduced by
representatives Gonzalez,
Sarana, and Miloal Moya, an act
relating to school personnel
providing for licensure
endorsement in computer science
for all grades. House Bill 297.
House Bill 297 haven't been
written to us by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee.
Thence the House government
election in Indian Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 298, introduced by
Representatives Chandler and
Duncan.
An act relating to
municipalities, amending
sections of the municipal code
clarifying the governing law or
mayor council forms of
government.
Providing procedures for filling
vacancies, providing procedures
for the appointment of officials
and voting on matters before a
governing body, clarifying
mayoral authority, powers and
duties, providing procedures for
the nomination and appointment
of employees and officials,
codifying the mayor and
governing body's lack of
authority over judicial branch
affairs requiring organizational
meetings, providing the
appointed members of a governing
body are not subject to merit
system ordinances requiring
member
of a governing body to recuse
themselves from voting when true
or perceived conflicts of
interest exist, supplying,
specifying procedures for such
recusals, removing the
requirement that special
elections occur within 90 days
of the adoption of an ordinance
to change the number of members
of a governing body or trustees
or such a petition, amending the
powers and duties of a governing
body, admitting the powers of a
commission in a commission
manager form of government.
House.
Bill 298.
House Bill 298. Haven't been was
by title. His order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 299 introduced by
Representatives Hall, the 2nd,
Lundstrom, and Joshua Hernandez,
an act relating to public
employee retirement, creating a
state law enforcement instructor
member, providing a definition
for state law enforcement
instructor member, including
state law enforcement instructor
members under state public
safety member coverage plan one,
providing for an election
pertaining to the adoption of
state public safety member
coverage plan one. House.
299.
House Bill 299 have been was by
titles or printed and referred
to the House Labor Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee.
Thence the house judiciary
committee.
House Bill 300 introduced by
Representative Zamora and act
relating to schools enacting the
seizure Safe Schools Act to
provide for seizure disorder
management and care by school
personnel providing for
rulemaking, limiting liability,
House Bill 300 300 haven't been
read to us by title is printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 301 introduced by
representative Zamora, an act
relating to missing persons,
improving the implementation of
Silver alerts requiring cellular
service companies and paging
service companies to execute a
procedure for notifying their
representatives so that text
messages are sent to all
customers at no additional
expense. House Bill 301 301 been
read twice by titles or printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 302 introduced by
Representative Joshua Hernandez
and act relating to local
governments, amending sections
of the development fees Act,
providing that impact fee
credits are not reduced by
proportional share concepts.
Providing that municipalities
and counties cannot require the
waiver of any provisions of the
development fees Act. House Bill
302.
House Bill 302 have been read to
us by titles or printed and
referred to the House Rural
Development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee, then
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 303, introduced by
Representative Doo.
An act relating to crime,
providing for exposure of a
child to a Schedule 1 or
Schedule 2 controlled substance
to constitute abuse of a child,
providing for taking newborn
children into temporary
protective custody under certain
circumstances, declaring an
emergency. House Bill 303. I was
303, haven't been written by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 304 introduced by
Representatives Dow and Murphy,
and act relating to law
enforcement enacting the law
enforcement officer loan
repayment Act, granting loan
repayment awards to certain law
enforcement officers providing
for contracts, contract
cancellations, and contract
enforcement, creating a fund,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 304.
As with 304 have been read to us
by title is order printed and
referred to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 305 introduced by
Representatives Doo and Garcia.
An act relating to public
contracts, requiring that public
contracts provide for increased
contractor and subcontra
subcontractor reimbursement and
worker wage increases in
accordance with and concurrent
with state minimum wage
increases or increased costs as
mandated by law. House Bill
305305 have been written by
title is or printed and referred
to the house the labor veterans,
Military Affairs Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 306 introduced by
Representative Lujan, Senator
Stewart, and Representative
Garrett, an act making an
appropriation to the crime
victims reparation commission
for sexual assault services
programs. House Bill 306306 have
been read to us by title is
ordered, printed, and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, Denz House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 307 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to Internet services,
enacting the Internet privacy
and Safety Act, establishing
requirements for service
providers, prohibiting certain
uses of consumer data, providing
rights to consumers,
establishing limitations on
processing of consumer data,
prohibiting waivers of rights
and retaliatory denials of
service, providing for
injunctive relief and civil
penalties, providing for
rulemaking. House Bill 307.
You didn't see that
We
House Bill 307 have been read to
us by title is order printed and
referred to the house cause to
the House of Commerce and
Economic Development Committee.
The,
the house judiciary.
committee.
House Bill 308 introduced by
Representatives Linte and
Armstrong, an act relating to
conservancy district elections,
removing the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District from the
local Election Act, providing
timing and other procedures for
the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District elections,
defining terms, providing
procedures for compiling a list
of qualified electors,
eliminating certain requirements
for absentee voting, Election
notices and polling locations.
Amending and enacting sections
of the NMSA 1978, declaring an
emergency. House Bill 308
committee of the whole debated
right now.
Has 308 haven't been so my title
is order printed and referred to
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 309 introduced by
Representatives Sanchez and
Pettigrew, an act relating to
property crime, providing a
process for removing unlawful
occupants of real property from
that property. Providing a form
to request the removal of an
unlawful occupant from real
property, providing procedures
for a peace officer to remove
unlawful occupants from real
property. Prescribing procedures
for notice, providing fees,
creating a cause of action for
persons who were wrongfully
removed from real property.
Bill 309.
House Bill 309 haven't been read
to us by title.
His order printed and referred
to the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 310 introduced by
Representative Ortiz, an act
relating to motor vehicles,
enacting the, the promoting
responsible end of life
management of electric vehicles,
batteries Act.
House Bill 310.
House Bill 310 have been twice
by titles, or printed and
referred to the House
Transportation, public works and
Capital Improvements Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 311, introduced by
Representative Small, an act
relating to water enacting the
reclaimed Water Act, providing a
process for creation of
reclaimed water authorities,
providing powers and duties of
an authority providing for the
use, sale, provision, and
certification of reclaimed
water. House Bill 311.
House Bill 311 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house house
agricultural gas and Water
Resources Committee, thence the
House Judiciary Committee.
How's
House Bill 312 introduced by
Representative Matthews.
A
Relating to litigation, enacting
the litigation financing
Transparency Act, requiring
disclosures, providing.
Enforcement, House Bill 312.
Mhm
What we
As we have 312 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to.
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 313 introduced by
Representative Serato and act
relating to consumer protection
enacting the digital age
verification Act, defining
terms, providing enforcement.
House Bill 313.
How's it been 313. I've been
read twice title is order
printed and referred to the
house, Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 314 introduced by
representatives Mejia and
Hochman V Hill, an act relating
to motor vehicles, allowing a
law enforcement officer or
Department of Transportation
employee to move a hazard. House
Bill 314.
Thank you.
Thank you for fixing my mic.
You're the man. How's about 314
have been there twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house transportation
Public Works and Capital
Improvements Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
Just one, OK.
House Memorial 16 introduced by
representatives Nicole Chavez,
de la Cruz, Reeb, Lundstrom, and
Vincent, a memorial recognizing
victims of violent crime and
their families and honoring
their losses. House Memorial 16.
House Memorial 16 have made by
title is order not printed and
placed on the speaker's table.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered.
Members make an announcement,
uh, we read it a committee
report wrong yesterday, and by
we I mean I.
We need to expunge a house
government elections in Affairs
Committee report that was read
in with an error yesterday.
This is how joint resolution 3,
which was red.
In house education committee,
but it should have been referred
to the house.
Energy
Natural Resources Committee.
We have conferred with both
leaders and we have agreement
that in fact
I screwed up.
And seeing no objection.
Mr. Speaker
State your objection, sir. I,
I'll pull that back. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to,
since you delayed, I thought
I'd, I thought I'd object.
Sounds like you objected to me
claiming responsibility for the
mistake. Thank you. Good looking
out and just want to emphasize
it. We're good.
If you in the building, that is
parliamentary procedure for you,
right there. If no one objects
before I gavel.
It's kind of game over.
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your rural
development, land grants and
cultural affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.
in room 305. Uh, House Bill 210
is getting moved, uh, to next
Tuesday instead, uh, at the
request of the sponsor, but we
have 3 wonderful other bills to
be discussing tomorrow 9 a.m.
Thank you. Members take note,
announcements generally from
Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house appropriations and Finance
Committee will be meeting today
at 1:30 in room 307.
Members see no gentle lady from
Berlio. Mr. Speaker, your
commerce and economic
development committee will meet
in a little less than half an
hour, 1:30 in room 317.
gentle lady from Ber Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House La
Veterans and Military Affairs
will be meeting tomorrow at 1:30
or 15 minutes.
After session in room 315 and we
have some wonderful news perhaps
members can tune in or come we
will have uh a state of the
state given by the cabinet
secretary for Veterans Affairs
and then we will have a state of
the state.
Given by the highest ranking
military officer, uh, officer
Aguilar.
Um, in our committee room
tomorrow which I believe will be
groundbreaking so I invite
everyone because this is an
important message for all of us
and we're very proud to have
them before our committee. Thank
you so much Mr. Speaker.
Jelady from Los Alamos and Santa
Fe, Representative Chandler. Oh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, just a
reminder that your House
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting today at 1:30 and we
have a whole slew of wonderful
bills to hear today.
We'll also be meeting on Friday
and Saturday, Mr. Speaker.
Members take note.
The lady from Taos.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
house, uh, agriculturalsea and
Water Resources Committee will
be meeting tomorrow morning at
9:00 a.m. and 3:15. We also have
a committee dinner tomorrow at 6
p.m. at Restaurant Martin and I
want to remind everyone that
AgFest is happening today.
So you should go and the egg
prices are the same Mr. Speaker,
7.09.
Activist member sick note other
announcements. I, I do have
another announcement, um.
close attention. House Bill 198
sponsor sponsor representative
Lente. This is a tax cleanup
bill that we have every year. It
used to be Lenty Harper, now
it's just Lente.
I referred it to judiciary. I
don't know why it doesn't need
to go to the judiciary. I talked
to the chairwoman. She does not
want to see it. um, so I'm gonna
drop.
No offense.
I'm gonna drop the judiciary
referral because it makes no
sense and it will just go to tax
and.
Everybody can
Have fun with it in tax.
See an objection.
accepted. It is so ordered.
Nobody wants the boring tax
bills, I guess.
Any other announcements before
we leave for the day.
Briefly on Friday it is American
Indian Day in the legislature,
so we will have a packed house,
very exciting day for the
rookies. It's probably one of
the, one of the best days, um,
we had a PI day yesterday,
American Indian Day, African
American Day and also Hispanic
Culture Day at some point, I
think in the next couple of
weeks, so very exciting days to
celebrate our all of our diverse
communities here in this chamber
and in this roundhouse.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
The house was in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
Enjoy Afa, but don't enjoy it
too much.
