Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, we have a quorum.
OK, thank you. Um, and we have a
presenter for House Bill 470
neglected child definition, and
Representative Herndon, and I
believe you have an amendment.
I should ask, is this a friendly
amendment?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am before you for
House Bill 470.
And the house
And, and House Bill 470 relates
to.
The definition, the purpose of
the hospital for 70 is that an
expansion of the definition of
neglected child under the abuse
and neglect Act to include
situations where a child was
unsupervised.
And had access to a firearm or
other deadly weapon.
The bill aims to hold parents,
guardians, custodians legally
accountable if they negligently
allow a child to have access to
firearms or other deadly weapons
without adult supervision, Madam
Chair, I do have an amendment.
And uh I would like to move. Can
I move it for discussion.
OK. Thank you.
Madam Chair, the amendment
simply uh does is only a
clarification, and it just uh
makes it clearly.
Uh, references a child.
OK, is there any discussion on
the amendment?
Madam Chair, move to adopt the
amendment.
OK. Is there any opposition?
The amendment.
OK.
You have an amended bill.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair, I, I have explained
the bill and the amendment
really did not change the bill
at all. Only it just clarified
one word and uh I stand for
questions.
Um
I didn't see who went first of
the audience. Oh yes.
Hi, audience.
Yes, is there anyone in the
audience in opposition?
To this bill.
OK. Is there anyone in support?
OK. Um, let's go to Zoom. Is
there anyone in opposition?
And support.
OK, there's
OK.
One
OK. And support or opposition?
OK. Go ahead, person on Zoom.
Admin.
Oh, that that.
My apologies,
members of the committee. My
name is Nat and I support 470
the time
in the late hour I stay in
support. Thank you.
Thank you, Nat.
Anyone else?
OK, we're good.
Uh
It will go to Representative
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative
Herndon for being here at this.
I don't think it's that late
actually, Madam, it's only 6:30.
So Madam Chair representative,
when it comes to this bill,
I do have a few questions, and
first is about deadly weapon.
I think that's probably the the
big stumbling block I have with
this. It's on page 3.
This deadly weapon means an
object instrument, substance, or
device that's likely to
And that is used by a person
with the intention to cause
great bodily harm or death or
with which the death of a person
can be easily or readily
produced.
Madam Chair, I did have a
question because I saw the CYFD
analysis, I don't know if you
have a copy of that. And
according to CYFD from what I
read, they had some concerns
about how broad that definition
was because Madam Chair, I
believe what they said was it
could include any number of
household objects according to
the FIR, it says.
I see
I had the CYFD analysis in front
of me and I lost my place
already, so.
Here it is. OK, madam Chair, it
says, according to CFD, the key
issue lies in the broad vague
definition of deadly weapon
which.
is an object instrument sub uh
substance or device and they
said that it can include kitchen
knives, pocket knives, baseball
bats, hammers, wire, rope,
screwdrivers, ice picks, rocks,
and more could be classified as
deadly weapons, and they had a
concern about that. So Madame
Chair Representative, I just
want to make sure that
If I ever
cool rock like I collect rocks
in my house and.
What if, could that be used as a
deadly weapon? Would that need
to be like
Secured in some way, or even
like a rolling pin, for example,
that could cause great bodily
harm or a kitchen knife. So
could you just tell me a little
bit about how we got to the
definition of deadly weapon and
and what it includes and doesn't
include because CYFD did have
concerns.
So Madam, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
block.
A deadly weapon is intended to
um.
A line with something that would
be intended to use to call great
bodily harm or death. We don't
normally intend to call cause
great bodily harm with a rolling
pin.
Or with uh any of the other
items that you talked about.
And so, madam, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, I
think a reasonable application
of the definition that is in on
page 3 would be applied if it
came to that interpretation.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I agree with
reasonable, but, but it also
includes things like baseball
bats, like when I was a kid, I
played baseball with my dad and
so I'm just wondering about
that, cause they did have a
concern that was in there, their
concerns.
So.
Members of the committee
representative block, I don't
think you intended to kill your
dad or anybody else with your
baseball bat when you were
playing, so I'm just saying if
you look at this reasonably, the
things that CYFD included, I
think we're a little bit
extreme.
And so those items, if you think
about them rationally, would not
be considered things that you
are intending to call cause
great bodily harm or death or
which death of a person can be
easily or readily produced when
you're playing baseball, you are
hitting a baseball, so I, I just
submit that to you and in any
event, it would be up to a court
to decide.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives. So, I mean, I
guess, yeah, it's technically a
bat you probably have to beat
some, I don't know how many
times you'd have to beat him
with a bat.
Great, great bodily harm, but
when it comes to a kitchen
knife, for example.
That is readily available.
And so how would that factor in
when it comes to that because it
a knife is meant to cut
something, and if you use it in
a nefarious way.
How would that play into this?
Would there be someone who could
potentially be charged with
abandoning a child just because
you didn't lock up your kitchen
knives at the end of dinner.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Black,
no.
Thank you, Madam Chair
andresentative, I hope not,
because I did see that in the
FIR and the analysis, and I did
see.
There there was concern, because
these, these agencies that have
to deal with these kinds of
cases, they didn't want to have
a broad definition of that. So I
think that's something that just
needs to be considered, maybe
tightening that up.
little bit, but Madam Chair
representative, I'm wondering,
can you tell me what the prime
rationale for the bill was in
general, and why we're bringing
it forward. Was there a problem
with things
Being
Left out for kids to harm other
people, uh, can you tell me a
little bit about that? And I
know we had a bill a few years
ago that Benny Hargrove act.
And I believe that
I believe that was supposed to
fix these problems. Can you tell
me a little bit about that?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative block.
This, uh, this bill actually
aligns with Benny Hargrove in
terms of a deadly weapon in
terms of the, the definition and
in terms of actually uh items
that are left.
Primarily on um.
And secure
In a place where they should not
be in the hands of a person who
shouldn't have them.
Is absolutely um makes these
two.
Pieces of legislation.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. And then what,
what about when it comes to
something that's not a firearm.
So, a
A knife, like a pocket knife.
How did that work?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative block,
it would be I think the court
would be looking at what's
reasonable and what was
considered at that time at a
kitchen knife you would expect a
kitchen knife to be there. You
eat with it on a daily basis, a
pocket knife sometimes people
use it to carve, Boy Scouts use
them all the time. So those
types of things I do believe
that the court would be very
reasonable in considering what
is, what would be a deadly
weapon or not.
And I think CYFD would
To once they think about this a
little more.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. So I'm, I'm, I'm
just wondering, OK, what court
would decide? cause would
someone have to file suit? Would
there have to be some kind of,
how, how does it play out in
practice. So, Madam Chair,
members of the committee
representative block, if you
look at this, if you look at
this uh definition carefully,
would a person have taken the
the kitchen knife with the
intent to cause great bodily
harm or death, and does the
parent know that the child
generally would be uh
susceptible to doing that type
of activity.
Those types of things would have
to be considered just because a
child has access to a knife
doesn't mean that they will be
that the parent or that it's a
neglected child, uh, that they
had access to a um.
Pocket knife doesn't mean that
either, uh, either.
A representative.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, that, that
does help me a little bit on
that. So,
OK.
So, I'm gonna go to page 5 here
for a little bit. I'm gonna
start on page or I'm sorry, line
15.
19.
It says whose parent, guardian
or custodian negligently allows
the child to have access to a
firearm or other deadly weapon
while the child's not under the
supervision of the parent.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
so with this, let's just say um
My uncle picked me up. We, we
hang out sometimes and if my
uncle picked me up and somehow
this this happened where I had
access to something like a like
a a knife, a large knife or
something that was not intended
to
Eat, right? And something like
this occurred.
Would this be included since
it's his parent guardian or
custodian, would that be
custodian and how, how does that
work in that, Madam Chair. So,
Madam Chair representative uh
block, uh, if we look at, you
can't take line 19 out of
context. You have to read line
15 and 9 through 19 together.
And it talks about whose parent
guardian or custodian
negligently allows the child to
have access to a firearm or
other deadly weapon and so
again, would you normally think
of a kitchen knife as a deadly
weapon that could be left out uh
with a for a child unless you
know the child has that
propensity or that the child
would absolutely be utilizing it
under those circumstances to
kill people, then you would be
held liable, but right now we're
talking about reasonableness
under the.
c ir cu m s t ance s and I do
believe that any court, if a
proceeding was brought by CYFD
or any other person would be
looking at that.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. And going
away from the kitchen knife.
Right. So I don't want to be too
narrow about what we're talking
about, but I know a lot of
people, people I know, they have
Display items on the wall, for
example, of an old rifle or a, a
very like a machete or something
cool that they think is cool and
they're displaying it, and they
go to the bathroom for 5 minutes
or 2 minutes, and they leave the
child alone and somehow the
child gets access to that, then
Madam Cha representative, would
that be included in this? It
wasn't a kitchen knife.
So, madam, Madam Chair,
represented Black you presenting
a lot of hypotheticals and uh I
would hope that most people
would not leave a machete on
their wall.
in an old rifle that's unloaded,
that's in a case.
Uh, it's not intended to kill
anybody because it's not there
for that purpose, so I, I just
wanted to direct your attention
to the purpose for which this,
this piece of legislation was
here.
If there was something that
would, that was intended.
That could be intended to cause
somebody's death and that the
child would use it for that
purpose, then you should be
liable.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, the, the
reason I ask these questions is
because these are real
experiences, like people I know
who have these, like I know one
guy who has these samurai like
swords, and he just has them on
the top of an armoire, right, in
his house because he thinks it
looks cool and I think it's
cool. But Madam Chair
Representative, that's kind of
why I'm bringing these
hypotheticals because if we
don't know what could happen in
certain instances, then what
could
Follow when it comes to this
bill's enactment. And so,
especially when it comes to
legislative intent, I know that
courts also look at that kind of
thing. So I just want to make
sure that we're very clear when
it comes to that. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
wondering,
Have any other states than
adopted similar child neglect
laws in their, in their laws,
Madam Chair.
That have there that are mirro
mirroring this.
Madam, there have been
There have been states have
adopted bills that are similar
to house-built binds with this
bill, which is House Bill 470.
I don't have all the list of
those with me right now.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative, and I like to
ask that question because I like
to see what other states in the
region are doing and just to see
how
How that works, but I'll look it
up as well. So Madam Chair
Representative, I'm also
wondering about how this bill
could affect or lead to an
increase in child neglect cases
in contested in court.
How, how would that work, Madam
Chair,
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. And
then do we, do we know if COFD
has sufficient caseworkers to
handle the potential that this
could increase if it was enacted
and that did happen.
Uh, Madam Chair representative
block, I don't see an increase
in caseworkers being needed for
this purpose. House Bill 9 has
been in existence now since
since June of 2022.
And there has not been an
increase of need for their
caseworkers, they would have
aligned very much with this. I
mean the same work would be
done. So now just puts the
definition into um house 470 now
puts it into uh what is a
neglected child.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I guess I'm
just trying to stick to the
bill. I don't want to talk about
HB 9 as much, but I do want to
talk about HB 470 because this
increases that.
It increases the definition. The
definition is now.
Kind of broad, more broad than
it was before. And so I'm just
wondering when it comes to the
broadening of that, that
definition, do we see?
If there could be any more
potential for this to happen
because when it comes to wire
weapon we have firearm, and then
we also have other kinds of
weapons, deadly weapons, and
object, instrument, substance or
device. So, Madam Chair,
representative, I guess
substance that could, that could
mean any number of things, uh.
I, I'm just kind of trying to
clarify.
If the bill won't change, if
it's not projected to change
anything. I'm just wondering why
the bill would be.
Push forward, if that makes
sense, Madam Chair,
Representative, Madam Chair,
members of the
committee represent Bach. It
creates greater clarification
for purposes of
Parent guardian custodian who
would be responsible when they
do when they are responsible for
a child, making sure that
they're putting dangerous
weapons, firearms.
Out of the hands of a miner.
For a child who should not have
them.
So it is a it's a good
clarification.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and then another
question I had was how might
this bill impact families in
rural areas where firearm
ownership is common and really
necessary for daily.
Daily duties. So, madam,
Representative Block, I'm gonna
draw your attention back to the
wording in the bill itself.
And so in the, in rural areas
you have mentioned people using
uh.
rifles of
For shooting and for hunting and
for uh gaming, but this says
specifically that was with the
intention to cause great bodily
harm or death.
Or up to a person.
And so in the rural areas when
they're out uh with their
families and their shooting and
they're engaging in
Uh, competition that is not the
purpose for which they're using
those items, so it's important
to stay close.
The uh focused on the definition
that's legislation.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
All right, I'll have to, I have
to look at that again.
That did concern me a little bit
and then I'm just also
wondering, should unsupervised
firearm access.
Could it be treated similarly to
child neglecting cases where
There, there was an accidental
poisoning or exposure to drugs,
for example.
So it's important to go back to
the intent and what it says in
the in the specific writing of
the definition.
With the intent, and it talks
about an object instrument or
substance or device with the
intent to cause great.
OK, so Madam Chair
Representative, to be very
clear.
Yes.
If I had
prescription on the counter. It
was my prescription, and I went
to the bathroom for 2 minutes,
and the kid.
I don't know why any kid would
do this, but if they swallowed
the whole pill bottle, wasn't my
intention for that kid to have.
Take those and let's just say
the kid gets injured or passes
away, would I be in any way
liable, more more liable with
the enactment of this
legislation since it was not my
intention.
And how is that found?
Well, I, Madam Chair.
Representative block did the
child intend to cause his own
bodily death.
A harm
I think you, you have to look,
you're still gonna have to look
at this, at the circumstances
any case that comes before any
court with any statutory
provision, the court is gonna
always look at the evidence and
underlying circumstances for
which something happened.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. So, so I agree.
That it would be case by case,
but
If the, so it would be the
child's.
Thought process instead of the
Individual the adult who left it
out. Is that kind of what I'm
understanding? cause if the kid
attempted to kill themselves
with these pills, and they were
successful or not successful,
doesn't matter. It's the
intention of the child or is it
my intention? Oh, I didn't mean
to leave my prescription out on
the countertop, and they did get
access to it.
So again, uh representative, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair
Representative block.
So in all of these cases, the
court is going to be looking at.
What, what was the circumstances
in which an incident occurred.
They're also going to be looking
at what did the what did the
custodian.
The parent, the guardian, know
about the child at the time that
they left something out.
And would it have been done,
knowing that that child was
likely to cause uh.
Death of a person easily or
bodily harm or death at all and
so you can't just narrowly
describe a set of circumstances
and think that you've come to an
answer.
is going to look at this, the
totality of the circumstances
you can't get around that.
Thank you Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, and I
have total regard for our
judiciary and our fact finders,
but a lot of the time these
kids, especially if they are
suicidal.
Some sometimes kids
They, they suffer in silence,
and they don't really talk
about.
Issues that are happening in in
their lives or at school, and
unfortunately, a lot of the time
when kids kill themselves and
it's horrible because it's
happened in my family just last
year. One of my distant cousins.
She, she killed herself and it
was, it was horrible. But a lot
of, no one knew that they were
suffering at the time, so Madame
Chair Representative, I just, I
really want to understand
because when it comes to things
like this, like, even I don't
see why I mentioned it could
even
Include
Rope, for example, cause I know
a lot of children, unfortunately
they, they kill themselves by by
hanging and things like that,
and I just don't want that to be
something that could
Like in my, my dad's garage, he
has a rope there. He has so many
other things. And if I was a kid
at in that instance, and I was
suffering in silence. I'm just
wondering how the fact finders
know those circumstances when it
comes to what circumstances
happen at school, what was told
to the parent, and then what
liability does that parent have
if that unfortunate horrible
circumstance does indeed happen.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, that's one reason why
we've added mental health rooms
to the schools.
It was this huge risk as you
described of individuals who
were
We were having whatever the
reason was, but in any event
we're gonna be looking at
examination, cross-examination.
It would be a whole lot of
things that would be looked at,
but still the purpose that we
are looking.
At this definition.
I
Would a reasonable person think
if I left this out.
For a child that they it was
likely to be used to cause great
bodily harm or death.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, I
understand that, but I, I guess
I just
I, I would hate to see a
situation where a parent.
bereaved parent whose child
killed themselves because of
something super unfortunate like
leaving out pills on the
countertop before they went to
bed. They didn't, they forgot to
leave him there, and
Then that that child did indeed
kill himself. I would hate to
re-victimize that parent after
they lost their child, they did
not, no one wants to lose a
child, but something in that
such such a horrible
circumstance. I would just hate
for that even to, to potentially
be a case if this was was
created in such a way with this
very broad language where it
includes even substances, and so
there, there are just so many
different factors that I see in
this bill that that just really
scare me and concern me,
especially when it comes to.
OK, we're going to let the fact
finders figure it out. Well, I
don't even want it to get to
that point, in my opinion, Madam
Chair and Representative, if a
child got access to a bottle of
sleeping pills, for example. You
know, I go to bed late
sometimes, especially after
floor session or something. If I
had a kid in my house and I took
a sleeping pill, one, I didn't
intend to leave the bottle out
there, and that child did take
care, take a bunch of those
pills. I didn't know this child
was suffering in silence.
I, if I was the parent, I
wouldn't want to have to be
victimized again after that. And
that's just my big concern,
especially when it comes to some
of these things, and I know that
the CYFD also brings that up.
And I usually don't agree with
what I've done much, but when it
comes to the broad definition, I
think that that's something that
is concerning to me. So, Madam
Chairpresentative, I'm just
gonna leave it there, but I, I
will listen to the rest of the
debate, and I really appreciate
at least the thought process
behind the bill and, and I
appreciate your your candor.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, I have quite
a few questions.
I talked to
About 10 different law
enforcement officers stand a
prosecutor, and can you show me?
Where intention is. You need to
find intention for me. That's on
page 3.
I can't, madam.
So the problem with my law
enforcement officers, DA's
prosecutors I was talking about
is with this intention.
There are some things that are
blatant or some things that are.
Like if a child
Picks at the firearm points at
somebody, I'm gonna kill you or
shoots them. They, they have the
intention, but
When we moved to
This part over here, man Chair
Representative on page 5.
Now you start talking about just
access.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, the
law enforcement officer I know
what not want to know what you
mean by access?
I'm sure.
of the
bills in a vacuum.
Access is clearly defined in the
Benny Hargrove bill that was
passed in 2022.
And so if you'd like to and I
assure you that a prosecutor
would be looking at both of
those items.
So Mister Speaker, gentle lady,
are you talking about the Benny
Hargrove if the firearm is not
locked up at all times. I'm I
talked about access. That is
correct, uh, Madam Chair,
representative Lloyd.
So Madam Chair representative,
uh, if, if somebody's in their
bed and the uh they're reading a
book and their gun is by their
nightstand because let's say
it's a woman and her husband
wants to kill her and the child
outside playing, is that access
or can you explain exactly what
proximity means, how close is
that child have to be before
there's access, Madam Chair
representative block, the
scenario that you presented
doesn't provide access. You said
the child is outside playing
child doesn't have access. The
child's outside playing.
You are near your firearm.
And most specifically incidents
are talking about when you are
not present.
So,
Madam Chair and Representative,
can you define how many feet,
inches, millimeters are OK, see,
there lies the problem.
Because my law enforcement
officers, what they're telling
me with the passage of this.
Because there's more to it than
just this bill.
This is now we're surrendering
kids to CYD.
And everybody knows how I feel
about that.
Because everyone that I talked
to
When there isn't a case of
abuse, they must call CYFD. They
also have a SVU Special Victims
Unit, all that is triggered, so
this is a very big deal to me
because I don't want kids going
into CYFD.
I understand. I think a little
bit of your premise of, OK,
somebody negligent leaves
something out, but we already
have a crime for this. Now
you're talking about removing
the child out of the house and
putting them in COFD, Madam
Chair representative, would you
like to address that why we want
to put more children in the CYD.
Madameer, don't see what you're
seeing. Sorry, I don't
understand what you're,
I would highly recommend that
you go talk to law enforcement.
I have talked to a ton. I was on
the phone till late last night.
Anytime there is passive abuse,
uh, they can't care for
themselves like a junkie,
there's dirty children.
They have to report must be
reported when there is active
abuse like torture, abuse,
sexual abuse, and now you're
gonna include this CYFD must
come and remove the child.
So, we have got actions
happening from this.
And, and, and Miss Maam
representative, it's not in your
bill, but it's what happens when
there is neglect, so Ma chair
representative, did you take
that into consideration that
we're going to be putting
children in CYFD and on top of
that, I'm especially troubled.
When I was looking at some red
flag bells, one of the things
that jumped out is black people
are reported far.
Higher.
Than any other section, and I'm
looking here with CYFD.
More 60% of kids that end up in
C Wefty or black native or
Latinx or Hispanic.
Hispanic
This is a big problem for me
because the next step is to put
these kids, there's a phone call
and the next step is to put
these children into CYFD and
it's gonna affect black children
because historically they're the
ones who are gonna get red
flagged, more affected, have
more interactions with law
enforcement, so man, would you
like to say something on that?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Floyd, I would not because I
don't see what you're seeing.
OK, so man, I, I please, I'm
begging you, you have got to
talk to law enforcement.
Because I was talking to them
and when there's any abuse,
there's passive and there's
active.
Any of those things triggers
CYFD to be called. There's a, a
special victims unit.
That gets called and in extreme
cases those kids are pulled out
and if this is an extreme kit
there these kids so my problem
with this whole thing.
As we went from being criminal
to now this civil case where
kids are gonna get pulled out
and I'm begging you, I'm asking
you, please go and talk to Lamor
because they're going to tell
you, talk to the district
attorneys, talk to prosecutors,
they are going to tell you that
yes.
You were saying this is abuse,
and when we go in here, Madam
Sharon Representative.
When you say a deadly weapon,
it's all kinds of things
daggers, grass, knuckles,
switchblade, knives, bowie
knives, butcher knives, you're
asking a police officer and this
is what they told me.
If this passes, they're gonna
walk into a house based on this
bill. I'm gonna err on the side
of calling.
Because they don't want to lose
their jobs, so they're gonna
call more often on something
where they can use their
discretion right now to say, OK,
walked in the house, that's over
there, kids not near it. There's
no intent. I don't have to do
it. If this passes, what they're
telling me is they're like, oh
damn, there's a firearm there's
bras knuckles, there's whatever
I need to call this in because
it is now neglect. Neglect is
neglect.
The chair
Representative, that is like my
biggest issue without even going
into all the details of also you
have in there, if there's a
silencer. Why, Madam Chair
Representative on page 4, if
somebody had a silencer in their
house.
Why would that mean that the
child will be removed and put in
CY
assumption that I have not
spoken to any.
Law enforcement and that's not
true.
That's a false assumption, and
Madam Chair representative Boyd.
If uh the only reason that of
the law enforcement would be
walking into the house as there
was an intent to cause bodily
harm to somebody.
And if you know the child has
that propensity.
you've left something out.
Yes you have done something to
cause the definition to be a
generated in this act. I'm sure
that I, I hate to disagree with
you, but that is not true,
manurism. I talked to law
enforcement officers who were
telling me, if they go into the
house for any reason, any reason
at all, they go into a house and
they see there's a farm or any
of these deadly weapons that
forces a trigger for them to
call.
It's not just that the kid has
an intention because that should
be a psych hold on the kid.
What I'm saying is these
officers are telling me they go
into a house.
And they see this bill you pass
this bill. This is now removing
children. They have to call CFD.
It's not necessarily they get
called for the intention. It's
the fact that they got called to
the house for any reason. There
was a dog barking. There was,
we, you know, uh, your alarm
went off, there's any reason to
go in the house and they see
this, you have removed that
because you're saying.
Access. Access means by Benny
Hargrove that the farm is out.
You're now forcing a law
enforcement to remove a child.
Madam Speaker generally and I'm
very passionate about this
because I don't like kids going
into CYFD.
I'd rather them go with
relatives, but sometimes I have
to, but this is where we're at,
representative. Do you want to
address that?
So Representative Lloyd, you are
creating the situation that is
beyond that the scope and the
description for which this piece
of legislation.
Has been presented.
So I, I direct your attention
very carefully 3, and the
wording that's there.
It is was something used that
would be the purpose that they
would be called.
That was likely to that was left
there, and they used it that
likely caused some in a bodily
harm or death.
So if a law enforcement officer
just walks into a house for
whatever reason, I don't know
what it would be, they see um TV
and uh
so the question was did an
incident occur that caused this
uh definition to be.
Brought to the attention of the
law enforcement officers, so we
must be talking to different law
enforcement officers because the
ones I talked to.
Don't have the same idea that
you're talking.
So I'm just sorry that I'm I'm
sorry for the ones that are
listening right now, Madam
Cherubs and that our law
enforcement who said this is
very problematic because on page
5 it says whose parent guardian
of custodian negligity allows a
child to have access.
We don't know what an axis is.
We don't, don't know what the
parameter axis is. You're just
saying without supervision,
which I had brought up before
with the Benny Hargrove which
one of my issues was somebody
set the gun on the counter,
they're going to the bathroom
and how far away is far away to
not have them is that they turn
their back and you said, yes,
that's problematic. Person turns
it back, boom, but we're not
just talking about firearms,
Ma'am sure Ribson, if you have
in here.
Deadly weapons.
Deadly weapon means
A farm that is loaded or
unloaded. So Madam Chair, do you
think that if somebody had a
unloaded firearm.
That was decorative.
Would be enough reason because
it says right here that's what a
deadly weapon is. Do you think
that's enough to pull a child
out of a home and put him in
CYFD.
So, Madam Chair, Representatives
look at this holistically.
So if we're looking at
specifically.
A deadly weapon that's been left
out. Why would you leave it out
in the first place? And you know
that there's a child,
excuse me, we just got word that
the webcast can't hear you, so
if you could
lean a little bit you don't
move,
yeah, just there you go. Thank
you. So I, I just think Madam
Chair representative Lord.
Our conversation is circular.
Because this is focused on.
a firearm or other deadly weapon
that was left out.
A child is unsupervised. Thank
you very much.
I'll take this one off. It's
unsupervised and there was a um
death or great bodily harm that
was caused. So it's not just
taking the child out uh for any
reason. Something has to happen
in order for that to occur. So
I, I think that we've come to a
point where we're just gonna
disagree on the application of
this. The other thing about this
that's really important is that
CYFD or anyone else with respect
to this legislation. You also
have the opportunity to write.
Rules that would also clarify
anything that might be
misconstrued. So I also present
that to you, Madam Chair,
Representative to Lloyd.
Ma'am and we go back to page 3
where it says it is more likely
than not.
To be used.
It doesn't say that it was used.
It is more likely not.
That it would be used by a
person with the intention.
There is no great bodily harm.
It doesn't say that they use it
for grapevi harm, so they had
the intention.
And we don't have a definition
for intention.
Charis. So what I'm asking you
is show me.
What intention means.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
Lloyd, I do believe that the
term intent is clearly defined
in our statutes. It's not what
we are looking at here. It
doesn't say or most likely, it
just says that it's likely and
to be used by a person with the
intention to cause greater,
great bodily harm or death, and
the court would be looking, did
you leave a gun out, Madam Chair
Representative Lloyd with the
intent that a child that
You know, could get access to it
and cause great bodily harm or
death. Did you do that? And so
the court would be asking that
question, and that would be
whether the evidence,
information, the totality.
Stances in determining whether
or not this piece of legislation
is going to apply. But madam
chair and said they didn't use
it to cause bodily harm. So
again, I'm going back to what is
the intention. Explain to me
what intention looks like
because they haven't done great
boly harm, they haven't caused
death.
In this first part and one.
That is likely to use with an
intention. I need to know what
the definition of intention is
because just like law
enforcement officers when they
walk in the house, they need to
know if a firearm is on the
nightstand. What was the
intention, whose intention, the
parents' intention, the child's
intention, whose intention and
what is the intention.
Uh, I mean, represented, I mean,
Madam Chair, representative
Lloyd, you're creating a
circumstance which
You're, you're creating these
scenarios that uh a for one, a,
a uh
A, uh
Are you fire, I'm sorry, a law
enforcement officer is just not
gonna walk into somebody's
house, first of all. So they're
not gonna walk in there unless
something happened or there was
an occurrence that caused them
to come there and again we're
gonna be looking at was
something left out that should
not have been left out, that
there was the resulting action
that did cause some great bodily
harm or death, so I'm, no matter
how you frame it, there has to
be an incident that occurs.
And that that was the reason
that the law enforcement officer
is there, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord. Ma'am Chair
Representative, your house gets
robbed, a law enforcement
officer, if the doors open,
could very likely walk into that
house, right? Is that correct?
There's numerous reasons why
somebody could be in there,
Madam representative.
Because you just said there
wouldn't be any reason for them
to go unless they were called.
So there's lots of reasons, or
DB, there's an argument with the
neighbors, lots of reasons why
law enforcement officer may come
in the house. It's cold outside,
they're raining, they want to
talk to you about, you know,
your car being stolen from
report, so explain to me if they
come in and they see that
firearm sitting there and
there's a child. How close do
they have to be and how do they
know what the intention was
because you're saying this was
an intention, but I can't get my
question answered. Well.
I think she did answer it and
you keep asking the same
questions, so we need to stop
and go on to another question.
Yeah, cause the whole thing with
this is that it seems that it's
better to to any, if there's a
firearm, oh my god, we wanna put
the kids in COFD.
But other than that, we're
anti-fixing the CYFD issues,
which is what frustrates me. I
don't know what intention means.
Law enforcement officers don't
know what intention. So ma'am
Cha rips in. Let's go to some
parts of the bill that we have
in here, or when you say
firearm.
And you give the definition.
What's the difference between a
a frame and a receiver.
Since it's in your bill, madam
chair.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
Lloyd, we do have things called
3D guns that people can create a
frame and cause um a firearm to
be created.
So the intent is to look at all
possibilities that could occur.
That cause um great bodily harm
or death, and still, I, I want
to just take your attention back
to the fact. It's not just if
your house gets robbed or the
house burns down, there has to
be an incident regarding these
items that caused this
particular incident to occur.
And chair representative, so
since we're breaking apart.
A framer receiver, you know what
the difference is between an
upper and a lower with the AR-15
and which one of those would
have to be in the house, both
parts together, could there just
be parts of a firearm in the
house, there be an upper, uh ARP
into the house and would that be
access to a firearm chair
representative.
Madam Chair Represented Lord,
could that be used to convert or
expel a projectile.
And your representative, you
have silencer in here which does
not shoot a projectile. It's an
item that is put at the end of
the firearm, so it's not as
loud, which is especially great
for our PTSD victims that like
to shoot. So you have a firearm
muffler and silencer which do
not shoot projectiles, Madam
Chan.
Madam Chair, represent Lord, I
don't know what you're asking.
I'm sorry. OK, Ma'am, do you
know what a suppressor.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
uh.
Lord, does that have anything to
do with the firearm. It's a
suppressor firearm. I'm asking
you that. It's not my it says
or. It says or any suppressor.
So you're saying that a
suppressor arm means all these
things that this then and then
or.
So you're saying that this
canister.
A suppressor is a firearm.
Representative, I think it's not
saying suppressor, it's saying
silencer. It's the same thing,
silence or the suppressors a
technical.
Oh, well, it doesn't.
Madam Chairs, or any firearm
muffler or silencer.
It doesn't say suppressor,
madam chair.
It's technical word is really
suppressor. So if you had a
firearm silencer.
it. It's a canister.
Doesn't shooting projectile,
that's in the house. You're
calling that a firearm and that
is now a trigger to remove a
child because they're having
access to this silence.
So Madam Chair Representative
Lloyd, I take you back to the
literal reading of the document.
So there's a word and.
Includes a handgun, rifle or
shotgun.
Right, but you have me Sheship
or any fire muffler or firearm
silence or semical.
And that's right. OK, so you're
saying that if they have that
part. I'm trying to break this
down, explain to me what parts
have to be in there. So if they
have this silencer in the house.
Just a silencer.
And the hindgu handguns here,
the sensor, the handguns locked
up, the silencer.
So you're saying that the
silencer is access to a firearm.
So Madam Chair, Representative
Lloyd, I'm gonna take you back
to uh the beginning of section G
on line 3, and you have to read
this sentence in its totality.
So it talks about a firearm
being a weapon that can uh can
Be converted or produce a
projectile, even if it has a a
frame or a receiver and it
includes a handgun, rifle or
shotgun. So you have to read it
all together. You can't just
read and and take little pieces
apart and say, well, oh gosh,
that's weird and there's a huge
problem with that. It should
say.
Any firearm with that includes a
muffler or silencer, cause the
way that this is written, you're
saying that there is a silencer
in there when you talk about
parts, you're talking about you
could just have an AR-15 in
there. When you start to divide
it up into parts like you did
here, that now becomes an issue
of what this child has access
to.
And when I'm trying to get it in
representative.
In a lot of my rural area,
including my land grant areas,
uh, they have got animals that
need to be protected. I brought
this up before.
You're now saying if that
there's an ARF rifle, anything,
a law enforcement officer is
gonna walk in there.
Because you don't have intention
to find.
We go back to the access
portion. So Mason, can you tell
me how in section 5, the access
part supersedes the intent.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Lloyd, you'd have to read this
bill in its totality. We would
go back to part 3 and part 3
this uh I'm sorry, page 3, not
part 3, section D, it talks
about a deadly weapon and one
that's used by a person with the
intent to cause great bodily
harm. How did they have access
to it. It was left there, it
should not have been left there
unsupervised by an adult who
wasn't around.
And so then you go and you look
back and this is simply
describing what a firearm is,
Madam Chair, you cannot
segregate these items like
you're trying to do that. You
have to read this bill together,
Madam Chair, Representative
Lloyd.
And chairman representative, it
says when we talk about deadly
weapons because you're not just
talk about arms, you talk about
deadly weapons. It also says if
the firearm is unloaded, so if
there is a farm, it's unloaded,
that still would be considered
access and it would be neglect,
which could trigger a CYFD
removal. Is that correct?
Madam chair, this bill isn't
talking about CYFD removal is
talking about the definition of
negligent. Madam Chair, what
happens when there's a charge of
negligence and an officer enters
the home. What do they do?
representative, so I'm gonna go
back to the bill, so this bill
is providing the definition of a
negligent child, somebody who
has left the child unattended
but left things out or available
they can cause great bodily
harm. So if we stay focused.
focused on the definitions and
this piece of legislation, then
I think we would probably be in
agreement.
Madam Chair represented I can't,
because the issue that I have
with everybody I talked to,
prosecutors, district attorneys,
law enforcement officers, when
there is neglect, whether it's
passive or active. If you, if a
law enforcement officer walks
into a house and a child is
being abused, there's they're
broken bones that says my mom
and dad just beat me. What is a
law enforcement do, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair represent Lord, this
is not about an abused child
who's been beaten with broken
bones. This is about leaving a
deadly weapon or something that
could cause great bodily harm,
and they use it to do that, so
it's important to stay focused
on exactly what we're talking
about here. So I, I truly
understand and agree with you
that we wanna, we don't want a
child that's been beaten, but
that's not what we're talking
about here. We're talking about
leaving things out where a child
has access to it and they can
cause great bodily harm or death
because you were negligent in
leaving it out.
Madam Chair Representative in
this whole bill where you were
talking about revising the
neglected child. This is now in
the neglected and abused
children. What happens when a
child is neglected, Madam Chair
Repson.
Or abuse because it's in the
title.
This is a we're now we're what
you're doing is you're now
saying that having access to a
firearm is now abuse and
neglect. So what happens when
the law enforcement goes into a
home and there is abuse and
neglect, you're adding new
wording to that, what happens
so Madam Chair Representative
Lloyd, you're still taking this
out of context. So if the law
enforcement officer is walking
into the house and the child had
access to a deadly weapon, a
firearm, and they used it to
cause great
bodily harm or death. That's
very different than what you're
describing.
Madam Madam,
it doesn't say that. The second
part on on line 3 says, which
was used.
But D1 says likely to have the
intention, please make this make
sense for me. Officer goes in.
There's a firearm there. OK,
let's just say somebody said,
hey, I was at my neighbor's
house as a farm outlet and the
child was there. They're already
looking at criminal charges
because of Benny Hargrove. This
is now we're adding abuse and
neglect.
So manan representative, you
just added this, that if the
intention was, explain to me why
you think it's a good idea to
remove a child when they
haven't.
Committed an act
They haven't killed anybody.
They haven't harmed anybody.
We're saying the intention is
good enough to remove the child
and put him CD.
Madam Chair,
So Madam Chair and
Representative, we don't know
what intention is, um.
You are making a bill.
That talks about revising the
division definition of neglected
child for abuse and neglect.
That triggers the CYFD to be
called.
We're sane in this part there's
likely to, and that is used by a
person with the intention, they
haven't done anything. There is
an intent.
And that the parent allowed
access even to a, to even an
unloaded firearm, and Madame
Chair Representative, that
triggers this whole bill
triggers, and you can ask, I
wish it was law enforcement
beyond an expert triggers the
COFD, even COFFD says right
here, this bill will lead to
more children being removed from
their homes.
And I don't understand why you
didn't do something of like we
do farm education, but I, I, I
can't agree with you on a bill
that is very blatant that we're
gonna pull children out, and all
I've heard since I've been here,
Mo represent and maybe you want
to make a comment on this.
Is that pulling children,
especially on.
Navajo reservation, Pueblos,
anywhere.
And taking them out of the home
is never a good thing,
especially if there's not
someone to put them in, so I
don't agree that taking a child
out that is anyone of color who
are more likely to get these
kind of calls and have a law
enforcement in the house and
then to pull children out and
place them in CYFD when we have
enough neglect and abuse, we had
one case it was in health where
there was a kid giving back to a
parent.
Who's a sex offender and got
raped for the entire weekend. So
I don't understand either why we
did not pass fentanyl as abuse,
which is blatant representative.
It's not on the bill. Madam
Chair representative, we've had
people in here speak for about 5
minutes without ever asking a
question. I'm sure I'm
pontificate, no, that's not my
argument. You're going down to
fentanyl and other things.
The gentle lady, she, she's just
asking questions and she has the
right not to be interrupted
pursuant to New Mexico's house
rules, page 11.
7-10.
A man of here so.
And that's what you're going OK,
so we'll, we'll go deeper into
the bill. So madam chair, so you
don't.
So what you're saying, I just
want to get this on record.
You're saying that if a law
enforcement officer goes in the
house, believes that there's
some sort of intention. We're
not talking about harping in
somebody.
And that they had access to a
farm or deadly weapon, which
includes brass knuckles.
You're saying that that law
enforcement officer, even though
this is now considered abuse and
neglect is not going to call
CYFD or a special victim unit.
Is that correct, Madam
Chairbson? I would like to hear
what you have to say.
If all the criteria you are met,
but there's an intention.
And they had access, I'm not
even say deadly weapon, brass
knuckles, uh, a knife, and they
believe there is an intention,
so you're saying that it's it
that putting them in CYFD will
not, Madam Chair, representative
Lord.
You have to read this bill in
its full context. So if you go
back to the first page of the
bill.
For example,
So you talk of it defines uh a a
number of things and starting
in, in part A, for example, if
we look at that, it talks about
what does abandonment mean? And
then it talks about what does an
abused child mean and then it
talks about aggravated
circumstances. But then part D,
it talks about a deadly weapon,
and then it defines a a a deadly
weapon. And then it says this is
this is a weapon that is likely
to be
used by a person with the intent
to cause great bodily harm or
death.
So, the circumstances again,
this is very specific, and they
are very specific provisions
within this piece of
legislation. Part D is being
added to include a deadly
weapon, and what happens if you,
you, uh, leave this object out
and it's likely to be used with
the intent of causing great
bodily harm and death.
So this is a very specific
circumstance, not just with a
law enforcement officer
haphazardly walking into her
house. I've had many
conversations with law
enforcement officers,
prosecutors, and others, and so
I am still directing your
attention to the very specific
intent for which this was
written and that it is in this
piece of legislation.
And Chairman Representative, can
you define the deadly weapon
cause it says on page 3 deadly
weapon means object instrument,
substance, or device.
So you're talking about all
deadly weapons, so that would
mean daggers brass knuckles, uh,
slingshots, anything so, uh,
anything that could be
considered a deadly weapon,
correct as a ma'am, what do you,
what do you mean by that?
Representative, I think that's
been asked by both of you. Well,
I want, I want to know, is that
what you're, you're going by the
definition of.
30-1-12.
Is that correct on what a deadly
weapon is? That's what I'm
looking up that's in New Mexico
statue.
So there are 2 provisions to the
To the full definition, Madam
Chair, Representative Lord, and
you have to read it in context.
The Mayor Chair Representative.
I feel like we're just talking
in circles because there's
numerous things that are a
deadly weapon which include
brass knuckles and law
enforcement walks into the
house. I'm just.
A law enforcement officer goes
in the house, there's a DB call.
There is a firearm there.
Uh, on the table, there's a
child there.
The law enforcement offers
somehow figures out that there's
uh intention, let's say, let's
say all the criteria is met.
Let's just do it your way. Let's
just say there was a deadly
weapon, you can show that there
was intent that they were going
to go outside and stab little
Timmy.
And that officer now does what?
And I'm Chapson.
I'm not sure I understand your
your
defined neglect and abuse. There
was a deadly weapon. The child
picked it up, says, I'm gonna go
next door and kill little Timmy.
That's the intention.
The parent had the parent was
negligent that they left
everything out. The child had
the intention to go use that to
hurt somebody.
What is the law enforcement
officer supposed to do in that
case? Is it not neglect and
abuse? What, what are you
telling me that it is, madam,
representative Lord, did the
child take the, the, the gun,
the knife or whatever and go to
little Timmy and try to kill
him?
No, it doesn't.
It says intention. That's right.
OK, so if he's in his house and
he never went to little Timmy's
house. How can you say you have
the intent to kill him, Madam
Chair representative Lord in the
second part were death occurred,
but we're also talking about
brass knuckles, knife, swords.
Till the child picks up the
knife, and he goes, I'm gonna go
kill Timmy. Parent stops him,
stir the DV. They the officer
hears I'm gonna go kill little
Timmy. He's 6 years old, and he
has intention to go use that
knife and he says, I'm gonna go
hurt somebody. What is the next
step that the law enforcement
officer must do,
Madam Chair Madam Chair,
representing Lord did the
parents stop the kid?
Answer is probably yes. So the
child did not go to little
Timmy's house and did not try to
kill him. So we are looking at a
very specific set of
circumstances. You are to keep,
you keep trying, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord, to create a
scenario that doesn't apply to
the definitions that are listed
in this piece of legislation.
OK, so let's just use I because
I'm trying to figure out what,
OK, so there's brass knuckles
that are left, a knife that's
left out. The child picks it up.
The parent goes about
ba th ro om s so they're not
supervising the child in that
moment, the kid runs out,
there's a police officer there,
she's coming on a call and the
kid says I'm gonna go next door
and stab little Timmy, and he's
6. What's the next thing that
the law enforcement officer
does, Madam Chair, represents
the Lord, I, I have no idea. The
answer is they call CD.
Because Madam Chair
Representative, you are making
that scenario abuse and yet and
I don't know how you don't
understand this cause this is
your bill, that this is now
changing the definition of use
and neglect, the child had the
intention that thing was left
out, six year old kid says, I'm
gonna go kill the kid next door
or ghost next door, say I'm
gonna kill Timmy, so he had the
intention, he had the access.
This is now changing the whole
abuse and neglect. Aunt Macha
representative, I don't want to
put more kids in CYFD because
this is the next.
thing that must happen that law
enforcement officer has to say,
hey, I've got a case of neglect
and abuse because this child had
the intention, this child had
access and now we're going to go
ahead and put him in CYFD, which
I keep hearing since I've been
here is inherently racist and a
bad thing, and we don't want
kids going there or in foster
care. So Madam Chair, I, I vote
absolutely not on putting more
children in the CYFD. Thank you.
Ma moved the table.
I second. I'm sorry, we still
have some discussion.
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I certainly
understand the intent of the
bill, um, but unfortunately I,
my, um, concern is just in the
drafting of the deadly weapon,
um, definition.
It is quite confusing,
unfortunately, and I know that
there are multiple definitions
in both criminal law and civil
as to the deadly weapon and your
drafter did you no favors how
this one works, um, Madam Chair,
I would love to, um,
I don't know if it's gonna be
easy, but I have a proposal for
the federal definition of deadly
weapon that could easily be
inserted.
Um, if we wanted to do that and
I can make the promotion and
proposal for that.
Um
The other question is whether or
not if this is just talking
about firearms specifically,
Madam Chair representative, if
we just wanted to narrow the
definition to just firearms and
then just strike deadly weapon
from this.
Part of the statue and strike
deadly weapon from the change in
the statue and um on page 5.
Which, which is preferred um or,
you know, how,
what your Madam Chair,
uh,
representative, I think that's a
great idea because that was the
intent when this was written
and, and so it's important to
stay with the intent for which
the, the bill was actually being
drafted. So I think those would
be friendly amendments and that
they, I would be very amenable
to those. So Madam Chair, just
so I'm clear, if the, if we're
just gonna limit it to firearms,
Madam Chair representative.
then my um proposal would be to
strike out the deadly weapon,
um, definition on page 3 lines
12 through 18.
And then on page 5.
Strike
Or other deadly weapon on page
16 or line 16 and 17.
No, just um, sorry, on page 3,
like the entire definition of
deadly weapon lines 12 through
18, and on page 5.
Strike, um.
The words starting on line 16 or
other deadly weapon.
Um, on line 16 and 17.
Page 5.
And can ask for a repeat of what
you did.
These tests
Um, Madam Chair, the, I'm
recommending on page 3 strike
the entire definition of deadly
weapon, item D.
Um, lines 12 through 18.
And then on page 5.
Um
Strike.
Or other deadly weapon, lines 16
and 17.
just
Excuse me.
It's, it's just the uh, on what
we did before we already
approved, Madam Chair, on line
16 was just to strike the A and
make it a.
In lieu thereof, um, the child,
correct. And then you're saying
to strike to the very end of
line 16 or other and then line
17 deadly weapon.
So we're just, we're taking out
deadly weapons from the statue
entirely. We're leaving firearm.
Which was the intent is my
understanding from the Madam
Chair,
also represented like to make
some changes to page 4.
And I item 3 through 7.
There's some adjustments you
would like to make Madam Chair
representative, so I did look up
the definition of firearm, and
that is consistent with what we
have in statute, so I wouldn't
actually change that definition.
OK.
We have, is that considered a
friendly amendment
OK. I'm sure we're taking a vote
on that or are you doing that in
the next.
Are we doing that? I'm, I'm
proposing it right now.
I, I go the table out of it.
second that.
OK, um, we'll take a vote to
table um the amendment.
A friendly
And if you'll take roll call.
Sorry, I jumped ahead.
Representative Lord.
Yes, the tables representative
Romero? No.
Representative Thompson? No.
Madam Vice chair? No.
A I'm sure.
No.
OK, so now we need a motion.
I move that we adopt the
amendment.
I'll second.
Right, it's been moved and
seconded to adopt the um
friendly amendment.
Um
And we'll take roll.
And
Representative No, ma'am.
Representative Ward? No.
Yes. Representative Thompson.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Yes
So is there any other
discussion?
your bill.
I move with Du pass. Madam moved
the table.
The subsequent motion to table
as twice amended.
Doesn't matter.
All right, I'll take a roll
call.
And
this is the motion to table, OK,
And
this is the motion to table,
the table.
Representative Lord, yes to
table.
Representative Ramiro.
I'm sorry.
Representative Thompson. No.
Madam Vice Chair. No.
Madam
No to table, OK, um, the motion
to table the twice amended, um.
failed at 4 to 2. Um, we'll go
back to the other motion to um
for a due pass second for.
It's, it's twice a
ended right for 40.
As twice amended.
Uh, Liz and 2.
Representative block.
No, ma'am.
Representative Lord. No, with
the explanation.
Representative Romero, yes.
Representative Thompson. Yes,
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madamhu,
Yes. You have a due pass.
On house bill for 70 as twice
amended.
And Representative Lord to um
make it.
please, um.
Absolutely, Madam Chair. I, uh,
you're just made an amendment to
a bill to penalize people that
have firearms for any reason,
even if they're unloaded, which
is going to trigger a CFfty
response.
Which has systemic.
Well we have a lot of issues
with racism, a lot of uh issues
with abuse, and I, I absolutely
do not agree with this bill in
any way, shape or form. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
next we have um make sure I'm on
the list. Uh house Bill 518.
For LGBTQ.
Day.
Representative Anaya.
Anytime you're ready. Thank you
so much, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you so much uh for hearing House
Bill 518, which is a day of
observance every 60 day session,
the 4th Tuesday of each January,
uh, to observe LGBTQ day. um,
here in the legislature.
Um, and of course, uh, is
alongside African American Day,
Hispanic Culture Day, AEPI
Native Hawaiian day as well. And
it was actually during these
days. Oh, and it was actually
during the celebrations, Madam
Chair and committee members, um,
that one of our colleagues said,
wow, it's so great seeing so
many leaders from our community,
and I thought, oh.
We as LGBTQ people, um.
Don't necessarily have a day.
Um, so, Madam Chair,
representatives, committee
members, I remember being a
young person and hoping so much,
um, that I would see myself
reflected um in leaders and if
they're not highlighted, it's uh
not necessarily true that you
will see them. So, Madam Chair,
representatives, um, with that,
I will stand for questions.
Great. OK, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition?
A on Zoom, is there anyone in
OK?
And in the audience is there,
are there people who are in
support.
OK,
would you all like to speak?
OK.
Knowing what to speak, but we
have a good crowd. OK, and is
there anyone on Zoom?
4 people, OK, if, um, those on
Zoom, if you can make it one
minute, please. And state your
name.
Diane McCash.
Hi, good evening. I won't even
take a minute. I'll take 15
seconds. I love to celebrate our
community and thank you for
bringing this forward,
representative.
Let's
She
So much
Bernadette Hardy.
Good evening Chair
representative. My name is
Hardy.
I'm here as a resident of
district 17 and Senate District
19 and I would like to say me
and my community, we are in
support of HB 5 allowing a day
for our brothers and sisters to
celebrate.
Their freedom. Thank you.
Alyssa Coraz.
Um,
good evening committee members.
My name is Alicia. I'm from the
San Domingo and I have been a
youth organizer since I don't
like way back when, um, also a
member of the Indigenous youth
Council under the Indian Affairs
department and uh just speaking
of support to give us space and
honor our LGBTQ plus youth, um,
because this is also a way of um
harm reduction to
for acceptance and uplifting of
our uh LGBTQ plus you. Thank
you.
Karen Chavez.
Hello, Madam Chair of the
committee. My name is Karen
Chavez.
As a woman working in the house
who was married to another woman
working in the house. I would
love to come to work during
sessions and see the complete
inclusivity and celebration of
the committee. My name is Karen
Chavez.
As a woman working in the house
who was married to another woman
working in the house. I would
love to come to work during
sessions and see the complete
inclusivity and celebration and
for all. Let's show everyone how
supported New Mexico is and has
HB 518.
Javier Butcher.
Good evening. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
All righty. Good evening, madam
chair and esteemed members of
the committee. My name is Javier
Butcher, and I work with Juliana
to represent the Planned
Parenthood of the Rocky
Mountains. Our LGBTQ plus family
members, friends, neighbors, and
ancestors are part of what makes
our new Mexican community so
special, and their formal
recognition should be a part of
our collective cultural pride.
Please vote in favor of HG 518
to support our community and
share history. Thank you.
Is that everyone, right?
Do you have anything else you'd
like to add just in closing, uh,
Madam Chair committee members,
thank you all for being
co-sponsors as well as
Representative John Block,
Representative Lord, I haven't
quite gotten to yet, um, but I
will.
Um
Just a couple of things to
highlight, Madam Chair. I'll
make it short.
Of course, our LGBTQ young
people are committing suicide at
a much higher rate that
surpasses their straight
counterparts and life expectancy
for LGBTQ folks in New Mexico,
um, our average age is 37 years
old, while non-LGBTQ folks are
49 years old.
Um, so, Madam Chair, committee
members with that. I hope we can
celebrate what we have and who
we have while we have them.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, we'll go to the
committee. Madam Chair, I move
to pass a second.
OK.
Is there any opposition? I see
none.
You have a
Thank you
Probation and parole.
Modernization.
Senate Bill 17. Is that correct?
Yes.
I'll speak louder. I'm just. Oh,
hi.
OK, and representative, um, this
is um SB 17 as a mint.
Amended parole.
Parole board changes and you
have an amendment too, right?
OK.
I'm sure, would you like me to
explain the bill or?
Yes, I'm sorry, now that we have
everyone has the amendment, um,
if you like to explain the bill
and then the amendments,
whichever's.
Super quick, madam Chair, so
this bill just uh merely
modernizes and updates the
parole board, um, process, um,
both for the folks that are
appearing before the parole
board or crime victims and for
the community at large, um, we
haven't done this in a while, so
grateful to the advocates who
have been working really hard
through the interim, um, and
otherwise to make this a
bipartisan effort on reform, um.
I think everyone got a fact
sheet, um, the, the only change
that we're making,
unfortunately, having already
gone through the Senate is that
there was an inadvertent, um,
Removal of the governor's
authority to remove a board
member and so we're just making
sure that that's back, she
already has the power to
appoint. Now we just need to
make sure that.
Um, she also has the power to
remove and that was just an
inadvertent change.
Um
Would you like to add any more?
Oh, we have to the amendment.
Um
Madam sure I move.
OK, I moved to adopt the
amendment.
OK. Is there any discussion?
OK, you got a second.
During discussion on the, OK,
um, so you have uh amended.
Amended.
So um if you like to go back to
the bill.
00, we need to take, is there
any um?
Listed
Um, so is there any opposition
to the amendment and then.
So now you have an.
Thank
Go ahead. I just want to
introduce my experts and then if
I think we can go.
Go ahead.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee,
thank you very much for allowing
me to be here. I am Abraham and
I am the chairman of the New
Mexico Adult Parole Board. I've
been on the parole board for 12
years now, one of the longest
standing members, so I'm just
here if you have any technical
questions about the parole
board, how we operate or what we
do. Thank you. Sergeant, he's a
multitasker. Yeah, I'm the one
holding the mic, but I'll try
not to yell into it like most
people do a hero.
And of course we have Denali.
Thank you, um, committee, Madam
Chair, my name is Jane.
classmates.
From law school together.
That was meant to be a whisper
anyways, it's fine.
Thank you, sorry.
I did too. Yeah, thanks. And um
how about on Zoom? Is there
anyone in opposition?
No, OK, great. Um, anyone in the
audience in support.
A on Zoom.
People, right, if you could um
please state your name and also
take just one minute.
Alicia.
Mhm
Good evening, chair and
committee members. Alicia Creese
from Pablo San Domingo, also a
registered lobbyist with NME to
vote
in support of this bill as it
continues to provide
conscientious support for our
survivors of violent crimes and
the families of the victims of
those crimes. We feel that it's
important to um understand the,
the trauma that is inflicted,
um, as a
um, recurring events and so this
bill continues to um ensure that
we're supporting our families as
they are going through this time
and support their healing
journey. Thank you again.
Sorry,
Diane McCash.
Good evening committee. I in the
last 7 or 8 years I've had the
opportunity to hear stories of
people who have served their 30
years, have shown themselves to
change and a successful engage
in programming and education and
evolved far from the
circumstances that brought them
to prison with 30 years to
serve. Nonetheless, the parole
request may be denied based on
the terrible har like decades
ago. Something that is
impossible to change. One of the
important things that does is to
steer the parole board.
Toward a focus on risk and
readiness for release as well as
other changes that could lead to
a more fair and balanced outcome
for the victim's loved ones, as
well as for the person there
several decades of
incarceration. There are things
we can control in our lives, we
can't, things that the person
can't control, are their choices
and behaviors going forward.
Disregarding how a person may
have changed and matured and
they have shown themselves to be
in several decades prior to
their parole eligibility makes
no sense to me.
Please vote yes on the team.
Thank you, uh, is there anything
else you'd like to add before we
go to the committee.
We go to questions, madam. OK,
thank you. Um.
No. OK.
And I'm sure I would do pass.
Are there any objections to a
due pass?
OK.
Thank you. Um.
You have a due pass on house
bill of Senate bill 70.
Uh, as amended and to do and a.
Do pass as amended by the
committee.
Um, next bill, Madam Chair is
Senate Bill 72.
I'm stepping in for
Representative Chandler, who's
Um, out.
All right, whenever you're
ready.
Um, this bill merely allows
nonprofit condominium
associations to be able to
conduct business remotely, um,
by way of modern technology,
Madam Chair, that's the change
in statute here.
will go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition to
the spill.
OK, anyone on Zoom?
To
OK.
Go ahead, one minute please and
stay here's my, I apologize, I
should have introduced him.
Colin Cameron's my expert for
this if they're.
OK, so Colin is not in
opposition hands raised is my, I
apologize. I should have
introduced him immediately, I
forgot.
Um, all right, and is there
anyone in support this bill.
And
yes, I would hope so. as your
expert, no one else. OK, great.
We'll go to the committee, or
unless you had anything else
you'd like, OK, um.
OK.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative.
And so I have a few questions on
this. So Madam chair is pretty
much what I'm seeing is a
majority of this is just trying
to update language and some of
it is saying by by proxy on page
2 or via simultaneous remote
electronic means, so Madam
Chapresentative, this definition
by proxy, would that not
B
I guess it probably wouldn't be
if you were on Zoom currently.
So how does it work currently?
And can they have people meet
via Zoom, and is that why this
is needed, Madam Chair, and
representative, Madam Chair,
representative, so as I
understand proxy votes, right,
you have a designated person
that's disclosed to the board,
um, that's already current law,
that just means you have that
designated person available via.
Say Zoom remote electronic
means, etc.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative that that helps a
little bit on that.
And so I know when it comes to
statutes, where we say, oh, we
need to update statutes, and I
would love to update statutes
now to be for like 150, 200
years from now, so we're not
like, oh well, there's extra
things other than Zoom and
electronic remote means cause
that could be something else in
the future. So, I mean, I wish
we had a time.
Yeah, like time machine, but
unfortunately not. So Madam
Chair representative next year,
I'm gonna go in the back here
and we're just adding the same
amount of words. I don't know
why we have to repeat it 7 or 8
times on page 4. Can you tell me
why we can't just tighten this
up in some way to just rewrite
section 4 in its entirety, just
say,
This bylaws, etc. by, by a
simultaneous remote electronic
means. I'm just wondering why
it's so uh wordy in that way,
I'm sure, Madam Chair,
representative, to be very clear
and specific in statute. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. OK. So, I guess
that's pretty much my my only
questions on this. I mean, I
would be vehemently opposed to
this if it was something
different, but it's just so
benign in every which way. I
think it's has to be a support.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
You.
Representative Lord
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
So I'm looking through cause I
haven't seen this bill before
and it came to the Senate, um,
if I'm understanding correctly.
I'm looking at the
FIR in the summary. I just want
to see if this is correct. The
synopsis of Senate Bill 72.
Uh, Section 47C78.
Allows nonprofit condominium
associations send meetings,
notices electronically.
If they consented in advance.
What was the way they've done it
prior.
I
Colin, if you
Yes, could you
Colin, can you give a response,
please?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I appreciate
the question and your service
late at night. Um, presently the
statues which were written in
the mid 70s and, and 1982
contemplate uh US mail or hand
delivery of notices to requiring
people up here either physically
in person or by a hand
delivered.
frosty in advance, the, the, the
way meetings are conducted now
with electronic means and
through technology like Zoom,
uh, simply wasn't contemplated
at the time.
Right, thank you Madam Chair
Ripsard. That's what I thought
we're getting at with that. How
did they sure representative?
OK, so they do by proxy, but
they still do a quorum, is that
correct? Even if they do it on
Zoom, they would still have to
meet a quorum. That's correct,
Madam Chair Representative
that's required. OK.
Um, ma'am, so I think if my
understanding is we're just
upgrading this so that for
updating this so that.
It can include Zoom meetings and
other ways,
I'm sure.
Then I'd like to move it to
pass.
I'll
OK, we have a motion for.
Do pass and are there any
objections?
OK.
Thank you, Colin.
I'm glad he didn't have to wait
here for us all. OK, so you have
a
on Senate bill.
72.
And with the 6 to 0 unanimous
vote. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK,
final bill, um, housegirl 554.
Um, this bill essentially
creates a statewide opportunity
for allowance of accessory
dwelling units, um, across the
state to be built in residential
zoning districts and allows um
for multi-family housing in
commercial districts, um, with
me are my experts, Danny
Warworth from the Office of
Housing and Carlos Camara with
sites Southwest over the past 5
weeks, Madam Chair, we've been
hosting these meetings.
And I don't know if
Representative Dao is here, but
we do have an amendment for this
bill, um.
We've been sharing a a
bipartisan committee on housing
and one of the clear policy
initiatives that works is
allowing for exactly this bill
to take place in New Mexico, um,
to be able to incentivize
building across the state. Uh,
we are 35,000 units short of
housing right now in New Mexico.
This is, if there was a silver
bullet, madam Chair, this is it,
um.
And do you have an amendment? I
do and this is meant to be in
partnership with Representative
Doo, who is unfortunately not
here, but I'll explain the
amendment.
Um, and in good faith, um, we'll
go ahead and move that for
discussion, Madam sure I move to
discuss the proposed amendment.
And I just need a copy is there
any discussion on the even I
just have a quick question on
this one part.
Um, oh, sorry.
And some experts on page 4 line
3. Why did we change from
transit.
to the passenger rail train. Is
that so transit takes up bus.
Arab
Madam Chair Representative again
in good faith to make this
bipartisan um representative Doo
understands that in her
committee and please, I'm just
paraphrasing as best I can, um,
in her community, many of the
highest value commercial areas
are near bus stations, and she
didn't want to impose a
non-commercial residential
imposition on some of those bus
stops, um, and so.
A compromise that we made was to
make it just real only for now,
um, to see how this plays out
and what it would look like.
Um, and so that was, that's the
the mild change, big picture,
we're still on board.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm sure.
There are there any objections
to adopting.
OK. You haven't amended bill.
Thank you. All right, so with
that, Madam Chair, we'll stand
for questions.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone in opposition?
OK, anyone in support? Yes. And
how about on Zoom?
No one for either.
OK
All right.
Do you have anything else you'd
like to add?
time for questions, OK.
Mitty
A representative.
Black
00, OK.
Oh, we just have a few
questions, ma'am.
No, ma'am Chesson, I, I see that
the.
Oh, it's the best with the.
Municipal League had issues on
there.
About infringing on local
planning and zoning authority,
which is one of my questions. So
you're going to now make changes
statewide that affect local
communities.
Yeah, that is correct, Madam
Chair Representative.
And
I didn't see, is there anything
in there.
That has anything that excludes
that dwelling that could be used
as a rental to be used as like
an Airbnb or weekly rent.
Can you repeat that? Sorry,
Madam Chair.
Can you repeat the question?
Sorry, Madam Chair,
representative experts, is there
anything in this bill that says,
yes, you can use it for a long
term rental, but you can't use
it for a short.
Representative, um, we're
leaving that up to the local
jurisdiction to decide that
specific.
I'm sure we're upset because I
would have liked to have seen
them there because a lot of
issues, a lot of the rentals are
being gulled up by people using
the Airbnb, especially
California, so I'm gonna pick
on.
They come here, they buy sold
their house for a million, they
buy multiple houses in the music
for Airbnb, uh, I think that's
all the questions I have.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and experts and
thanks for sticking around with
us here. So I'm wondering, Madam
Chair, I'm looking at an agency
analysis. I
For the life of me I can't
figure out which one. I think
it's DFA. I believe it's DFA.
Essentially to bed. So on this
one, it says.
The problem that they were
having was it says re
residential properties in New
Mexico are subject to a 3%.
annual cap
And property tax increases, so
if an owner with significant
tenure builds in ADU, they can
see a shock increase in property
tax, often doubling or tripling
their current property tax rate,
and then this is one way to help
make sure that the regulatory
changes lead to actual new home
construction would be to provide
a temporary abatement or have
taxes ramp up over a set period
of time, the current and correct
value.
And it said allowing taxes to
increase 20% toward current and
correct.
Per year for 5 years would give
time for existing owners to
adjust. Can you just address
that, that concern that they
had, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Representative, um, I was the
author of that FIR so I'm happy
to address that
the um
The intent to call out that
issue was just more along the
lines of something to consider,
not necessarily within this
bill, although I'm not sure if
it's even possible to consider
within this bill because it's a
separate tax issue. Um,
But essentially, yes, that is an
issue that happens where if you
were to build a guest house, it
would be reappraised and you
would be reappraised at current
um and correct value which
could, if you've lived in your
house and benefited from years
of 3% increases, you know, we've
had to see a 70% increase across
the state in the last 7 years on
housing value so it could
increase your um your property
taxes. So that would be a
further incentive, not a reason
to to not enact something like
this, but something to consider
to make adoption.
of building more uh entry level
housing more attractive.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and that does
help me and, you know, I'm, I'm
a big supporter of
All kinds of Airbnbs and verbos
and uh.
Whatever other things out there,
there are, so I think this could
help with that, especially with
the housing crisis. But Madam
Chair, Representative, so I, I
saw in the bill, I think it has
specific guidelines when it came
to the amount of
I believe it was 10 ft, I think.
And I just wanted to see what
that, is that industry standard
for something like this, Madam
Chair, and representative, could
you just go into that for me?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so, uh, I think contextually
just talking about what you can
and can't do regarding how close
you are to another given
structure. So standard again,
construction, just being being
able to create those buffers.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So I did also
see that it defined it. I think
it had to have its own entrance
and exit, had to have a place
for sanitation and sleeping. So
Madam Cha representative, would
it have to accommodate anything
else in that unit to to be
included in this, Madam Chair
and representative. Madam Chair,
representative on the ADUs or on
what are we I believe on the
ADUs according to the definition
I read, and I, I lost my page. I
apologize, so it's in here
somewhere.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's uh.
Um, lines 8 through 13, but you
are correct representative in
that section. It talks about
having an independent living
unit and defining that
independent living unit as
separate ingress and egress.
And then having um permanent
provisions for sleeping, cooking
and sanitation, those are
standard things that we see in
other parts of the state and
tend to be a standard things
that we see across New Mexico
jurisdictions as well. So tries
to provide a consistent uh
definition.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative and expert that
helped me on that and then I see
on the same page.
14 and 15.
it as zoning authority,
including a zoning authority of
a Home Rule Municipality shall
accommodate. So Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering
how that works when it comes to
home rule. Are we superseding
what they can do when it comes
to home rule, and can you just
go into that for me a little
bit?
Madam Chair Representative, so
all we're doing is defining what
accessory dwelling unit is at
the state level, so that it
essentially encompasses both
home rule and non-home rule
areas.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. So it would
include both.
With the changes, correct?
Correct. OK, got it.
OK, is, does that have any
constitutional problems with
that when it comes to home rule,
telling them what to do.
We don't foresee any issues with
that, Madam Chair.
Sounds good. Thank you, Madam
Chair and representative that
helped me on that.
One other, one other question
here, see.
OK, so yeah, we deleted the
question I had. So that's
My questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Hey, um, but it's the will of
the committee.
Be movement do pass
we have an amendment on this
one?
That's.
Any objections.
OK.
Oh, OK.
We'll take roll call.
Representative Block. No, ma'am.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Romero. Yes.
Representative Thompson. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Adam Chair.
Yes.
on a vote of 4 to 2.
And
or in favor, to against, um, you
have a house built.
5:54 as amended.
