Representative townsend
made investigating yeah mister
chairman mcqueen yeah
we have a quote okay
before we we have a bill in the
morning often the house energy
environment natural resources
committee we have before stay
house to fifty nine in house
memorial forty two
before we get started questions
are announcements or anything
from the committee
okay let's go the house bill to
fifty nine or seven serato.
Morning everybody I have.
Is that better now I I am still
suffering the fact the prior
okay
i'm trying to control the volume
on my voice as which is a so I
have with me today secretary
roper with a new mexico ed the
economic development department
and I have with me i'll look
screen burgers with the governor
staff is her economic
development advisor so what we
have before is right now is each
b two fifty nine and i'm gonna
walk through the bill a little
bit kind of talk to some of the
concerns that i've heard from
different communities arm that
have come up so what this bill
does is it takes money from the
program the new mexico private
equity program on which
investment any funds regardless
of where those funds invest in
right they could be investing in
germany
oklahoma doesn't matter wherever
those where there's been those
funds are investing anywhere and
want this bill does as it says
two percent of those funds
should prioritize
about funds to present it a two
percent of this program should
prioritise funds that have an
investment in new mexico
specifically around climate and
so this in particular this this
section of investing this these
assets this climate tack
it's kind of the history's a
little interesting it started
with clean tech back with the
big internet boom back in the
day and then that feeded away
and it's had a bit of a
resurgence and this is a really
good thing a lot of research has
shown that in so far as private
equity can influence the future
of green house gas in our world
you know each developed nation
for lack of a better term on
should have at least a hundred
billion dollars invested in some
sort of clean climate tack
something that's going to reduce
green house gases and so we seem
china take off with this we've
seen europe how you know do a
lot with this and recently we
see a lot more investment in the
united states after the
inflation reduction act that's
been a huge piece of this puzzle
so now there's a lot more
investment but again it's still
neal and just like the sac the
state investment council these
investors are judged by their
returns and the sic is really
good at getting returns it's one
of our you know when.
If you're on the pension I
pocket you're on the interim
pension oversight committee and
you sit through some of the
hearings I see is just this
breath of pressure because
they're very good at the returns
that they get and in the
investments they make so what
this bill does it says hey just
make sure some of those funds
more than a hundred million
dollars as it turns out because
they are so effective that
investing are invested in
climate check now I know there
are some concerns on and it was
interesting these conversations
because these are not
industries that are as developed
in new mexico so you know i've
heard blue hydrogen comma come
up effort brackish water come up
these funds will go split and if
you serving step back investors
in particular like to invest in
what they know and like to
invest in industries that they
understand and so what new
mexico has done pretty well
overall is renewable what we're
doing more now and and you know
especially in the conversations
i've been part of with with the
folks here is we're doing more
battery more with them work more
aspects of of increasing battery
um you know storage increasing
renewable from that perspective
the for an investor to decide to
make a a left turn or right turn
going to hydrogen or go into
water supply
on that would have to be a
company that had investments for
multiple places and then these
funds at our national or
international would have to keen
on those particular companies to
do that investment when in truth
what we've been able to do with
a lot of our investments in
renewables in women solar what
we have an abundance of my
anticipation is that's where
investors that's where the funds
would be looking at any mexico
There is not necessarily or in
this program the private equity
program they can invest in
anywhere it doesn't have to come
back to new mexico in any way
and if you know me I really like
it when our investment investing
money comes back to new mexico
and get eyes on your mexico so
that is the target of what this
bill does and I know we'll get
into definitions and everything
later on but I just wanted to
kind of give that landscape
because it's it's this might be
a little bit of that I live lucy
episode where she has like she
speaks english and her husbands
have expansion that guy speaks
to a minute spanish and they
translate to french and I feel
like there is a bit of a
disconnect I want to try to
bring it together as much as
possible i'm gonna hand it over
to secretary repair to talk
about some of the companies and
some of the work that the
economic development department
has been doing in this room.
And you represent mister chair
members members of the
committee.
New mexico is a leader in energy
and were poised to continue to
be a leader and energy.
We know with it where number two
in the country.
And the oil production we're in
the top ten and gas production
we were also positioned very
well.
Two be the next energy leader
whatever the next energy is
we're well positioned for that
and we're getting noticed for
that there's a couple of key
things that we need to do to
take advantage of
the opportunities that are being
presented in the united states.
By the inflation reduction act
and one of those is
international marketing
and getting those companies from
outside of our borders to not
only look at the united states
but to look at new mexico for
those opportunities of bringing
that technology to the us and
so.
It's important that we not only
look at how we're investing the
money as we're talking about in
this legislation but also how
we're marketing ourselves from
an economic development
standpoint internationally and
to make sure that we continue to
fund the things we know and do
very well called jip and leader
at all all of this has to work
together in order for us to be
successful.
What were here today to talk
about specifically is giving the
state investment council a
target
of two percent.
Of the seven sex permanent phone
to invest in these types of
energies
as the representative said we're
talking about investing in funds
the size seed as a great job of
investing in funds that invest
in businesses that bring a
return on investment they will
not be taking a flyer on some
company that may set up shopping
new mexico that's not what they
do they're very good about
getting a return on investment
as is evidenced by the
overbillion dollars that they
bring into the budget on an
annual basis all we're saying is
that a portion of that money
that are really been set aside
that two percent of that be
dedicated to these types of
industries to take advantage of
what's happening on the federal
level in the inflation reduction
act this will get us noticed
internationally it'll help us
market the state just by say
that this large fund.
His dedicated to this energy.
As it focuses out specifically
these moneys into these funds
for the mexical products and new
mexico energy production we're
investing in the future.
We're investing in to
diversification of our economy
not.
Not deluding our economy but
diversification and improving
our economy.
I urge you to support this
concept and i'm happy to answer
any questions at the good news
to permeate a day
is that I have alies grainburg
alice used to work for me at the
economic development department
as the director of my science
and technology division
department he is
spent some time in the private
sector in the fund environment
and he's going to be that
person that talks spanish all of
us in the ear and that in that
world that we don't understand
and the representatives can do
the best we can to translate
back to english a week at all
understand it.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee yet
just for a little context on my
background my degree is a with a
construction management
technologies i've been
interested in working with the
private equity sector for a long
time my first job at a grad
school was with the start up
raising capital where we got to
pitch it a lot of veteran
capitalists and then prior to
joining the executive branch I
was working as managing director
of server cap ventures which is
a early stage b c firm based out
of california that mostly
investments are security
artificial intelligence and bio
science as mark mentioned house
the services directed such
technology office for the
economic development of arbit
and so i've been
trying to be part of this world.
Mister tere with at.
Okay so we're gonna do a public
comment in.
Supposedly the room is mike I
don't think it works very well
so we're going to do
okay so just make sure turned
off for you move it over hand
people people come up so first
we're going to do a public
comment in support
if you would like to speak and
support please start come up and
staying behind the desk anyone
in the audience in supp.
Okay is there anyone online in
support please region.
The casing is there anyone who
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay.
As far as you know
good morning mr chairman members
of th.
Chapter introduced myself
melissa bernard and with the
sierra club rio grande chapter
we stand and respectable
thoughtful consideration of the
spell this morning major
investment of as much as a
hundred and seventy five million
dollars in funds into climate
technologies is attractive but
we have to ask what rules are
guard rails will be.
Will evidence based peer
reviewed considerations guide
these investments if this is for
local investment strike
particular initiatives then we
wonder if the funding couldn't
be tied to the state investment
council renewable strategic plan
which would drive investments to
technologies we agree.
Or are these broad investments
across clean tag funds in new
mexico.
Come on.
Committee representatives my
name is I have the alliance I am
the coalition corner for new
mexico for solutions last night
we sent you all some of our
appointed concerns that we have
specifically with this bill
one of which that I want to
point out is the fact that this
would authorize at least two
percent of the severance tax
permanent fund to be used which
could be invested in private
equity funds investing in
climate technology we feel that
climate technology is not
defined in this bill you're
concerned about the community
involvement in these things many
of these better tax breaks come
from the justice for the
initiative we want to see
community involved in this
process we know that it's going
to take a bunch of different
methods to current emissions to
fix the climate disaster that we
are heading towards so you know
we respectfully disagree with
some of the representatives that
I believe that carbon capture
hydrogen are the ways to go
because these can bring for very
dangerous technologies and we
are also concerned that this
would pay way for some of the
pieces of rackage water produced
water in the governor's
strategic supply
what are supply so.
Thank you next.
Animal chair members of the
committee my name is silence
grants on a campaigner with the
center for biological diversity
here new mexico we have
thousands of members of parties
across the state and we urge you
to vote now at hospital nine at
fifty nine two fifty nine my
qualities
this bill advanced at least a
hundred and ninety million of
the seven tax permanent fund and
climate technology as was
mentioned kind of technology in
the bill is defined loosely in a
way that leaves open the door
for this money to be used for
the state to purpose to false
climate solutions like hydrogen
carbon capture and sequence
traction or director capture
these are all unproven untested
technologies that will continue
new mexico's reliance on the oil
gas industry and which new
mexicans have asked you time and
time again to reject
i'm also concerned that this
bill may be the financial
mechanism through which the
state will appropriate half a
billion dollars over two years
to find the strategic water
supply which is the plan to
purchase treated oil and gas
waste as well as treated
brackets water we should all be
concerned about this proposal
which purchased puts the cars
way before the horse in terms of
both ra.
New mexico does not currently
have to be this kind of action
and there's not a way to safely
treat oil gas was water for
reuse outside the oil field
I come in
one of the series of legislation
introduced this year that
reports to address climate
change for which there has been
zero state engagement with the
communities that are most
directly impacted by the climate
crisis
new mexicans do urgently need
the state to take action on
climate thank you but this needs
to be done clarification thank
you so now so we we do ninety
seconds you're over
anyone else in opposition
mr chairman members of the
committee thomas singer
may seen your policy with the
western environmental law center
um try to race through.
National business and for many
years have worked on the
christian and policy for the
last permanent and fund.
I'd like to just bring three
issues of restrictions for
consideration
and the first one is about to
better need for the capital does
climate technology and climate
investing need additional state
public support of this time and
I just want to run through with
the legislature has already done
you have committed substance
amounts of capital to climb it
and energy technology
development
and the mexican recent sessions
there is a new mexico venture
capital phone run by animal fate
it's received appropriations of
thirty five million dollars for
twenty two and fifteen million
dollars for a four twenty three
there's an advanced energy work
program rendered allocated seven
million for twenty four twenty
five from the twenty ninth
twenty twenty three fifty
million dollars speed to line
item appropriation for advanced
energy so that's this advanced
energy work highly project
there's a small business and new
mexico small business credit
initiative run by ednemifa that
provides seventy four million
dollars american rescue plan
funds over ten years for small
business investment and this
program is announced italian
hitting sixty four million to a
venture capital equity funds and
nine thank you support program
interesting yeah thank you for
that part thank you
your time is expired
so so just for the needs you
know I I hate to cut people off
but ninety seconds and in
interest appearance so can I
read one quote before so like
ten seconds it's from the lfc
consensus revenue forecast.
Permanent for distribution
through the most stable revenue
source in the general funded are
growing at the fastest rate of
all major general fund revenues
harry general fund growth
throughout the forecast period
thank you messing up on
principle it's risky anyone else
in opposition in audience okay
we'll go online again
will be ninety seconds for
separate july very.
Yeah good morning chair and
committee members my name is
july bernard
on the executive director of
action alliance where a
grassroots organization engaged
in a climate policy and action
and i'm also a dual degree
candidate at your name and water
resources and community in
regional planning
we stand strong opposition to
you
to fifty nine we believe that
this is two percent of the
separate tax permanent fund
going you know for a credit
equity investments quote uncle
for a climate technologies
this is essentially a financial
pathway for the strategic water
supply cannot technology is
poorly defined in the spill and
could streamline funding for
you know potential potentially
screen life I need for the
treatment of rockish waterways
water from gas
that is like two million dollars
would go to private investment
technology that many of us
like hypothetic s and this like
new water supply and that it
would problem the gas industry
to vote on this unless there are
clear definitions for specific
big types of technology that
these investments would go
towards and I stated earlier we
we feel like this is one of the
bills that I was working to
stream my funding for a climate
technology investment as that
again we believe our connected
to this reply so or if you are
to please ask like really hard
questions but also opposed to
thank you they could you learn
mixed up as crystal currently.
The.
Yeah
good morning at a bnc early in
the executive director of a
nonprofit called and digital
sife way and we also are
strongly opposed to we believe
that this bill will
be we have a word of questions
first one of the questions is
why is our tax dollars as new
mexico citizens going to these
types of part of the industries
and why are relying the pockets
of private industries and on top
of that why are we trying to
invest into the climate
technology that has no proving
any pack on the climate prices
that were experiencing
and that goes for any paper
urban
departmentization any type of
claim
there's any anything to do with
intermissions there's no real
proven technology that will
lower our or anything like that
and we shouldn't be investing in
these types of
industries and climate
technology that is not proven
and as a
as an indigenous moment and we
are tired of being getting picks
for not only climate
technologies for
or millenia but also
with these types of climate
financing
that has no
provider
back up so we just would like a
better
and a beth man in into your
science and technology and find
anything that is proven and that
are real solutions thank you
crystal next up we have
needed low p.
Good morning my name is and i'd
love this now here today
representing
requirement crisis action yaka
has thousands of members of the
parts across the state we are
urge you to wrote no one
hospital to denying this bill
follows a series of bills that
we have seen rolled out that are
aimed at streamlining our
investment our public sector
into energy technologies
whenever we take public dollars
to subsidize industries we need
to make sure that we are making
sound investments the permanent
band is precious we cannot and
should not be investing in
technology in an industrial
enterprise that exactly
environmental justice in climate
justice concerns for this port
this proportionally impacted
communities the lack of
definition regarding climate
technology plenty of average for
investment in interpretations
around about solutions like
hydrogen like carbon capture and
produce water why don't read
this the parcel fewer industry
is deeply invested in these bar
solutions because it will only
provide our dependent on them
the governors did water serve
the industry interest by
establishing a new market around
taxic and radio activity
that is not scientifically
selling per costs to treat there
was a call consortium working
try to try to figure out the
reuse early toxic racking with
into the state there is no data
to support this risky and costly
in the dangerous experiment that
can tell me our scarce water
resources as young people we
need to prove that you are not
just chasing dollars in making
risk that because the industry
is loving you to do so we see we
see you giving into industry
concession after concession is
time for the state to take the
size of action to protect my
communities in the environment
we need intentional investment
and renewable energy improvement
technology this will come up
nowhere near to accomplishing
that it either needs to be
reworked to do
they said we have so fear
jinkens neto.
Can you hear me
yes
good morning my name is sophia
drinking is near the
new members
care where community development
and on profit based on this
outside of the thousands of
members and supporters where we
routed the oppositing hd to
fifty nine
and tell you confident that this
is all only support investment
technologies that are improving
into mitigate climate change we
raise our concerns with the
sponsor that the current
language of the bill makes
public investments in what we're
climbing technology but because
like books are said that the
bill lacks definition of the
specificity that could include
energies energy technologies
like hydrogen ninety eight
percent of which comes from
parcel.
Other unhuman and harmful
technologies like car protection
use a cracking ways not very
improvement to be safe seem to
also be included this also only
incentivises private investors
who may have the interest of
exploiting them new mexico's
land are water when you
protections in the guard rails
and we need to make sure that
public funding for climate
investments is only used on time
typically sound solutions we're
also concerned about the
relationship between the spell
on the governor she did worse by
plan we asked the community to
get to the bottom of the
connection between this bill
mistakes
as well as the government plans
allocate hundreds of million
dollars so that I was a market
for interference regulative
weeks water respectively asked
the sponsors in the committee
worked and make sure that the
technology is still out of find
and the only renewal and
sustainable technology
communities help environment are
supported with savings minutes
he's won't know on each few to
fifty nine thinking.
Thank you that answer public
comment back to the sponsor with
srato would you care to have
anything before we get to the
committee thank you mister chair
if I may I really appreciate it
that comments especially going
back to prove and technology and
I think that that's a big piece
of what we're going to discuss
today is the fact that again as
I see is ensuring they have good
returns and the process for this
would be is are not budget I
these are talks text in the same
way this is the fund that has
been growing and they managed
that fund and it's in the
manager money to invest in funds
and what this would do is
prioritize funds two percent of
those this specific program.
To prioritize those that have
climate tech in new mexico so
again it's not all regulating
that arm that's being able to
produce a lot in its ins keeping
that term climate tech in line
with other international focuses
but I know we'll talk more about
that so that I stand for
questions for the county
okay thank you to the committee
for step we have
thank you mister chairman thank
you representative.
And experts for
the presentation on this
legislation
I have a couple of questions
can you share
with us
what current car about we have
in the seve.
Mister chair representative just
to be clear like the different
programs that it's divided into
or I guess what it would be by
carbouts in particular well what
you're trying to do with this
legislation mister chair this
essentially is the car about of
our service tax permanent fund
and a masking what existing car
route do we have in the.
Thank you mister chair think you
represent it's all all handed to
secretary roper in a moment so
we do give and I think that's a
really good question we do try
to give the severance of their
extra the sic is much
flexibility to invest as
possible so they're investing
smartly and what this does is
help them prioritize two percent
of that in when they're ranking
ranking essentially where
they're going to be those
investments so
if if for example as they're
prioritizing maybe that maybe
there's a company that they
don't end up investing in that
sorry maybe there is a fund that
they invest in that doesn't have
any new mexico climate tech
businesses and that would still
be fine they would just have to
prioritize funds that do have
those investments I do want to
point out that the three most
resent of funds that they worked
with don't have any money coming
into going to any new mexico
businesses at all that's
billions of dollars that are not
invested in new mexico that we
are investing in so i'll hand it
to secretary roper other
examples of I I would say
guidance into how they're in
making those investments.
The.
They could represent it mister
chairman members of the
committee representative garcia
currently the
permanent fan have an eleven
percent service though this
doesn't change that
this is just saying the out of
that eleven percent there's a
two percent priority to energy
new mexico based businesses so
we're not changing anything
that is currently in place as
far as telling the sic there is
an additional it's not an
additional two percent is just
prioritizing two percent of what
is already set aside for foreign
investments in new mexico.
Came mister chair.
The sponsor has an accident by
question
was specific art worlds that
exist within the service deck
permanent fun
mr chair representatives when I
hear that we're car out I hear
that we are going to use two
percent exactly for this amount
and what this is doing is saying
we're prioritizing the companies
that are wearing a prioritising
funds that invest in climate
check companies in new mexico as
well so I I guess to me that I
don't I can't think of a I don't
see that as a car about because
they because it's not saying
they have to invest in climate
check in mexico they don't they
have they are going to invest in
funds through the private
equity program and when they do
and when they're looking at
where they're going to be
investing they should prioritise
important funds that invest in
new mexico companies
mister chair
you know we do have car about
since I service tackle and find
the colonials.
Tribes
water resources.
And
and I don't see this legislation
any different that we are
creating a car out and the
mister chair
the other thing is in our
service banks.
Permanent planned.
Our line grant permanent and
find.
Are
wisely invested.
By yes I see
and
the language program find
as higher returns than the
severance tax.
Um.
And why is it that you target at
the service tax.
Thank you mister chair think
representative we are actually
focusing on the private equity
program itself that is within
the severance tax fund so that
program is through that fun
that's why
okay thank you for that
you know mister chair and down.
A representative serator.
I want to say was last year.
There was as big
push on the part of the
executive to tap into some
federal moneys and the billions
of dollars
regarding
hydrogen.
Technology particular blue
hydrogen apology.
So there was a big hype coming
into the session regarding the
need for new method of yet the
forefront of hundreds
development.
And naturally that legislation
came before this committee and
it died in this committee.
Because a lot of us mister chair
will not sold on the the
feasibility and why ability.
Of.
Blue hydrogen
mr I myself.
Emma proponent of green hydrogen
and we're seeing headway in that
development with the could
carson electric coop.
To wear their starting to make
investments in that technology
and i'll probably be the first
cooperation our state.
To utilize
green hydrogen
and
on mister chair I know that the
viability
of green hydrogen and I don't
necessarily agree with the
advocates that are even a post
of that technology.
Ah mr chair black down.
But in essence your legislation
doesn't really differentiate it
just so open ended
and
and I I can't really see.
You know I and again mister
chair you know i'm not saying
that this is kind of a gateway.
To.
Greater national resources in
terms of funding to kind of
fund these types of private
equity initiatives in our state.
The advocates apparently feel
that the rear some kind of link
to that.
But.
And mister charlie just don't
feel comfortable with this
legislation.
And especially if that we are
going to kind of allow.
Industries and tech companies
the look at developing.
Garbance creation and carbon
capture and
and blue hydrogen you know
does that I feel that these are
not.
Really.
Viable technologies that have a
good proven record of efficacy
mister chair.
And
and thank you mister chair thank
you representative.
Thank you
the acceptable rivier.
Think you representatives
I i've got a few questions and
it's very much
on the end of what many of the
advocates have brought up many
of you know I grew up in the
southeast so a lot of my work
here in the legislature has been
to not only oblift the voices of
the workers specifically who
were employed by oil and gas
but also from through the lens
of climate justice I mean that's
really where
my value said is moving in a lot
of these spaces and I think one
of the things that I really
wanted to touch on is
the question around the
definition
last year we worked on
legislation
hospital one eighty eight which
made it out of this committee
but then just sort of just
stalled after
but really talked about how do
we support workers in this
transition but without really
impacting the climate and the
environment particularly
frontlines who are always being
the one who are always directly
impacted when we're talking
about extractive industry and so
I guess the question is is
around the definition what is
the.
What is your.
Your sense now having heard a
lot of the concerns in terms of
how do we beat how do we make it
more clear that this.
Piece of legislation is actually
not
I mean is it not going to be
because I think that's the
biggest concern is is hydrogen
and it's on secretary and in all
these other things that people
are really concerned about so
could you like elaborate more on
what that looks like thank you
mr chair think you
representative and I appreciate
the representatives closing
comments as well as I think is
all are really important
conversations and I think this
is where that translation really
makes a difference so as I see
takes their and I I would
explain the process I know you
all know it but I think it's
worth kind of just walking
through where those why I don't
look at this is being a hydrogen
bill if that's my pieces
so when I look at this as I see
gets their part of money and
they look at where to invest it
people want to be attract sorry
funds want to be attracted to us
I see because it's such a good
amount of money it's a very
trusted partner if asis if the
new mexico state investment
council investigator everyone
takes notice because it's it no
matter what industry this is
because it's such a trust.
So please so companies want to
prove that they have investment
that they have that they're
growing into their moving in the
right direction just in general
absolute anything to do the
climate just in general then
answer these funds so the exact
legal accident so they want to
track this to funds and the
funds want to be attractive as I
see so let's so when these funds
are looking with the s a c's
wants and the s I c says in your
portfolio and companies the
investing there's gotta be some
climate technical mexico then
it's up to that phone separate
that fund could be anywhere in
the world you could be they were
the right states that fundaments
as who where what companies in
new mexico are worth investigate
what can I trust in your mexico
investing now as we all know to
maxi doesn't have a ton of
capital and there's not a lot of
investment happening in general
our state and I think a lot of
what one of the the
articles members mentioned was
that we did we've done a lot but
it still has its all the change
that that perception of the
mexico so when they're looking
at so the companies are going to
want to be attracted to this
fine the funds are looking at
attractive what I would say this
convention has done an excellent
job love is really focusing on
renewables that feel that they
feel trusted in and in this week
and so to that end we have
invested in a lot in wind and
solar and in that we're doing
more on battery you know that's
my hope to really treat those to
other markets those really
exciting options there has been
talk of of hydrogen from my
perspective and again i'm not in
here every day in the same way
but for my perspective i've not
seen hydrogen companies coming
into the level that we're seeing
wind and solar companies come
into their own in new mexico I
would make that argument I think
we can do that I think I don't
think that's the organic is that
when you're looking at what we
offer that is that the more
astablished energies are the
wind and solar and renewable
energies from that perspective
and also by the way because the
price of those have gone down so
significantly people are looking
so those funds are then gonna
look at new mexico companies
that are doing things in a
really interesting way I would
argue it would be wind and solar
and then they would then invest
in those companies or lease get
eyes on the companies in mexico
maybe they decide you know what
there's nothing in new mexico I
want to invest in.
I it's not worth reaching out
for s I see money getting that
funding but at least they've
suddenly started looking at us
as a market and that's it's kind
of an exciting thing is that we
can start shooting and and
changing the perception
internationally of what new
mexico produces right we don't
have to only be number to an oil
we should and arm growing into a
different so that is why that's
that connection and then once
that fund were to invest in a
mexico then they would get a
prioritization in the private
equity program under the
severance but and so again it's
not even guarantee that they
would get money through us I see
that that fund would get that
money to as I see but it's a
good that prioritization so to
that end for this to be
my way of creating more hydrogen
or creating my way this bills
way creating more hydrogen or
creating more money into the
strategic water proposal
um it's a bearing indirect way
and there's a lot of people who
are outside of this state that
are looking at this from a very
different perspective they're
just looking at what what's
growing in new mexico and what
is truly growing is
agricultural tech and winded
solar tech if it looks like my
expert might want to add to
that.
Thank you representative mr
chair members members of the
committee at the young thing I
will add is that the definition
is industry accepted standard
definition
and to shray from that would
then create down in the industry
of how to invest it and when you
start being more restrictive it
creates a doubt on the
investment side in the ultimate
goal of the sic is to maximise
the return on investment we're
not talking about investing in
risky behavior here we're
talking about maximizing the
return on the investment we're
just we're just saying that
there is a priority given to
this new energy technology
specifically in new mexico or
saying you have to we're just
asking for the priority if we
stray from that industry
standard on that definition
we're going to restrict and make
it less likely that companies
are going to invest in new
mexico
mr chair representative I may
add just for a little more
contacts new mexico private
equity investment program under
the sizey as about eight hundred
and fifty nine hundred million
dollars and it currently that's
money that's already allocated
for fund to find investments
this program would just be
moving a little less than twenty
percent to give priority to
climb attack funds and come and
find the have the potential of
investing in climate technology
specifically new mexico
contributing positively to
mexico economic development i'm
so those climate technologies as
much as we've been focused on.
What a purification related to
produce water blue hydrogen more
likely it's about smart cities
great resiliency solid state
batteries agricultural
innovations and absent of a
mandate to investing climate
technology that means more
artificial intelligence
investments more cripped
occurrency and block change
investments all which are are
going to be to a net gain and
green house gas missions
and as a no as it's much money
we work very closely with sici
on this build to
make sure the language is
comfortable within their mandate
because ultimately they have to
do share responsibility in new
mexico which means their first
priority is returning above
market gains to the new mexico
taxpayer and so that's going to
remain their first priority and
this is just a a secondary
priority to be able to
incentivise a certain sector of
technology certain sector
investment but being technology
agnostic that will contribute to
the positive economic
development.
I think your representative
I appreciate that I think what I
have concerns with and word I
think we've heard from a number
of folks is that
new mexico of course needs an
investment we need to be able to
invest in our communities and
and and provide whatever
opportunities for communities to
flourish but I think when we
talk about return of investment
it's always at the expense of
communities and when we're
talking about issues related to
and we're talking about
historically historically
frontline communities have
always been at the expense of
return of investment and I think
that's what the main concern is
around this legislation is that
what commitment do we have from
sic and and this is where we
bring in she's related to guard
rails is are there guard rails
that can
push bs I see to consider
that when we're thinking about
different types of technology
that were prioritizing like
because I think a lot of what
you're saying around the
priorities are just.
They're they're not actually
said in stone I mean in the end
s I see can decide where they
want to make those investments
and so I think that's really
it's not necessarily changing
the definition but really what
are the guard rails that can be
added to this legislation that
communities can feel comfortable
with that they know that
if investments are going to be
made that they're going to be
done.
Through the lens of of that
climate resiliency versus
what the fear is which is
continuing this conversation
around hydrogen
and secret secretary and and all
these others I think that's kind
of where my concern is is how to
cow can we be much more clear
about that and and and confident
that this is where that
legislation will take us
rather than what many
communities have historically
faced which is a lot of
injustice from a climate
perspective and so and also
economic mean we there's we we
see it all over the state and so
built those are just some of the
things that I wanted to raise
because I feel like that's
we want to make this we we
support the investments but we
just we have to take into
consideration at two home it's
at the expect it's what the
expenses in doing so and and a
lot of times it's many of our
native communities and
communities who are
heart who are historically
marginalized so that's it thank
you.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you representative and
experts
you know as you know in
particularly interested in this
area
and appreciate that you have an
expert with you who has worked
in in investment so i'd like to
get a little bit of
clarification and ask some
questions i'm in that band so
that I think
maybe we can talk about
investment strategies and and
how it's done so mister chair
and
representative i'm interested
first in how if we could walk
through how investment firms
make decisions on which types of
technology
they invest in.
Yeah.
Representatives and thank you
for the question I generally
venture capital fund who raises
capital will raise capital from
organizations like sovereign
well funds which as I see would
be considered which are called
limited partners you could look
at high network individuals
corporate venture team to invest
in other funds or soberwell
funds and so they try to raise
their capital and try to deliver
more capital back to their
original vesters ultimately and
so to take a portfolio approach
which means that they have
internal expertise usually in
the cluster or sector that
they're investing and it will
also reach out to a natural
laboratory's research
universities and other outside
experts of validate the
underlying technology these and
the goal is to invest in i'd say
if you invest in ten companies
the whole bus that one or two
will be so successful that
they'll pay for the rest of the
portfolio so there's a specific
focus on emerging technologies
in the technologies aren't
mature yet and so these are
going to be aren't trending
towards the more innovative
type of technology and again
having this mandate within the
sicky would encourage novel
climate applications that are
capable of reducing our
greenhouse gas missions rather
than being completely sector and
technology agnostic for example
one of the sectors that have
been getting a lot attraction as
video games and I know you know
lots of people like video games
but they don't have any
cascading benefits or societal
benefits and having a car about
or a mandate to invest in
climate technology would be able
to create that kind of
investment technologies that not
only can have a boat market
returns and and pay back the
fundamental limit of partners
but also contribute positively
to our climate goals and the
economic development in new
mexico so absent this
legislation I think the question
which will ask ourselves as what
kind of investments both sicy
continue prioritize the last
three major investments which
probably total near two hundred
million dollars was to look
capital playground capital and
cost love enters none of whom
have.
Dedicated office presence in new
mexico none of whom really had
been active in new mexico
ecosystem a home versus one of
the more recent investments
dangerous ventures that invest
in impact investment for climate
technology that's right here in
new mexico and her backyard i'm
in so now only they have the
in house expertise to invest in
viable effective climate
measures but are also located
here can contribute to the new
explorer economy in absent this
legislation it'll be more of the
the luck's capitals and
playground capitals rather than
the dangerous matters.
Thank you mister charles thank
you mister greenberg i'm I want
to talk a little bit you
mentioned expertise
I want i'd like to talk a little
bit more about the expertise if
you are managing cyber security
portfolio
or a climate portfolio could you
just give us an example of the
type of expertise that
a fund would have the type of
the backgrounds for a particular
sector to illustrate who is
making the decisions at the fund
what is their background mister
chair representative dixon thank
you for the question so i'll
take sarah cabenches for an
example
their thesis is developed based
on the inhouse expertise and the
expertise of the limited
partners who invest in the fund
so in the case of serious
adventures we had someone who
had worked in siber security for
decades and was a himself and
operator that was capable of
making wise decisions and
further we prioritized limit a
partners who were interested in
the cyber security space so that
they could open up their
networks and provide that
additional level of scrutiny to
potential projects obviously and
better capital in its nature is
highly speculative again if you
have one or two projects that
are wildly successful they pay
for the other eight and that's
the power law business model of
venture capital and so the by
investing in climate technology.
Funds who have climate energy
and climate technology expertise
you're giving the opportunity to
have these break throughs and
climb technology that wouldn't
exist otherwise if you look at
nobody from.
Google to amazon to apple these
are all venture capital and it
will companies and a lot of
times are our greatest
breakthroughs and society have
come from venture back companies
including semi semiconductor
manufacturing which is another
uh should be a strong suit in
new mexico and so prioritizing
climate technology gives us an
opportunity to have technologies
deployed that we might not even
be aware of yet
not about.
Some of the other technologies
are mentioned earlier than you
mister chair thank you mister
greenberg and the other thing
that you mentioned that sort of
picked my interest is comparing
the how the funds the sic invest
the funds right now
and that there are currently
a lot of those funds are going
to out of state
managers but also not
necessarily into
technology that is going to have
a significant social benefit
could you
talk as through that component
again just said that we have a
better understanding of where
the money is currently going.
A mission reps and dicks and
currently the sics main mandate
is return on capital and so they
could invest in any fund that
has a a prior track record of
high returns but those other
funds have no dedicated sector
that they invest in so could be
gaming it could be wet three
point mediverse which i'm i'm
sure many of you have heard
about me it could be crypto
currency and block chain
technologies many of which not
would only be a net gain in
greenhouse gas emissions but
have no societal benefit or
cascading impact on the new
mexico economy on it and so the
only prioritization is that
return on initial investment
from funds so
I I would urge the the committee
to to look at what the status
quo would lead to in terms of
continuing investment rather
than having a priority for
specifically new mexico based
economic development which you
have we all agree is is early
new to darce.
Thank you mister chair thank you
I was also
appreciated the clarification I
believe that representative
surrounder talked about this
that we're not talking about in
this bill
with drawing more money from the
permanent land any of our
existing funds well could you
secretary robert maybe elaborate
on that walk is through that
again.
Thank you mister chair
representative and members of
the committee as as
representative sorrow mention
there's currently eleven of
eleven percent
that is that is in the the
private equity fund portion of
the sac investment whirlingly
saying to prite warranties two
percent of that
two climate technology or not
changing it it's still eleven
percent
and we're not saying you have
to.
We're not saying shell we just
were just asking for a
prioritisation to climb it
technology in new mexico.
If I can digress for just a m.
The.
I'm a seven generation to
mexican you can tell by the
color of my hair i've been
around for a while.
I was raised in ranton.
A call my meantime.
No different than being raised
in our teacher.
That reflyings oil and gas.
Very much time to the economy of
the industry.
In nineteen sixty there was a
gentleman around tone along with
his brother and engineer partner
they decided they were going to
bring natural gas into this cold
town.
Pretty bold mood.
To bring natural gashing bill
call town a town that was
established in eighteen eighty.
On cole and railroad.
They made the bold move in
nineteen sixty to bring natural
gas.
Every furnish and ran at home
was a call furnace there was a
black cloud that how over that
nice little beautiful committee
and community in the located
extra the sungrade a crystal
mountains.
Within a few years those hard
line call minors found out the
natural gas was cleaner it
wasn't his hard to shouble into
the furthest.
And within a decade.
The dark cloud was gone cleaner
fuel was being burned and people
were happy energy changes.
It changes it happens.
We need to embrace the fact that
there is a new energy out there
we may not even know what it is.
We're an energy leader right now
we need to continue to be an
energy leader.
We don't need to be scared of
what the new energy is we need
to really said could you stay in
the thank you
thank you mister thinking
secretary repaired that actually
leaves into one of the other
questions that I have so my
understanding is that global
investment in climate tech is in
the hundreds of billions of
dollars in maybe trillions right
and you know we
in this conversation
seemed to be stuck on a few
technologies
but what I would like to hear
from you is about the diverse
range of technologies that
portfolio companies are
investing in meant the only
thing that people seem to be
highlighting here is hydrogen or
carbon capture but am I mistaken
in thinking that there are
hundreds of other types of
technologies could you share
some of those please.
This.
The.
Mister representatives and I
think for the question as a
mentioned earlier I think smart
cities are really beautiful take
off resilient grids at the the
next wave of battery technology
for clean cars is going to be
solid state batteries whose
range it's going to be far
superior and far more cost
effective and more dorable than
what we have now
as well as the different
components in terms of emerging
technology later the solar wind
and geo thermal and
innovations and designization
technology innovations and try
to harness the
the motion of waves for energy
production I would all types of
emerging in front your
technologies that are on the
average person's rate are yet is
what's being invested in within
climate technology and venture
capital and i'll argue to the
point of electrolicities which
is how you produce how did you
out of natural gas is a mature
technology so it's incredibly
unlikely that electrolises
companies are projects are the
recipient of any of these
investments because the early
mature technologies they're
early in the market and I I
think we should we could look at
domestically towards the future
in terms of what's coming down
the pike in terms of emerging
technologies thank you mister
thank you mister greenberg that
is an excellent point that I had
certainly not considered that
electronicise is
a mitcher technology so that is
not something that were actually
talking about when we talk about
investing in some of these
early and innovative i'm
technologies one of the other
things
in some of those texts you
talked about you know i'm.
Title and ocean energy is
probably not something that's
really being developed here new
mexico but what about some of
the technologies that are being
developed at our national labs
are those.
Types of technologies things
that uh some of these funds may
be investing in.
Mister chair represented books
and members of the committee at
absolutely
it's it's very similar to the
the technologies that we've seen
in the bio science sector with
anti expired that came out last
alamos national apps that
actually has a venture capital
found out of austin that is that
is back in them but it would be
very similar to this take
technologies that come out of
the labs
most likely these types of
technologies would come out of
last hour most as thought to say
they couldn't come out of
thindia but most likely in this
sector they would come out of
the last alamos national labs
and would start.
On a lab table.
And prove conceptually that it
could be done at a small scale
and and what then they venture
companies would come in and
these funds would come in would
prove that it could be done at
at at scale and be done in a way
that was profitable.
Mr chair secretary robert I know
you mentioned los alamos but I
did want to highlight if i'm not
mistaken there's some
concentrated solar that has come
out of san diego national apps
is that correct
that it that is correct that
there's been a considerated
solar alot of the silver
technology that even still
exists today started intended
elabors
decades at decades ago so it
most likely to come out of last
alamos in this sector but it
doesn't mean that sandia
couldn't be a part of it.
Thank you mister chair thank you
secretary and much so one of the
things that
you know I think were
illustrating is that the vast
majority of the technology that
we're talking about
is clean and actually reduces
carbon emissions and helps to
clean up the environment is that
correct.
Mister chairman.
Representative account members
of the committee absolutely
all of this all of this
investment
in claim that change technology
is geared towards reducing
greenhouse emissions thank you
mister chair thank you secretary
mr greenberg do you can you
share for as I think that there
is a concern about whether or
not this is a wise financial
investment it were the state to
ask the as I see to prioritize
some of this technology what are
some of the returns that these
funds are seeing nationally I
mean can you are there can we
look at some of the data and
stay with confidence you know
understanding that nothing is a
hundred percent but is it fair
to say that the funds are
performing at or above.
Other levels
mister shirt representative
dixon yes a historically venture
capital has exceeded what you
would see in terms of market
gains through the nasdaq
downdustrivage over the last
thirty or forty years are the
typical venture capital fund
even sort of the the median
venture capital fund or return
anywhere between one point eight
x two ten x on original invested
capital in a period of between
six and eight years
so if you can tell and limit a
partner that they're going to
double or triple or quadruple or
even ten x their money within
that period of time it's an
attractive investment sector and
has proven itself out over the
last several decad.
Thank you mister tere and and
thank you representative and
experts i.
I have really appreciated the
conversation I have appreciate
the fact that I feel like we've
been able to
zome in on a couple of the the
specifics of how this would
potentially work why it would be
beneficial for new mexico and
and the global the greater
global economy.
So I am I would like to thank
you for bringing this bill I
think it's
a.
I think it is a good step a.
Financially.
Worthwhile endeavour I think it
has social benefit for the
greater good
and I would really like to see
new mexico be a leader and step
out on some of these as opposed
to being held back by.
Other factors thank you.
Thank you reps.
Thank you mister chairman
representative mr.
To begin I am always skeptical
of politically directed
investments in particularly
I believe the prime directi.
Of the severance tax permanent
fund is.
The maximiser return
for
this generation and future
generations of
new mexicans could you describe
a simple remember a report
where some of our politically
directed investments that are
already in place or not
performing as well
as those investments that were
unrestricted is is do you call
them.
Mister chair members the
committee representatives are
not familiar with with that
report that you're referring to.
Okay
would be fair to say mister
chairman
representative mister
phones would be invested in
cutting edge technologies
that would involve fairly high
risk
of
no return on the investment.
Mr chair members of the
committee represents card I I
think the the nature of any
ventured capital fund has some
risk to it because they are
investing up crossed the board
and cutting edge technologies
but that's also as mister
greenberg referred to why they
generally return
a greater return on investment
because because they are a
little bit on that cutting edge
so
to your point I would say yes
the funds that they as I see
investment that has a larger
return on investment most likely
are on the risk your side which
is why they hand the greate.
And mister chairman mister did I
hear you say that some of this
money would be directed to
marketing state.
Mister chair members of the
committee representatives got no
I did not I said that was a it's
an important part of the overall
picture but this none of this
money would be is for marketing
mister chair representative I
could help clarify we see that
this effort to highlight to
prioritize you mexico renewable
climate tech is in it of itself
advertising the state to
international funds
and mischairman representative
mister last question in affect
this is already been
voiced as a concern
of some of my colleagues here on
the committee what is the
definition
of climate technology in this
what
is there any specificity with
respect to what types of climate
technology were going to be
supporting with this.
Mister chairman of scott no and
that's by design to make the
language too restrictive would
lower the availability of funds
that would be investible
in the earlier point a typical
bencher capital portfolio let's
say it only has ten companies
the expectation would be that
eight of those companies fail
completely and the two delivered
outside returns to the entire
portfolio this past year in
twenty twenty three was the
worst funding year for venture
capital funds raising money in
more than a decade and so the
sic has a unique ability because
of how well capitalised they are
to drive funds to them because
of how difficult the funding
fundraising environment is right
now and should not take
advantage of that by trying to
prioritize economic development
new mexico I I think would be a
lost operat.
Okay thank you mister chairman
thank you
thank you for breaker
thank you mister chairman
good morning representative
cabinet secretary in your guest
um
so i.
And looking at the spill I did a
little bit of my own research
because I had people lobbying me
on both sides mister chairman
and I and I see some of the
points of my colleagues
of concerns for how the money is
invested and in looking at your
bill.
Trying to move that
and I see that you have included
a representative mister chairman
I definition of climate
technology which basically
equates to the the definition
that I found on google went
energy solar hydro power
and reducing green house gases
and or emissions which is
basically what was I am google
and listening to this
conversation
I happened to have some
experience at investing state
money
when I served on the per a board
for eight years and I served
twice as the chairman of the
board
fourteen billion dollar fund
which
during my high ten year as the
chairman of the board mister
chairman representative
we lost seven billion dollars
overnight in two thousand nine
two thousand ten when I served
chairman of the board
but prior to that mister
chairman and representative the
board decided to invest in
emerging markets and
and clean energy at the time mr
chairman and representative we
were invested we chose to have a
policy that invested in at
energies such as timber
ethernell at the time when we
were transitioning i'm saying
when the world was transitioning
to ethernet clean fuels etc and
I could go on with the list of
investments that our policy
allowed
the paraphoned basically had a
policy mister chairman and
representative.
That invested in and directed a
certain percentage of our fund
to be invested
the fun house since come back as
we all know and it's in its
doing well
and during this time mister
chairman and representative I
was able to obtain a certificate
in emerging markets and
international investments from
the university of pennsylvania
martin and so this is a very
interesting discussion to me
because I think what I hear or
what i've heard mister chairman
and representative is that there
needs to be parameters to ensure
that we're not investing and
these questions similar
questions came up when I was on
the paraboard with regard to
whether or not because we are an
emergency we were investing in
emerging markets
that we weren't investigating
for example in diamond minds
where there was child labor in
africa or or such investments
that were really
negative I guess you could say
investments so the question the
question of my mind mister
chairman and representatives
is how the state invests and I
happened to know a little bit
about how the state investment
council works and there
parameters as well
so
having said that mister chairman
and representative
it's important to me that those
parameters are you know that
we're not further contaminating
our our land in our water and
and so on and I hurt you very
clearly cabinet secretary when
you got a little emotion
emotional in your testimony I I
clearly hear that I think we're
all here for the good of the
public
but.
The way that I see this fund is
mister chairman or madame chair
and or madam
I guess chair
is accurate
yeah you're in the seat
yeah that I I looked over and
you there was someone else there
so it kind of threw me off a
minute
the way that I see this is the
state investment council will
surely be looking for those
parameters to ensure that there
are some
that the money managers that we
hire because out the process the
state investment council hires
money managers in certain areas
to invest money in certain areas
madam chair and representative
and so it's clear to me that
when
they state investment council
comes to us and says there's two
percent it's going to be
invested in
this protect from the several
spend in this particular
technology that
as it comes back to the
pensions and investments
committee those questions are
going to be asked
to ensure that we're not in fact
investing mountain chair and
representative in things that.
Have been discussed here today
especially
negative
investments we're going to be
investing to ensure that that
you percent those money managers
that we hire and that two
percent is going to be invested
in things that are going to
generate revenue back into the
fund and ensure that we're
receiving the interest properly
and that those investments are
orange fact
solid and that they're not
further contaminating our
properties so mister chair with
or i'm sorry you guys keep
switching on me over there
mister chair and
madame representative I think
that this is a proper
legislative
proposal
what I do have questions on
further mister chairman and and
a representative is you talk
about.
But the build is not saying
anything about staff and there's
no you know I i'm just one of my
questions is with regard to
ftes like how many of these are
going to be part of this
proposal.
Mister chair representative
brego
to your first point you're
exactly right the the state
investment council has a due
diligence process that they go
through before investing in any
fund that would invest in other
companies that that is a very
thorough process and that's the
that's the first stage of gay
keeping if you don't make it
pass the sic due diltance
process you will not receive
investment from the state
investment council which means
that only high quality funds in
in two point ones that are
capable of delivering those
returns will be considered to
begin with and it's only on that
second level of get keeping that
the priority all else being
equal may be given to climb the
technology and funds that could
invest in new mexico and into
your question about after ease
that the language in the bills
is it speaks to.
The priority given to funds that
could invest in portfolio
companies that have personnel
affiliated with the state so
this would require no fte that
the state level this is just
saying that.
Funds that are capable of doing
due diligence on new mexico
based portfolio companies and
those companies have personnel
who are hired within the state
would be given an extra priority
all else being given all else
being equal and having already
passed the initial new diligence
process so there's no fts needed
or associated with this
legislation are the only
priority would be given to funds
who could invest in companies
who have dedicated personnel
within the state and thank you
for that clarification so this
would be
implemented within the structure
of the current
sicy process the current staff
process and
and the current hiring process
for many managers under the sic
which clearly has policies
already
engaged
where do they call them
gatekeepers I guess guard rails
thank you for that
that would ensure that the money
that's been invested isn't being
invested properly.
Okay and further more mister
chairman and representative they
have a little bit of experience
with brackish water having been
a city planner and I think that
it's important to know that
brackish water can be used in
many positive ways and I just
wanted to close with his mister
chair because we've tough often
talked about that
and whole process for brackish
water being used to for example
water office property landscape
for things like that so i'm i'm
i'm not
in having one of the things that
were said to me is that that
water would be contaminated but
clearly that water would be
cleaned before it was used and
considered rackish water so I
just wanted to make that comment
mister chair and thank you for
that appreciate your bill
thank you.
Thank you mister chair
thank you representative and
set mister secretarian and
expert
just having a couple of
questions about the state
investment council
I did see that they that there's
some information here on the FIR
but do they have a position on
this bill thank you mr chair
think you represent it this is
part of the reason why we're
what we freeze from the
definitions as as they are
they've been direct consultation
with this bill to ensure that
they can maintain their
production obligation to the
state of mexico and our citizens
while upholding our our climate
calls as well so thank you
mister chairman and
representative the way I
understand this bill is it's not
necessarily a set aside it's not
that two percent will be
invested but there is a
suggestion that if these funds
exist in new mexico that they
will be.
Just moved up the list for
consideration is that correct
thank you mr chair thank you
representative yes that's
correct so
mister chairman representative
the.
I believe we did this recently
with solar and wind uh projects
that and i'm not sure that that
got all the way through and
but I don't believe that
because of their fiduciary
responsibilities that we've
really seen any investment so
far.
Bye.
The sim it was that correct or
did any knowledge thank you mr
chair thank you representative
on the
there are there's a small bundle
where they're encouraged to
invest in new mexico start ups
but but that's never really
taken off aren't to be quite
frank and so you know there is a
few things that we worked on
since i've come into this body
that really have focused on kind
of getting the most bang for our
buck if you were right where the
sac is you know performing well
in the getting the returns at
our state needs but at the same
time there's some sort of
investment or attractiveness of
new mexico companies by them
adding investments there and so
the way this would do it is
because this private equity
program goes through funds it
would go to international
national funds incurred them to
investigate occurs up to look at
the programs interstate and
should they see a company that's
worth investing in then that
would move them up the list of
so yes you're sorry to kind of I
went along but yes you're
correct it really haven't we
haven't seen a lot of sic funds
go into new mexico companies
directly so thank you mister
chair and representative cerato
the
so what were you how we've
previously directed
the the sic two to consider this
they have not been forced into
investing
they are stealing there still
their never on priorities to be
prudent in investment second yes
mister chairman
so
miss chairman and
representative.
I also heard that what we're
talking about is high risk.
High reward.
The.
Investments is what we're
talking about here so what
percentage or do you have an
idea I wish there was somebody
here from a state investment
council but what percentage of
investments
that that new mexico dollars are
going into would be classified
as high risk high reward
currently I think you
representative and chairman i'm
in a handed expert in a second
but for all of us with borrow
and case you know they ask you
depending on on how soon you're
going to retired you want it
into a higher risk or a lower
risk or a medium risk investment
and they essentially compile all
these different companies
together in some are high risk
and some are you know very solid
you know next
I can put up a good companies a
solidly finance company like
that we've seen and they put
them all together and they they
rank your risk based on that and
so on and so so that's kind of
you know maybe one company in
that fund that s a c would
invest in is pretty high risk
but the other one's offset it to
ensure that sic is getting the
returns that they that they're
desiring if you want anything
on toyota thank you for the
question so venture capital as
an aside class is is high risk
in our reward and so the current
statute for the sic is that
eleven percent into the new
mexico private equity investment
program in all those investments
would represent high risk high
reward investments
and so the hope within a venture
capital fund receiving capitals
again you know i'm an investment
ten companies one or two are
really going to take off and pay
for the majority of the returns
what as I do see is doing is
taking one step even further
back and taking a portfolio
approach of funds and so now
only can one fund or two funds
fail but the majority of funds
are going to provide outside
return collectively and and
investment index ones you for
one k a specific stock precious
metals there's many different
asset classes that have their
own degree of risk in return but
you're never going to get the
type of return to again better
capital in any other past the
class and that's the the hope
from the sic is having that.
Eleven percent of the total
service tax one into these high
risk high reward endeavours will
deliver more returns than just
index one sort of good deposits
precious medals or anything else
thank you for that
so much chair
i'm looking at the the language
of this and it says
uh new mexico funds are there
funds currently in new mexico
that are the specific
technologies i'm i'm not aware
and if there are how many of
these funds exist where it's an
in mexico companies that are
investing in this type of.
Technology.
Mr months with the believe that
the language you may be
referring to speaks to the
portfolio companies that the
fund would invest in so there's
no mandate that the fund itself
be a new mexico only that they
consider new mexico based
companies but your point are
dangerous ventures who already
receive money from the state
investment accounts council is
already located new mexico
trambling ventures is another
one the investment bill signs
are cotton what technology find
is another one station here
that's received investment
historically and climb
technologies one of their
several thesises and and and
that's I think an important
point also that these funds
don't have to exclusively invest
in climate tech but maybe one of
their verticals would be given
priority but yes there are
several new mexico based funds
already having a received say
investment capital regardless of
sector so thank you so much
jared in an expert what was your
name again i'm sorry
mister chair representative of
your alexander your last name is
greenberg greenberg okay thank
you I miss chair and mister
greenberg um
so
these funds
that exist
could there be i'm just to use a
round number you mentioned as
many as ten commitment ten
different companies that are
being invested in
could their these funds
that exist could there be ten
nine of the ten companies not in
new mexico but one of the
companies being in new mexico
and that would qualify for this
type of investment or is there a
number or or the majority need
to be in new mexico
how would this work mister chair
represented my toyota know that
so yes that if there's only one
portfolio company out of ten
that was in new mexico that
would be adequate to have says
he give them some priority and
for reference
though the fund I work for
previously historic adventures
they had a fifty million dollar
fund to an investment about
sixteen portfolio companies.
So you could imagine especially
with the larger fund sizes who
are raising a hundred million
dollar funds two million dollar
funds that were talking about
twenty thirty portfolio
companies and the only
preferential treatment they
would receive is if they're able
to do do diligence on and invest
in new mexico based companies
which may only represent a small
portion of their overall
portfolio but that small portion
would be greater than zero which
is the current mandate
so thank you mister chair.
Okay
this is why I have a problem
with
the the directing sic to make
investment in this because it is
being presented that this would
help new mexico companies and
help technology and new mexico
when the reality is it could be
a s a very small portion of the
overall fun fund that exists.
However at the same time I can
imagine that there's a lot of
businesses in new mexico that
even qualify to be part of a
fund right now because it's
emerging technology even in new
mexico.
So mister chairman and
representative I I voted against
this in the past in directing
the sic.
That that we as legislators
direct them to invest in
something especially high risk.
I would rather them just look at
the fund and if it happens to be
something that affects new
mexico businesses so beer.
But giving priority to a firm up
in new mexico that is trying to
to get off the ground i'm not
sure that i'm comfortable with
that so I I have voted against
this in the past I voted against
it when when we were doing that
with renewable technologies.
I think there's other ways for
us to try and help new mexico
based businesses.
Without directing them.
Two it would directing that the
the sic to make decisions
to help potentially put their
thumb on the scale or put our
them on the skill for these type
of funds.
I think there's other ways for
us to help these technologies I
actually believe in these
technologies uh to and I think
as I was reading the the
fire
it actually states in here that.
That
will first off it says that
there is a risk and there is a
very high likelihood that we
could lose money.
On this but then it's also says
that these technologies they
give in the current market
circumstances may reasonably be
expected to outperform our other
investments.
So I believe they already have
the ability to do this I I don't
know that we have to direct them
so I i'm
i'm i'm wing i'm weighing us
because I see that
soon enough we're going to be in
a position if we rely only on
wind and solar and the hope that
battery technology will get here
by the time our eta
may cause a sim issues with
other things here in new mexico
I I think we need to find a way
if there is there is a way to
clean some of the energy
traditional energy she sources
that we have now and continue to
use them I think it's proven for
us to do that I just don't know
that I think directing the as I
see to do it is the right way to
go thank you mister chair
thank you
for small
thank you very much mister chair
thank you representatives rato
thank you secretary thank you
mister
first mister great conversations
I really want to appreciate you
for your openness we've heard
really strong and adding
thoughtful dialogue both in
public comment and from my
colleagues and I really
appreciate it at second mister
chair reps and sorrado going
back to ripped him but I go and
other questions were not
changing sort of any of the core
feduciary rules by which the sic
makes their investments is that
correct
mr chair representative that is
correct and I think that's kind
of the crux of what we're coming
to is that
it is it's were balancing
something right here you know
and you put too many guard rails
on and if we run it to that
you're restricting this I see
too much and they won't be able
to get the returns that in
mexicans need but if you're not
you know if if you're not
thoughtful about how this
happens then you know maybe it's
an investment so that you don't
want you know the core of what I
think I can say for myself my
experts.
Is that we we know that new
mexico is doing exciting things
and investing and we want more
funds to look at new mexico and
that that should be considered
not the only thing with that to
be a thought while s I see is
making some so yes they're their
forduciry responsibility remains
there they're up most prior got
the thing mister chair thing or
some sorado so I i've run down
sort of all the rules that that
apply now will continue to apply
should we pass your legislation
i'm here and that that's the
case mister chair representative
I think in terms of a additional
guidance are you open as we go
through this process to sort of
look for ways that.
Um sort of take in many some of
the comments that we've heard
perhaps look in reference back
to already existing work within
the state that helps
differentiate
perhaps in just
understanding perhaps in statue
for instance on the electronics
this conversation
you know mature technology used
all over the world it's not
going to be a technology that
brings a whole lot of return.
Thank you mister chair thank you
representative you know
absolutely one of the one of the
commenters during the public
comment had mentioned the
strategic climate plan that are
as I see already has in place
arm just kind of generally
governing back in twenty twenty
we directed a number of agencies
and authorities everyone to
really consider renewable and
how we are doing that and so you
know I I was something else kind
of mentioning to my experts a
moment ago I I think they'd be
something would be open to
adding into the definition on
page two you know around twelve
thirteen fourteen adding that
they would have to consider or
I don't want to say consult with
the document I think that's kind
of a funny framing but somehow
it's it's essence you know up
appalling that they're their
guidelines that they laid out in
their strategic plan that they
miss your trailing represents so
set out though and I that that's
helpful to me I think it also
speaks to something I again
heard in public comment which is
there's been a great deal of
work in this and other areas
including and funding you know
the legislature over the past
several years and many different
ways has invested significantly
in climate resilience in energy
and zero cut loan zero carbon
energy renewable energy we
really worked hard and looked
for ways to that you're bringing
a new and innovative way here
i'm glad and I appreciate your
openness to sort of continuing
that work and finding even in a
short bill looking for ways to
reflect that third mister chair
represents that though
I I just wrap up
we
after this fiscal year all
excess oil and gas revenue above
this year's sort of faceline
direct rents and royalties it's
gonna go straight to this fund
the severance tax permanent fund
is that right
based on a statute we passed
last year that's what we've
committed to as a legislature.
Yeah I was just confirming that
yes representative chairman yes
great thing mister chair think
represents said out though
that's a really interesting
end large commitment the
legislature is as we continue
during this time of very high
production all excess
revenues from that production
after this current year that
were in or gonna go straight to
this fund we also were sent set
out though you agree that
obviously new mexico faces
pretty significant and some of
the most significant certainly
in the country risks from a
changing a rapidly changing
climate would you agree with
that thank you mister trade
thank you representative yes
okay that thing was terrible
representative so what I see the
bill on my i'll look forward to
supporting it today especially
with your commitment to keep
working we're making we have to
manage a really challenging time
we're saying all new revenue
from
production of oil and gas going
to the seven tax permanent fund
everything above the baseline
set this year you're bringing us
a chance to sort of say take a
very hard look at the
technologies that are
protecting us helping ensure
that we have a strong and
resilient state and in fact can
grow and diversify our state
economically
during this time of change and I
think that's a really positive
step I think it's one that we
can financially support mister
chair representative and again
you're openness to continue
working with folks your experts
and I think the majority then
we've brought in the state
government is very positive so
for all those reasons i'm happy
to support thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you mister chair thank you
representative serrator
secretary robert and mister
greenberg thank you
so as as I understand this that
the said investment counts all
currently has the ability to
make these investments and in
fact at believe he said eleven
percent in this type of private
equity funds is that correct.
Thank you mister chair thank you
representative so yes the in
private this is their private
equity program which is up to
eleven percent of the of the
separate
fund and yes so yes they can and
they can go into those in own to
climb attack they can really go
into whatever lane they want to
this just insurers that they're
giving some sort of
prioritization of that too
climate tech companies in new
mexico not sorry in funds that
invest in climate check
companies in mexico
thank you representative mister
chair representative if they
have the ability to do it now
why aren't they thank you mr
chair thank you representative
that is my favorite question
because new mexico is doing so
exciting things but when you
look at the start up landscape
and when you look at the
investment landscape we just
don't have a lot of capital in
our state and general and so we
have done a lot not just in
climate league across the board
on there's exciting things we're
doing an agent right there we
have a exciting ventures but
what happens is an investors
common and often times they'll
look at us but there's not
necessarily an ecosystem that
exists and so they'll go to
other more established
ecosystems of start ups or or
these kinds of companies so
they'll go back to california
they'll go to the good colorado
or utah and invest in those
companies instead of here and so
what this is trying to do is
make is essentially as the
secretary said forcing funds to
give a second look to new mexico
companies and that not only do
they looking at that but the and
peach two weeks we specify that
they have to have a permanent
office presents and dedicated
personal within new mexico that
language is very specific
because what happens also is
that if you're gaining funding
from venture capital out of
california and they say what
we'd really have prefer you in
the ecosystem and the silicon
valley
we lose companies all the time
and so instead would work asking
for a permanent office with
permanent staff that is here new
mexico that is that is grounding
what we're hoping to bring is a
strong ecosystem for for
businesses so that the reason
why that the.
That the long short of it is
that we're just not big enough
to be noticed by the people that
are putting money in there and
so when s I see is looking at
where they should be putting
money we're just not on the list
of of of who is being invested
in.
Thank you representative
mr chairman representative
but
as I understand it the state
industry council has the ability
to do that now.
So again I I
if they have the ability to do
it and they're not doing it
there must be some other reason
why
the
answer please okay I I never
want to overstep thinking mister
of chair and representative so
on societies like a parent and
their first obligation is to
keep their kid healthy and and
alive and everything like that
you know what you could cry
but sometimes they get a cry
because you're going to be a
good parent right like that's
kind of part of it so fsic's
first and foremost job and
keeping new mexico alive is is
making sure that they're that
what they're investing in is
getting returns to mexico that's
their first and foremost job and
entered one of the presenters
are talking about this is what
helps our securities this will
happen this is a certain
education I mean helps
everything on so they're doing
shared responsibility the
responsibility getting returned
to mexico's everything now what
the thing they have to also do
what would I like them to do is
you know to give us lolly pops
chances is to invest in new
mexico it really is because then
then in my mind they're their
dollars going further in that
sense but which tricky is
because we don't have that that
start up environment necessarily
and we don't have all the other
people investing in mexico
investments can be a little bit
a risk here in that sense so
they have to rely on foot funds
that are making investments that
may not even have looked at
mexico and how this would repair
that is that one sixteenth of a
fund maybe a new mexican company
they've suddenly got an
attention when they would have
never before and so that's this
is how we are able to kind of
address that getting some money
back into mexico without
creating additional risk for the
sic that can help
yes it does thank you
representative mister chair
representative because what it
sounds like to me and you used
to have to do shari duty and I
understand that the fiduciary
duty the
the fiduciaries roll.
Is to put the principles
goals and then and things like
that above its own
and so to me what it sounds like
you're doing is trying to lower
the fiduciary duty of the state
investment council would you
respond to that police thank you
mister chair think you
representative I would agree
with you if I mandated in this
bill that two percent had to go
to a fund that had some money in
new mexico then I could then I
think sic would hate this are
and they would they would not
talk to me anything more but
instead with this at request
that they prioritize our number
these these funds that have some
skin in new mexico right the
date that they care about that
so and again if that doesn't
work out if that plaratization
still doesn't make this an
attractive fund that it does
then there's no loss to to be
sic it's just since you're
looking at there's a fund that
has some skin in the mexico
here's whether doesn't their
equal one has a more skin
interest who want to get a
little for credits to if it's in
this you know in this round
okay thank you representative I
appreciate that that's all I
have mister ch.
Thank you represent him
any other members of the
committee before I ask the
questions
of them shorado
I have a few questions for
software we're talking about a
hundred ninety million dollars
is that right
thank you mr chair thank you
represent a thing it's a hundred
and s.
If I said.
The fire has it ninety.
Mr apologies that it might be a
fluctuating value but two
percent of two hundred eleven
percent rep.
Okay.
The.
And there's a trotto there there
was concerned about what this
had been best
including
had you
current captures strategic water
supply
in your opinion is this like
language brought enough to make
those investment thank you
mister this language in the
bills it sands would allow for
the sac to invest in funds that
may invest in those in those
technologies as well
okay in reserve a more concerned
about the the structure.
Um
it says yeah I heard it's a
target I heard were prioritising
but they actually says at least
which is a floor and I know
there's language in there that
says it's a less beautiful
investment
but I think those two statements
are the other some tension
between those two statements
you have started mandating a
minimum
but giving him it out you know I
I think there could be pressure
to.
Yeah making investment that
maybe not maybe went otherwise
rise to the top in order to meet
that that floor give me thoughts
about that.
Mister chair would like to
point you to the the again sort
of like I think coastal ventures
is a great example they've been
in business for about fifty
sixty years now one of the most
historical venture capital funds
are who recently already
received stay investment council
money they have many verticals
but with billions of dollars of
assets under management they
have many verticals that they
invest in one of those climate
technology so this is an overly
restrictive in the sense that
the s I c can find funds who as
climate technology as one of the
verticals it but not necessarily
exclusively as a vertical.
Mister trouser is what it kind
of complete the looking at the
language itself may help so
sectionate your right says that
at least two percent of market
value shall shall go to this arm
should be invested in climate
tech but the next section says
the state investment officer
shall make investments pursuant
to the section only if the risk
of loss is commissioner is is
commissioner it with expected
returns so essentially they'll
only do the only duse or a if
they if it were if it if it's
with the line of the expected
returns are getting otherwise
okay and that's the sort of my
question that I I think those
two statements are there's
tension between those who
statements that you have mandate
met meet the school but so got
be a good investment that second
part
and my concern is that in their
effort to meet the goal.
The second part.
Doesn't get the credence it
deserves
thank you mr cherry you know
if you're suggesting that this
is an ad
strong enough bill on that I I
would kind of agree this is a
soft encouragement for my
perspective from my perspective
to encourage them to investigate
attack in new mexico
that is that's what I see yes if
that's what you're asking
okay
so under the language of the
bill it's
it seems to me that you could
invest in these climate checks
start ups that have no
connection to mexico
is is that the first time it
think you mister chair they
already are able to yes it but
in that section too where it
talks about the portfolio
company has to have some
presents in new mexico that
would keep it so residents
rather that's not actually a
requirement it's those companies
that have a present to get
priority so if they don't have a
presidence
that doesn't mean this build
doesn't say there's a lot
negatives in there the spill
still mandates two percent
and if
there aren't companies have
present in new mexico it still
applies
those companies our priorities
because they know of this
so you so you could still hit
that
two percent floor by investing
in companies that have no
present in the mexican.
Thinking mister I believe the
service kind of conferring on
what you're saying I I believe
we are saying is right mister
chair that we are encouraging
them to invest in climate tech
and specifically that when
they're the portfolio company
that brings a presence or hazard
presence in new mexico arm
they're already able to invest
in any climate check out as it
stands they can however they
want their private equities this
just really does encourage that
protestation of of those who
have a company that exists in
mexico.
Yeah.
Resist
are are there other funds that
could do this other in mexico
programs funding part of money
they could do this think mister
chair I think that's a fantastic
question so some of the reading
that i've really been doing
around this and some of the
thinking i'm i'm happy to turn
it over to anyone and
even talking my brother about
how sees work you know sorry
that is matter in conversations
are what I found is that.
Government incentives like the
inflation reduction active you
know the encouraging animal fa
to invest in venture capital all
of those are government senators
right any any tax credits we
give out those government
centers to push an help
encourage the the beginning of
an industry but at the end of
the day you would other
investors also look at is what
what's being invested in and
what's actually growing or
organically it it needly right
like they want to see that the
private market the capitalism as
it is supports these these other
endeavors so we do have things
that are you know within our
guidelines in our perview with
our state money and our tax
credits that do encourage this
type of technology but those
companies in new mexico are
never going to get off the
ground truly unless they were
private investors and and others
that are that are encouraging
that growth as well and sic is
is a private investor from that.
Here's a strategy
we we put a lot of money towards
this type of actively in recent
years so
I am I am concerned that we're
you're marking another hundred
and eighty million dollars for
it.
One unless question
it takes about investing in.
And I know.
Yeah research and development is
kind of a freeze are indeed but.
Are there investments at the
research stage.
Mr share.
That the funds the funds that
that the sices investigated part
of their portfolio could be in
research.
Most likely it is not
usually research is is funded
through other resources that
aren't part of the bench of the
world that doesn't mean it
couldn't happen
but it would be doubtful that
eventual planned is investing
specifically and reason.
Okay
so and security ripper.
And so is the word research in
there
just because it's part of that
phrase research and development
mister chair so there's there's
a wide scope of venture capital
funds that receive investment
from the state investment
account council already those
include so usually that the the
sequence of staging for a
company looking for investment
starts with precede which may be
of research and development
project that's just like a
concept of an idea versus a seed
state investment which may be
you're ready for angel
investment to develop a
prototyper proof of concept
versus a serious a investment
that is now i'm ready to start
acquiring customers and and
start breaching the market to
the growth stages bc and de
where now i'm scaling and
deploying out a wide scale also
there's venture capital funds
that you as their competitive
advantage to to invest in any
one of those stages so currently
if if the size you were to
prioritize a precedent
investment fund then yes it
could be research and
development that's nothing more
than an idea in the engineer's
mind of versus serious day
investment which is the
overwhelming majority of veteran
capital funds are are normally a
serious investors ah we're now
ready for customer acquisition
there's already proof of concept
we've already had of round from
angels or friends families our
friends and family and now it's
ready for sort of wide market
adoption.
This.
Thanks for that represent
throttle any closing thoughts
before her with
we are retain the motion thank
you mister chair thank you
thank you mister chair thank you
committee for all the
conversation in discussion you
know I I do want to just kind of
go back to these ideas that are
with this fund we are just
encouraging a behaviour that we
that we've been investing in as
a state and so I think that we
will you know looking at how
this is growing I think at the
beginning I mention that you
know we're in order to dress the
climate challenges that we have
as a world when he most
countries that have a lot of
money to have a hundred billion
dollars investing and that's
happening that's rolling as we
speak so we want to see new
mexico addressed this in this
way it's kind of the best way to
get like I said double bang for
the buck but i'll stop there
things that you think before
solid
okay thank you reserves for
other sector router and mister
greenberg was pleasure the
mister chair I would move to
pass second
we have a motion for a dupassing
second.
Victoria could you take the.
Yes mister chair.
The.
Representative
representative dickson yes
representative yeah
representative him be no
representative montoya.
Representative rubio no.
Representative scott no.
Representative small
representative townsend.
Matter by share that any anna
message her member queen
okay that motion feels.
Motion to table mister chair.
Yes mr chair.
Representative but I go yes
representative dixon.
No
representative gracia
representative henry yes
representative monthly.
Representative rubio.
Representative scott
yes
representative small.
Representative townsend.
Made it by chester and yanna
mister chairman mcqueen yes.
So your bills.
Much determined
i'm curious as to why we tabled
this bill.
Erms into the impression when
motion failed that that
question.
The.
Residents got I don't believe
that's the case I believe the
motion bills the motion fails
and bills stone from the
committee and that's why I don't
just in front of the committee
is now been tabled.
So the motion that fails is not
this positive of the bill and
from us that motion simply
failed
so the bill would have still
been before the committee now
the bill has been tailed
mister chairman appreciate that
explanation I have to go back to
my masons and do some search
guide if you find a different
answer please let me know mister
chair
also in that I I believe that
any bill it's on a table can be
brought off the table by a vote
I don't I don't know that it
makes any difference with them
until you that's correct I don't
think that's why the little
stable though if the motion if
the bills on friend the
committee it can be reconsidered
and anytime as well so the fact
that the regional department
should failed
doesn't spell the demise at the
bill it just means the motion
has filled mr chairman I believe
that the bill can be
reconsidered that's correct
still
taking it just.
The.
Tidy to th.
This.
We are by the way she is from
floor.
We have the excuse from the
four.
Okay next we have house memorial
forty two mething the mission
task force or serve scanty
whenever you're ready thank you
mister chairman and members I
recognize there time frame that
were operating under so i'm
going to briefly summarise the
memorial I do have an amendment
and i'll introduce my expert
witness
so at mrperiod chairman and
members this memorial seeks to
set up a working group and the
charge of the working group is
to evaluate the potential supply
requirements for responsibility
source gas or certified low
emissions natural gas
this is part of driving forward
toward a renewable energy future
and
the intention of this is to
bring for bring together awful
set of while working group of
experts and stakeholders aren't
that would represent the whole
spectrum of folks that are
concerned about this issue to
develop proposals for rules and
legislative recommendations to
reduce my then emissions
relating to the production
transportation and marketing of
natural gas specifically natural
gas purchase by new mexico's
regulated utilities so this
memorial is focused on
you tonighty scale natural gas
and I don't have to tell the
committee too much I think about
the impact that matthew had
one
in its contribution to green
house gas emissions
the intention is to structure
this group as a bride
set of advisors to bring forward
these recommendations I do have
an amendment.
Um and i'd like to introduce my
expert here gerald was seeing
who's the vice president of
external affairs for the new
mexico gas company mr chair came
with the amendment for
discussion
please
so we've moved their moment for
discussion or this community
would like to explain the
moment.
Yes mr chairman and members the
amendment number is two two
eight one nine three point one
and the immensious reflects a
couple things wine reflects the
start time for this working
group to meet
moving it for word to
august rather than april just
knowing that there's always a
lot of.
Eh quick work that the agencies
have to do after the session
just wanted to make sure that
that time for him was reasonable
secondly mr chairman you are as
well as a various colleagues
have brought up the fact that
the intention for these working
groups should be that they be as
all benefits parent as possible
so it is adding language to
request that the
working group comply with the
open meetings act.
It's very discussion on the
amendment
I know it's go back to the
public on the bill but me we
could take care of the amendment
first.
Move adoption of the moment.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment
okay so we've amended the
memorial
ever since get anything further
before we go to the audience
yeah mister chairman.
Okay
we do
ninety seconds in this committee
i'm talking to my ice tea like
it's microphone it's not.
Is everyone who would like to
speak in opposition to this
more.
The.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition to
this memorial please reassurance
is there anyone in the committee
room who would like to speak in
support of this memorial okay so
her spanish if you make sure
that's turned off and then move
it to the middle.
And then turn it back on if you
could come up in
speak brickly no more than
ninety seconds please
good morning mr chairman
representatives members of the
committee very briefly more
supernard and serious clever
grand a chapter we support this
memorial and study and work
group new mexico has passed
nation leading zone rules at the
eid and methane rules at the ocd
that's out of floor for the
recently finalized epa method it
would be helpful to understand
what further steps downstream or
and use practices that can make
utility gas use safer for the
climate and customers one
recommendation would be to
require inclusion of the
in the working group to be led
by me d because the topic
directly involves and affects
matters within the exclusive
jerks excuse me
and control of the.
Thank you next.
The.
Good morning mr chairman members
for sanchez on the executive
director of government and
public affairs at a piano and as
you know pm is the largest
investor undertility and the
state we have approximately five
hundred and thirty thousand
customers we substantial support
of this memorial as it is a
reasonable and wealth add out
approach to identifying pote.
To further address the energy
transition in particular the
saving of paragraph of this
memorial that is most meaningful
for p and m and it's commitment
to climate solutions on the
energy transit transition is
that h three lines seventeen
through twenty one which talks
about developing proposals to
encourage new mexico's regulated
utilities to purchase fuels with
the lowest possible amount of
associated method missions
we believe support this this
approach to encouraging the
utilities to do so
we they response are for her
leadership and bringing this
memorial and we and we ask that
you respectfully ask that you
vote
yes
thank you next.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you my name's
decent bush i'm relations
director at the.
The memorial forward I just
wanted to flag that we are doing
some very active research in
this area specifically in the
areas of method detection
developing low cost mething
sensors that can be connected to
smart grade technology
throughout the state we're also
working with some private sector
partners on this so just wanted
to offer our resources hopefully
we can engage the conversation
further but thanks for us.
The.
Anyone else in support
is there anyone online who would
like to speak in sport
okay
seeing them
asking anything further before
we go to the committee no mister
chairman thank you thank you for
stepped we have replacement
scott.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
representative and
sure expert
I have with me charles was sign
whose vice president of external
affairs for the new mexico gas
company
thank you for that answer I
would feel
much more comfortable
voting for this
if we haven't spent the last
year
a particularly with respect to
upstream operations with methane
reduction regulations on
precaution
regulations that had a very wide
arranging
uh
stay called
so
mister chairman representative
expert to
could you describe why there is
a belief that we need.
The brief isn't these issues
that we have already addressed
just recently
mr chairman and members I I can
start and then would love mister
was seeing to add that I think
part of the interest in
convening this working group
would be as one of the public
commenters mentioned the
inclusion of the prc for the
specific specifically to look at
the utility scale at natural gas
but I I will ask mister was
seeing too also chairman
mr chairman representative one
of the reasons we support this
working group is because we are
a regulated utility our
obligation is to purchase
purchase lowest cost gas and
there may be a premium attached
a small premium probably pennies
of her to certified lower
mission gas in the early days
and so if we establish some
guard rails about if there is a
premium what's acceptable and
how much
then the utilities can come
forward and provide and and
provide new mexico producers who
are already reading a meeting
very stringent targets a market
for that gas in new mexico as a.
In this chairman equipment is is
not true that
these downstream operations also
involve compressions
in
pipeline distribution systems
that have not yet instead.
Mr chairman representative
were subject to regulation but
they have not been part of a
prior work on methane emissions
reduction so mr chairman of
I would be
much more likely to be
these methano mission.
Studies.
We're limited to those areas of
the natural gas transmission
just tribution system that have
not yet
been study
because it looks to me like
you were trying to bark up the
same tree and territory that's
been covered
quite extensively here in just
here is it
is it
intention of this
to develop
cost estimates for compliance on
the upstream side that will be
that will be
translated into customer.
As a consequence of.
All of the recent regulation.
Mister chairman representative
the focus of this is on
regulated utility purchases of
natural gas not on on upstream
production that sort that's been
dealt with so two year two year
concern this isn't about
additional work on methane
emissions up street in several
states where
certified lower mission gas or
responsibly source gas is being
used and is mandated a tennessee
virginia for example at one of
the concerns was about the cost
of customers and as we've looked
at their so I think they the
idea of having a working group
is that if there is legislation
required or at this direction to
the p r c this working group
will be able to provide
legislators and our regulators
with certainty about what I
certified low mission gas
purchase program would look like
and if if we are moving forward
with it we'd have we have
evidence about consequences or
not in this chairman put his
definition of certified lines.
The mister chairman represented
typical definition of certified
low mission gas would be
production that is monitored
where you can you can prove that
a standards are being met and we
already have that in place in
new mexico so that's not a big
step up but again this working
group I think can set out some
of the definition of about what
new mexico once once to define
certified.
So mr chairman we don't know
what the definition today of
certified
yes
mr chairman and representative
scott that would be part of what
the working group would say
and recommend.
Mission representative would you
consider
an amendment to this pill
it would eliminate all
references
to upstream production
that has already been addressed.
A mister chairman representative
I think a a reference to
upstream production is important
in in the acknowledgement that
producers in new mexico or
already reading meeting very
stringent standards and as a
result of that
you want to have the utilities
in new mexico consider
purchasing that gas versus gas
that may not be produced in new
mexico and may not be subject to
those standards for use to serve
new mexico customers
and if I might add mister
chairman and representative
I think we want to make sure
that those day colders are at
the table or so so I would be
concerned if we deleted them
that then they would no longer
be part of the discussion.
Okay mister chairman
representative i'm still
confused
as to the objective here I mean
your
forgoing a limit the mexico
consumers to the purchase of new
mexico gas
view that is being
very problematic
could you elaborate a little bit
on the ultimate objective of the
work sturdy group.
Mister chairman representative
perhaps it would help if I if I
talk just for a moment about
about how new mexico gas which
is as gas for its customers.
About two thirds of the gas that
we purchased for customers comes
from the san one basin.
A the other third
comes from the premium based
gases of passed through
we don't mark that up what we
pay for gas on behalf of our
customer.
We are obliged by the public
regulation commission to
purchase the lowest price gas in
all instances and that includes
whether it whether it's from new
mexico or outside of new extra
there's no there's no.
Given the fact that new mexico
producers are **** or subject to
and her meeting stringent
conditions or or or regulations
about the production of gas we
think it's a reasonable thing to
have a conversation about making
sure that that gas is used in
new mexico and when it when what
other comment from a new mexico
gas perspective if we know the
gas is produced with the lowest
carbon footprint gas in new
mexico is if it's transported on
a system that is well maintained
and and kept up to date which is
our system and it's used in new
mexico homes by new mexicans who
have access to high efficient
appliances the carbon footprint
of that natural gases as low as
as low as it can be so the
certified low emissions gaster
that the
the confirmation that the gas
that were delivering to our
customers has been through some
kind of a process which already
exists helps us to be
comfortable that that's.
Okay i'm missed chairman
representative which leads me
back to the question.
Yeah we're already acknowledged
upstream producers are doing
everything that's
promited with recent regulations
why is this not an issue
between
the distribution of marketing
folks
and
irregulatory.
Mr chairman representative out
the p r c would want some
certainty if there was an
additional cost and we don't
know that there will be
that there had been some
some direction legislatively or
some framework around the
parameters of that because right
now they're in economic
regulator their direction to us.
It would be to change of some
kind of pay up if if responsibly
source gas.
We don't know that in other
states that has actually been a
discount to gas it's not
certified
the the regulator would require
probably wouldn't agree to that
unless there been some kind of a
process like this where to.
So mister chairman
representative which you agree
that a prc
should have all of the
information with respect to
upstream operations readily
they should already have the
data accurate chairman and
representative I would use this
is an opportunity to have more
stay colders at the table for
this kind of large policy
conversation for utilities and
new max co and the way that they
are handling natural gas so I
don't think it mister chairman
and in representative I would
view this as a way to brought in
the table so that when we have
these conversations around how
the responsibly stores gas what
that definition is how it should
be treated what the value of
that is due for state into the
customers a working group like
this allows what typically would
be it within a strict regulatory
process to now have a more
organized way to bring everyone
together including the upstream
producers including the utility
and including a lot of state
holders who are concerned about
the impact of matthew
within the state as well so it
it's just a way to bring more
folks to that table
so mister chairman
representative would one of the
objectives of this work group
better determine whether
a gas
process with these
what was the turn.
What is the term for the clean
gas sort of fight
with one of the
objectives of this work group be
to determine that the
increase caused of compliance
with the upstream regulations
plus any regulations that might
be come and on the downscreen
side
that would certified yes
it is would one of the objective
speed to determine the value of
the compliance of all of with
all of those new regulations to
the new mexico consumer
mr chairman and represent if
scott yes I I believe so and and
I believe that it would also
because it would be discussed in
a policy environment rather than
a straight regulatory
environment it might encourage
some innovative thinking around
how we had dressed out value.
In mr chairman representative so
i'm not hearing it admission
that this regulatory
requirements
have the potential to hit
christmas course to guess.
Mister chairman representative
the the answer is yes but the
study group will help us
determine that in some states
were certified lower mission
gases are reality the cost is
lower but I think for certainty
especially for a regulated
business having the benefit of
the work of this committee
provides that provides more
certainty than we have now
rather than saying what we think
the experience in another state
has been this and therefore it
will be a new mexico the salaza
step tak.
Thank you mischairman thank you
for your attractive look forward
to risk
thinking of ten scotters and
curse here
thank you as the model german I
just have one question for the
representative.
Up in terms of
the group
or criteria is the secretary
using to select the group and.
Our consumer groups are of it.
Mister chairman and
representative of other weight
tonight in the memorial as the
sponsor of the memorial I would
certainly
be requesting to the department
that that consumer groups and
other state holder groups be
included the public
you know the end user of the
natural gas should be at the
table
so mister chair reps and go
sorry you're gonna know
contribute.
Suggestions to the secretary in
terms of what
parties are individual should be
part of the working group yes mr
chairman and representative yes
I do plan to and i'd be happy to
take any suggestions that you
would have forward also thank
you mister chair thank you.
Rips in gracious.
Yes thank you mission.
Most natural gas pipe minds b.
It has.
It is a soul provider to meet
you places for example
I think you buy
and you can correct me if i'm
wrong but
you guys it gates wahar
something somewhere in the
permit in the end
one.
And those voucher ball.
Allow you know opportunity or
anyone in the opportunity to
segregate from what may be
certified or not certified.
Mister chair representative the
the hub set the price we have
contractual arrangements with
individual producers and were we
too put a requirement in our rfp
for gas that the gas be
certified or it as certain
portion be certified we first of
all would be able to make that
request and second of all we.
And representative.
I appreciate that and I I
have quite a bit of experience
on this.
The.
Could or I could anyone that
purchasing could have an ip for
certified.
And that just means that that
quantity of gas that I get off
of the main off.
Would be a volume that is
certified accordingly
but it really hasn't I mean you
don't really know where they
came from a well that or
a production platform that was
certified it was just of the
same planet as that correct
mr chairman representative it is
but the valid it
then the it's credited against
the overall volume of gas we buy
so that she tributed to new
mexico gaster new mexico gas
customers that much the same way
until the the electric grid is a
hundred percent renewable the
same thing about electrons right
molicules electron same thing so
it is you're correct but you can
attribute the production out a
specific facility that is
producing certified gas to the
end use customer through the boy
with gas moved on the overall
system.
I appreciate that chairman.
Natural gas utilities.
There are
at least three investor own
utilities there is a municipal
large municipal utility and
there's also some smaller
uh utilities new mexico gases
largest
appreciate that and
my memory is right
chairman.
Returns here.
Thank you.
Mister chairman representative
expert have those utilities
other you told his bit involved
in this process and are they.
A mister chairman representative
I have had some conversation
with representatives of other
utilities but not speci.
And mister chairman and
representative
I think i.
What we're really doing is
where allowing the utilities of
the mexico to the buying
a classification of gas
that could be then defined with
them a right rider that allowed
you to
allow a utility not you just
allowed a utility to
authenticate their rates based
upon a classification that may
or may not be the cheapest gas
but it'd be the cheapest class
cation of gas is that is that
great
mr chairman representative yes
and for their if you could put
some parameters around if there
were if there were additional
costs you could put guard reals
around what that would.
Or premium paid you could you
could actually.
If
if there was a.
And miss chairman and
representative expert do you.
Do you believe that.
There is a realistic opportunity
that yes new classification
might be more economical for the
consumer.
A mister chairman representative
the experience and a number of
other states has been that
certified lower mission gas is
cheaper than guests that's not
certified
not in every circumstance in its
it's relatively early days as
well but about a third of total
natural gas production in the US
is already certified.
And so that it's
in my mind it's an industry
trend and something that the
study group will help us get our
arms around so that were it at
peace with that change
in chairman and representative
and I apologize get your first
name your last name was seen
I appreciate that is it
is it
would it be real listed sir.
A
issue like fourth day house
memorial forty two
with it would it be.
In the consumer's best interest
to task this working group
with that fundamental priority
is to define a cheaper source of
natural gas not another source
of natural get.
Mr chairman and and
representative I believe that
that that is the task is to
understand.
The climate on the cost to
understand the options and but
in the guard rails to ensure
that there's consumer protection
in miss chairman representative
I appreciate that and that is my
concern and it you've heard me
preach on this before
so
you know we we passed a bill the
other day HB forty one.
That I don't think does that and
I think everywhere it has been
introduced there's match.
Match car.
What we're doing is going to
increase the price to the end
consumer so my.
Thought would be that important
to do this.
Set this in place where we are
telling that work group
that they're supposed to
identify not only a cleaner
source but a cheaper source.
And is that in an amendment.
See as friendly.
Mister mister chairman a
representative I mean III
appreciate your point very much
I did view that is being
included where it says developed
proposals for rules rate
recovery mechanisms legislative
recommendations because
inevitably
the cost.
Consequences of those decisions
will have to be considered
I didn't view this as
subverting cast considerations
to other considerations
particularly
yeah there's there are some
discussion in the language of
the surround cost effectiveness
so I I wasn't viewing it as
placing the priority on one.
Representative can you dread m.
Page.
Speaks to protecting the cons.
Mr chairman what I do the
representative towns in mr web I
was looking at page three line
seventeen through twenty one it
doesn't specifically say those
words however
I would assume that that would
be part of
any
discussion of a legislative
recommendation I mean mister
chairman and and mrperiod web
downsaid if you added
suggestions
yet and and mrperiod was service
suggesting including any cost
implications for consumers as a
possible language inclusion
which that would be.
That would be a friendly
amendment.
Mister chair with that being
made if you will give me.
With the proposal i'll go sit in
the corner in fa.
Goes intensity of recent brigo
next so
you're a couple minutes.
There's a brief actually mr
chairman and members might
comments will be very brief and
madam whip
I am that you're speaking right
up my alley because you know I
planners so studies or very
important to me especially and
justification for policy and
good policy
and so without question
they don't see anywhere and and
this is one of the issues mister
chair that I really tell them
you need to turn off your mike
or
my river reverberating
apologizer please continue
so one of the questions that I
always have and.
I don't know it's good or bad
but I think it's good is that
as a result of these task forces
and committees that we go back
and you know do more research on
I don't always see a document
coming back to us with
information about what
transpired during that time
that an issue has been studied
so I would like to get some sort
of a commitment and i'm gonna be
asking us.
Um probably moving forward as we
go through
you know our legislative
sessions that some sort of
document come back to us and I
would just like to have a
commitment for that madam chair
doesn't say anything in the
legislation
and I if you wanted to add that
that would be a great hopefully
that would be a friendly
amendment but.
Mister chair and
representative
in your your guest having some
sort of document that gives a
third of a summary of what
transpired maybe what what the
agreements that were reached and
maybe what was not
you know agreements that were
not reached or not
you know
I mean
how do I say this mister chair.
What was the greet upon and what
was agreed upon that was not a
you know everyone's commitment
so that would be one thing that
I would ask if and then the
second thing is that all
stakeholder parties are part of
the task force
there's a couple of bills mister
chair that come before us or
that were contemplating right
now that people have said to me
while we weren't part of that
that group that we weren't part
of that group so as much as
possible mister chair that the
in that doesn't have to be in
the in the legislation but at
least that we have some
agreement on the record that
i'll stakeholders as much as
possible are part of this town.
Thank you chairman and
representati.
Sure thank you yes and mister
chairman and representative that
actually goes to the heart of
why we adapted the amendment to
it for the open meetings act so
that not only
would there be documentation
that documentation could also be
produced by a tend years of
these meetings at the meetings
as well we will have the report
to the relevant interim
committees and all certainly
encourage them to provide a
written report and I certainly
again want a broad set of state
holders at the table that I
really appreciate you.
And thank you mister chairman
and representative I think
sometimes we get the minutes of
those task force meetings but
there's not really a true study
or summary that comes out of it
so I very much appreciate.
Thank you represent brigo.
Reserve a
thinking mister unless you had
questions
when I recently
happy to get you can ask some
questions
mr chair and representative
is there a premium for
certified.
Natural gas that's low emissions
I I apologize that I have
forgot.
And mr chair representative
the short hence or is it depends
in some states for this has been
implemented there has been a
premium typically about a penny
of them.
So
the average new mexico home in
the winter uses about a hundred.
But in some states where they've
implemented a certified low
mission ga.
Thank you thank you mister
chair.
I
don't actually have the bill in
front of me or the memorial
sorry I have the agency analysis
and so could you remind me who
is on this proposed to be on the
test course.
Mr chairman and I representative
dickson am it so the the task
was will be convened by an
immediate and it is
a defined as a working group of
state experts and stay called or
so it is bride.
Thank you mister chair thank you
representative I really
appreciate having the experts as
well as other stay colders but
one of the things that.
I find happens with the
structure we have with the
legislature is that during the
session some of these issues
policy issues and concerns come
up
and it's really difficult to
convene the people who have
expertise in various areas that
can inform an issue and so I
appreciate uhm.
That task forces allow for.
People to have input
where it can really make a
difference and I certainly
mister chairman representative
with second
representative breakers comment
about the report and having that
accessible and I do appreciate
the addition of the open
meeting.
To be a part of the conversation
at least i'm listening and then
relay their concerns back
so I appreciate you bringing the
memorial thank you so much.
Thank you representation.
Go back to you towns or do we
have any other questions
reps and towns in are you ready
mister chairman representative
will will soon find out
this is very.
Here's what I w.
That we strike line nine through
six.
On page.
This.
And online on page three line
nineteen after the word with all
we answered the family barbage
continue to require all
utilities to deliver the lowest
price natural gas to its
consumers and.
Strike incourage
and replace it with frequently
the mexico regulated utilities
to purchase your with the lowest
possible amount of associat.
I think those two are inconflict
so I I think you answered
require.
After will you insert continue
require all utilities delivered
the lowest price natural gas to
its consumers period
and strengthen balance of that.
The purpose is to protect the
consumers
that's my purpose and you know.
So intense at home come back to
you to clarify that language but
is that the motion
he missed out that is a second.
Okay so either with the merchant
in the second for the amendment.
Towns and exercising the program
with the chair I ask you a
question okay the first
streaking wines nine through
sixteen.
We're striking the language that
convenes the working group.
Which would seem to be to be
necessary for the memori.
Chairman I thought based on the
comments of committee members
got
he pointed out that those
efforts
had been addressed
previously within the industry
so I understand that I
understand that issue that's.
On the flight so quickly
so
reps and ski I think we need to
we're going to need to repeat
the amendment and maybe possible
a bit but
can you tell us whether this is
a friendly amendment or you
still think in the month
mr chairman in.
Mister with towns and eight
it is
I I agree with your intent i'm
not sure thee
exact amendment that you just
described
is something I don't
I will be concerned about
striking.
Um I wonder if an alternative we
could insert.
The.
Continue the mission of new
mexico gas to
reach the lowest cast.
I think that's that is not an
issue with the striking of them
the working group I think
then takes away the purpose of
the memorial went thing I would
offer just and sorry to go so
long mister chairman one thing I
would offer is
you know i'd be happy to work
off line with you
on something
that would be a little more
targeted I i.
Thank you.
Thank you for th.
If this bill proceeds.
So
person tons in nurses can ask
you what i'm hearing is
we have so we have a motion on
the floor we might need to
withdraw that i'll be happy to
understand so that's withdrawn
and
will take a vote on the world as
it's currently drafted such as
the minute that where we put on
it.
And her sisters came rips in
towns and prior to the memorial
being heard on the floor will
tried to come to an agreement
regarding the language for a
house floor subsidy that that's
that so mister chair would be
proper to move a
due pass with no recommendation
don't want to give the wrong
impression
I think that's a proper motion
i'm not sure if there were no
wrecked a memorial
mister
resents for mr chair I I
appreciate conversation I think
maybe a motion for a due pass
i'll be happy to make that I
would not thought that under I
think our policy is sort of
hearing memorials that have
unanimous agreements so the only
way that this moves forward on
the floor is if the there's
collaboration.
Rips and smaller I think that is
a
actually accurate statement that
III don't think this will be
brought up on the floor if
if the parties don't work out to
create it I could be wrong yeah
I don't control that but that
would be my expectation
represent brego mister chair
we're meeting on saturday
reps
if you know that that would be
news to me I mean I I don't know
I haven't been told on where
we this committee
so unless you're bibly coffee
and starbucks resident services
that discussion okay let's wrap
this up before we go there
represent henry thank you mister
chair i'm just sort of confused
about this processes fairly new
to me because as as I understand
what
representative small was saying
was that for the memorial to be
make it to the floor we need a
unanimous is that is okay i'm
sorry I I didn't
reserve as a simple majority
vote to advance the memorial
my expectation is the memorial
wouldn't be brought up on the
floor and again I don't control
I don't make this decision if
there if it was controversial
in the past
your new in in the past
we have done some concentrators
so memorials that had received
them a support your five or six
you put on it I can send both we
vote them all at once as a way
of adopting the memorial without
tying up the floor so if if this
was
if the this is a spoiled
forwarder which I suspect it
would be it's probably that they
probably would not be put on
that consent calder which
requires the agreement of
leadership from all sides
so I think that's what we're
talking about.
Thank you for that exploit okay
mister chair so so we have
we have an amended memorial or
some towns it withdrew his
follow up amendment resident
small would you like to make a
department motion mrperiod
chairman of a house on the house
memorial forty two
okay seventeen eighty that you
have is there any further
discussion per taking effort.
Okay
take the
yes metal chair.
Representative.
Yes with the understanding that
the two parties will meet and
meant.
Representative dickson.
Yes ma'am
yeah
representative.
Yes with the understanding of it
will work together to amend
president of mansfire.
Represented everybody else yes
representative scott no
representative small yes same
understanding
representative town send.
Um representatives the the vocal
pass it's currently sixty two.
Madam
madam yama
and mr chairman mcqueen yes.
Seventy three so.
Some three with interested
conditions thank you to
represent a burgers point I
don't know for a meeting it
always report that I don't think
we're probably that meeting
saturday we would expect that we
meet tuesday
but I don't know if we do meet
tuesday were likely going to
start earlier
just because yeah I did when we
set this meeting at a thirty did
not know the speaker with set
the floor session that ten that
