Applications in this this money
is available to them and then
they may put in an application
so that DOT can accept a bid on
service and that's usually how
that works that's great thank
you so much.
Appreciate that.
Anybody else.
Harper.
Thank you madam chair just a two
quick questions I remember when
we put this fun together and it
was a great idea we had several
carriers expressed support and
I'm just trying to remember how
much did we seed this fund was
and how long did that last.
Thank you Representative Harper
I believe we started with five
million.
And it lasted a little less than
a year and then we asked for
another I believe five to seven
million that lasted a little
longer and now we're going the
distance and we're asking for
ten point five.
Thank you madam chair that
that's super helpful so we're
hoping this'll last for maybe
about two years issue based off
of prior history.
Well Representative there's
actually another bill bring in
the Senate that gives up to a
hundred million dollars for this
type of
will air enhancement so we'll
see where we end up in the
budgeting process when you know
that the Senate and the house
appropriators and and government
governor's office needs but this
fund is here to stay I'm a
little biased but I think it's
exactly it's working exactly the
way it was designed to and it is
something that we should
continue to support an Indian
and any number possible the
budget would allow.
Thank you madam chair.
Sorry my what I'm sorry
legislature.
Question.
Yes yes Representative groups
of.
You know the committee members
just stop wishin you know these
are us and you'll come in or on
a really good for economic
crimes in the state of New
Mexico I think this is the end
of trying to get funded for
this.
And we all of the unit the
committee is real economic
driver if you will be able to
fly in drive in some of these
places that the manager.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia anybody
else.
Yeah.
On motion Mr chair I move into
the house on house bill three
zero three.
Thank you any opposition.
Okay great my bill putting on
deep detail is done for the day
which is a good thing
we gonna call.
Next is
Representative Lord in the
audience.
The madam chair I think
Representative L. Martinez is
here.
Okay Representative Martinez you
come the.
Welcome to our committee.
Madam chair thank you members of
the.
Representative I'm sorry I
mistook I miss something very
important but I wanted to
mention during this portion of
the meeting but I today is our
committee secretary Haley Fortin
father's birthday his show so
watches everyday.
Everybody can say hi to Joe
birthday that would be great.
Thank okay representative here
on a very Happy Birthday to Joe.
madam chair members of the
committee today I.
Bring before your committee
house bill three four.
All of us.
This poem G. the school.
Close to forty mins chapter
sixty six of a motor vehicle.
To allow for some of subsection
B..
The provides other vehicle may
not be driven in the furthest
left lane.
I weigh this less than ten miles
questions we look.
For me is two fold.
What we see we see a rise in
cases of road rage and anybody
that drives between Albuquerque
and Santa Fe you see the cost
of.
People getting a for left lane
driving lower posted speed limit
somebody coming up behind them
tailgating honking flashing
lights.
The other thing is I feel it's a
public safety issue because we
have
police officers first responders
trying to navigate it's hard to
navigate because people are
pulling.
The shoulder and let these
emergency vehicles go.
And when you have somebody
driving slow in the left lane it
just makes it more because
there's a long line of traffic
this out first responder has to
fight.
so with that madam chair members
of the committee I staff
request.
Thank you very much
Representative as there anybody
in the audience to support this
bill.
Mr Baxter's chairman John Merrow
on the other operations division
director I support this bill I
agree that
slower vehicles in action is an
issue it is known that speak
differential is a known cause of
accidents and
causes of usual specific things
that we tell you things that
generally speaking so I do
support thank you.
Anyone else.
Is there anybody and and
opposition of the spell on the
audience.
Okay let's go to committee
members committee members
questions.
Sure.
Representative Garcia of the
general really questions you
know I've worked on in state
forty of most of my career.
Only.
Would you know what what you
really need and madam chair you
see if you think about
coming in Santa Fe get
interstate forty cause us dollar
relatively so what do you see a
statewide are doing they're
pairing up to each other.
Going to only thirty miles an
hour and not let anybody go
through especially when you're
coming up to constructions all
madam chair their profile before
the construction and and back it
up miles and miles and miles in
that happen pretty often.
We've been having a lot of the
Televisa of interstate forty in
the Representative Gallup area
of eighty.
To the fact that the semi
driver.
Collecting all of this is a good
piece of legislation maybe
it'll.
Keep writing you know of madam
chair if you read the California
California's got a speed limit
of fifty five.
And so much cannot go of that
faction rating and district the
enforce that state and maybe we
need to go that route would you
be able to happen in the state
of New Mexico especially in the
state forty chair because of pro
crack because so right now again
Nix's of five or six thousand
trucks a day coming and the
Interstate so.
Appreciate your up to the
station.
Thank you
for your service chair right
next to have Representative data
Cruz thank you madam chair
Representative markings I
promise to be fair about.
Just kidding I support this year
traversing between Albuquerque
and Santa.
obviously frequently I
experience exactly what you're
talking about in many many
drivers motorists to as well so
just one which I think it's
great bills for.
So madam chair what one more
call I made.
Absolutely this this ammendment
to this statute has a little bit
more teeth because there is a
hundred dollar fine so
More chief to what and I think
the first time somebody gets
pulled over House Bill number
dollar fine maybe the last.
Absolutely Representative
anybody else.
Representative Brown thank you
madam chair and representative.
So I appreciate this bill my
initial impression was that it's
a bit of apples and oranges of
the bill time talks about Madam
prohibiting driving less than
the certainty.
And then he this section here
that cited in section one deals
with
The statutes in front of me Mr
chair and it just seems that
We might be maybe putting in
will confusion there are to be a
star stated you don't drive less
than a certain speed Laughlin.
Page two provides a bunch of
exceptions to that and I I kind
of get that there I just wonder
if maybe there should be a new
section.
Because again I think it's
talking about two different
things yes I'm trying to make
the match madam chair but I
still have a little struggle
with it so I'm going to support
the bill I just wonder if maybe
a little more thought could go
into.
How to structure in terms of the
sections of the code maybe this
would be new material out so but
other than that I think the
merits of the bill very good.
And so madam chair just to
initially back on thank you.
Thank you Representative and I'm
Representative I'm glad you
brought that up Representative
Brown because Representative
Sweetser in our analysis of this
bill there were a few sections
that were noted as creating
possibly conflicting penalties
within the statutes as codified
now we can my committee can go
through this with you if you
want to just take some time
after the hearing today I do
think I get a sense from the
committee that would like to get
this bill out today for you but
if we could perhaps work on
either amendment meant for your
next committee or if it has to
committee substitute that's fine
to just come and get some of
these issues on penalties and
new material confusion
rectified I think it'll make you
look at your much stronger bill
so if you're willing to work
with our committee you can come
and work with me or not to I'm
not going to volunteer
Representative Brown but anybody
in here I'm sure would would
happily show you that analysis
so that we can get you a strong
go on your next.
Mexico.
Share our.
I'm sorry say that again I will
abide by the wishes of the
committee I do want to make sure
that we do with correct.
Great thank you very much and
have a happy to work with you
just come and find me in my
office once I'm out of a COVID
jail which by tomorrow welcome
Representative Lundstrom good to
see you thank and the and that
so okay do I have a motion.
Madam.
Yes Madam chair representative
so the next committee is the
appropriations and finance and I
don't know that this needs to go
to that committee meeting to
Judiciary instead.
Yeah that's an interesting
referral I can I can talk to I
can go back to the speaker's
office and talk to them again.
Of the about this issue.
Happily to.
Senator I make a motion to the
world built and redress it
afterwards.
I'm sorry what was the motion
Representative editor.
Drove a motion
Cheryl full of moving too fast
with the understanding that
we're gonna work with
Representative to get it to in
the right.
Market set properly the second
motion chair.
Thank you is there anybody in
opposition.
right Representative Sweetser
looking forward to working with
you on this.
The representatives I appreciate
it.
With the whole.
Thank you.
All right is that.
Representative Lord all right
welcome to transportation.
Servicing.
Thank you
towards share.
Good morning madam chair.
Other.
Thank you as you see everybody's
point second half.
It's a scored it's almost like
the same people keep on I I'm
gonna blame a lobbyist to keeps
on talking all legislative.
Senate Bill.
Okay good morning everybody I
think this is the first time
it's been before this committee
and today nineteen of Bill about
this to increase the penalties
for those who commit careless
driving resulting in death or
great bodily harm this bill has
been presented before
experts is here Representative
twenty six years.
Years of the right.
Do you do when you do so I'll
not the normal process with the
thank you very much of Madam of
ice here's the members of the
committee so we are at a very
very well so you get I've not
had the opportunity to but
premium for over a the state
Representative four major forty
to the house and former chair of
education which the
representative now holds and so
but I'm I'm here because I used
to carry this bill and I'll be
able to talk about that in that
so thank you very much for long
status within the funds so
welcome for.
It was important to introduce a
because he's brought this bill
forward before inducement of
Business really quick enough on.
Committee chair and I know some
chairman for the next couple of
cycle starts organizations
working on this bill now over
eight years I'm trying to get
past the house we had actually
through the house and Senate but
that's one.
So thank you so on of the bill
so New Mexico need to cal star
county has to offer several
reason terrace is a traffic
violation occurs make are
operated vehicle without the
necessary care and attention
required to avoid collisions or
accidents the following are some
of the reasons why New Mexico
may need straight penalty one hi
number of accidents fortunately
the Mexico seen increasing the
number of traffic accidents in
recent years twenty twenty or or
forty five thousand traffic in
the state resulting in over
three the tallies careless
driving is often a contributing
factor to many these access to
settle the handsome may serve
the deterrent for courage safe
driving behavior.
Paychex dangers right behaviors
careless Revenue compasses that
broad range of industries
including textiles driving
driving under the influence
speeding and failing to yield a
signal maintenance repairs are
prevalent in Mexico and enhanced
penalties for careless driving
may help deter drivers from
engaging in these risky
activities in adequate counties
currently the penalties for
careless driving New Mexico.
Low violators may face fines and
points on the license but these
consequences may not be enough
to discourage reckless behavior
an enhanced penalty maybe priest
of fines or more severe license
suspensions which may reflect
the seriousness of careless
driving and encourage more
responsible driving.
Section of Google road users
careless especially dangerous
and volatile for road users
especially reading about this
pedestrian to have higher rate
adjustments being anywhere near
the top in the nation of
pedestrians being run over and
St Louis these individuals are
more susceptible to seizures
into your death an accident and
hands go to the careless driving
may help protect them record
service to exercise greater
caution insurance with them.
Enhanced building for New Mexico
must help deter dangerous
driving behaviours reduce number
access to tellers of the long
without the sacrifices.
Okay great thank you
Representative that's where the
audience is there anybody
standing in support of this bill
today.
Your doctor I wish to.
the fact that manager for their
we what we at
for five people.
Okay and if we keep it down to a
minimum we do have to be a.
Four nine.
The.
We're also offers.
What is your of representatives
these for the opportunity to
speak to a my name's James
angle.
System we are actually Mexico
I'm gonna
build.
In in my in my lifetime I've
been part of a have you have a.
Road construction company and
senior fast that Carol
strategies had coworkers
Committee eight I also see
firsthand as an OSHA certified
flag.
Have control person see the
first few mild take place on
roads
you know with the rise of the
cell phone we're in a totally
different place than we were in
nineteen seventy eight this bill
was first put on the books there
is a lot more opportunity to
drive carriers I'm also a former
class A. CDL license holder
commercial truck driver which
gives you another perspective
just a birds eye view of the
amount of tax the and fishing
for your out of state plates on
both so when I heard the laws at
a Max of three hundred dollars
which in nineteen seventy eight
bills written was a whole heck
of a lot more than it is today
I decided I wanted to jump on
board and support.
so that'll you'll appreciate it
thank you for.
Mr.
Your question members of the
committee my name is mark before
and for this bill US branded
quality tourists driving some of
you might even remember no major
that was the right access to the
legislative and up and also
loving community daughter which
actually became the
Representative.
School
hardcore bicycle this guy would
write under miles of date great
to get off the bike and seconded
over by the shop this is what
happened in this case and got
his New Mexico Way careless
driving of the the driver's seat
nothing further actions actually
part of your stuff of the bill
that to bring up to date on all
of that I think it's we were
growing date.
And up the consequences for
everybody right now is hard
enough and I strongly urge you
to come together what this bill
actually pass it thank you for
your time and your.
Anybody else for.
Good morning madam chair good
morning to me good morning
Representative Lord thank you
for the opportunity to of.
Explain hello I am in support of
house bill thirty nine years ago
I worked on this bill with the
New Mexico motorcyclists rights
organization and it was a lonely
journey to be involved in the
community get to know all of the
pedestrians construction workers
of blue collar workers why
Curtis motorcyclists all the
people that are out there
enjoying the gorgeous New Mexico
weather and landscape.
But then there's the other side
of the bill that I wanted to
point out to you.
If anyone of us in this room
would have a flat tire.
And needed to pull over on the
side of the road.
Assessed the situation called
for a tow truck.
And then someone was texting on
their phone and ran us over.
There would be a penalty of
three hundred dollars at the
discretion of the citing officer
and up to.
Ninety days in jail.
Any one of us in this room any
one of us that lives here in
this beautiful state.
I participate in.
Motorcycle sports.
And not of what this really nor
do I ride a bicycle however my
application the on their
building roads and construction
construction management and as a
motorcyclist avid motorcycle the
struggles across this great
country I can't implore enough I
I can't insist enough that you
support this bill and push for
their it is critical that we
give some of the committee Hey
your modifications some kind of
deterrent maybe something the
second thought the people that
are distracted driving for
retention to the driving all of
us that are on the road to share
these.
I thank you for your time just
support House Bill research.
Anybody else for the bill what
are my questions Albuquerque New
Mexico
I really don't but here's for
the last.
statement also places a little
survivor both motorcycle and
bicycle accident caused by
people tension and so I think
that is the stronger.
Consequences thank you.
Anybody else for the bill.
Yes Sir madam chair members of
the committee Division chief
bathrooms Mexico state police
used in support of the.
Anybody know that.
Anyway they're speaking in an
office than the opposition.
No.
Let's go to the committee so.
Okay Representative Lundstrom
thank you madam chair you know I
I can I can say madam chair that
I've heard this before.
I want to welcome Representative
yeah here's to the committee
thank you thank you for being
back with us I can tell you this
but a lot of this in the many
rules it should have thank you I
know we served together on a
long time.
But I I think this is incredibly
importance I'm gonna support
this bill if I hadn't been
dumping my gums are what made
the motion for to pass but Hey
this is this is that this is a
good thing.
The group thank
you representative madam chair.
Your question committee.
I have a couple of questions
Representative Lord thank you
for bringing this bill to us
back then.
My old life I used to be a
contract attorney with the law
office of the public defender
and a couple of issues that I
see with this bill are couple
questions to ask you about this
bill is why is that why isn't
additional crime necessary one
you could have a DA simply
charge someone for that you know
second agree manslaughter lower
manslaughter and or.
And any any other kind of
applicable crime in which there
is loss of life for our major
meaning of flash why do we need
to add another crime to this
when there are there are ways to
charge folks for this type of
behavior already.
Chair thank you for that
question this bill is not about
that but I'm in love the
representative for experts to
answer my question.
The state.
Thank you madam chair.
What is your good question and
the reason we're doing it and
have been doing in the work with
athletes for quite sometime but
imagine we have to relook at
this bill many many times we
have many of additions of the
piece of legislation that Gen
funding and mostly because of
the question that you asked us
to get it up to a higher level
the of those charged officer has
to make that decision at that
point in time that this of
accidents that cause either
death but usually not the
situation but great bodily harm
I think the the bills mentioned
Stephens that's the only issue
we have great bodily harm that's
involved in it and to do that
the individual that made that
decision to not pay attention
and hit someone was acting in
such a manner that they were
they did not do it on purpose
and so this is what was just an
accident and so therefore we're
going to be able to be able to
charge it with the ninety days
and the three hundred dollar
charge what we know that it's
already gone way beyond as was
stated of we're looking at
situations that you have a look
at that were there was an vision
I've been attention jumped the
curb hit a pedestrian whether
walking jumped off and kept on
going and still sixty well I
didn't see him of the situation
I think we are making reference
to that unfortunately did they
do this on purpose I think we're
moving that issue up a little
bit taking that out of the
context of whether or not the
intended to do it or not
contention is if you've driving
recklessly or carelessly you're
going to get a higher phone last
purpose of this particular piece
of legislation Madam chair I'm
also going to give you my own
personal example my first and
only motorcycle accident was by
another motorcycle rider that
rode carelessly and it because
we have very severe crash
locally only broke my toe and
then be a perfect example where
he should identified with
something higher because it's
clearly it was his fault for
riding carelessly and I would
mentally applicable.
To to my situation chair yes
thank you thank you very much
Representative I'm really good
Representative occurs next thank
you madam chair of I'm
sponsoring a bill that is called
vision zero which intent is that
as we move forward building
roadways and wrote.
We made a very concerted focused
effort to try to build those
roadways that are best for you
bicycle friendly I appreciate
this particular bill
Representative because it's it's
it's another aspect of the same
thing and if if it tries to
solve.
Saw it attempts to create our
learning experience and
consequences for driving
carelessly.
And.
You know I was looking at
somebody said three hundred
dollars fine adjusted for
inflation is about fourteen
hundred dollars today so with
nearly up to where and so are we
this is a good piece of
legislation and I will be
supporting your thank you madam
chair thank you.
Thank you San Juan Senator R. I
know there are other expert had
something he wanted to talk
about about the question Madam
chair members the committee
specifically addressing your
question from it here from
depending attorney's perspective
we had a case in twenty sixteen
or otherwise for struck by a
Motors judicially charged with.
Reckless driving and included
raiment that was a between the
Senator county courts and the
and the offender she played out
to careless driving so we had a
husband and wife lost both limbs
and they're suffering now it's
almost thirty thousand dollars a
year to replace those lands and
we have a plea deal that was
made so the defendant actually
got at least six months in jail
your some other charges that
compounded that but we're
looking for equitable justice
for victims and the offenders
and this also gives a tool to
the prosecutors to negotiate
that justice of the court system
where if you just charged with
discharging carriage driving no
there's minimal fine and then we
have victims that really don't
feel like the court system has
as a dresser issue especially
with their their main in such a
horrible way we're also not
trying to prison for life I know
that careless driving I'm guilty
of grabbing a cheeseburger just
as much as anybody else would
options so we want to keep that
like I said equitable justice
for defender and.
Thank you very much
Representative and thank you
expert for that additional
information that I'm just
prompted a couple more questions
from me though however I mean
when you're talking about
prosecutorial discretion to
charge average charge down I
also have some concerns in terms
of cleaning up for using this
offense as a lesser degree
lesser included offense to get
you to let's say a felony murder
charge if this is the if this
lesser included working part of
the fact pattern that would have
let someone to let state commit
murder while loanee Isley you
know speeding away from a drug
deal or and and driving
carelessly or someone who
was wasn't paying attention or
was speeding over a hundred
miles an hour I can't really
worry about that I really worry
that there's not much in this
this bill that keeps us from
state be Yarborough which would
be an out felony murder so I
think this opinion this
potential legislation I think
In the Senate hi I think.
The intent is good but I think
that there could be some real
legal problems there's real
legal issues that could result
from the legislation as written
as is with those with those
couple of issues in mind so
I'm not sure how I'm gonna vote
on this yet but would no matter
what the outcome is in the
committee I would ask all of you
to maybe have a meeting or so
with both the district
attorney's association and or
that the criminal defense excuse
me for all defense lawyers so
that you can keep this from I
think being misused or turn this
into a crime that I'm is much
bigger than you intended it to
be so thank you for that is
there anyone else the committee
that has questions Madam chair
for campus Committee dress or
where they have money to ninety
for back into the incident that
happened with the with.
Injury that was a nice to have
that person charged for
something more severe than what
they were and so madam chair
members of the committee the
actual bill is right.
That causes serious
disfigurement for that the
probability of death happened in
in the scenarios you gave
someone actually was killed
unfortunately that would be.
Director striving so then
there's willful intentional
willful disregard for public
safety knowing what they did was
wrong this is our issue and the
problem once again the cursor
differences circumstances
and so on the bill itself
when when the FY are refers to
death.
Your face I'm not sure that
would apply because this.
Driving would be charged if
there was a death.
Okay thank you thank you
Representative thank you expert
again I think I think we need to
really ask the experts on this
one
it's it's a real concern for me
south presented brown.
Thank you madam chair
representative more than both of
you as well.
Would it be accurate to say that
House Bill three thirty nine.
Creates a new offense.
Of careless driving resulting in
death or great bodily.
Senator Papen steaming and
waiting for to be to turn to
when the and the term of office
Madam chair representative so
I'm thinking this is.
About penalties yes but are we
not creating a new office.
No chair for my effort.
The madam chair committee.
Is actually charging under the
thirty one dash one nine dash
one is a nineteen seventy eight
so it's an offense is already
on.
Yes chair representative is
thirty one nineteen mon NMSA
nineteen seventy eight
sentencing according.
Five thousand dollars.
Both that the three of us.
Right back chair.
So I'm like the children a
little little bit I'm sure this
is drafted just the way it needs
to be and I know this is many
years in the making and so on
I'm not going to propose bills
but there's just a little
something here that just seems a
little bit fuzzy to.
And that maybe is because we're
not calling out we're looking at
some section but
that one has to go through a
process to even figure out what
that means and so it's not.
The staff will support the bill
Madam chair of our.
Thank you Representative madam
chair the first year I sent only
to at a little bit too what the
bill is all about we've been
talking about historical
perspective with just to make
these are really make you feel a
bit better this bill is passed
through the house to pass the
house floor just the way it was
written gone over to the Senate
as passed the Senate that
includes judiciary so move your
Judiciary we know we're not.
Especially this year just the
way it was written a little bit
different title this year that
was up to the tractor but we did
get all the way to the Senate
floor just about her.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
The manager of that is an
important point past all the way
through the second for the way
it is right.
Next we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair just a few
questions.
This bill and Freeman one we
started talking about it.
The sorry.
Madam chair representative one
of the state I think I heard
question from committee members
because it creates an
additional.
And madam chair and
representative if I read this it
to eight one and and upgrades it
to a different one this would
that be correct we no longer
have the three hundred dollar
ninety day funds we go to the
thousand dollar up to one year
fifty eight percent.
I am sure to miss rest your I
believe you're you're correct in
that assumption.
So madam chair New York then
we're not creating an additional
we're not stacking we're just
upgrading it to something that
and.
The terms of the legislature for
the two and a half years of in
here is equitable yes Madam
modernizing yes exactly going
from where currently isn't just
for three hundred dollars fine
and.
Madam chair of the I appreciate
appreciate we're trying to do
the stories are our heartfelt as
well.
You know some of the discussion
comes around other offenses that
may take place at the time and
other words somebody speeding
away from a drug deal I truly
honestly all the somebody's
doing that it is a charge.
I think they are breaking the
law.
Is a piece of equity that
doesn't belong in the equation
when you're breaking the law.
But I get to work for fast
assimilating I pay the bills.
You know.
So there's there's a piece of
equity that doesn't belong there
yes I understand we all get our
day in court we all have that
opportunity but to be to be
played down like the story that
we just heard where people were
actually manged and the service
was was six months in jail and
three hundred dollar fine and
that is because I have the staff
to something else that's crazy.
Madam chair representative less
than what state is one of the
comments was that we should cut
our dust I have
the dust that I just talked to
of the is yes Sir all those for
the school thank you so thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for the vote.
anybody else literature.
Mr vice chair what what what.
Is that what the difference
between carriers and
Representative this would be
under the same staff this
culture both of that's a great
question and I will discuss our
mentors and expertise so there's
about madam chair committee
there is a difference between
reckless and careless careless
reckless has more as intent
wilful disregard for the safety
of others that's the difference
between rectus Harris is like I
said the need for now judicial
each for for someone and I
entered the national responsible
for actions that there's no
intent you know what I was doing
was wrong but there still be
some accountability for our
actions so there is a difference
in this regard for directors.
Madam chair you know of just
the.
Concerns me that if you're on a
cell phone.
That the directors you action
will be care those very careless
will occur due in no particular
order.
To.
Madam chair representative for
my experts of thank you madam
chair this researchers big
question I think that's the
discussion that we had talked
about we're dealing with the and
I carry a lot of those bills on
the early charges for drunk
driving whether or not somebody
was intentionally making the
decision to drink and drive and
of course of great bodily harm
what happened after that.
Attention from the very
beginning to do that of the
difference that of the your
because the cheeseburger you're
looking down that was not the
intent of that was mentioned
earlier so hopefully that
answers your question with
regards to how far is it up to
the officer making the is the
decision to whether or not what
happened was intentional or not
but if you don't you're only
going to be able to get up to
that certain level that's what
we're talking about in passing
penalties.
Yeah chair at all
of the above the chamber of the
door and picking it up.
And and intentionally in the
south for talking on a or
texting.
Do with different to me you know
I just have a journal.
Where the line is of
carelessness or recklessness
madam chair and representative
affected answer that question I
would look at it this way if you
are just did.
dealers if you just left a drug
deal in your driving at a high
rate of speed you run somebody
over to me I look at that as
your intent was to skate you are
not careless intention was to
get away at all costs with my
incident what happened if you're
on a motorcycle you're headed to
your mask around the radio
you're looking you're talking to
the person next to you your
intention wasn't to.
Harmony it was very you were
careless you were paying
attention to you when you're
when you're riding a motorcycle
when you're driving your chances
are I think in California have
cure you mess up the radio not
looking and you would harm
somebody that would be careless
I think would also depend to it
unless you're in the school's
own lights flashes up so you
cancer free then I think that
might go to an intention but
that's kind of the difference in
high state to her ex.
And madam chair.
yes yeah the.
That the cell phone yes yes if
you to self injury cited yeah
right that that is our law so
do try to answer questions.
It is not a question was
careless reckless.
To wrap herself with Dr.
Thank you I just want
to sell you know toward the bill
because I've been connected is
all the more I am off of high we
with another semi randomized in
my to the hugest Representative
primary care speaking of credit
get a we were on the.
The accident the road that's
happened and we are right on the
side the lead for the state so I
just want to clarification.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair.
Representative Brown next thank
you madam chair Representative.
I used to be a Judiciary the I'm
not there now but what would
help with the bill do you think
is a better bill would be to
just add a little clarifying
language and I would do that on
page two starting a point one.
For page to learn more it says
whoever commits Care driving
with the answer is what is not
result in death or great bodily
harm is guilty of a misdemeanor
as provided in the this is one
section coach.
Section see on board that would
make more sense because it says
whoever commits Care currently
that results in death or great
bodily harm will be sectors
basically under this other part
of.
I just think there's a
parallelism that needs to be
here but the point is this
creates more contrast so when I
read the bill and get it
immediately what's being said
center.
Reiterate what you said so
online one page to whoever
commits careless driving that
does not result in debt rates on
the on demand Representative
okay as chair.
That that the ninety.
What madam chair I would propose
sentences amended in committee.
With of yours I hope saying it's
a friendly amendment.
It is a permanent representative
madam chair was chair
I'm wondering when we're looking
at that and my concern is that
we have from that I mentioned
briefly when I was used to build
was that it talks about this.
With reference to
Yeah.
That maybe somebody might be
bringing that up if you look at
the time of the bills and
What we're looking it up in the.
Where.
Yes
is there's a lot of talk about
it so from.
The high probability is.
Is the you have any problems
with that since we're looking at
is amendment of just one if you
have no problem with that one
that was not
The talk about this if and go to
the judiciary last.
Russell bills exactly yeah Madam
chairman and Representative Lord
is yes Representative I I think
you're just a new wants that's
probably a good idea I did and I
don't maybe in sentencing
committee then to just take this
to the next level Committee
rests with the members more you
go with make sure what the
drafters that you get exact that
we feel better I think that's
the.
In New Mexico.
This point Representative on
that point Representative what
is the next committee that you
are you have to this.
The shares share close to do
dishes were it passed last time
through years ago.
Okay I'm okay with that as the
rest of the committee is so at
this point does anybody want to
make a motion.
Madam chair of a do pass on
house bill three three.
I want anybody in opposition.
Okay I would like to explain my
vote if I could.
Representative I I I shared my
concerns with you on this bill
before I think that the
amendment Representative Brown
does help clear up quite a bit
some of that confusion I think
that has as drafted now you
might have some really some bad
problems in terms of unintended
consequences and you know
multitude of fact patterns that
you know for whatever reason
should not or may not fit this
particular crime but could could
fit it regardless I think about
when people have seizures or you
know since the medical incidents
or right now they just drop it
used hot cheeseburger hopping
Donald's coffee in your lap so I
do I do hope that you have that
language and I'm sure when you
go up to do this year you're
probably gonna have more
questions like money so be
prepared thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Brandon's point is
representative Nibert no
Representative remember you have
to go right.
Because Madam chair
representative from last week's
two thousand.
And you.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Just to be clear on the record
you might want to know it's
unanimous do pass.
Thank you thank you very much
yeah we have a unanimous do
pass.
That issue.
The tax ID number.
Madam chair committee Dr but I
was engaged with other I.
Clocks General.
The board.
Warriors health bill three
thirty four let me tell a story
on house bill.
I was traveling to Denver
Colorado I sent.
Our traveling north on I. twenty
five I would be able.
That was passing the eighteen
Wheeler IBM has a three Wheeler
and about the time I started
passing the eighteen Wheeler the
eighteen Wheeler.
What that that.
And up to the front of the eight
the.
I noticed why there was a car
that had a blow out that was in
the right hand drive line.
Of.
It has to there was not moving
it was unable to move and the
eighteen Wheeler lauded time to
avoid a collision of taking out
for cell phone records from the
has been closer.
So I reported to chief Johnson
that the.
While marker for lines of the
spring or there was a disabled
car.
With the Denver.
All the way back to Johnson gave
me the rest of the story all are
the fact.
He told me that the that car and
blow up it was disabled
a state policeman
did go to the saying.
And of course turn lights on but
had to wait quite awhile for a
tow truck to arrive to remove
the obstruction from the drive
line.
And that there are.
And he asked me he said we need
a law.
So we got to the longer the.
the but he said that the state
police.
Cannot assistance moving
vehicles off the drive going on
to the shoulder they have to
wait for a tow trucks.
Well in my part of the state.
Many of your parts of the state
that way can be ours.
And so it seems to me that we
need to the first of the
solutions of the faxes House
Bill three thirty four
This bill allows the state
police.
Use the highway department to
move of structure and off of the
drive.
The side of the road so traffic
can proceed and there's another
important aspect with
basically
provides for No liability to the
owners of the vehicle for having
done so this is Barbara.
If they have something up in
movie about structure hi Laurie
they are not.
For with that being.
And frankly I think this is a
life so because of structures on
our highways need to be dealt
with properly hours later.
The state should not be
responsible for the average
calls for moving that
obstruction off the highway
because frankly if somebody
plowed into that vehicle would
be drive Stephens they were
these folks and.
Potential why should be in there
and so that's essentially what
this bill does under our
transportation has
said some things that have to do
all this stuff.
They don't want to do it they
don't have to we put them in
because we know they're out on
the highways often and they all
have the ability to remove that
stuff as well I don't want to
think about their.
Who are you.
I would be is mages General
Mexico state police department
these lines for as I have some
comment to say that will the
committee for questions.
Good morning.
Madam chair vice chair members
of the committee the need for
this bill began in two thousand
seventeen the New Mexico state
police and the department
transportation gauged in
training curriculum that's known
as teams for trafficking in
incident management this is a
nationally recognized training
that is adopted in talk by the
US department of transportation
federal highway traffic
administration.
The purpose of ten is that
affected traffic incident
management reduces the duration
impacts of traffic incidents
while providing the safety of
Motors crash victims emergency
responders statistics have shown
the chair person can respond to
an incident in cleared from the
roadway there's a drastic.
Of reduction for the potential
of the secondary pollution and
I'd like to share some
statistics with you
just internally from two
thousand nineteen into ill
today's date the New Mexico
state police has responded to
approximately two hundred ten
secondary crashes of those a
hundred fifteen or injuries and
twenty three of those resulted
in a fatality through our tunes
they can studies have shown with
their data that for every.
A minute the traffic lane is
blocked it's going to cost but
we're still result in
approximately four hours of
instruction to our of our travel
system what that means is that
that's our families the motoring
public are responding they're
stuck in traffic the intent of
this bill is to allow our first
response.
Up to work uniformed matter with
their fire departments are
transportation of employees
professionals to to be able to
have the ability to move of
whether to roasters
degree for the most important
is.
Inoperable vehicle off of the
highway to pre bid up.
Our rural systems from backing
up in creating the potential for
first responder and professional
for being killed and clear that
that road as it stands right now
I'm sure most of you have been
stuck in some type of back of
related to a minor crash on the
highway what's happening is that
we're the investigation has
already happened and we're
parked there waiting for part
companies to come and remove.
What we're asking for again is
it's an adopted standard it's
it's being used across the
nation
I can speak to our reserves and
will to the training other
states that have this in place
Arizona Colorado Utah up.
Again it's federally adopted but
this will allow us to clear
those rules by the standards are
training that's developed to
allow the flow of traffic it
said to keep our families are
respond or state.
And with that we would stand for
questions.
Okay great is there anybody in
the public that stands in
support of this bill.
In thank you Sir bye Sir madam
chair members committee rickety
executive director of the
department transportation of my
representatives I present in the
state in the FY are we get to go
look at and generally understand
the really the intent of the
goal of of Representative night
or state police we have talk
process of understand exactly
what it is we're trying to
accomplish here and for that we
are definitely in favor of that
madam chair so we are here to
support this bill thank you
thank you anyone else.
Anybody adoption opposition to
the bill.
Committee members.
Mr vice chair of thanks for the
presentation thank you Mr
officers you know I've been in
business for forty years.
And I wish this station one were
further and give authority.
hi Department war New Mexico
state police cars are on the
shoulder well good always issue
the ward on the highway you
stated in the car first over the
second one there knows whatever
you know I think tell the cost
but are not only on the way on
the shoulder that that there are
and then the committee in there
for awhile and then stripped
down I think are hired on thank
you for the engine of the car
that I would you know that would
be to the station.
It would be nice to prevention
over further and we gave the
department of transportation for
New Mexico state police
Committee at St utilizing our
highways so we want to make sure
that that we've not be
responsible for the Hargrove's
well I don't think.
Obviously you want to tow truck
to deal with the with an
eighteen Wheeler and Sam.
Most police vehicles not capable
of moving
the the turnover trailers offer
off a hundred so the stock
staffing for something that
Representative to the extent
that they are capable of moving
that
we want to make sure that you
can.
Deal with the situation quickly.
Have if there is some damage to
cargo vessel of the they do not
need to we would not be
responsible for for after work
for the get this office of the
nobody else's is involved in a
third dollars.
The officer might have some some
additional comments or.
That will be by accident after
the all three of state here in
the office.
Liability for damage part of the
committee with that that vehicle
or with them after taking.
Yes manager officer if you like
Madam chair representative the
the techniques that will be used
to to move this to per year in
they're part of a training
curriculum so that there be
pushing or pulling or dragging
on the vehicle I think we look
actually at some of the other
loss the terminology that was
used to remove liability so that
if you were you respond to the
scene of a motor vehicle crash
that vehicles been damaged as
for the crash that
the law enforcement and the
department of transportation
would be litigated for damages
as a result of the cart of
course are the damages for the
crash it was rolled over on its
roof for or something like that
so that some of that mortgage in
other states adopted to present
you know.
Wrongful litigation actions here
or having public lane on the
police officers or the
transportation for women for the
targeted and this is part of a
motor vehicle crash and again
rendered inoperable disabled.
Madam chair representative also
I you know I with and remember
to safety is the prime mover
here I thinking of you know
there's a car haulers got a
portion on board the sudden stop
portion rolls off their car may
or may not be damaged and it
just seems like it be
disrespectful to just get a
bulldozer whatever you know
whatever they have to do things
the right way to get it may be a
tough truck but that's the only
concern I had about it and
I suppose madam chair
representative if some really
valuable cargo that comes off of
other voters probably come help
clear the roadway so.
That's so.
That's all I have to thank you
thank you Representative
representative Garcia for the
second time thank you madam
chair on the porch
Representative all made you know
I've been in the business for
like I said for forty years and
usually what happens things that
happen on the interstate the
police officers say call the
company.
The do an inventory of the
vehicle of pictures prior
damages that we at the end of
the day.
Say it is I would be far removed
our grads about the role of the
teacher the state police officer
thanks for listening time will
take inventory and make a prior
damage and and again you would
take pictures of that we the
next person is involved in
moving the optical is not liable
for the the biggest issue that
the I would be brought face
would be people complain about
writing tyres by shredding
vehicle off the road fortunately
would entire that's going to be
an issue if you're gonna have to
address is low even at us when
we pick up our car on that been
locked up.
You're right get up there and
people we would like to use this
year if I see the movies is
concerned I think there are will
cover themselves because.
People come back and see.
The car was noted in the the
video pictures clarifies that
just on that point thank you
madam chair thank you thank you
madam chair thank you thank you
I have a question.
You can see just of
representatives okay thank you
madam chair I'm not an attorney
but I try to think like one
sometimes but I'm just wondering
It looks like we've covered that
the liability piece if if the
officer or the DOT's decides to
renew this obstruction whatever
it may be but but what if it
just gives the the choices as
may move what if if they choose
not to move it and then there's
a an accident because they
didn't move it R. is there a
possibility that they would
apply for them.
Madam chair representative that
would be whatever liability
would be associated systems all.
I would agree the.
Reaction from the state police
of their own state right here.
Moves were your vehicle or.
Generally as you see there are
going to be behind that are
structured with our lives.
Hopefully slow down motorists.
Structure.
And and tried to.
Keep the motoring public so from
from that situation
more stories of police officer
was behind that.
Vehicle for.
An extended period of time until
the tow truck drive to remove it
but if you have some patterns of
that faction stated what is the
