test
To, to.
To test
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum, please rise for the
invocation of the day led by the
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie,
and Lee, Representative Mason,
Mr. Speaker.
You'll bow your heads and pray
with me, please.
Our Father in heaven, thank you
for today, a day to do your work
and to glorify your name.
May your love showing us today,
may we be patient and kind with
each other.
They
may we be not arrogant or rude
and maybe be not irritable or
resentful.
Help us to rejoice in your
truth.
In your Son Jesus' name I pray.
Amen from Senator Borego,
lead us in the pledge to the the
Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it
stands, one nation under God
indivisible liberty and justice
for all.
And the gentleman from Curry
debaca Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and
San Miguelent leaders in the in
the pledge to the New Mexico.
Hey, gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered actually it's
afternoon. Good afternoon,
gentle lady.
Good afternoon members.
It's 5 o'clock somewhere,
gentlemen from Donana you have
some special guests and uh I
ventured by my office earlier
and found some special goodies.
Would you kindly introduce your
guests and tell us about those
goodies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
So, um, today you have a bag in
uh in front of you with some
treats from Solo Park, New
Mexico.
I am very honored and proud to
have uh Mr. Juan Carlos and his
beautiful wife Brenda, uh,
Fadela here today. If you could
please stand.
So
The favelas, uh, the family owns
La Premera Tortilleria and
Southern Park and it is one of
the icons of my of my
legislative district and um I'd
like to uh to recognize them
because, uh, especially since
their their success story, sir,
Mr. Speaker is a story of many
of of uh a lot of New Mexicans
who have come to the United
States to make a better life.
La Premera tortilla factory was
was a dream of Jose and Aurora
favela, who immigrated to the
United States in 1974, settling
in Southern Park, they began
with a family owned and operated
grocery store that included a
single tortilla machine and
limited grocery items they
struggled to to sustain
themselves in their early years
in 19 in 1993 with the help of
their three sons Horacio, Juan
Carlos, and Sergio. They
expanded their reach by
delivering products to
neighborhood stores.
Their reputation for quality and
authentic taste led to a
partnership with a larger chain
stores, solidifying the position
in the marketplace. La Pinera
has grown to become leading
provider of locally made
tortillas in the El Paso region.
And the supporting areas with
their products of corn and flour
tortillas, masa for tamales,
tortilla chips, and tamales.
In 2021 with assistance from
leader from the LIA.
Uh, La Premera was able to
double in size and expand their
operations in 2022. La Premera
was received a recognition as a
minority manufacturing firm of
the year.
Larira continues to expand its
operations under the management
of Juan Carlos Sergio and
Horacio La Premera most recently
expanded its presence in
Albuquerque stores and
restaurants and continues to
grow and contribute to the
economic development of New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, uh, it also happens
to be today National Tortilla
Chip Day.
So we, we kind of, we kind of
worked it out that way, it kind
of worked out. And also I, uh,
you know, you do have, you
should have some tosals with red
chili in there and those
tostadas, uh, and, and, uh, like
just like every uh everything in
New Mexico it's red or green so
it's red and green chili month
as well.
So I would like to once again
welcome the favelas. Thank you
for everything you do for for
Soland Park and for New Mexico,
and I hope that your business
continues to flourish and grow.
Thank you. Welcome to the house
primera tortilla factory.
Gentlemen, so were they the
first?
In Southern Park, hence the
name.
So
You totally could have just said
you were and nobody would have
known you.
But for those listening, he was
saying that it was actually uh
it's original piece of business
was on First Street, Brimera
Brimeraale
You totally could have just said
you were and nobody would have
known you.
But for those listening, he was
saying that it was actually uh
it's original piece of business
was on First Street, Brimera
Brimera Calle
Avenida whatever the case might
be there the the name Larimera
um I met these good folks
earlier today and I was sharing
a story, uh, for, for those of
you who like me migrated here,
uh, you'll know what I'm talking
about, but in, in Mexico or in
Juarez where I grew up. It used
to be the case, I don't know if
it is anymore.
Every neighborhood had a couple
of tortillarias and literally
that's all they sold tortillas
and there it was nothing fancy.
It was usually just a hole in
the wall with a machine.
Um, if you've been to the
frontier, uh, on Central in
Albuquerque. They've got the
flour tortilla making machine.
It was kind of like the same
thing, but it was corn tortilla.
And uh you know, your, your mom
usually would send you after
school to go get a quilo de
tortillas and they wrapped it in
like butcher paper and before
the, the, the, the tortilla
person wrapped up the quilo.
He, he or she would ask if you
wanted a little sample, so
they'd give you one tortilla off
the top.
Threw a little salt in there,
roll it up, and then you munch
on that on your way back home.
Now, the moral of the story is
not that, the moral of the story
is don't drop the tortillas
because when you got home.
You, uh,
You heard about it, so you
cannot drop the tortillas. You
gotta use both hands to carry
those home, um, but truly one of
the, one of my fondest memories
growing back, uh, growing up as
a kid in Mexico and very, very
cool to have that.
be happening here for such a
long time in our community, um,
in addition to tortilla tortilla
chips, they sell tamale masa
tamales. So if you make tamales,
that's probably where you need
to get your masa if you're down
there, uh, because the masa
makes all the difference in my
opinion.
Um, so welcome to the house,
very proud to have you guys
here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Announcements, guests to
introduce folks have some
shadows, uh, gentle lady from
Berlin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, uh, it is my pleasure
to introduce my intern for the
week, um, and his name is
William Hassan Witter. He goes
by Hassan. Hassan is a junior at
UNM. He's a double major in
political science and
philosophy. He joins us for the
week through the New Mexico, the
UNM state legislature internship
program. I've had an intern,
every year I've been here, Mr.
Speaker, from this program, and
they've all been wonderful, and
I'm excited to host uh Hasan
again. Well, not.
His first time, but uh to host
an intern again. Um, he's always
been interested in government
and the distribution of
resources and how this affects
ordinary people. Last
semesterson had the opportunity
to intern in the Albuquerque
Mayor Tim Mayor Tim Keller's
office. He lives in northeast
Albuquerque, but is staying with
his family this week here in
Santa Fe and fun fact, Hassan's
grandfather, Bill Whitter
founded the Santa Fe Community
College.
Hassan's long term goals include
attending law school and
eventually working in the public
sector as an assistant DA or
city attorney. So please welcome
his son to the house. Welcome to
the house.
Gentle lady from Bern Lee or
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, it's my honor to
introduce my shadow for today.
Her name is Amaka Tubman. She is
a junior at the University of
New Mexico, where she is
studying business administration
with a focus and operational
management and marketing
management and when she isn't
studying, she is working in the
labs at the Anderson School of
Business and a, and a legal
intern in a local law firm as
well as supporting the
African-American student
services at UNM.
And when she graduates, Mr.
Speaker, she wants to go to law
school at the law school of the
country, Howard University.
Please welcome Amaka Tubman.
Welcome to the house.
I thought you were gonna say you
in law school. That's why I was
smiling, but hey, Howard, I'm,
I'm with you, um, no knock on
Union law school, that's where I
went.
Gentlemen from Valencia Baca.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Uh, I do
have the privilege of having a
shadow with me from the
University of New Mexico. This
is my 4th year in doing this and
as I said before, one of the
great things is I'm encouraged
by these young people, uh, my
shadow was Lucas Guterres. Lucas
is a senior at the University of
New Mexico. He's involved in the
ASUNM and I believe he's on the
Senate side. Uh, Lucas' plan
upon graduation would be to
attend law school and someday he
hopes to be sitting in one of
these chambers, either the
Senate or.
The house, so it is my honor to
have Lucas with me and he'll be
with me all week. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Welcome to the
house.
gentle lady from Bern Leo
Representative on I.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
have a shadow with me from UNM
today. Um, I'm really glad to
welcome Asia Corwin, and she is
a senior at UNM. She is also a
member of UNM's Political
Science department. Uh, she was
born and raised, uh, right here
in, well, I guess right over
there in Albuquerque. Um, she's
a member of UNM's pre-law
Society and the Asian American
Pre Law Society. Right now I
asked her where she's working,
what she's doing. She is
currently
a legal assistant and she wants
to go to UNM School of Law. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome
to the house.
gentle lady from Santa Fe I have
an
announcement um today is Culture
Day at the Roundhouse, uh, where
we celebrate the Department of
Cultural Affairs and celebrate
our state's heritage, creativity
and resourcefulness, um, and Mr.
Speaker, it's worth noting that
DCA is a national leader for
agencies of its kind with uh
it's expansive programming and
huge impact, um, they served
last year more than 2 million
visitors, including 6
685,000 children at their 8
museums, 8 historic sites,
statewide service divisions, uh,
that include arts, archaeology,
historic preservation, and
library programs so uh.
Mr. Speaker, and members on your
desk you have a turquoise
folder, and I would encourage
you to look in the folder
because inside the folder is
your legislative pass for 2025
that will allow you and your
guests to go and check out all
of these museums and historic
sites, um, and it includes all
of the uh upcoming and annual
events to enjoy across the
state, and Mr. Speaker, I would
point out this beautiful pin.
This is we.
a lot of pins. This one is
really pretty, uh, so I would
encourage you all to wear that
today and celebrate Culture Day
at the Roundhouse. Thank you.
Members take note.
Second prettiest pin.
is in your bag today.
I'd save the leader from herself
on that one.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of Senate Bill 1
as amended, has been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate in open session
and request the signatures of
the officers of the house,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansen at chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and engrossed copy of Senate
Finance Committee's substitute
for Senate Bill 3 as amended
without an emergency clause has
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Members take note.
No gentle lady from?
Oh.
Message will be entered.
Sure
That's OK.
The message was entered twice
for the record. Yes.
2 times is great.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Finance
Committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 23, Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Conservation Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 33
with the emergency clause and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhansson a chief
clerk.
Message will be entered
apparently it takes more than
one person to enter the message
back here.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
an objection is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 84 has had
it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended.
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're adoption of a favor 4. All
those in favor Cinna.
Bona.
The report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee to has been referred
House Bill 87 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable community report in
House Bill on House Bill 87, we
are an adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
87. All those in favor sitting
for I.
I suppose,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 143 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption
of a favorable committee report
on House Bill 143 as amended.
All those in favor, sitting by
saying and I.
Propose a, the Anabic committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, commerce and
economic Development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
112 has headed under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for House
Bill 112 do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee,
respectfully submitted Doreen Y
Gallego's chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption of an unfavorable
committee report in House Bill
112, but a favorable committee
report on House commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 112,
all those in favor.
signified by CI.
All the suppose name.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic Development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 154 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Doreen Wa
Gallego's chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report on on
House Bill 154. All those in
favor sitting by saying I.
All the supposed name the habit
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 155 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Doreen
Yao's chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
favorable committee report on
House Bill 155, all those in
favor signified by say 9.
All the supposed name.
The SAA committee report
adopted.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m. I move we adjourn until
12:01 p.m.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning's session are present in
this afternoon's session.
See an objection. It is so
ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
Business Committee. it is
ordered.
Welcome to Legislative Day
number 9.
51 more to go.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I will go to that
order of business introduction
of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Finance Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
An act relating to public lands,
setting the royalty rate on
future oil and gas development
leases on certain state trust
lands to enhance revenue for
beneficiaries, requiring the
manner of posting of certain
information. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23 haven't been read twice
by title is referred to the
House Energy Environment and
Natural Resources Committee,
then the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33.
An act relating to forest
conservation, enacting the
wildfire prepared Act, amending
and recompiling a section of the
NMSA 1978 to be a section of the
wildfire Prepared Act.
Adding members and duties to the
fire planning task force,
creating the wildfire prepared
program.
Creating the wildfire prepared
fund reconciling conflicting
enactments of the same section
of law by repealing laws 2003,
chapter 115, section 1.
Declaring an emergency, Senate
Finance Committee's substitute
for Senate Conservation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 33.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33
haven't been read twice by title
is referred to the House Energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, we're gonna take up a
little bit of 3rd reading this
morning, um, a couple of really
simple bills, so we should be
out of here in like 2 minutes.
Um,
we, uh, we will recess after
those, uh, we'll, we'll probably
have to do some community
reports assuming they come in
while we're in 3rd reading, and
then we'll break for afternoon
committees.
Um, as I said last week, we
should be planning on longer
floor sessions so we could do
3rd reading, um.
And hopefully we can keep the
work flow going the way it is,
uh, if not, we might have to
start pulling in some evening
floor sessions, um, I think
everyone's preference would be
not to do that, but we'll just
have to play it by ear depending
on how efficient we are.
Um
Any other announcements before
we go to 3rd reading.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hall the 2nd Mr.
Speaker.
Like to represent, representing
Tarazas. It's his birthday.
Oh, I won't tell you how old he
is, but it's old.
Yeah
Well, now we're curious.
Why don't you sing happy
birthday to him and then we'll
make him tell us how old he is,
gentlemen sing.
Happy birthday to you. Happy
birthday to you. Happy birthday,
dear Louise.
Happy birthday to you.
Mr. Speaker, I'm 75 years old.
The formaldehyde that I use is
working very well.
I'm 53, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
guys. Thank you so much.
I'm just gonna say no one was
like super shocked when you said
73. I don't know if that's good
or bad. Everybody just kind of
shook their heads and said, OK.
The lady from earlier
representative Serana. Mr.
Speaker, we have another
birthday in the house, a
representative Little is, is,
um, I don't 10 today. I don't
not sure how old you are. Oh,
we're not gonna ask her that
question.
But we're gonna have you sing,
gentle lady to sing.
Everybody
Happy birthday to you,
happy birthday to you. Happy
birthday, dearpresentative
Little.
Happy birthday to you. Yeah.
In honor of you all's birthdays,
we should have a very late
evening floor session.
And just have a make it a big
party.
Yeah, time to bake a cake. There
you go.
Any other birthdays?
Going once, going twice.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I'm moving to that
order of business, 3rd reading
of legislation. It is so
ordered.
Gentleman from Donana, are you
ready?
Uh,
item.
Number 33. Mr. Speaker, I am.
Would you get me to that point,
please the record reflect that
all action necessary for place
in House appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House bills 2 and 3 on final
passage has been taken and it is
now subject to debate. Amendment
or substitution, the gentleman
to explain the bill.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm very
privileged today to get to
present House Bill 2 and 3, our
budget for the state of New
Mexico. Mr. Speaker and body, I
know we'll be getting.
A few folks in here behind me. I
want to start with some thank
yous, uh, Mr. Speaker, first, I
want to thank our incredible LFC
staff are remarkable HAFC staff
with uh budget director riding
also want to thank Mr. May, who
is the minority, uh, chief, uh,
for the budget as well. um, Mr.
Speaker, I want to thank, uh,
Chairman George Munoz in the LFC
during the interim, where I had
the privilege of serving as vice
chair this year. We
traveled the state, I think it
was a more open process, uh,
engaging with New Mexicans for
the last 2 years and uh I want
to give a big thank you to them
as well. Finally, Mr. Speaker,
I'm not sure they're all in here
at this point, but could I ask
if all of the members of the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee could briefly stand?
Members, please rise.
It's so appropriate, Mr.
Speaker, uh, for us to say thank
you and I get to say again a
personal thank you to all of the
members. This year we asked more
from our members with 4 public
subcommittees, 6 public working
groups, uh, for instance, Mr.
Speaker, when it came to public
education, the full committee
met twice. The work group met 2
times over the course of at
least probably 6 to 7 hours,
their work in building this
budget.
Uh, makes me, uh, just super
proud to get the chair of the
committee and very pleased with
the product.
Mr. Speaker, we're going to do a
few different folks who we're
going to introduce specific
parts of this, but I wanna just
say first, uh, the New Mexico is
remarkable. Uh, among the 50
states, we are #2 when it comes
to oil production, higher
education student support.
Uh, and potential for solar
energy. #2 in the entire nation.
Mr. Speaker, uh, New Mexico has
the North America's largest
onshore wind farm.
The United States' single
largest investment in clean
energy with Sunzia. Of course,
the the galaxy's best green
chili and the world's largest
balloon fest festival. We're the
4th most biodiverse state, one
of the most culturally and
racially diverse states we've
cut childhood poverty from being
number 50 to go to number 17th
largely through investments that
have been made in both our
budget and especially Mr.
Speaker, through great work in
our tax.
code we have so much to be proud
of and so much to work on.
That's what our budget does.
It's focused on making immediate
impact for New Mexicans across
key and important areas while at
the same time, Mr. Speaker, uh,
maintaining strong safe and
steady reserves, uh,
particularly with some of the
federal chaos that we see these
days to the top lines, Mr.
Speaker, we uh propose a 5.8%.
increase in our budget over last
year's $10.2 billion dollar
budget that brings the recurring
increased, uh, roughly to around
$10.8 billion.
Mr. Speaker, body, we have over
$300 million or $3 billion
excuse me, when it comes to
special supplemental mainly
special, uh, some supplemental,
some deficiency and then the 3
year grow investments that are
supporting key areas of need
from workforce training to
housing to much needed CYFD
investments and reforms, uh, Mr.
Speaker, we do all this with a
very strong reserve.
We keep 31.2% reserves in the
budget that the body has before
it today, which is well over
$3.3 billion in reserves. This
is all within a target overall
of 6% annual growth.
30%, um,
Reserves and spreading out so
much of the surplus that we're
seeing now, particularly through
non-recurring special
appropriations, uh, either
through the, uh, the three-year
grow or through more traditional
specials. Mr. Speaker, I think
it's important for the body, uh,
and all of us to discuss
briefly, um, why we can look
ahead and have a lot of
stability in what we're looking
at. The core part of that, Mr.
Speaker, and body.
is because our oil production
continues ascending. I took a
look, uh, last Friday at our rig
count, Mr. Speaker, we had 105
rigs according to Baker Hughes.
A year ago, that same time, Mr.
Speaker and body, we had 102 and
when we think that uh in sort of
think about how the technology
is actually producing more per
rig and per well. I think we
continue to see what the
C and the director here, deputy
director and the staff have
modeled, which is continued
steady increases we've had some
sharp increases over the last
couple of years. We're looking
at a continued steady climb,
just not as at such a steep
level.
That translates, Mr. Speaker,
body to over 60 million barrels
of oil produced every month in
the state of New Mexico.
For the 40 years from 1970 to
the early 2010s, uh, the oil
production in New Mexico was
remarkably steady. It was every
single month, never less than 5
million barrels, never more than
7 million barrels for 40 years.
Mr. Speaker, body, again, we're
now over 60 million barrels a
month and headed to a place as
we go through this decade into
the 2030s where we can continue
to responsibly produce with some
of the strongest rules and
guidelines, the most uh
partnership with our producers,
new investments in our um
Energy, uh, and natural
resources agencies to be that
source of production that is
remarkably one of the strongest
in North America. Speaker Bari,
this doesn't dismiss or look
over other areas of strength of
which there are many in our
economy, and I think it, uh, as
I mentioned at the beginning,
when you couple our renewable
and our oil and gas energy
production, it becomes very
clear, Mr. Speaker Badi.
That we are an energy superpower
and we have the ability again in
our budget to do some really
remarkable work, uh, because of
that. So, Mr. Speaker, Bonnie, I
wanna um turn it over here to uh
a few folks who're gonna talk
about specific areas to
reiterate 5.8% recurrent. Well,
one quick thing, Mr. Speaker,
um, in our public work groups,
which I'm so pleased that folks
really dug in there, uh, members
of both parties.
The priorities that they set
really help show the work of the
committee. The number one
receiver of new recurring
funding from the work groups,
Mr. Speaker, public education,
schools, teachers, and public
education. The 2nd largest
increase, Mr. Speaker, in body
was our frontline uh Department
of Public Safety police
officers, and I want to thank
the gentleman from, uh, the many
counties, the ranking member,
and all of our members for
helping lead that.
The 3rd area of focus for the
committee, Mr. Speaker, and body
was water. The office of the
state engineer received $1.5
million recurring increase for
salaries because we know that
water is paramount in New Mexico
and the progress they've made
needed, needed to be supported.
Uh, it rounds out, Mr. Speaker
body, with um
a billion dollars for economic
development department and then
investments and things like, uh,
in-state meat inspections,
growing the budget for the New
Mexico Livestock Board a
relatively small agency over 20%
so that our in-state producers
can uh receive the benefits of
processing that meat in state
and our New Mexicans can receive
uh the high quality meat, uh, as
a result of that, so Mr.
Speaker.
I want to turn it over to a few
folks to briefly uh talk about
some specific areas and uh I
first go to the gentle lady from
Briario, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, do I
need to ask if the gentleman
yields.
He does yield.
Mr. Speaker, I.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, uh, Chairman Small, um, I
wanna first, uh, acknowledge
what a tremendous committee, uh,
has been assembled this year for
house appropriations and the
incredible work that everyone,
all of the members put in, uh,
starting with our staff, um, as
you have mentioned, uh, the
year-round staff at LFC and our
session staff at House
Appropriations. Mr. Speaker.
gentlemen,
This budget is.
It's a wonderful culmination of
the work of so many people and
so many communities that are
represented and so many diverse
interests and really reflects
wonderful values and priorities,
uh, for this body. I'd like to
highlight a couple of areas that
I feel most passionate about,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
that would be economic
development. I think that
economic development is really
a, a foundational component, uh,
for the future of this state.
And so I'm especially pleased uh
with the holistic and
substantive investments that are
seen in this budget, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
What I
What I think is really exciting
is how this budget shows support
in a holistic way for existing
businesses here in New Mexico.
Some of our high technology
startup companies as well as
companies that are looking to
relocate uh to New Mexico. Some
of the ways that we see that,
Mr. Speaker, um, and gentlemen,
we see that through $24 million
for site readiness to make sure
that when companies want to move
to New Mexico, there are spaces
that are ready for them to move
into.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there's also $7 million into
LIDA or local economic
development program. We've seen
the success of that program in
the past and so we're
continuing, uh, to invest in
that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there is also funding, really, I
think for the first time for the
state of New Mexico to market
itself as a wonderful location
to bring your business to set up
shop here, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there is also, uh,
$50 million for recreational,
um, what we call um quality of
life, the regional recreational
centers and quality of life
grants and so those are
instrumental in making sure that
our
Communities including our
military communities, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, have the
amenities that help to attract,
um, our thriving communities.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there is
also $50 million in this budget
to support some of the work
around our uh technology and
innovation through research
development and deployment, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there's
also support for talent
recruitment and retention in
some of these high-tech fields
as well as uh support for our
entrepreneurs through incubators
and accelerators.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
just wanted to, you know,
Delve a little bit more deeply
into some of the facets of this
budget for economic development
because I think they're huge. I
think that they will really
position this state, um, in a
big way to support the growing
industries that we have as well
as bring in complimentary, uh,
companies that will help this
state diversify its revenue.
And put us on track for long
term growth. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Next, I'd like
to turn to, uh, the gentle lady
from Bernna Leo Representative
Garrett, who's going to discuss
our work in public
schoolsentative Garrett, you're
recognized. Well, the gentleman
from Donana Yield. Yes, I am.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
And members it's been a real
honor to serve on
appropriations this budget
really demonstrates our
commitment to supporting the
strategies, the initiatives that
will move our state's students
forward and so this public
school budget really reflects
the largest increase that house
appropriations made in the
budget framework. It shows we're
really committed to funding the
efforts in reading and
see in mass to improve our
special education efforts so
that our kids can really get the
education they need our teachers
can get the training they need.
We can attract and retain our
fabulous educators at all
levels.
And some of the framework things
we did that we included besides
spending those initiatives were
recognizing as representative
Dixon pointed out all of the
economic development, uh, in the
sciences and technology in
quantum, and so we increased
funding for a STEM network that
will unify the efforts statewide
to uh help our students grow in
these areas.
On a very practical level, we
funded the free school meals
program. We have initiatives to
support unhoused in housing
insecure students. We continued
diverse investments in career
technical education that affects
every one of our districts, uh,
we funded 30 million over 3
years for Indian education
initiatives we increase the
general fund, uh, funding.
for the state equalization
guarantee or the SCG factor
raising increased funding for
6th grade, which we know is an
important point to engage our
youth and funding for secondary
education, uh, education
reforms, we are now #2 for
higher education student
supports which you'll see
reflected in our budget and this
year we prioritize student
support services along.
with instruction and general
funds for higher education
institutions, uh, we gave a 4%
raise to educators, uh, which
will be balanced out with new
educator tiers at 55,000
6,500,075,000. So, uh, you can
read more details, the education
section starts on page 133 and
continues on through higher
education, uh, so I wanna.
that I want to turn, I yield
back to the gentleman, uh, Mr.
Speaker, from Donana County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
thanks to the gentle lady from
Ber and Leo. I'd now like to
turn it over to the gentle lady,
uh, from Santa Fe, uh,
Representative Lujan to talk
some about our health,
behavioral health and child
well-being investments.
the gentleman from Dona Anna
please happily yield. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Um, very proud to serve on House
Appropriation.
This will be my 3rd year, Mr.
Speaker, um, the bill that we
put together will allocate 200
million towards behavioral
health initiatives designed to
support our most vulnerable
populations, including unhoused
individual, individuals.
Were those in crisis.
It also champions the well-being
of our youth and the future of
our behavioral health workforce
by funding mental health spaces
in schools and providing
stipends for students pursuing
careers as social workers.
We also know that public health
starts with our families and so
the budget includes key
investments in family, infant
toddler programs for the early
childhood department.
As well as over $30 million in
pilot programs for the children,
youth and Families Department to
increase caseworkers and pilot
programs to keep our most
vulnerable children safe, Mr.
Speaker, this is a a bill and
I've, I've not seen um our
values as represented as ever
before when we are dealing with
the crisis of behavioral health
in our state so I wanna just
thank all not just all of us on
appropriations, but all of our,
our entire body who cares and
who has been working towards
these initiatives. I like to,
uh,
Thank our staff, the LFC, for
all the, the tireless work that
you've put into helping us put
this budget together because
without you we wouldn't really
have all the resources we need
to to make these, these.
These huge decisions I'd like to
thank our leadership for, for
working with everybody and
working with uh with all of us
to make sure all of our ideas
are included in this budget and
for all the
work that we did to make sure
that the public was involved.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with
I'll yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank,
I'd now like to yield to the
gentleman, uh, from Mora San
Miguel and um Rio Ariba, uh, uh,
Representative Sanchez to talk a
little bit about public safety
from Colfax San Miguel in Taos
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you Mr. Speaker, the gentleman
yield?
I gladly yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, public
safety House Bill 2 prioritizes
those who serve in our public
safety system.
It includes funding for raises
under the state police step plan
as well as for targeted wage
increases for our lowest paid
district court staff.
District attorneys and public
defenders received new support.
Additionally, the bill includes
support for local law
enforcement and every one of our
communities with 10 million for
capacity building and 4 million
for recruitment and retention
grounds. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I yield back to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. Finally, I'd like to
go to the uh gentle lady, um,
from Rio Reba, uh, Taos, uh, and
other counties, uh,
representative Herrera to talk
briefly about the, uh, water and
I don't see the gentle lady
here, Mr. Speaker, uh, so I
wanna,
oh, absolutely.
I also need new glasses, Mr.
Speaker.
So, gentle lady, please.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I will, uh, uh,
distinguished gentleman from
Dona Anna Hill, Mr. Speaker, I
gladly um.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and, uh,
representatives, I'm proud to be
a part of this budget for this
year. I think we did a lot of
things to protect our water
resources in the state of New
Mexico and I just wanna give you
a few highlights of this budget
because they're important for
every single district here in
conservation and infrastructure
we started out with a budget of
about 60 million. We increased
that to $211 million for a total
of 271 million, the highlights
there are 2.
100 million in the water trust
board we gave uh 25 million for
Indian uh water rights
settlements and 20 million for
rural water infrastructure
improvements. Um, we also, um,
enhanced river systems.
Uh, with uh $10 million and uh
and that's what we did in the
conservation and infrastructure
systems for our state for a
total of 271 million. We also
did work in innovations,
innovations for water systems in
our state. The strategic water
supply for brackish water now
has 40 million. We put 19
million for aquifer mapping and
monitoring a huge increase in
that budget, uh, probably the
largest ever, and we put a 4
million for
uh research at NMSU in uh
Brackish uh Water Research and
improvements in our water
treatment systems at 4 million,
so we put a total of starting at
um 63 million we went up to 69
million for innovations in uh in
water treatment in our state and
now for protection part of this
budget, protecting our water
systems. I'm very proud to say
that we put 50 million to
up contamination sites we did 12
million in wildlife mitigation
and I think most importantly, we
put 20 million a new 20 million
in forest management
restoration, thinning, and bed
uh uh vegetation, um, um,
planning, so that was a total we
went from 70 million to 90
million,700,000 in that budget
for a total budget in water, uh,
resource management and
protection and innovation, a
total budget of 400.
31 million and we're very proud
of those accomplishments. Thank
you, um, kind gentlemen, thank
you, gentle lady. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Um, Mr. Speaker,
one other feature that we did
this year in HAFC was inviting
the um
The uh the chair and ranking
member of each uh of many of our
committees of expertise, so, uh,
obviously a bipartisan voice to
come and brief the committee on
priorities, particularly with
budget nexus, uh, Mr. Speaker,
this along with the public work
groups, the public comment,
which of course has been a
feature that we've done, uh, in
addition to just the overall uh
great member participation was
so essential to um.
Uh, uh, our work, uh, in this
effort. Mr. Speaker, I'd also,
I'd like to, uh, briefly yield
to the gentleman from Colfax
Quay, uh, Harding Union.
Curry and Debaca, San Miguel
County, uh, the, the gentleman,
uh, briefly as well, Mr. Speaker
Colfax Curry Harding Qu San
Miguel and Union Representative
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we've been
working on this since this time
last year. We've been a year
putting this together and, and I
think it's been a, a good
effort.
You'll hear in a little while
from some folks that, that some
things in this budget that they
don't like. I can tell you that
there's some things in this
budget that I don't like, but
there's some things in this
budget that I do like. This
budget contains our roads.
Our schools.
Our CTE programs.
Our colleges, our junior
colleges.
Aging services.
Small rural communities.
The various needs of our small
rural and remote communities.
It, it contains funding for
locally produced food and
programs to bring that to our
aging and programs to bring that
to our schools.
For our hospitals and our
medical services.
It contains funding for our law
enforcement, both state law
enforcement and local law
enforcement.
It, uh
Contains funding for the needs
of this state.
All at about a 6% increase
somewhere close to that in the
last I heard, reserves were
around 30%.
I think that's a
That's a good offering.
Uh
We worked hard. We, we went line
by line down to the budget.
And I think all of us got some
things that we liked.
All of us got some things we
might not have been that excited
about.
And so Mr. Speaker, I'm gonna
vote for this budget, and I
appreciate uh having being able
to have input into it.
Uh, thank you for your time, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you very much, gentlemen and
thank you for your leadership.
OK, Mr. Speaker, with that we
stand for questions.
There is first on the list, we
have the gentle lady from Santa
Fe, Representative Serrato.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from Donana Yil,
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, I really
appreciate the
multi-generational uh uh
proposals that are coming
forward in this budget and how
they would affect our families
truly from cradle to grave and,
and everything in between. Um, I
specifically looking at the
investments in early child
education and care, um, in
particular, how do you feel that
these uh in early education
investments will help grow our
workforce, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've made
really serious investments in
our workforce, including through
the growth fund with a wage and
career ladder for the family
infant toddler or for the
infants and toddler, uh,
caregivers, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, this budget expands
those investments with over 100
million new dollars for
childcare, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, in addition, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
We're working at balancing
expansion of pre-K slots, uh,
making sure that we're trying to
braid that funding this budget
continues that excellent work
and Mr. Speaker, General lady,
uh, a very strong focus on
building the workforce,
supporting, including through
higher education, uh, and in
other areas, bringing that
workforce, supporting the
caregivers who are so essential
to families all across the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I, I really
appreciate that approach, you
know, for my kids when they were
one as they are going through,
you know, that early pre-K, um,
acknowledging these teachers,
not just caregivers, but these
teachers is what they are. Uh,
my kids will often refer to, you
know, teacher so and so as
opposed to just, you know, uh,
by their first names. So again,
these communities that are being
built in the educational aspects
are, are really improving and
supporting our families and
building communities, um, early
research I heard from UNM's
graduate School of Economics was
showing that we were seeing uh.
Better results even through 3rd
grade for some of our early
childhood investments, and I
will say that um we are seeing
that growth so I'm glad to see
that we are continuing that and,
and hoping for the expansion of
it. Um, I also wanted to, and I
think this will also go to some
of my elder care questions as
well. I am curious though, um,
if you feel that these
investments will affect rural
childcare and education as well,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, coming
as the chair of uh rural
development, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you and chairing
that committee and also I want
to thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, for pointing
out that these early educators
are teachers. I think it's so
important, um, thank you for
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
this absolutely supports our
rural families. In fact, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, uh, we
heard when we, uh, visited, uh,
for the second time with the
early childhood education and
care secretary who's done really
good work at pooling resources
this body has dedicated to bring
childcare to very remote parts
of the state, including parts of
the Northeast.
In the northwest part of the
state that where the density is,
is just not something that I am
familiar with, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady living down in
Donana County, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, also we, uh,
budgeted half of the increase
from the increased distribution
from the trust fund in large
part to be able to support the
department's efforts, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, one area
that's really important in this
is the family infant toddler,
the fit program, Mr. Speaker,
general lady.
We have new rate increases there
that followed some challenges
this last year and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what we heard there
is that as you pointed out, the
services are, uh, sort of
springing our New Mexico kiddos
forward. Also, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that after COVID
we're seeing New Mexican, uh,
kiddos and families sometimes
with higher than average need
for some of the services, so the
budget meets that higher need
with these proven ways of
helping those families and
kiddos.
through increased funding in
that area. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
want to key in a key piece
because you, you kind of let my
next question, um, you know,
proven ways of, of seeing
results, and I, I do want to
point to some of the results
that you're pointing to on page
8 and I believe
on '87 and I'll just point to
you, um, we're looking for
outcomes where the percentage of
infants and toddlers
participating in childcare
assistance enrolled in childcare
programs with 4 or 5 stars, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I believe
that's tied to the education
element, their, their star
rating. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen? Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, yes. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and what do
we anticipate or hope that some
of these investments would lead
to more educational uh
components for childcare in our
rural communities, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, absolutely, yes, that is
our focus supporting.
knows New Mexico businesses and
those educators to be able to uh
raise their level of service and
uh better serve the families in
their areas. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen,
and I'm not sure how familiar
with, uh, the body is, with how
those educational components
come together when you're
dealing with a 6 month old or
even a 3 month old, but I will
say in my experience in my
child's, uh, you know, well, uh,
high star rated because of the
educational component childcare,
um, you know, they sit down with
the parents and they say these
are the markers that we
anticipate for these years.
And this is where your child is
at and this is what we're seeing
and they'll give you examples,
uh, you know, uh, there was once
they told me my child was
negotiating and that displayed a
certain amount, which is
terrifying, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, but she was
negotiating something, uh, and
but it, it showed that the level
of conversation that she was
getting to and how that paired
for her age level, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And so I think it
really does give our rural kids
and our urban kids the chance to
really to excel that way, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. One other
outcome I wanted to point to you
as well is, uh, on page 87.
You are also, it looks like
comparing one of the outcomes A
says percent of children
enrolled for at least 6 months
in the state funded New Mexico
pre-kindergarten program who
score at first step for
kindergarten or higher in the
fall and B is also who
participate in in pre-K who are
proficient in kindergarten and
math and in kindergarten. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I feel
that these are the first steps
we need to see for our students
to really excel and enter this,
this new workforce that we're
really bringing forward, not,
not to push these kids too far,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but I,
you know, we're looking to
invest in, uh
high tech industries. We have
national labs that are here in
New Mexico. It seems to me that
if we're giving them off on the
first right step, um, that
we're, we'll see them enter
this, this workforce wall. Was
that the intention, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, or what was your
thoughts on that, those
outcomes? Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you for, uh, uh, uh,
focusing in on that. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I think
overall we have a strong focus
on results, particularly with
the legislative finance
Committee, and I think with
members from uh uh from both
parties really asking how can we
make
new investments but also what
are New Mexicans getting for
those investments, so we see
those specific measurements
being called out, uh, in many
different areas. I think in
this, Mr. Speaker, General lady,
we know that math is a place of,
of needed improvement in our
state and as you point out, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it's an
area of enormous remarkable
opportunity for us. So I think
it's absolutely right, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that this
is starting our New Mexico
kiddos outright.
Particularly when it comes to
things like math, and we know,
uh, that those jobs are here,
they're growing, and they can
support, uh, folks in really
awesome ways. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, I, I
appreciate this because we all
talk a big game of making sure
our values are in our budget.
Our values are where we're
putting dollars and we can talk
about that all day, but until we
talk about outcomes, that's
where we really see if those
values are in our budget, and I
believe that getting our kids
out on the right foot, letting
them see the
value of of numbers and getting
excited about reading. I mean,
at a very early age, that will
transform the future for our
kids and put them first, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. I do want to
move into uh another part, as I
mentioned, multi-generational
aspects and really looking at um
our aging investments that you,
that you're looking at. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I'm
curious in here, I, I heard
about this grandparents raising
grandkids, pilot, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you give me some
more information on that? Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, there is
$4 million in our budget to
support grandparents raising
grandkids, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, through some really
excellent work of committee
members, uh, they're bringing
this idea forward and matching
it with uh with other funding
that's not state funding, which
is great, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we always try to make sure
that we're bringing uh as many
sort of funding sources to the
table, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and this will provide a pilot to
support these families in the
grandparents, uh, with funding
over a several year period as
they go through the important
work, uh, and as you point out,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
multi-generational work of
supporting those kiddos when
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
combine this with the uh
expanded access to fresh fruit
and vegetables, uh, and better
educational supports, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. This is
meeting New Mexico families
where they are. This is seeing
if we can do some really good
work.
For folks who are uh working
super hard, these grandparents
raising their grandkids and Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I think
it's very much our hope that
with the results that we can
show from this, uh, that we can
look at leveraging again more
non-state funding and being
ready, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
to potentially dedicate new
state funding because if that's
meeting New Mexico families
where they're at, then that's
what we need to do. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. It seems that we're
actually approaching a problem
we've been hearing about for a
long
time. I wouldn't say a problem,
but uh, uh, um, uh, a unique New
Mexico family situation, um, and
we talked about this a lot, the,
the, the Rockwell vision of
what, uh, uh, a family is,
doesn't necessarily apply here
in New Mexico uh or across every
community, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is that pilot going
to be across the state or is
that focused on a specific area?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it's focused right now on Rio
Reba, uh, Taos Santa Fe and
Donana.
And McKinley Counties, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my sense
is, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that these are some of the
counties where, uh, one, there's
been a lot of great work that's
already been done to you may
have a lot of the, the, these
family, these family situations.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It also sounds
like those are communities where
you have a good cross section of
New Mexico populations to give
you some good data and to
potentially making this a
permanent program. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, how are we evaluate
if this will become a permanent
program.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we're
going to be evaluating it
robustly, uh, with sort of
expected outcomes on the front
end, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
with funding for evaluators to
actually be doing independent
evaluation. And then, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady through a
evaluations through each year of
the program.
Mr. Speaker, that's fantastic,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I want
to go to a more expanded look at
aging, uh, if I may briefly, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I
noticed there was another
allotment into the Kikia Vedra,
uh, uh, Legacy Fund. Can you
give us more information on how
that, that, that changes
happened and the changes to that
uh funds funding, Mr. Mr.
Speaker, lady, I believe it's uh
$5 million new investment in the
Kiki Savera Dignity Fund, senior
dignity Fund, and Mr. Speaker
Boy, this is a fund that's
pretty broad. It can support.
a number of different things,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, since
it's been brought in with this
administration and the
legislature, it supported a
number of things including food,
access to food for rural
seniors. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, as we look at, um,
doing serving more, uh, uh, of
the senior of our seniors needs
this fund and its ability to
both uh sort of um uniquely and
and and easily find different
initial.
ative s while at the same time
with the LFC focus on uh
monitoring results and and sort
of saying what's the, the best
investment for the state. We
wanted Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
to be able to put some more
money back into this fund as we
use some of the funds for, uh,
for food in particular. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. You know, I had a
meeting with uh one of the food
banks who was talking about how
the shifts um have happened over
the past year with increased
costs, uh, and, and how that
they've been serving more
population.
including seniors as well, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. So it's good
to see how the Kikiavedra fund
will be supporting that as well.
And again, all the services
that, that we can see
potentially rise from that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. I am curious
and you, you touched on rural,
uh, you know, seniors and how
they'd be affected by this
investment, but I'm also curious
because I know we're leveraging
uh federal dollars and private
dollars, does, does the
investments into our aging, uh,
infrastructure or, or, or, or
elder care, I'll put it that
way, or elder care. Um, do, does
that
calculate the state and our
population from what some of the
shifts that we're seeing at the
federal level, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it's such a good question,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
we, this is sort of a layered
approach. We're making sure that
we have uh really prudent and
strong reserves, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so that, uh, in one
of those ways that these are
buffers against uh potential um
sort of federal upheaval, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady also.
We're, uh, smartly matching
funding and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, one of the areas I'd
actually like to focus on there
is the, uh, rebasing and
increase of $9 million annually
recurring for our nursing homes,
Mr. Speaker and body, our
nursing homes, which of course
are serving uh elder, you know,
senior New Mexicans, uh, the,
the nursing homes have a very
high percentage who are on
Medicaid, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and uh what the committee
heard
is that these Medicaid served
seniors, uh, need, uh,
additional care, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, they, they, some of
the facilities, there's a needed
upgrades and because we hadn't
done that rebasing in so long,
uh, that some, we've been
falling behind, Mr. Speaker,
General lady. So, uh, with the
$9 million recurring increase
there, um, you were seeing sort
of that uh spectrum and that
continuum of support for elders
from elders.
their grandkids, uh, yeah,
through the Kiki Saedra Fund
with what we just discussed to
now, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
those seniors and also other New
Mexicans who are served by
Medicaid and in our nursing uh
homes who need that uh uh sort
of kind of slightly higher level
of care. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I believe if I'm correct, those,
those nursing homes haven't had
a rebasing since the
pre-pandemic. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen? Mr.
Speaker, lady, you're absolutely
right. It's been a very long
time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you.
gentlemen, and I've been working
with those long-term care
facilities and nursing
facilities in our state that try
to provide a high level of care
with additional um um
regulations that have been
placed both at the federal and
the state level and working with
them to really help that work as
we know, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
we have an aging population in
New Mexico and origin population
may be raising their kids and
they may be living on their own,
they be in a rural area, they
may be, you know, in a nursing
facility, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I really do
believe that these investments
that we're making will protect
our community.
And, and again, put our values
where it matters. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen, for all your hard
work on, on this budget. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle.
Members, there has been a
request to for the gentlemen to
remove their coats, uh, please
do so if you wish.
There is it optional?
It
Go, go right ahead, gentlemen.
Uh, there is further debate. The
gentle lady from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, will
the fine gentleman from Donna
Anna County and chair of HAFC
please yield. Mr. Speaker, I
gladly yelled to the incredible
gentle lady from uh Eddie.
Thank you so much, um, Mr.
Speaker, and, uh, colleagues, I.
Um, consider it a privilege to
serve on the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Actually, a few years ago asked
to get off judiciary so I could
try to get on appropriations
because it gives us an all the
bird's eye view of government
from 30,000 ft and sometimes we
dive down a little deeper on
that, so it's a fantastic
opportunity to learn and to be a
part of something that is of
course vital to our state. So
Mr. Speaker.
When we convene in Santa Fe for
session, I think probably job
number one for us is budget,
creating a budget for the coming
fiscal year. So it's very
important we do this.
And uh again I wanna thank you
for uh the privilege of serving
on that committee.
Since the governor took office 6
years ago and if House Bill 2 is
adopted today.
State government spending will
have increased by a whopping
70%.
And to be exact 70.6%.
Uh, I'd like to note that $60
billion of this has been in
recurring spending and we'll be
if we add in this year to that.
And of course this is just part
of the picture in addition to
recurring spending we have
non-recurring spending or one
time spending and the figure on
that in the last 6 years is $15
billion.
Yet after the legislature.
Has been in excess of $75
billion since 2019.
Many New Mexicans are wondering
what we have gotten for this.
How is New Mexico better?
Our state persistently leads the
nation in poverty, Mr. Speaker.
We suffer the worst violent
crime rates.
Our public education system has
failed to improve student
outcomes across the board.
And yes, we do have some good
things happening in education
here in the state.
But we watch our young people
leave the state for better
opportunities elsewhere.
So Mr. Speaker, it's obvious to
me at least that the solution.
To New Mexico's challenges is
not spending more and more
money.
But that is exactly what the
legislature continues to do.
I believe it's time to change
our state's fiscal course.
Instead of growing government
ever larger and expanding the
power of government in our daily
lives, Mr. Speaker. We must
begin returning power and money
to the people.
In fact, I view today's debate
on House Bill 2 is the perfect
opportunity.
To propose a new direction for
how taxpayers' money is spent.
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am
offering a House Republican
floor substitute to House Bill
2.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
have that delivered to the chief
clerk so that we can compare 202
numbers, get it passed out and
on the website.
Oh, and Mr. Speaker, I'll ask
for a roll call at this point as
well while we're getting that
all taken care of.
You've got a roll call.
I'm informed there's no 202
number. That was my mistake.
There never is a 202 number on
this bill.
Original lady from Eddie and Lee
looks like the proposed
substitute has been passed out
on the floor and it is online as
well. Will you kindly
Explain your substitute and then
we'll go back to the sponsor to
see if it's friendly or not.
Yes, um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, so,
I will explain uh what the 4
substitute does and um again as
you just mentioned there is no
202 number on a 4 substitute, so
I, I have no number to give you
there.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and members, um,
This
Uh, house for substitute
provides as follows.
One recurring spending and this
is very important, Mr. Speaker.
The floor substitute maintains
all of the recurring spending
levels contained in the HAFC
reported bill.
There's only one exception to
this.
And that involves funding for
the early childhood education
and care department.
Instead of using general fund
dollars to fully fund ECECD, the
4 substitute replaces $168.7
million in general fund dollars
with an equal amount from the
early childhood education trust
fund.
Mr. Speaker, this trust fund has
grown so rapidly.
Since it's establishment, only a
few short years ago that it will
soon eclipse the overall state
budget in value.
So we're talking about
approximately $10 billion for
the state budget.
$10 billion very soon for that
trust fund.
Next, the 4 substitute results
in a modest recurring spending
increase of 4.1%.
For fiscal year 2026.
Which is less than the House
Bill 2 figure of 5.8%.
Next facet is reserves and
deficits. This floor substitute,
Mr. Speaker, keeps state
revenues for fiscal year 25 at
3.3.
42 billion or 32.7%.
For fiscal year 26, reserves
would be 3.408 billion, so call
it 3.4 billion or 31.6%.
Both of these reserve levels are
greater than those found in the
HAFC version of House Bill 2.
Mr. Speaker, it's also important
to note that the substitute
creates a $17 million surplus in
fiscal year 26.
While the HAFC version of House
Bill 2 has a deficit.
A deficit of 148 million in FY
26.
And would need to take money
from reserves to balance the
budget.
Mr. Speaker and members, um, now
on to non-recurring spending.
The Republican budget
alternative generates $1.5
billion in savings pertaining to
non-recurring or one time
spending.
We achieve this by eliminating
or reducing one time
appropriations for certain new
programs.
By lowering certain grow GRO
pilot project appropriations and
by transferring funds
strategically.
These changes are found in
sections 59, 10, and 11.
Of the 4 substitute.
Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to
talk next about um something
that's very special about this
bill.
And that is that the Republican
budget proposal.
Because of the savings that we
just talked about would
appropriate $1.26 billion to the
from the general fund to the
Department of Finance and and
Administration.
With instructions that.
Every New Mexico resident.
We'll receive a $600 dividend
payment this year.
This distribution, which I'm
calling the 2025 Energy dividend
for all New Mexicans.
Would directly assist
individuals.
And families in every village,
town and city in the land of
enchantment.
As um the.
Chair of HEFC just mentioned a
few minutes ago. New Mexico is
#2 in the nation for oil and gas
production.
And we are indeed an energy
superpower.
So we have great.
Natural resource mineral wealth.
And uh in light of the fact that
for the past 3 years.
We've had more than $3 billion
in surplus revenue in the state.
And this year
For this for 20 for 26, the
surplus amount.
is 3.4 billion, so the trend
continues of great.
New money
And that's in accordance with
the traditional definition for
that category.
So this $600.
Energy dividend for all
residents of New Mexico.
Uh, would be, I think, a
blessing.
And as I said, a direct and
immediate a direct and immediate
impact for New Mexicans.
Mr. Speaker, uh, a family of 4,
for example, would receive a
dividend payment of $2400 with
checks arriving after July 1st
of this year. Now on to
transportation, Mr. Speaker.
Most legislators see the need
for increased funding for road
and highway projects in their
districts.
This floor substitute
appropriates an additional $250
million from the general fund
for transportation projects.
You will find this in section 11
of the floor substitute.
And that deals with special
transportation appropriations.
It's an established category.
Mr. Speaker, the money would be
used for right of way
acquisitions.
Planning, study design and
construction.
Roadway rehabilitation,
preventative maintenance.
Roadway maintenance and new
construction.
Funds appropriated in this
section.
Could be used strategically to
match state or federal funds.
This additional 250 million for
new highway transportation
projects and maintenance would
be in addition to the 1.3
billion in non general fund
dollars programmed into the
House Bill 2.
For the State Department of
Transportation.
And Mr. Speaker, and, and
members, uh, just briefly
mention I.
I'm sad to say that we did it
again.
Um, just 4 days ago.
A national publication came out
with an article that's titled
The State with the Worst Roads
in America is out west.
New Mexico.
was named as the as the one with
the worst roads and Mr. Speaker
and members, I, that hurts. That
really hurts.
We spend our transportation
dollars, I think very
effectively.
But we still get
Bad press in the national news,
so we were told that our
fatality rate is too high
compared to other states.
We have rough rural streets and
we have a quote preponderance of
urban rough roads, unquote Mr.
Speaker, but there was one
bright spot in this article.
It says while New Mexico may
have America's worst roads by
several metrics, Mr. Speaker.
The land of enchantment also has
the undeniably charming high
road to Taos lined with cute
shops and stunning sights.
And I think that's that's a very
nice comment.
Just a little bit more, Mr.
Speaker.
This next item uh deals with the
children, youth and Families
department and the foster parent
program.
The first substitute provides a
special appropriation of $25
million that's in section 5 of
the bill.
For the CYFD to increase the
foster you stipend by $1000 per
month per youth.
There are currently about 2100
foster youth under CYFD control.
And Mr. Speaker, this
substantial increase in the
monthly stipend would help our
current foster use and
incentivize.
The recruitment and retention of
foster parents across New
Mexico.
This next subject area which is
um.
One of the features of the floor
substitute is very near indeed
to me, near and dear to me, and
that's career and technical
education.
Before substitute provides an
additional $10 million.
As a special appropriation again
found in section 5.
From the general fund for career
and technical education programs
in the public education
department.
This brings the total
appropriation.
For CTE to $50 million.
And next, Mr. Speaker and
members, I'm gonna talk a little
bit about the New Mexico grown
fruits and vegetables.
Program which uh is helped by
the floor substitute.
The substitute appropriates $2.3
million as a special
appropriation from the general
fund.
To the PED for the New Mexico
grown fruits and vegetables
program.
This is for the children.
And I think it's very important
that we give them the best food
that we can.
And then before I come to my
little summary, Mr. Speaker, I
just mentioned that we also
provide.
A special appropriation of $1
million to the Department of
Finance and Administration.
To create a working group.
To assess.
And recommend how to eliminate
where found.
Waste fraud and abuse in all
entities receiving state funds.
This appropriation could be used
to hire new employees by needed
software.
Uh, for computers and procure
the necessary, uh, other types
of equipment.
So Mr. Speaker and, and
gentleman from Donna Anna.
I'm just gonna do a quick
summary now of what the floor
substitute does.
Number one
Every resident of New Mexico
would receive a $600 dividend
check this year.
Celebrating and benefiting from
the harvesting of the states
vast mineral wealth.
As I said earlier, a family of
4, for example, would receive a
direct payment of $2400.
Second, uh, the first substitute
eliminates more than 1.5 billion
in low priority spending.
And reduces the size and breadth
of state government.
3, it expands funding by 250
million to build and repair New
Mexico's roads.
4th, it would increase the
stipend for foster youth by
$1000 per month.
5, it improves funding for
career and technical education.
In our public schools.
Mr. Speaker, number 6, it
preserves an important nutrition
program that helps feed our
students with New Mexico grown
fruits and vegetables.
Number 7.
It begins an effort to eliminate
waste fraud and abuse in state
government where it might exist.
And 2 more, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, the 4 substitute makes no
reductions in important
recurring spending programs.
Such as public school support.
Higher education, Medicaid.
Law enforcement veterans
services.
And caring for our elderly.
I'll just emphasize because
we're not reducing.
Important recurring spending
teachers would still get their
level um increases and their 4%
raises.
And then finally, Mr. Speaker.
gentleman from Donna Anna.
The GOP budget alternative is
balanced without needing to use
reserves and in fact.
It has a $107 million surplus in
FY 26.
While also having larger state
reserves in fiscal years, 25 and
26 than the HAFC version of
House Bill 2.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
would stand for questions on the
floor substitute Donana, let's
go back to you. Is this a
friendly floor substitute thank
you Mr. Speaker. Thank you very
much, gentle lady, a well-earned
drink of water or coffee there.
um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't think that it's friendly.
Uh, in fact, I'm pretty sure
it's not friendly. I do have a
couple of quick questions
though, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
first I'd like to ask, um, would
you agree that, uh, housing, uh,
and, and particularly the
homeless, the unhoused New
Mexicans are a challenge in New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
think it's not just New Mexico,
I think it's everywhere and uh I
know a lot of communities and
even the state were embarking on
or already underway with
programs to help with uh the
homeless, uh, problem. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. I, I agree, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, in fact,
we both had the privilege in uh
um sort of the opportunity to
see a late night prison or went
into a later evening a full
housing present.
Station where we heard from
communities across the state
including our largest
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
County. Would you agree?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
was a very good presentation.
I'm glad we stayed as late as we
did that evening because it was
very good information.
Um, the $600 dividend in
particular would help with rent
and uh making a housing payment
so again for a family of 4
that's $2400 that could be used
directly for that need, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Uh, that
is, um, well, I wanna touch on
those here in a second, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, the
average rent, I don't have it
right off the top of my head,
but I know for a family of 4,
it's quite high, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's a, a couple
of months.
may be less in some parts. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, as
I recall it, the presentation we
heard and what then informed uh
our uh house appropriations
bill, it dedicates $110 million
to transitional housing. We
heard from communities that
dedication of state funds will
get folks off the streets in the
housing and expand options of
housing is that in your uh
substitute, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and, and
gentlemen from Donna Anna, so,
um, part of the concern I have
about that is most of that
money, uh, and that you've just,
just, um, mentioned is for
Albuquerque and Donna Anna.
And uh Las Cruces area so I
don't see it getting to parts of
the state where, uh, maybe we
need to do something too, so you
know, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do not live in the
Rio Grande corridor and I'm
really sensitive.
To not solve, you know, at least
trying to aid all across the
state, so that was one of the
reasons I had some objections
there, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, my
recollection is that 20 million
of that is statewide and Mr.
Speaker, general lady, it's also
my understanding that our uh STB
severance tax bond dedication to
the mortgage Finance Authority
totals somewhere between 35 and
$40 million so Mr. Speaker,
generally.
I add those up and that's $65
million that will in this coming
year be available statewide, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would you
agree that uh uh most unhoused
individuals are in Bernelio and
Albuquerque, Bern County in
Albuquerque.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
let me go back to your just your
prior statement. Um, this for
substitute does not do anything
to touch the severance tax
permanent fund just to make that
very clear.
Uh, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, so your question
was, do I think that probably
most homeless people reside.
Or don't reside in Albuquerque
or Las Cruces, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know, I could
make that assumption, but I know
there are homeless people in
every.
Every community in the state
practically, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
agree, uh, going back, um, that
said, when we look statewide, I
just want to make sure that it's
on the record for the entire
body. There is 57 or $58 million
available statewide. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
housing presentation that we
heard, uh, sort of noted, I
think anywhere from like a 20 to
$40 million need outside of some
of the largest metro areas we
heard from communities.
That's why we included uh more
money to uh in transitional
housing for DFA and Mr. Speaker,
Jo Lady, the STB airmark that
goes to the mortgage finance
Authority, that's there for that
year one, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think it's um
As I see it, when we have a
clear problem that is increasing
a challenge that's increasing
and all of us, I don't live up
here, I don't live in
Albuquerque, but everybody ends
up and they see what's going on,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
seems like, um, the smart thing
to do is when a community brings
a comprehensive plan forward and
says this is what we need to get
folks off the street to build
new housing, welcome in new
jobs, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, that that's a very important
thing to do, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, your, the floor
substitute you're proposing
would take that $20 million
that's available statewide, it
would take it away. It would
take away the money, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, for
Bernalillo County in the city of
Albuquerque. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's one of the big
reasons, uh, that I can't
support the budget, Mr. Speaker,
General lady, it's also my
understanding that um,
The water trust board, you
reduce that appropriation. Is
that right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, would you be so
kind as to repeat that I, uh, I
missed part of what you said.
You're fine, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the water trust board
where uh our uh house budget
dedicates $200 million. It's my
unders did you, uh, keep that or
did you decrease that amount?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so, um, the 4 substitute
dedicates 150 million, uh, which
is more than was, uh, uh,
earmarked last year.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, I know that that is greater
than what was dedicated last
year, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the cut to the water trust
board comes at a particularly
tough time, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we're about to make
wastewater services statewide
eligible for water trust board
funding, and Mr. Speaker,
general lady, thanks to some
really great work, the, uh,
water trusts board is now in a
position, uh, and I think a
request of uh communities that
have sort of.
Shovel ready projects up to and
perhaps even over $200 million.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's another area where the
cut, uh, to what's in House Bill
2, in the, uh, as we go into
what could Mr. Speaker,
generally, would you agree we're
in one of our driest winters
sort of in recent memory.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so let me just kind of get to
the bottom line here. There are
hundreds of millions of dollars
of funding available for for
water projects and things like
that.
Um, so in answer to your
question, uh, what do I think
about the weather, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, weather has
always changed, um, from the
beginning of time and uh cycles
come and go, um, so.
I think it's just nature and uh
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again,
there's a lot of money already
out there in agencies for water
projects. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I acknowledge and agree with the
overall observation, but Mr.
Speaker, general lady, my
question is sort of the weather
conditions now. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I look at least
weekly, sometimes particularly
up here almost daily at the, uh,
snow equivalent index SEI I
think it's called, and the
water.
equivalent index, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's put out by
the NRCS. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what you, you wanna see on
there is like a deep blue sort
of thing or maybe a green, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we're, uh,
in yellows all the way into red
in New Mexico, there is, I'm
pretty sure I looked this
morning, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, there is no basin that's
above 50% of their snowpack. The
Speaker General Lady, uh, as you
go further south and in the
southwest in the Gila area, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, uh, the,
the, uh, it's 8%.
Uh, and so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady,
I, as all of us do in here, hope
for more moisture, um, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, it seems
to me right now, I mean, I
checked elephant Butte in a
couple of weeks, but that's, uh,
I'm sure quite low. We're gonna
be facing a dire water situation
and Mr. Speaker, General Lady
body, I think every dollar
that's in the West Water Trust
board. I hope it gets dedicated.
I know that they have the
capacity and the projects that
are lined up ready to go.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
it's actually my sense that we
will need to refill this again
over the next few years because
communities are gonna have to do
more with less, look at water
reuse and treatment, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's one
area where I just can't support
the bill, uh, because of the cut
to the water trust board, uh,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, the,
um,
Uh, uh, you've heard, you, I
assumed the GBI guaranteed basic
income.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
heard it. Mr. Speaker John Lady,
what's your, is that a program
you sort of are interested in
support or no.
sort of support or opposition.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, you
know, I've, I've heard about
this, it's some people have been
proposing it. I don't really
have.
A strong opinion either way I'd
like to see what the actual
proposals would be on that, but
right now, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
I don't favor that because I
think families, men and women.
Need to take responsibility for,
um, caring for themselves and
their families.
And uh giving a check to
everybody regardless.
To me, Mr. Speaker, um, is just
causing the price of everything
to go up because there's more
money in circulation, so I do
have some, some very big
questions about that and at this
point in time I'm, I'm leaning
against, uh, what you just
mentioned, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I appreciate that and Mr.
Speaker, General lady, so then
the $600 payment to every single
New Mexico family that seems
like, um, that seems like it's
gonna
put out a whole lot of money,
uh, all across, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it seem, would you
anticipate doing that again next
year because that, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady starts to look a
little bit like the guaranteed
basic income.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so it's, it's really not, uh,
guaranteed basic income.
Um, we all have heard about
Alaska and how they have a, a
fund where they basically if
there's a good year in mineral
production, the residents of
Alaska, uh, do benefit from that
because they're all in it
together.
Um, Alaska's, uh, fund was
established in 1976.
And basically it uh it varies
from year to year, but what I'm
proposing here in the 4
substitute is a one-time
payment, I think coming at a
very crucial good time. We still
have so many people, Mr.
Speaker.
trying to get out from under
the, the COVID lockdown and the
way it stopped, um, businesses a
lot of times and it just was a
hard time for families in so
many ways, so what this would do
is just say we've had
These many years now of uh lots
of new money, billions and
billions of dollars and it's
time we just take a pause here.
And see New Mexicans, uh, we've
got your back you own these
minerals.
They're not owned by the
legislators or the legislature,
they're owned by the people.
So let's give them.
A little something because we
are in it together and so again
it's a one time payment and uh I
think it would, like I said,
come at a very, very good time
for all of our constituents.
Thank you, gentle lady. Perhaps
you're referencing the rapid
rise in the price of eggs and
some of these other price
increases that we've seen here
in 2025. Is that what you're
thinking of, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Missed it.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
So, you know, I think that's
kind of
An odd way of looking at it, uh,
quite frankly, uh, Mr. Speaker.
We know that the price of eggs
really went up during the Biden
administration and what we have
right now is uh a bird flu that
is causing um those who raise
chickens to just slaughter them,
so we're part of the increase,
it eventually I think we'll be
back uh to a better, better
price point.
But basically the problem is
because we're slaughtering all
the chickens and again we'll
bounce back from that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I share the hope
and, uh, you know, we're a
resilient state, a resilient
nation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, my understanding,
particularly when it comes to
some of these costs, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we New
Mexicans are paying a lot of
money for housing, a lot of
money, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, for some.
some of these other things, you
know, heating and cooling, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
and the, I guess, I would point
out for the body, I believe the
language that you insert to for
this whether this payment is
that um that it seems to, I
think it's nonwithstanding
language. Can you explain, Mr.
Speaker, body, uh, a gentle
lady, what nonwithstanding
means?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
don't quite know what you're
referring to on that, but the
bottom line is I don't want to
presume to tell people how to
spend their dividend.
They'll make those decisions.
They know what their needs are.
Maybe they need a new washer and
dryer.
Um, maybe they want to pay for
uh sports memberships for their
children. I mean, it could be.
10,000 things on where they
might spend their dividend, but
that's not for us to decide. I
just want to make sure, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that we're,
we're doing something for our
constituents that is going to be
a very direct blessing to them.
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
The nonwithstanding, Mr.
Speaker, a body that I'm
referring to, that's a pretty
believe on page 216. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what
nonwithstanding means is that
you're saying everything else in
the law doesn't matter that the
budget overrides that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that
brings me to a quick question. I
think we all know the answer.
This budget wasn't developed
with any sort of uh public
hearings, public input, that
kind of thing, right, Mr.
Speaker?
young lady? Uh, Mr. Speaker, Jo,
before we move too far, uh, too
much further ahead here, the
notwithstanding language, um,
I'm understanding is sort of a
technical way of phrasing that
if something um and if there's a
conflict that this would um help
us uh resolve that, so that's um
I just, if you don't mind my
pointing that out, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Not at all. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Uh, I know that, that this body,
um, uh, in the past, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady has uh
changed law just through the
budget and now Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, has generally been
sort of a broadly uh practice
that we've really worked to move
away from. The budget should um,
you know, fund the things that
are important in New Mexico
create strong reserves, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
nonwithstanding language.
us back into a time of uh of the
budget creating new laws maybe
uh changing that law next year,
not Mr. Speaker, General lady,
sort of the, uh, stable system
we should look at Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I wanna, uh, so
ultimately this is not a
friendly floor substitute, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I want to
acknowledge the um work that's
gone in the uh investments in
many areas that we share, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, cutting
entirely housing.
for the entire state, Mr.
Speaker, general lady, reducing
the amount that communities,
big, small, medium, in between
have to support uh their water
needs, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the, um, I believe there's
25 million that are cut from
quality of life grants. These
support, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady is a gentle lady from
Bernal Leo talked about quality
of life improvements all over
the state. Those are, uh, cuts
that are um.
Not in keeping with the, the
what we heard, frankly in the
committee, uh, and, uh, for
those and other reasons, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I can't
support, uh, the 4 substitute
but appreciate the conversation.
There is debate on the floor
substitute gentle lady from
Bernalillo and Torrance,
representative Lord. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Well, the gentle
lady from Eddie and Lee County
please yield.
I do.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, real quick before I
ask my question, I think we
should um have had the budget to
hands for every family to
address the egg shortage issue.
I think it's a great idea. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
uh, Mr. Speaker and generally
maybe a hen and a rooster.
Every family for fertile, Mr.
Speaker
for fertile eggs, yes,
absolutely, I agree. As long as
we get one that doesn't grow too
early in the morning.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I just
have one question. There was
something in the bill before
that made its way still into the
substitute on page 114.
Talks about the environmental
protection and the purpose of
the environmental protection
progress to ensuring the
Mexicans breathe healthy air to
prevent and mitigate the impacts
of climate change and that is to
reduce greenhouse gas, protect
the public from environmental
contaminants, liver exposure to
radon and radioactive materials
at a cost of 31 million. Mr.
Speaker Delady, was there a
reason why that was left in the
bill?
And the substitute sorry, Mr.
Speaker, Dan Laney.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so you know this is a
voluminous project to go through
a budget this thick and I would
say with the time we had, we, we
did a lot of uh work and I think
a lot of his, you know, I say
it's good work and I think it's
um meritorious, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so, um, we do have
one of our budget reductions in
the non-recurring category was
um a savings of $253 million
that's in the budget for the
so-called.
Community community benefits
fund, which is a new um program
aimed at um climate change and
so we did um take those savings
and apply those as we have
already discussed, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, yeah, because uh
I, I just had a question on that
why that had made from the last
bill into and that this one
that's coming with the climate
change, but thank you, that's
all the questions I have.
There is further debate on the
floor substitute to a lady from
Berley, Senator Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, will
the gentle lady yield?
I most certainly do.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, as I noted
earlier, I am particularly
invested in, uh, diversifying
New Mexico's economy, um, and
so, um, I had a couple of
questions, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, about, um, some of the
cuts, uh, to our economic
development initiatives, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
think if we were to start on
page 192 of the substitute.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I noticed that there is a
substantial cut to the tourism
department, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, could you tell me
how much was cut from tourism?
Um, yes, um, we just wanted to
confirm those numbers and, and
by the way, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, my expert is Rick May, um,
who is our Republican budget
analyst and, and, um, policy
guru.
Um, so in answer to your
question, uh, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, um, what we did do on,
uh, if you're referring to the
Route 66, um, anniversary that's
coming up, uh, what we did there
and let me just get to that
page.
Um, that was, um, let me just
make sure I get the exact
number. Uh, just one minute. Oh
yes, um, so.
It was proposed that the Route
66 advertising program be given
$8 million that along the way
got boosted another 8 million,
so we simply took it back down
to that initial 8 million, so
that that will have I think
adequate funding, um, it is a
kind of a neat important uh
event going to happen and we
think $8 million will certainly,
and this goes for national um
advertising, Mr. Speaker.
a lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, is, um,
Tourism, one of our, uh, most
successful industries in New
Mexico?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I think the return on investment
in um spending on tourism is
pretty good, and yes, um, New
Mexico is a destination place
for a lot of travelers, even
people from overseas.
So, um, we, we've always
traditionally supported tourism,
I think very well often give,
uh, given that department what
it's requested.
And so, um, yes, in answer to
your question, I think tourism
is a is a wonderful thing, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Um, I
do note, however, that the um
the funding is not just for the,
uh, Route 6 Route 66 Centennial
celebration, um, it's actually
for them to continue to, um,
promote New Mexico in
international markets and some
of our successful national
markets, so that does concern me
a little bit, um, that we
would cut such an important
economic driver, um, but, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
creative industries, um, New
Mexico is known for our, uh,
culture, and unique arts, um,
and I did notice, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, there was
a cut to the creative
industries, uh, cut in half
actually down to 2 million. Um,
do you know, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, how many grants were given
out last year, uh, with the
funding that was provided to the
economic development department
for that, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, I would bet a
dollar that you could tell me.
The answer to that question, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, actually,
I was assuming that you could,
since it was, uh, reduced. So I,
I assumed that there was some
statistics on that. Um, but, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
another area that was cut, which
I'm very concerned about because
Um, as we move into, um, some of
these high tech, high growth
economic sectors like quantum,
um, artificial intelligence,
advanced energy, biosciences,
you know, New Mexico has a
tremendous asset here in this
state with our national labs,
uh, with our research
universities, um, and a lot of
the technology that is being
developed is coming out of those
and is being.
Brought to commercialization uh
by entrepreneurs, and I can tell
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
spent about the last 9 months.
Uh, looking at exactly how much
money the state needs, uh, to
support its entrepreneurs,
particularly with incubators and
accelerators, and we actually
need upwards of $20 million. Um,
so I was very disappointed to
see that um that had been cut.
Um, by $5 million because that,
that money will make a um a
sizable impact in the success or
failure of our startups here in
New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
another thing that I noticed
Which, um, I am also very
concerned about, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is the 50%
reduction to the research,
development and deployment fund.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do
you know how much the state was
asked to contribute, uh, for the
um quantum collaborative that
the state applied for?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so I, I do recall, um, uh, we,
we had a presentation about
quantum computing and where
that's likely headed in the
future. I, I guess what it, what
it comes down for me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is.
I want the money.
Especially when we have such
wonderful new money to go to the
people directly and you know
some of these initiatives will,
will find their funding and move
forward, uh, if it's a good
investment, people will, will
find it and uh basically I'd
rather we put our money into our
into our constituencies than to
maybe put and some of these
programs, by the way, let me
mention.
Uh, gentle lady, um, we're
reducing, we're not to totally
cutting but we're reducing back
uh to a level that was initially
requested, so just to make that
clear, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady. I see we've had a,
uh, musical chairs, um.
With regard to the research and
development. So, so two things,
um.
From just the uh the University
of New Mexico, uh, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, I can tell
you that, um, within the last
year, looking at the uh federal
funding through NSF grants and
other federal collaborative
opportunities, the University of
New Mexico actually identified
10 projects that they were
applying for and working toward
that needed a match of in excess
of $100 million.
So $25 million unfortunately is
not going to go very far. And
the return on investment for
something like that actually is
exponential, um, in an industry
like quantum, we're looking at a
30% um job growth and so we
could actually be providing
countless jobs, um, educational
opportunities and a whole
variety of things for, for New
Mexicans. uh, well, I don't
dispute how nice it is uh.
for New Mexicans uh to have a
single tax rebate, uh, in one
year, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
I also noticed uh that for
economic development, and I'll
wrap it up quick because I know,
uh, that other people may have,
uh, questions, um, for economic
development and physical
infrastructure.
Um, I'm seeing, uh, Miss Madam
Speaker, no, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentle lady that.
Trade ports, Lita and site
readiness have all been.
Cut from the substitute, is that
correct? Or did I miss?
Part of it.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm sorry, could you just repeat
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
I'm sorry. Uh, so trade ports,
which was 90 million, LIA, which
was 7 million and 24 million for
sight readiness. Are those in
the substitute?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so the trade ports, um, uh, uh,
project would have other revenue
sources and um regarding and I
just want to mention that you
mentioned federal funding and as
a person who's worked at a
national lab in the past. I
understand um how federal
funding, uh, does a lot in our
in in the labs we have here in
New Mexico, but, um, for
example, um,
Uh, on the federal matching
grants funds, um, the substitute
took out 25 million, but that
program would still receive 50
million.
In an appropriation in fiscal
year 2026, so or 25 I guess it
is, so, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, did I answer your
question?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I believe so. There, there may
be two different lines, uh, that
we were looking at, um, but, um.
The, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, but did you also
remove the, the funding for site
readiness, the 24 million.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
that has been removed from the
bill.
Um, for a number of reasons,
actually, um, we could cite, uh,
a new company project probably
in a lot of places in New Mexico
and this is kind of like picking
winners and losers, um, will
people come because something is
ready uh for uh a building to be
put on the land or whatever we
just thought that.
We probably need to look at this
a little bit longer and uh it
again it seems to uh advantage
certain areas of the state to
the exclusion of many others,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady, um, the site
readiness initiative is actually
something that, um, I've heard a
great deal about from, uh,
constituents on both sides of
the aisle, uh, from folks in all
parts of the state, uh, because
it is so critical to New Mexico
having an advantage or even a
level playing field with our
neighbors, uh, to be able to
bring a company into New Mexico
in a reasonable amount of time.
So it's fundamental to our
ability to compete when
companies are looking at
If they're looking at moving
into hobbs versus Farmington
versus Phoenix versus Denver,
uh, the amount of time that they
can move in and have
infrastructure, um, and
utilities available, um, so, you
know, I do think that that is a,
a program that would certainly
benefit the entire state, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um.
There are a couple of other
things that that I was
disappointed to see being
removed, um, the support for
advanced energy and um,
Uh, in actually that sorry,
that's still there, um, the
trails Plus, that's um.
Is that an increase, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, or is
that the same amount?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
expert thinks that we cut that
amount in half, which should be
still adequate uh for um for the
work to be done, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, um, you know,
I certainly, um,
I I appreciate healthy debate,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, I
am very concerned about the
impact, uh, for our efforts as a
state to diversify our economy
to really invest in the growth
in these other sectors where,
you know, quite frankly, if we
don't invest now and we don't
invest in a meaningful way, I
think we're gonna miss the boat,
um, so.
I appreciate your time and
commitment. It's uh.
It's been a pleasure. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. There's further
debate on the substitute
gentleman from Montero,
Representative Block. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, with a kind gentle
lady from Eddie and Lee, I
believe, please yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and you, you know me, I
like to read through every line
of a bill before I vote on it.
So, Mr. Speaker, generally, I'm
not gonna ask you 1000 questions
because I do think you talked
about what you took out and took
and didn't take out. But one
thing that I had a concern on
the actual bill, HB 2 was I saw
that we're putting $3.5 million
for protecting the American
beaver.
On page 241, and I'm wondering,
did we keep that in the
substitute and I was trying to
find it. I found something about
big horn sheep, but I didn't
find anything about that beaver,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for that question. Um, I
believe, um,
There's something on Bighorn
sheep, um, but I think for
beavers I, I think we took that
out, um, I.
OK, thank you.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I mean, I'm not like a
sheep.
Team Sheep versus Team Beaver,
but it does say conservation
actions for big horn sheep
statewide and other state funds
appropriate.
From the game protection fund.
So I, I guess maybe that would
probably cover that as well, but
I just, I was confused about
where that would be. I know that
there are other, other funds in
there that I'm not really happy
about, Mr. Speaker, but
I do think that it's interesting
that originally we were going to
spend 3.5 million on bighorn, or
I'm sorry, on American beavers
versus the sheep. So that's
pretty much my, my big question
and then also other things that
were at the in the New Mexico
state budget, I saw that I
didn't really particularly care
for, but I do like the idea, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady of those
checks that go out to folks
based on the oil and gas
revenues, and I know that some
people, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, probably.
attempt to equate that with
other kinds of social programs,
but from my understanding, this
is just to give back to the
taxpayers their fair share since
after all these resources are
everybody's and I was wondering
if you could just comment on
that and just tell me the
differences between that and
then other social programs that
we cut from this budget quickly,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so I, I, I think you really
nailed it there. It's a matter
of.
These
exceptional revenues have come
from um extraction industries
primarily oil and gas.
And it has done um a tremendous
uh bit for the state in terms
of, you know, having the
wherewithal to uh to do um to
fund state government and then
maybe do some um expansions here
and there.
But if I were to go into a
coffee shop, uh, here in Santa
Fe, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
And I asked a person who's
sipping coffee.
What is the state government
done for you lately?
And you know it depends uh does
this person.
Uh
Take government services as this
person, uh, work and provide for
his or her family.
Um, you know, but if I, if I
were to say what would you think
about if the state of New Mexico
we have all this extra revenue
from oil and gas that you were
given a check for $600 and that
would be true for every member
of your family.
Because Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I think most people don't really
understand what happens through
state government.
Uh, it may not even much touch
their lives except maybe they
drive on the roads and you know
all those types of things, but
when we talk about direct.
Benefit to families and again
these are the people's
resources.
And um I think it just makes
sense to at least take a pause
right now for this this year and
say we're going to give back.
And um
You know, we, we know we need
state government. We know it
serves a legitimate function,
but sometimes I think we cross
the line, Mr. Speaker.
Of having government do what
private.
Individuals and companies could
and should be doing and I look
at for example housing.
Uh, in my community, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the, the
city has taken it upon himself
not to ask the state to do
anything but put in
infrastructure for housing
developments and things like
that.
I think
Strong local communities make.
The steps and the effort to
provide what is needed in that
particular community.
And so again I, I see this um
dividend as being something that
would be very well received by I
think every constituent at least
uh that I can think of, so, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there's
my answer. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and on
that point.
Regarding those funds. I, I know
some people have tried.
People who I've I've talked to,
I've tried to equate this with
A rebate check during COVID, but
it's my understanding, Mr.
Speaker, that those COVID
checks, they were federal and I
believe that they increased the,
the national debt. Will this
increase the state debt in any
way, shape or form by giving out
these.
These subsidies or these
royalties to citizens in our
state.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, also
a good question. I know this
would do absolutely nothing to
increase the the debt for the
state of New Mexico again it's
um an outflow, uh, to our
residents.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I'm of the
opinion, and I know it may be a
little hardcore, but I'm of the
opinion that
I would trust my neighbor to
spend money more than I would
trust the government to spend
our money, and I know that there
are good intentions, of course,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady in the
budgetary process which I
certainly wanna.
Tell people in the body today,
but I do think Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I would most
certainly like the people of my
district, the 26,000 people who
I represent to be the ones that
can tell me, OK, this is where I
will spend my check at the
grocery store or, or doing home
improvements or something that
could actually benefit the
entire community as a whole
versus some kind of
Very large budget in my opinion,
and what we're seeing proposed
today, and I think that that
could be something that could be
beneficial to the state long
term because it's a, it's a
one-time investment now, but if
it works, and I'm sure it will,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady. It
would be a good idea to, to
ingrain that in state statute
potentially to be like another
state like Alaska that's very
high in government subsidies,
but also has those natural
resources where they do give
those back to the consumer so
that the consumer can make those
decisions.
So I don't know if you have
anything to add on that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Yes. um,
thank you, gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, so, you know, I might
just, um, do a little mouth,
math calculation.
When we talk about um each
legislative district has, I
think on average House district
has about 30,000 residents.
If you take $600 times the
30,000 you're seeing a financial
good economic impact in your
legislative district and each
district here, Mr. Speaker of
$18 million entering into the
economic circulatory system, and
I assume most people would spend
that money, maybe some would
tuck some away in savings.
The point is they would make
their own decisions about how to
spend that money or not spend
it, but $18 million per
legislative district, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is incredible and.
It's uh, it would be a very good
omen to see how that works in
the community, and I, I agree
with many parts of this. I, I do
want to disagree with some of
the stuff we've left in. I mean,
Team Beaver versus Team Bighorn
sheep, but I, I digress on that,
Mr. Speaker. So I, I will just
yield back to the speaker. Thank
you.
There's further debate on the
substitute, the gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker was,
uh, will the gentle lady yield?
I will.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I've been trying to look
through, um, mainly starting on
page 181, um, in, uh, the
proposed budget that you've
brought forth, gentle lady, and
the budget that um was prepared
by, um, the gentleman from
Donana on page 183 trying to
sort of look through the sort of
principles and ideas that have
been, um, suggested here, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, part
of what we
we're discussing and I believe
you sit on appropriations where
some of the values that we were
bringing as priorities to this
budget, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady with one of those values
being public safety, um, would,
would you agree that that was
one of the principles of what we
were trying to um sort through
this session, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so,
um,
I do not recall that we did any
cuts on public safety, um, not
that not that we are aware of.
If you found something, if you'd
bring it to our attention,
please, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Yes, there are
significant cuts um when it
comes to public safety in this
budget, um, would you agree that
when it comes to paying for our
court services, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady swift and certain
justice is part of the public
safety agenda, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so I, I just kind of reiterate
what I said uh a few, I guess,
half an hour ago we are not
making any cuts to recurring
spending that was already in
House Bill 2 except for that one
little piece about the early
childhood education.
Um, department which instead of
using general fund money dollars
for about 187 million. We're
just going to use uh some money
out of that trust fund, Mr.
Speaker, uh, focusing back, Mr.
Speaker, on public safety, um,
starting with the administrative
office of the courts. There are
numerous cuts in your budget,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
helped fund, um, again, the
swift and certain justice that
we're looking for in everything
from ensuring that there are
upgrades to, um, certain
buildings, ensuring that we can
find.
the process again to bring folks
to justice, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, was that intended
in your budget?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
again, I think we need a little
reset here because we're looking
at our spreadsheet for the AOC,
the administrative Office of the
courts, and we do not see any
cuts in the 4 substitute for
that any of that that was uh in
HB2, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, let's
go to line item number 29,
that's missing from your budget,
um, in line item 30 from the
budget that was presented
through DFA, um, one of the
important pieces when we're
looking at, um, focusing our
criminal justice system, um, is
connecting it to the behavioral
health and transitional housing
opportunity, is there a reason
why you left out $110 million
for transitional.
Causing Mister Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I think we
already answered that question,
um, again, I, we have a lot of
spreadsheets in front of us if
um.
You want to try one more time,
that's fine, but we're not
seeing any, any cuts as you've
uh.
Uh, mention, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'll
point you to the budget on page
188 from the proposed budget and
then I'll look at as I look at
your budget for DFA on, um,
transitional housing, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I am not
seeing the $110 million for
transitional housing. Can you
point me to where that might be
in your budget?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so I, I'm looking at um
the HAFC budget here, page 188,
I believe it is, and we already
mentioned why we have problems
with um that original one
because it most of the money
ends up in two cities in the
state and, and we again, we want
to see something a little more
evenly divided, um, so, um, and
I am looking there at at um.
Lis uh 8 through 12, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
while we understand that
communities like mine, I have 23
homeless shelters in our
district, um, that help a number
of people across the region.
It's not just those that, um,
are, you know, living there, but
those that come to receive
services, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, while these, um, areas are
hard pressed to receive the
funding for the ability to serve
a variety of populists from
across the state.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
understand that they have to be
located somewhere and my
district in particular, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is that
place for many people to be able
to travel to who need to receive
those services, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think it's
terribly misguided to um think
that, you know, where these
locations are, um, is, has any
importance as to what services
are being received, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, they have to go
somewhere and as we
see in the budget that was
proposed, Albuquerque and Las
Cruces, um, have a heavy burden
with that given their population
centers, um, and the fact that
folks who are looking for
services, um, can go to those
places, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I think the value of,
of keeping that in there is is
certainly dealing with the
exacerbated situation that we're
in, um, with behavioral health
and, and housing that needs and
um it would be a detriment to to
leave that out of this budget,
but I'll move on, Mr. Speak.
gentle lady, I wanna look at the
public safety infrastructure
that was left, um.
was cut by $2.6 million in your
line item 34 page, uh, 187 from
your budget, um, and it's on
page 189 of the proposed budget,
um.
Is there a reason why you wanted
to cut public safety
infrastructure by 2.6 million.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, um, the HFC, um, promoted
budget, um, was giving a $7.6
million and here's where the
money is supposed to go, um, and
just, you know, kind of get to
the quick of it here. We did not
eliminate that funding and
there's probably already funding
still in the pipeline for for
facilities like this, but here's
where this money was gonna go
to, and again we just reduced
it, um.
For a public safety campus in
Chaparral, um.
Looks like $1 million 400,000
dollars for a local capacity
building in Columbus, $2 million
for support in Luna County,
Hidalgo County, and Dona Anna
County, and 500,000, Mr.
Speaker, for local sheriff's
offices to transport.
State inmates. So Mr. Speaker,
um, gentle lady, what we're
doing here is saying,
You know, a lot of these
programs they're getting the
funding that they um that was
originally uh suggested for
them, uh, but we've essentially
done is saying let's pause right
now, take care of the needs of
every New Mexican.
Uh, and, uh, some of this, you
know, we'll probably visited
again next time we meet, but uh
we think this is really truly
adequate funding.
And again, a lot of these things
are just reductions, not
eliminations, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, thank you for the
response. I just feel like once
we've gone through this
deliberative process and try to
get input, um, and be really
transparent about how these
dollars are directed that
cutting 2.6 million from a
public safety infrastructure
package, um, that would go to
numerous communities, just
limits our ability to, to know
where, what our intent was to
begin with through this.
Through this entire session, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I
just, I find that to be
troubling given the principle of
of priority that we all stated,
I think in in numerous ways that
public safety would be one of
those, um, I'll move on to, um,
another priority, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when it comes to
water protections and
understanding what it is that
we've been trying to do to build
up infrastructure across the
state in water, um, and, you
know, ensuring that we can
respond to drought, wildfire,
etc.
c Mr. Speaker, gentle lady on
page 201 of the proposed HAFC
budget, um, I see the missing
from your budget is the ability
to implement uh water security
planning, um, in the
modernization of information and
tools in how we understand our
water, um, across the state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is there a
reason why we wouldn't want to
have, um, a water security
planning act in 2025.
2026.
Mr. Speaker, General Lee, are
you referring to the, um
You see the strategic water
plan, by any chance, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm referring to the water
security Planning Act on page
201 of the proposed HAFC budget.
It's line item 109. It's, I
can't find it in your budget,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, generally, we're,
we're just checking another
spreadsheet here.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, um, we have an answer for
you. So, um, the 4 substitute
does strike that, but because um
there was information that there
would be other ways to fund
that.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
there's no doubt in the world
that we support public safety,
um, we would always ask for more
money for law enforcement, for
example, and, um, DPS Department
of Public Safety, uh, told us
during budget hearings that it
really needed.
Many more millions of dollars
for a real-time, uh, system for
combating crime and uh the
committee did not give it the
money that it needed, that it
said that the department said it
needed, so, uh, we, you know, we
can look at various line items,
but the bottom line is we do
heavily support public safety
and always have.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
just back on water. I think
that's what I was trying to
focus on with the budget. I
believe, and from my analysis
that there's over $19 million
missing here for aquifer
mapping, helping local
communities understand what
their assets are, the most
precious asset in water, a total
of $47 million in total for,
for, for water altogether from
your budget, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that the, um, you know,
everything from having a 50 year
water plan and, and moving on
is, is.
gone, um, I'm deeply concerned
about your cuts to, um, vouchers
for linkages, programs that are
serving directly to the
homeless, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that we know have proven
results and um I'll just add
that as I look at the
notwithstanding of any other
provision of law for your 1.2,
um,
Is it a billion dollars that we
would give away into to the to
the people of New Mexico. It's a
blatant violation of the
anti-Donation clause, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, going
through the Department of
Finance Administration. We
learned this in COVID, um, but
despite the ideal of being able
to um have an energy dividend,
um, I think we have to fix that
before we start looking at UBIs
for, um, the people of New
Mexico, which I am highly
supportive of, um, but I think
right now the impediment.
Um, of our Constitution
prohibits that and unfortunately
this is not, um, I think
notwithstanding other provisions
of law, this would not be
allowed, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady due to the anti-Donation
clause, um, I would just stand,
um, in strong support of the
HAFC budget as proposed, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, and
ask that the people, um, vote
against this proposed budget.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House for substitute number one
to house appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bills 2 and 3.
May I close, Mr. Speaker?
Very briefly, please.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, first of all, um, the
dividend, um, would not be, uh,
in opposition to our
constitution. Uh, we have done
this before as a state and so
it's perfectly legal, um, I just
want to mention that some of the
reasons I cannot vote for House
Bill 2 since, well, I'll do that
after the vote, Mr. Speaker.
I'll, I know you'll come back to
me, um, but basically, um, I
think it was just stated, Mr.
Speaker, that um we're gonna do
something for the people.
Or we're gonna do programs and
whatever so um I would ask for
support for the floor
substitute, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you. We're on a motion to table
house floor substitute number
one for house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bills 2 and 3.
There's a roll call, a vote of
yes, and we would have tabled
the proposed substitute a vote
of no and we're back on the
substitute. There is a 32nd volt
clock.
32nd book clock.
The vote is now open.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 42 in the affirmative, 24 in
the negative, House floors
substitute for house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bills 2 and 3 has been tabled.
The gentle lady from Eddie and
Lee, you still have the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and um.
Members of the body, I
appreciate the debate that we
just had.
And as was stated earlier, there
are some things we can really
like about this, you know, and
it's an individual analysis, but
some things we like and some
things we don't.
But I will say at this at this
point in time, Mr. Speaker, that
I am not going to be able to
vote for House Bill 2.
Not because I don't appreciate
the amount of work that went
into it, um, you know, there's a
phrase that people tend to
support what they helped create.
And for those of us who serve on
the appropriations Committee.
You know, we're working
together, it's collegial and I
will say I love and respect
every member of that committee.
But sometimes there are some
things in there that I just
cannot justify and I'll just
mention one although I could, I
have a list here of things that
um I don't like about the, the
budget that we're looking at,
but
uh
Millions of dollars into the
paid family Medical Leave Act to
me is the death knell for many
small businesses, not just in my
city, but in many places all
around the state.
And that alone is the I could if
I could cite one reason, it
would be that one because it's
gonna kill off.
A lot of our small businesses
and they've been very vocal that
they cannot manage under uh
what's been proposed and I know
there's been a a committee here
in the house that's looked at
some amendments, but Mr.
Speaker, that's really hard for
me to to stomach and then I will
mention to the $253 million for
so-called fighting climate
change, um.
I never have bought into climate
change as being a crisis of any
sort.
And I think it's hubris to think
that we can do.
Whatever some people think we
should do to change the
worldwide climate, so for those
reasons I, I will not be voting
for the bill, but again I do
deeply appreciate um the
chairman, the vice chairman, and
the work of the committee. Thank
you.
Thank you gentle lady. There's
further debate. The gentle lady
from Los Alamos, Sandoval and
Santa Fe Representative
Chandler. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, with a gentleman from
Donana County Yild. Mr. Speaker,
I gladly yield to the gentle
lady.
Um, well, first, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I just want to
commend you, the vice chair, and
all the members of the
appropriations Committee for the
incredible work that you've
done.
Over the summer and the fall and
then the winter and then meeting
constantly, Mr. Speaker, until
this great day when we actually
have a, a really wonderful
budget to support and thank you
for that, as you know, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I am not on
appropriations and I find some
of the work that you do is a
little, um, difficult to
understand, so I was hoping, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, maybe you
could, um, share with the body
and the and the speaker as to
how do you decide.
What adjustments to make in a
budget, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
great question. I think, Mr.
Speaker, John lady, like we've
talked about here today, uh, we
create a baseline open and
transparent process, uh,
bringing the um New Mexicans
first and foremost making public
on the, excuse me, public
comment on the budget. We are
all of our meetings are open to
public comment. Uh, we've heard
things, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, for instance, focus on
some of the stem.
investments that we talked about
earlier with the gentle lady,
uh, from Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the next part of
that is where committee members,
uh, can ask questions, uh, bring
different perspectives,
committee members are very much
encouraged to have, uh, I think,
a, um, as much input as
possible, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we believe that the best
solutions are brought by uh
folks who coming from their
communities have a sense of the
challenges and opportunities.
and so we make that very open
for committee members, uh, to
participate in. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, then with the, uh,
subcommittees and particularly
with the working groups, the
staff is there whether it's a
full committee meeting or a work
group meeting and so as say a
member of the public flags, we
as has happened in the budget,
Mr. Speaker, General lady, we
think there needs to be more
funding for local agriculture
and local food initiatives, uh,
going from the summer then into
the
budget, those flags from uh the
public advocacy from members
then we develop within our
budgetary framework to make sure
that we keep a strong reserve
that we continue to make new
investments in the high priority
areas, um.
That we take that input and
feedback. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it's reflected, you
know, schools, then public
safety, then water, then
economic development, I think
all of that builds upon that
those were the big recurring
changes, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that the body made.
Another area, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that, uh, that we,
uh, prioritize is clean up of
abandoned uranium mines and
other contaminated sites. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the body
is.
for a very long time, uh, about
how, uh, New Mexico has
supported the nation in many of
these different areas, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, the
need for cleanup came clear in
our committee. We asked the
environment secretary what they
could do if they had funding. We
ask community members if this is
something they want to
prioritize the Speaker John
lady, we heard from members from
both parties that this was an
issue in their communities and
that.
The support for cleaning up
those abandoned uranium mines
along with um characterizing
contaminated sites so that we
know exactly what's going on in
the rest of the state that that
was a priority. That was another
example of a, that was a
non-recurring change that we
made.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Thank you for that
answer and I know Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen having spoken with
you and the vice chair about
your philosophy that you're very
committed to engaging in with
the public, um, and so Mr.
Speaker, General, maybe you
could share with us how, how you
all went about engaging with the
public and um adding
transparency, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen to the process. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. And put simply, the
committee, we and certainly I
believe I know the
vice chair and it's been uh
really engaged in this, uh, and
really all the committee
members, the best solutions come
when you bring communities
together. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I think the housing
conversation was a great example
of that. Uh, we, uh, reached out
to communities all across the
state and said please send the
house appropriations and Finance
Committee that your housing
plans, some of your gaps and
some of the need analysis, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
we had a public meeting where we
had public comment.
Uh, and then a focused
presentation that included
stakeholders, uh, from across
the spectrum, um, that uh said
to the committee, here are the
needs in the communities we're
seeing here the needs across the
state, uh, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think it's
creating as many open doors for
uh uh public community members
across the state to share the
challenges of their community
also share, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the good things, the
op port un ities that are
working, the investment in STEM,
the investment in food, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
Reading academies over the
summer, the Speaker general
lady, the, uh, improvements with
career technical education,
opening it up to community
members, not in addition to
fully engaging our other uh
legislative partners like the
Legislative Education Study
Committee, uh, more input, more
opportunities to share that
input, more public dialogue, Mr.
Speaker.
lady amongst the members of the
committee, uh, done in public
with staff that are there to
help take the ideas, the
thoughts, and the focus from
committee members and turn that
into things that we can work on
together in the budget.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I do just want to
personally thank you we, I had a
constituent, Mr. Speaker, who
was very interested in the
supercomputing challenge and um
I was looking for funding help
support that as part of the STEM
program and you all, um, on the
committee and your staff were
very open to his suggestions and
I'm very optimistic, Mr.
Speaker, that we're gonna be
able to move forward on, on
funding, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So thank you very
much for that, but let me change
um topics a little.
Um, that Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, compensation is
always such a big issue for us
every year, making sure, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that
we're paying our state employees
and our teachers fairly and in
line with, you know, um, cost of
living and so on, and we know,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
things are really tough right
now, really tough groceries are
very expensive and I'm looking
forward to the day when the
prices are going to be brought
down as promised.
Now at the federal level, Mr.
Speaker, really looking forward
to seeing egg prices get down to
maybe $4 a carton. That's still
kind of chokes me, Mr. Speaker,
but I'm hoping that, you know,
we can get down from the $8 that
we're paying now to, to the $4
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
looking forward to having that
promise kept on the federal
level, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, but, um, moving now
to our, our state workers. Could
you share with us, Mr. Speaker,
and Mr. Chairman, gentlemen, um,
what kind of compensation?
increases, are we looking at for
our, our really dedicated state
workers, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
As we look broadly at the, uh,
compensation proposals, uh,
there were, uh, to the executive
proposed a 3%
um targeted pay increase or Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, sort of an
overall 3% increase for state
employees, including for
teachers, other educational
workers. Mr. Speaker.
lady, they targeted some higher
pay in some areas, so it could
have meant folks actually
received less overall in some
cases. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I think, uh, the legislature,
the our approach in house
appropriations and finance and
through the LFC budget was to
actually go at 4%, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that higher 4%
compensation increase was meant
to, uh, as you talked about, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, deal with
some of the cost of living
increases in the
Continud affordability
challenges, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, also to deal with
insurance, uh, and the potential
for the premium premium
insurance increases to take over
a great deal of, uh, or even
eclipse in some cases, salary
increases and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this is an area
where we actually did additional
non-recurring revenue to keep
those premium re uh increases
lower than they would have.
been, uh, what, for teachers and
for other state workers while at
the same time, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady, uh, making that
increase for 4% overall. The
areas, Mr. Speaker, general lady
that went above that, uh, is we
talked about the Department of
Public Safety, uh, has step
increases that the committee
increased here along with the
Office of the State Engineer,
the focus specifically on uh
water for the state, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, maybe could
you share with us, um, what kind
of vacancy rates we're looking
at and maybe tie that to our,
our compensation philosophy, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentlemen, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've
made uh significant compensation
increases over the last several
years, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we've seen vacancy rates
decrease because of that, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, SNAP
benefits is one area, uh.
For New Mexicans who get the,
uh, who are receiving that
support and helping feed their
family, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we were able to hire new
workers there at the healthcare
authority in order to make sure
they get their benefits in a
timely manner and for folks who
don't need those benefits that
they're not getting those
benefits. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we have seen vacancy rates
decline and the job of
protecting the Mexicans' health
and safety of bringing
new economic development,
increasing wages for New
Mexicans, I'll increase because
of our new investments in
compensation. This year, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, again, as
we see the rising cost of
insurance, the continued high
grocery prices and other uh
challenges of affordability, uh,
to keep those gains, we knew
that we needed to make the 4%
compensation increases.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
again, I just want to commend
you, the vice chair, and the
entire appropriations committee
for the incredible work that
you've done. I, I feel very
comfortable, Mr. Speaker, that
this is a strong budget, a
forward looking budget, you
know, an insightful budget, Mr.
Speaker, and I look forward to
supporting it when we're ready
to vote. Thank you. Thank you,
gentle lady. There's further
debate, the gentleman from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does my
friend and colleague from Donana
Guilt, Mr. Speaker, I gladly
yield to my friend, the
gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I too
Consider an honor to be able to
sit on the House Appropriations
and to be able to work through
this process and I appreciate.
The level of transparency that
we.
Went through this year.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
first thing I have to say is I
really think we need to start a
week early.
So, um, the process through the,
through the year, uh, was, was
great.
And
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
wanna.
First lift up the
The committee for such good work
on so many good things.
I, I'm in complete agreement
with the average pay raises for
public education.
For funding for law enforcement.
For the funding that we, the
additional funding that we gave
to our soil and water
conservation districts to some
of the funding that we did with
respect to water.
Meat inspections.
Um
The 30 million, we funded to
CYFD to to work to finally get
them in compliance with the
Kevinness settlement.
You know, the, the trainings for
teachers and administrators.
I, I appreciate that, um, I'm
still not completely convinced
that Hospital 157.
Fixes it in is in agreement with
the LSC policy spotlight that we
went through at the very
beginning of HAFC.
But those are good things. Those
are all good things, and I can
continue a list.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
My concerns are with the
recurring funding.
And the I think the 5.8 is too
high.
And
Mr. Speaker, in, in all due
respect, and gentlemen, with all
due respect, I do feel like the
majority, if not all,
It was in the uh commit on the
floor substitute.
It was done very transparently
because most of those
conversations took place, if not
all, took place.
Either as a full committee or in
subcommittee.
So to say that there was no
transparency in that some of the
things that I heard earlier, I
think.
It was a little
misstated
Maybe a lot misstated is better.
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen.
That I struggle with the 3.7
billion.
And non-recurring budget, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I think
we can both agree non-recurring
spending has
Exceeded 300% in just the last
few years, 2 or 3 years.
And while I understand the
concepts behind it, trying to
get some new things out. I like
uh.
There's a lot of different ways
we could have skinned that cat.
And again, to be clear, I feel
like that was.
Very transparent when we have
those conversations. Mr.
Speaker, some specific things
that I get concerned about.
Gentlemen, $433 million for CYFD
for a 3-year pilot project.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
books tell us the conversations
that we have when
In in committee, not just this
committee and other committees.
The
Department itself.
Needs
A total revamping and
restructuring.
And to start a 3-year pilot
project.
When what we really need to do
is focus on
The things that are broken and
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
You know,
I kind of felt like I got deer
in the headlight looks.
When we were talking with CYFD
about the Kevin settlement.
You know, are you, are you
telling me we're still not in
compliance, and they're like,
yeah.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, we're
still not in compliance and it
was like a shoulder shrug.
And I don't know how you do
that.
I don't know how.
That's not a topic of
conversation every day.
Where between the secretary
between the, the executive
between uh LSC every single day,
you're out of compliance with
the lawsuit settlement.
What are you doing today to fix
that?
And so
Mr. Speaker, and
Gentlemen, you know.
Inside that single lawsuit,
systematic failures resulting in
harm to children in foster care.
Lack of stable placements,
behavioral health needs unmet.
No trauma sensitive system.
Little behavioral health.
Capacity
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
understand inside the House bill
too some of that stuff is, is,
is addressed. But Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that money
doesn't come.
For months
And then to implement it and
then to get it going, that
concerns me that we're not just
sitting down and saying, no,
stop, do it now. So $433 million
to a department for a 3-year
pilot project when the current
pilot when the current projects
aren't working in their current
mandates aren't working that
concerns me.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, if
you'd like to comment on that, I
would love to hear that, and
then I can go on to my next one.
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it's my understanding
that the, uh, 3-year program is
at 37.3 million per year, uh,
you know, that's, uh, a little
over, you know, not quite 130
million, probably very close to
that in total funding, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, the need
for us to support New Mexico.
those most vulnerable, uh,
children and adolescents. I
think that is broadly shared.
There is deep frustration, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, with,
uh, the department as it
currently stands that shared,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I
think the committee felt a
pressing need to do the amount
of funding, which is sufficient
and the type of funding which is
targeted in this pilot for the
most part. There's some, uh,
there's a small deficiency.
some others. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we need to support
and try our best to help these
kids and adolescents have the
right sort of care at the same
time, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, that the, we're pursuing and
folks are pursuing much more
broad reforms. There are needed
targeted ways to get uh for
investment at CYFD, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, excuse me, $37
million total. I apologize.
12.3 million per year, um,
Very needed investments to get
to protect kids while we do
larger reform work. That's Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, what I would
categorize, uh, the committee's
broadly general sort of uh
conclusion, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, I don't dispute
that there is a broad sense of
dissatisfaction at the current
state of CYFD a strong and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think a
strong commitment to improve
that structure. There are
Varying proposals, but Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, to
reiterate, we've got to provide
new funding that we can track
the efficacy of and work to make
sure it's implemented as well as
possible, and the 3-year pilot
is the best way to do that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the proposed
way, uh, otherwise to just put a
great deal of new funding into
the base. The committee was
uncomfortable with that. I think
for many of the reasons we both
share is because, um, the, the
needed changes simply weren't
happening that way.
Thank you for that response, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. Um, my
spreadsheets are kind of small,
so there's a really good chance
I pulled it off the wrong line
and and did that and I do
appreciate, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that you're
correcting the, the dollar
amounts on that.
It's still does have some
concerns, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, can you speak a
little bit about what specific
guard rails.
are going to be placed on this
department with respect to this
pilot program and with respect
to so many of the other areas.
That
Um
This department needs to work
through.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I'm conferring
with my uh uh Mr. Sali Charles
Lee from the Legislative Finance
Committee. One of the guardrails
which we continue from last
year, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
is to disallow program transfer
authority within CYFD, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we've seen,
um, uh, some things there were,
uh, they're paying using state
general fund dollars for things
that the, uh, that should be
federally Medicaid.
matched. So instead of uh
spending Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
federal dollars they were
spending state dollars for
things we are uh we keep that
program transfer authority, uh,
removal in order to have the
most transparency and ensure
that dollars get spent
effectively. Second, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think that
just going through the grow and
in a pilot project, it allows
those dollars to be much, much
more.
transparent in uh so that um
that's a core guardrail and a
core opportunity that's been
afforded through this way of
spreading out the uh
The surpluses that we're seeing
into multi-year, uh, investments
that we can see whether they
work, how they work, work with
departments to try to get them
to work better, Mr. Speaker, um,
that's, uh, uh, just a big guard
rail in itself, making sure that
the money is separate,
transparent, intract annually or
more frequently.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for that answer and I hope
we're doing it more often than
annually and.
I, I, I feel like some of these
guard rows were set for
quarterly reviews.
And, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I do
appreciate that answer. I, I
still, it doesn't.
calm my concerns.
And doesn't.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm not gonna take that one any
further.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
with respect to career tech.
I feel like Mr. Speaker, and
gentlemen.
You know, we started down this
road, focused.
About 3 years ago, and I believe
a non-recurring spending of
somewhere around 15 million.
And then 2 years ago in 2023.
There is a $40 million.
Uh, non-reoccurring, uh, 2024 we
did the same thing in this
budget, Mr. Speaker and
gentleman has a $40 million.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
My concern was that the original
purpose.
Original focus of that request.
From the 15 million to the next
year, the 40 million was for
career technical education and
it was focused, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen on the tools in the in
the buildings in the space.
To kick off career technical
itself.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I feel like last year.
And I, I darn sure didn't catch
it, and I'm pretty good at
reading all this stuff.
That got hijacked.
That 40 million, which was
originally planned for career
tech and let's get it kicked
off, let's get it going.
was used by PED.
For other things.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
grew to CTSOs.
So all 8 CTSOs.
We're we're able to receive that
funding.
And on top of that,
Um, we added innovation zones.
NextGen.
And I think another one in there
somewhere to where.
The focus point
Of the request
Got diverted.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
We've had those discussions
during the last month or so.
And my, my suggestion.
To the chair and co-chair and
the rest of the committee was
that look if we're going to do
this.
40 million is not enough to fund
all the organizations granted,
there's other access points for,
for funding.
But that's not enough.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, when
When we were first started on
this, we had money.
In this document for
CNM to be able to run the annual
skills.
Uh, competition.
That was removed from the budget
as well.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
kind of confidence can you give
the supporters of CTE CTSOs that
range from DECA to FFA.
That that 40 million is enough
this year.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
talk maybe about your vision
with respect to turning that
from non-reoccurring to
reoccurring.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, in
conferring with uh Mr. Sali, uh,
the of the 40 million that were
appropriating this year, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, 10
million of that was a reversion.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
would I take that to mean is
that 1 out of every $4 that we
appropriated for this purpose
last year went unspent. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I think
that, uh, that shows.
That we're starting to see more
uh folks around the state take
advantage of it, which is great,
but when they're sending back 1
out of every $4 that doesn't,
uh, immediately to me, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, raised
concerns that were cutting
funding that other folks might
want. We need, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to support the uptake
and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
different districts have
different needs their ability to
access consistent.
significant CTE funding is
something that as you've noted
here for the last 3 or 4 years,
we started to build that in, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they're
still not using every dollar. In
fact, 25% of last year's
dollars, FY 25 have gone unspent
further, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
um,
There's, I think it's $50
million for uh sort of uh
security, career technical
education and other big capital
cost that's available through
the public uh school, uh,
capital outlay, uh, process. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, adding
those up, I think we share the
desire to see those uh dedicated
here in this body with enough
flexibility, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and
nuance and the, with the
inclusion of things like
innovation zones, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and some of the
others that reflects a lot of
the um
Feedback the committee has
gotten. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
this new sort of more open
process hearing not only from uh
the um PED but also hearing from
New Mexicans around the state
hearing from the legislative
education Study Committee, other
experts and other interested
members of communities they've
sort of brought that forward,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
hope that we get more of those
dollars that are spent this
year, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
and to the question.
About what our consistent
support can look like. We're
really looking at that because
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for some
of these one-time capital costs
or say equipment costs that are
every few years, but not every
year, um, hopefully soon, we'll
see some of that going in, uh,
and then, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we'll have a more
clear idea of what the uh
recurring costs, whether it's
for that instru instructor, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it may be
for that.
Licensing for that software that
they need for drafting, uh, and
maybe a 3D printer, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that could be more of
a recurring cost, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, those are
the sorts of things we'll be
looking at and
If we move if we get more uptake
instead of leaving 1 out of
every $4 unspent, maybe it's
just a few cents on that dollar,
maybe the, the, you know, uh,
more than 75% of that
appropriation gets used and then
next year we're in a place to
say, here are recurring
increases, those can be, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, done through
unit adjustments. Uh, I know
proposals, uh, mainly through,
uh, the SCG and other ways for
as you go into different grade
levels, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
those are just examples of how
we can build in recurring
support, uh, as we go through
this non-recurring increase to
help support career technical
education.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate the in-depth answer
with that. I think, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, as a committee
throughout the summer.
We, we need to have
Regular updates from PED. I, I
appreciate the detail that I was
given from legislative finance
and legislative education study
committee analysts on how the
money was spent that existed.
From the 40 million in the prior
year, how that money was
distributed, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I would suggest that
maybe part of that, the reason
why we got
10 million backwards because
it's not really easy to get to.
So, having that conversation
later would be good. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, I have two
more things that and, and.
Um, the first one is something
that
I stay focused on, and that's
with respect to transportation
budget.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
between section 4 and uh the
federal government we have over
a billion dollars for new roads
for plan to plan through
construction. That's great. Um,
But Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
we, we missed some critical
things.
I went back through, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, all 6 district
engineer reports over the
summer.
The total request for um
Equipment needs today with 75
million.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, when
we're flush with cash.
And we only between section 42
item F and then
why well.
Not everybody's gonna understand
this but line 425 on here we
give 22 million for that.
And um the average request is
over 10 million per district.
Just on heavy equipment. I'm not
talking about lightweight
trucks, half ton trucks and
stuff like that, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So that concerns me.
And then Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen,
When we add
From the specials inside of here
in section 11, 100 million to
the transportation project fund
and 64.8 million from section
41, uh, I E.
I would suggest maybe before
this goes any further through.
On the other side of the house
that that conversation be
extended back with the secretary
and his staff.
On whether or not
That appropriation is the right
amount versus 0, almost 0
appropriation for maintenance.
And I'm not talking about the
maintenance contracts and
striping and stuff like that or
the road maintenance supply
material, but just the actual
cost of the individual districts
being able to get the work done
that's their task.
So Mr. Speaker, I would ask
that, that in, and gentlemen I
would ask that maybe that
conversation continue on and I
know that the original thought
was out of that 188 million that
was in the original, uh, special
supplementals and deficiencies
that when that was pulled out.
That had a drastic impact on the
maintenance because a good
portion of that wasn't intended
for anything other than
maintenance.
So with that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
When I look at the totals on
here and we spend $432.7 million
in growth.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, LSC
got part of their ask.
Executive got part of their ass.
Last year we changed House Bill
Junior money to grow money for
the legislators.
Besides the capital outlay that
was given to us this year.
The, uh, from our side $2.5
million. We have no money taking
that we can take back.
To our district.
My county commissioners spend
more than that.
With respect to that.
We have nothing to go back and
say we fought for this. This is
what we can do to help certain
areas.
From a house Bill junior
standpoint or from another set
of grow projects and I think
that is very.
Disrespectful to 70 people in
this.
Room.
And that frustrates the heck out
of me.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
appreciate the conversation. I
yield back.
There's further debate, lady
from Donana and Otero,
Representative Silva.
Thank you Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Donana yield?
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady from Donana
Otero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, I
first wanna say thank you to the
chair and vice chair and my
colleagues on the committee, it
was the first time I was on
appropriations and um
I will tell you that this budget
HB2 for this year is going to uh
live long in my family. I'm
gonna tell stories about it. So
thank you so much for the
opportunity, um.
And for the opportunity for
someone like me representing a
community like Chaparral to be
on a committee, um, like this
was just a real honor, so thank
you. Um, I wanna talk about a
couple of things, but first, um,
as a community organizer, uh, a
faith-based community organizer
working in uh faith-based
communities across southern New
Mexico, um, I was taught early
on that budgets are moral
documents.
And that those are the documents
that help drive our values into
action.
And this was the first time I
think I really got a full flavor
of that and what that meant and
um wanna focus some of my
questions around some of those
values and how this budget puts
those values into practice, uh,
Mr. Speaker, and, um, and share
small and so um a couple of the
values that I saw, uh, in this
process where one public input,
the amount of public input we
got from communities from
nearly.
Every department agency
commission board that the state
works with and has a budget, um,
we got to hear from and that was
incredible and so I saw the
public input as a value, uh,
data and evaluations, how we
evaluate the way that money is
getting spent, um, I can't tell
you how much time I spent.
Through
With those 3 volumes, right, in
volumes 12, and 3, flipping
through each page and learning
about the data and evaluation
that was at our fingertips and
so I want to thank um the LFC
and their staff for all of that.
And so, um, really, um, just saw
the value of data and
evaluations.
I also think the other value
that I noticed in being in this
committee was um
The value of being targeted with
our ideas around the budget and
money, so being really targeted
in our focus with specific
dollars that help specific
issues and specific communities
while also still being universal
in benefit, and that is a hard
thing to do is to be targeted
and yet universal in the way
that this would help out and so
some of my questions will also
be um kind of focused on that,
on how
Um, we were both targeted in
areas and still having a
universal impact in the state
and so thank you so much, uh,
speaker and and chair small and
so, um, first I wanna talk about
um any of the opportunities
created for New Mexico, uh, and
New Mexicans in in our
communities across our state in
this budget, um, what are the
ones that particularly stand out
to you, Mr. Chair, and, um, and
speaker.
Uh, the opportunities that this
budget specifically looks to do
that might be different or uh
really innovative. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Speaker and Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, um, I
think, uh, first, we heard a
great deal, well, not first, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
heard a great deal about
housing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it's been a conversation
with the committee and with this
entire legislature as has been
noted sort of national.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and so
we heard a lot about housing and
continuing on investments that
we've made to make it to reward
communities, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, who are making it easier
to build, not necessarily to
mandate the mandate that they do
that. But Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, to support communities who
are making it easier to build.
That's what this budget does to
uh help there. But Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think we've heard
that far too many communities,
whether it's urban and
folks are unhoused on the
street, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, whether it may be as rural
and you have multiple
generations living in the same
dwelling that may not be at a
standard that is right for those
people, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we took a big step around
housing as we've talked about,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
taking the collaboration of
local communities where in the
past we've seen uh different
perspectives, say from a city
and a county or Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady from
A cog and a county, uh, in this
case, the proposals began to
really merge thanks to a lot of
work that the members have done.
And we heard Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, folks saying very
clearly, here are things that if
we get this funding, we'll be
able to help transform our
community, get folks off the
street, create new opportunities
for housing. So housing is one,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think we think a lot about
healthcare in this space as
well. Health care affordability.
And Healthcare access are very
important, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we heard about that in
this budget a lot in this budget
in particular, again, begin, uh
creates new opportunities as to
existing investments in a few
different areas. One, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, for the
last couple of years we've done
$15 million for the healthcare
repayment loan. The amount of
interest in that and what we've
heard from the executive, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Is that now we've got new, more
practitioners, whether they're
going through their residency in
state, whether they're out of
state looking at New Mexico is a
good place to come. Other
healthcare professionals who
want to access the healthcare
repayment loan. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the committee made
the decision to go from $15
million to $25 million. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, we've
also heard when it comes to
health care that provider rates
are really important. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this
budget, uh, builds and sets a
remarkable floor that for some
of the most important services
it's 150% of Medicare, the
Medicaid reimbursement that, uh,
practitioners will be receiving
in the state, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, in addition,
To expanding services for doulas
and other health care for a wide
variety of healthcare
professionals. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, this is something
that we're seeing a lot more
healthcare providers sign up to
provide Medicaid services for
New Mexicans and in the state,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, where,
you know, roughly half, maybe a
little less, sometimes a little
bit more of our New Mexicans are
receiving those Medicaid
services. The increased
writer, uh, network and uh Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, bringing
new providers in with the
healthcare loan repayment or
some great examples in the
healthcare space. We talked, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, briefly,
another really strong healthcare
investment was related to elder
care and specifically the
nursing home rebasing, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that um
Going back to the LFC interim
process and then Mr. Speaker,
General lady with really a lot
of gratitude to the committee a
late night nursing care, nursing
home, uh, operators said very
clearly that the level of
service we can provide is
suffering. We know that the most
vulnerable New Mexican seniors
are being served by Medicaid. We
want to provide a higher level
of service and so with the great
work of the LFC staff and that
rebasing.
We were able to provide for the
rebasing, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I've also briefly
mentioned the um
Snap, uh, benefits, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, these benefits
which, as we talked about the
focus on local agriculture and
local food, which presents a lot
of really good opportunities
that we heard very clearly from
the department that uh pass
lawsuits not getting benefits to
folks in a timely manner that
they needed new positions to be
able to support that. And so
that was something that very
much came through the committee
process, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
The, um, we, I think the food
investments in this budget
building again uh on the summer
we're super strong, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I then switched the
committees or the bo's attention
on public safety, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we heard from the
courts that the judges have
received raises that were long
overdue and much needed, but
that some of the lowest paid
court personnel
were had not received the
raises.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in
a very broad and bipartisan way,
the committee said we need to
prioritize raises for those
lowest paid court personnel. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we heard
from newly elected district
attorneys who said the previous
district attorney, uh, they, uh,
had, you know, the office that
the new district attorney is
leading, uh, was hiring a lot of
new, um,
Assistant DAs and other
personnel to shrink the time
from when a crime is committed
when somebody is caught and
charged, it takes far too long
for that person to, uh, justice
to be administered. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the investments in
some of those new district
attorneys were necessary as were
Mr. Speaker, General Lady
investments in uh the public
defender's office. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, there was a special
software for courts to be able
to trans
crime. So another area in public
safety. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the raises, I think that
we've talked about for the
Department of Public Service for
our, uh, state police officers
was very much a community-driven
process, um, where we had, uh,
and again, I want to credit and
thank the ranking member and
many others, uh, for making sure
that highlighting those internal
uh increases were very important
for the committee, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um,
Water and natural resources was
perhaps the most uh was another
very significant area of
investment, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the, uh, after effects of
fires in the catastrophic floods
had the committee very focused
on the multiple layers of
support that we could do. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, new
forestry investments. I want
very much think uh members
including the gentle lady from
um Don
Sierra, and Socorro for also uh
looking for language that in a
large investment, in this case,
$20 million to support forestry
will help get technicians who
are able to do some of the on
the ground archaeological work
that is necessary to work on,
um, federal land in this case,
sort of the different land
statuses that exist. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've
talked through the $200 million
to the Water Trust board.
The 19.7 million to Aquifer
mapping, the Speaker, General
lady, we've heard for a very
long time that in districts and
regions of the state where
aquifer mapping was taking place
that those communities received
great benefit. You have private
landowners who want a partner in
this case with the New Mexico,
um.
Uh, geology bureau who's doing
that work because they need to
know what's there and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, members
from both parties said we need
to make sure that we're pushing
uh this aquifer mapping to get
as much information in as short
a time as possible, uh, in order
to get that, uh, so that we can
make good decisions about New
Mexico's water, particularly as
we see, uh, constricted
freshwater sources and supplies,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um,
It's sort of like ranking your
favorite, like favorite
anything, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the uh economic
development investments, uh,
well, let me say quickly on
public safety, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we've heard from
communities including
communities across the state
that transport of inmates that,
that the sheriffs who are
transporting inmates for
different purposes that that
costs them a lot of money. And
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
they weren't receiving enough
reimbursement for that.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
increasing that reimbursement
for, uh, our sheriff's officers
who are transporting those
prisoners alongside, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, new
funding for public safety
infrastructure. This is going to
take, you know, this is gonna
serve the different communities
that it supports, but Mr.
Speaker, General lady, that new
money is a new source of capital
funding alongside capital outlay
that will help communities build
much needed public safety.
Uh, infrastructure think bring
new uh infrastructure at the
same time, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, as we added $4 million to
the recruitment and retention
for um
Our local law enforcement
officers and other, uh, the
public safety officers, those
are all examples of uh really
committee-driven investments and
when we say committee in this
case, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I think what we're really
clearly saying is New Mexico
residents and uh folks who have
come forward, whether as a
member of a local government,
whether it's somebody just
zooming in, whether it's
somebody who's been able to make
the trip up to Santa Fe, that.
were a great deal of this has
started and um that's what's
reflected in the budget, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, all in a
responsible manner, again, it's,
I think a great credit to the
committee that we're able to do
really targeted efforts, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, in
response, I think to your point,
um, that we're looking at the
whole state while keeping Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, an open
ear, an open mind, and a focus
on how we can help.
communities all across the state
solve the need that they may
have.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen for um that robust
um answer and just giving your,
uh, top 10 favorites on on the
budget, um, I wanna focus a
little bit on um on our rural
communities. I know you
mentioned that a little bit,
but, uh, I represent like many
of us a lot of rural parts of
New Mexico and rural New
Mexicans. Um, I grew up in an
unincorporated rural part of
southern New Mexico and so that
and the people in those
communities.
always have a really special
place in my heart.
And I tend to have a
preferential option for people
who live in rural unincorporated
communities, um, because of my
own experience growing up, uh,
in Vaddo and, uh, so in Southern
Donana County and so when I
looked at the budget and as I
was looking at different
agencies that um we're funding
rural parts of New Mexico, um, I
was often thinking about my own
district and Chaparral and the
districts that were nearby, but.
In being in committee, I also
learned about rural parts of New
Mexico that um I haven't visited
often or visited at all and so,
um, the representatives and
communities that were in the
room, uh, from like Harding and
Lincoln, Sierra Ria Riva Lee
Counties. I was able to learn
just a vast array of things from
these counties and the people
that represent these counties
and so in some ways
self-interest in the budget grew
and my self-interest as a
representative grew and and when
I say self-interest, I mean that
which I care about in concert
with others. And when we were on
appropriations and were sitting
in those late night meetings. I
was thinking about what, what is
important to me, but also what
is important as I'm in concert
with all of these other people
and all of these other agencies
in the state of New Mexico and
that's.
Where my, my interest grew and
expanded, um, as I was listening
to my colleagues from other
rural parts of New Mexico, um,
and, and I know that we have
special um special issues we
have a very unique ways of doing
things or we lack the um all the
tools and resources that bigger
cities, uh, or municipalities
might have. And so Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, I
wondering if you can talk about
the things in this budget that
might benefit rural, uh, Nuevo
Mexicanos, New Mexicans, um,
and, uh, and then how that also
might bring us into the future
and bring those communities into
the future with the state. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think like many of us in this
room, I've had the experience of
growing up on a dirt road. Also,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, where
we lived in Grant or outside of
Grants and
in El Cerro mission from 3rd
grade through high school, uh,
still dirt roads, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, this I really
proud of the support for uh vast
swaths of rural New Mexico in
this budget, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we've talked through the
water investments. I can't
overstate that enough. In
addition to the large
investments in the water trust
board, there's specific funding
to help uh the, uh, small mutual
domestics, smaller waters.
systems regionalized, uh, that
is funding that the gentle lady
has worked, uh, um, from Rio
Riba Taos, and many other
counties along with others who
worked on for a long time.
That's in this budget, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've
talked through aquifer mapping,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the trails plus, uh, the outdoor
equity fund, the river stewards,
these are all, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, going to support in
many cases very rural
communities, particularly, um,
Uh, and, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we've seen communities,
particularly in the Northwest,
uh, also up in Farmington really
do great work with some of these
trails plus grants. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, what the body
now knows, I think, and we've
all been educated on is our soil
and water conservation districts
are one of the few subdivisions
local governments who can work
across all different levels of
property ownership, so they can
work on, Mr. Speaker, General.
lady, uh, federal land, they can
work on tribal tribal sovereign
tribal lands, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, deeded land, uh,
private land, they can work on
state land. They get Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, a really
strong investment in this
budget. $9 million.03 million
dollars per year for 3 years
where we can monitor that
effectively and I'm really
excited about that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we've talked
through many of the forestry,
uh, the firefighting and
not shot related investments,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
wanna go back to the $50 million
for uranium, abandoned uranium
mine clean up, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, there are parts of
the state, uh, in whether it's
on state land, tribal land,
federal land, or a mix of others
where folks can, where it's uh
you, you certainly aren't doing
any economic development, you're
probably not going there for
recreation. They are still, um,
a dangerous sites, Mr. Speaker,
generally.
I think it's a very strong point
of pride for the committee that
we're dedicating state dollars
to begin a cleanup process while
at the same time learning more,
uh, and ensuring that we can,
um,
All the federal government
accountable and ask for the the
money back that they should be
paying back. But Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the idea of waiting
on the federal government or
beginning that process now, the
committee took a, I think a
convincing step in let's start
doing this now and I'm really
proud of that. Mr. Speaker,
General lady, a few others, uh,
the, uh, in, in-state, um,
Meat inspections is something
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
many in this body deserve a
great deal of credit, uh, for
working on over a number of
years, making a big recurring uh
commitment to the livestock
board for that purpose. That
also was a point of pride for
the committee and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, as we've heard
about New Mexico is sort of
punching above its weight,
getting more local meat into
schools, uh, senior centers and
others the opportunity to build
meeting.
that uh the in-state meat
inspections is something that
is, uh, uh, I think a lot of,
uh, there's a lot of pride for
folks, so the Speaker John lady,
if you're like many of us in
this room, looking forward to
turkey hunting in a rural area
in New Mexico, uh, chances are,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that,
um, the opportunity we have
today to vote for this budget is
going to support that area in
key things, health care,
Um, housing, but especially in
water and in natural resources.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen I appreciate um all of
those comments and do you just
want to close, uh, asking my
colleagues for a due pass on
this and for also the LFC's uh
top priorities that I think this
budget reflects is increasing
per capita income for New
Mexicans, increasing the quality
of life and access to health
care for the state. So thank you
with that. I yield. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. lady from Santa Fe
Mr Speaker, this matter having
been under consideration for 3
hours.
as I moved to close debate.
There's a motion to the debate.
All those in favor if I was
saying a.
Oppose a.
Yeah I have it. The baby is now
closed. Gentlemen from Donana,
we're back to you to close. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, buddy. I really appreciate
this conversation. I deeply
appreciate the committee's work,
Mr. Speaker, uh, if you're a
rancher in Raton, this budget's
for you. If you're a 6th grade
student at Seboeta Elementary.
This budgets for you. If you're
worried about affordability and
access to health care in
Albuquerque and any other part
of the state, this budget's for
you with that.
I would move that the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 2 and 3 do pass. We are now
on final passage of House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
bills 2 and 3, 32nd book clock.
The vote is now open.
Well it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 50 in the affirmative, 18 in
the negative, house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
bills 2 and 3 has duly passed
this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson, are you
ready on item number 12?
Yes, I am, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point that all
action is necessary for place in
House Bill 74 on final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the bill, Mr. Speaker.
Um, this is another simple bill.
It what it does is it sets up
the parameters to have a first
responders firefighters, EMTs,
etc. to be able to set up peer
to peer um.
Um, peer support, it, it.
takes away the liability if
they're acting in good, in good
faith and with that I stand for
questions to Mr. Speaker, I move
that HB 74 do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
The board is now closed by a
vote of 16 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative. House Bill 74
has duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Dona Anna, are
you ready on item 18?
And Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
214 on final passage has been
taken and it is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution generally to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. House Bill 214 creates
the dual credentialing and
Access Act. This act mandates
that the Department of Health
established a voluntary
credentialing uh process for
dulas. The credentials, uh,
enables doulas to enroll as
Medicaid providers Dula
credentialing is a volun
Frontier process that would
allow jelas to bill Medicaid. It
is not required to practice as a
doula in the state, however,
without certification, a juror
would be unable to bill Medicaid
for services provided and that
was Mr. Speaker, I will stand
for questions.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind gentle lady from Dona Anna,
please yield.
I yield to the kind gentleman.
Thank you so much.
Whoa, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Wow, I guess my little
stand here for my, my computer
didn't like my line of
questioning already. Oh no.
OK, I think, I think we're
stable now, Mr. Speaker.
Maybe there's a ghost in the
building.
I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, but
the gentle lady yielded and my
computer just just jumped off
the, the stand. So that's very,
very interesting.
Maybe I should vote no on this
bill, Mr. Speaker. I'm kind of
scared to vote yes. Anyway, so.
As I was saying before, uh, the
ghosts came into the chamber.
Mr. Speaker.
So Mr. Speaker, as we were
talking about doulas before we
were so rudely interrupted, uh,
Mr. Speaker.
I know we're talking about this
program being voluntary, a
voluntary program, Mr. Speaker.
Can you tell me, uh, when we're
talking about a credential
doula.
I know there are 2 large
national groups that credential
doulas, and I, I, I have a list
here. I'm just wondering, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, would they
have to go through those doula
credentialing processes.
Before they get state recognized
or how, how are we defining what
credentialed means.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, the uh, what, what
the process would be, it's a
state process and so they would
have to go through the state
processes of Medicaid to be able
to get credentials.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And do we know if
there's any differences between
what those, those trade
associations who do credential
doulas do versus what the
state's credentialing would be
for the doulas.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, they would be very
similar, but at the end of the
day it's the state processes
that our state dos would have
to, to get through that hurdle.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, you know, I,
I, I voted for the bill in
committee because I thought I
wanted to hear it on the floor,
and I know we were, we were kind
of rushed, so I didn't ask too
many questions on this then, but
I did, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
wanna understand kind of what
the requirements would have
been, and it sounds like they're
similar, but there would still
be a state process, and I'm
wondering, can you tell me what
specific amount would each
license cost annually.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that would be up to
the department to set that rate
and as of right now since it's
not this bill is not in effect
they have not set that rate yet.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I guess
according to the FIR I believe
it projects about $600,000 in
new spending would be needed to
fund
administration and credentialing
programs, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, do we know how many folks
we will need to hire to oversee
this process and then would it
be?
Just like a team of people or
what, what are those costs as
well as just the administrative
going to be.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so it would be for 2
FTEs and then 400,000 would be
to establish and run the
program.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that, that helped
me on that one and then.
I'm just wondering, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what is the federal
government's requirements say,
versus the state's potential new
requirements for Medicaid
reimbursement. So currently, are
we saying that now as of today,
Medicaid cannot be billed for
Doula services under Medicaid
without our state creating this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, that is correct.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General. Yeah, that kind of gave
me a little bit of a, I'm an
over overview because I was
thinking, oh no, well, if it was
not voluntary, then the state is
taking over the process, but
according to what I'm hearing,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, this
would just allow doulas to bill
Medicaid, and we would allow
doas in the state, whereas
before they were just privately
licensed or privately
credentialed and this will just
get us in line to get those
federal dollars for those
services. Speaker and gentlemen,
you are absolutely correct.
OK, perfect. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you for the
clarifications and, and I think
we got through this without any
more, uh.
Funny business, so I really
appreciate it, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
So, you know, for the debate
generally close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I now move that
House Bill 214 do now pass
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 67 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. House Bill 214 has
duly passed this house.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, um, that's gonna wrap
up, um.
3rd reading for today, but we do
have some committee reports I
would prefer if you guys can
stay.
Any announcements before we go
to committee reports, gentle
lady from Donana, Representative
Rubio, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
um, folks, I, we have some um
mailers delivered to your desk
today and it's regarding a film
that's gonna be shown on Sunday
afternoon with a Q&A and I'm
really excited to, to be able to
partner with uh leader Armstrong
and others about this. It's
called First We Bom New Mexico.
It's about the downwinders who
we really appreciate.
And so I hope you can make it if
you can't on Sunday, it's right
before the, the Oscars, if
you're not gonna go to any Oscar
party, um, because I'll be
dressing up for that and then um
alternative showings on
Wednesday and Friday, um, in
the, in the next couple of weeks
at the state land commission, so
thank you.
members take note, gentle lady
from Santa Fe Los Alamos and
Sandoval. Um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Your House Judiciary
Committee will meet 15 minutes
after the close of the floor
session. We have a heavy agenda
snacks, not dinner will be
served, Mr. Speaker.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. You're a rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee.
We'll meet tomorrow morning at
9:00 a.m. in room 305. Thank
you. Members take note any other
announcements, gentlemen from
Donana, Mr. Speaker, your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet 15 minutes
at the conclusion of the floor.
Wow, I thought you were going to
give folks a break. I guess not.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Taos. Mr. Speaker,
your house agriculture sekias
and water Resources Committee
will be meeting tomorrow morning
at 9 a.m. and 3:15, no dinner.
Members take note.
Gentle lady from Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. House
Commerce will be meeting uh in
at 4 o'clock and 3:17. Thank
you. Members take note.
And the announcement is going
once going twice, gentle lady
from Santa.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Bill 65 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Greer
chair.
Move adoption of the committee
report. We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 65. All those in
favor 589.
Who's name, the Committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, Education Committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 67 has had it under
consideration report seen with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted G on the
rests chair adoption of the
committee report of a favorable
community report in House Bill
67. All those in favor sign up
by saying a.
Opposed name. The IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Bill 365 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
government elections and Union
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted G Andreserve adoption
of the committee report of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 365. All those in
favor if I say 9.
' s name, the IAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 283 has had it under
consideration and reports same
without recommendation as
amended and it's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want to
Johnson, chair?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
adoption of a favorable
community report of House Bill
283. All those in favor and I.
On the supposed name, the Isabic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 297 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson chair?
Of adoption. We are an adoption
of a favorable committee report
of House Bill 2297 as amended,
all those in favor by C I.
All those Bona,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 340 has had
it under consideration report,
same with recommendation that it
do pass and he's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair?
Move adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report of
House Bill 340. All those in
favor and if I say I.
I suppose nay,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
to House Bill 367 has had it
under consideration in Port Sa
with recommendation that it do
pass and it's referred to the
commerce and economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted D1 Dun
Johnson chair.
of adoption. We're on adoption
of a favorable committee report
of House Bill 367. All those in
favor, sitting up a C 9.
All the suppose nay.
The ASA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 411 has had it under
consideration, reports same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted to Wanda
Johnson share.
Move adoption adoption of a
committee report in the House
Bill 411. All those in favor and
if I see a.
I suppose nay.
The SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred House Bill 303
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended, and
he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted, Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report of House Bill
303. All those in favor signify
by saying a.
Holzpo's knee, the Iaba
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 364
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he referred
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report of
House Bill 364. All those in
favor and I say na.
I suppose nay report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to whom
has been referred House Bill 370
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
health health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 370 do pass
and thence referred to the
commerce and Economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report of
House Bill 370 but a favorable
committee report on how Health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for house 370. All
those in favor, and if I would
say no.
Oppose me.
Yeah, SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee too has
been referred House Bill 373 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and he's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker, adoption. We are an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
373. All those in favors I would
say no.
I supposed,
the IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 389
has had it under consideration
report saying with
recommendation that it do pass
and he's referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, moved option. We
are an adoption of a favorable
committee report and House Bill
389. All those in favor say I.
Others suppose nay, the
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 393 has
had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson's chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption
of a favorable committee report
of House Bill 393. All those in
favoring C I.
All the suppose nay, yes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 430 has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Mr.
Speaker, moved. We're adoption
of a favorable committee report
of House 4:30. All those in
favor and I say I.
I suppose na.
Yeah have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your taxation and
Revenue Committee to has been
referred House Bill 417 has had
it under consideration report,
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended, respectfully
submitted, Derek J. Linda chair.
Mr. Speaker, please move
adoption. We're an adoption of a
favorable community report of
House Bill 417 all those in
favor say a.
Po's name.
The I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, you're enrolling
and engrossing committee to has
been referred House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 8 as amended with
certificate of correction has
had it under consideration and
reports the same has been duly
enrolled in a gross preparatory
to signing by the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
Anita Gonzalez, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
of a favorable committee report.
We're adoption of a favor
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 8 as amended with
certificate of correction. All
those in favor signified by
saying I.
I suppose nay.
Yeah I saw it be report adopted.
That the record reflect that the
duly enrolled and gros copies of
House Bill 8 were signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business mode.
Messages.
So no objection to disorder.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and engrossed copies of House
Judiciary Committee's substitute
for House Bill 8 as amended with
certificate of correction.
Has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and return same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 242 as
amended and requests the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson, a chief clerk.
you'll be entered.
Your lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to go to
that order of business.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, I will um be adding a
committee referral to House Bill
548, um, has 548 was read in and
referred to the House Taxation
and Revenue Committee, we are
going to start with a referral
to the House Energy,
Environment, Natural Resources
Committee, the the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
So again, House Bill 548, the
new committee referral will read
house energy environment,
Natural Resources Committee,
followed by the Houseexation and
Revenue Committee.
Any other announcements.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
I was, oh, hold on a second
before I take that motion.
There's one more announcement,
gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I
thought you forgot about me, Mr.
Speaker. What do Dennis call
X-rays?
What gentlemen?
Toothpicks.
It took me a minute. Good one.
General lady from Santa Fe.
On that note.
Mr. Speaker, on that point.
I move that the house recess
until 10:30 a.m. tomorrow
morning. recess until 10:30 a.m.
tomorrow morning.
