Representative Jones.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Romero.
Vice chair Lana.
You.
De la Cruz.
Here
Thank you everyone. Thank you,
members of the committee. We'll
wait for the chairman to.
Get to the hot seat there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Please
proceed.
Thank you, Chairman.
Oh
Let me have my guests uh my
experts actually so I'll start
to my right.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name is Joseph Simon. I'm an
analyst with the Legislative
Finance Committee.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman
Committee, Ricky Serna,
Secretary, Department of
Transportation.
Good morning, Mr. Cha Diego
Jimenez. I'm a uh budget analyst
with DFA.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I proceed.
Please proceed. Uh, we're gonna
be
talking about amendment to House
Bill 3, House Bill 3 in total.
Uh, before you is a proposed
amendment to House Bill 3, the
annual operating budget for the
Department of Transportation to
arrive at this.
Amendment, members of the
consensus technical Group met on
3 occasions to examine NMDOT's
budget request.
And the needs of the coming
fiscal year and arrive at a
recommendation with the
following priorities, and Mr.
Chairman, if I might just take a
minute, I really appreciated the
work that happened over the 3
days. I was able to attend one
of them and.
And members
This team LFC Transportation.
An analysts
had literally had their sleeves
rolled up working hard to make
sure.
Because the presentation that
you heard was an overview. They
had to get to the detail, and
that's what will happen today.
So Mr. Chairman, I will, there
are 3 primary points that I'm
going to read, if that's OK.
Please proceed, Mr. Chair. Uh,
the first one in rank or they're
just bulleted, but it's ensuring
an MDOT has sufficient budget
authority in the personnel
category to attract and reign,
retain the best staff, including
in hard to fill positions like
engineers. The proposal includes
a total of 249.5 million for
personnel, which includes
additional funds for health
insurance rate increases for
employers and 4% pay raises in
FY 26 as included in the LFC
recommendation for compensation.
And MDOT has been successful at
reducing its vacancy rate in
recent years and the proposal
allows the department to
continue to feel needed
positions, while also addressing
potential liabilities related to
pay inequity.
Next
Within the constraints of
NMDOT's limited revenue,
providing additional funding for
road projects.
While the largest areas
identified for increases was for
employees or possible, the
consensus group added funds for
road projects.
This included 5.6 million for
100% state funded road projects,
an additional 11.8 million for
local road projects through the
transportation project fund and
local government road fund.
When local governments need
assistance in completing these
projects, an additional 3.7
million from the state road fund
to help close the gap when
needed.
3, the proposal provided
additional funds for critical
but smaller projects. This
includes 1 million for the
department's road beautification
projects to put New Mexico's
best foot forward for both
residents and visitors alike.
And critically
The proposal includes 6,639,000
for the department's target zero
initiative to improve road
safety in New Mexico. New Mexico
has one of the highest rates of
motor vehicle fatalities and
programs like Target Zero are a
first step in improving the
safety of our roadways. Last
chairman.
Finally, the proposed amendment
shines a light, an NMDOT's
budget by separating out
individual line items for major
areas at the department's
budget.
This includes for road
construction construction
projects for local road projects
and road maintenance. Now, if
you want to know much about
MDOT's operating budget for
equipment.
It is here on page 4 of your
amendment.
If continued in futures, it will
allow us to see with clarity.
If we are actually investing in
these high priority areas. Feed
feedback from an MDOT allowed
for this to be done in a way
that will not require major
accounting changes in the
department.
As chairman, we stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mister Chair. Do I
have a motion?
Thank you. We have a motion to
uh discuss the amendment in a
second, uh.
Do we have any questions from
the committee?
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um
So I'm looking at the outputs on
page 4.
And I'm wondering if you've
considered an output that would
make sure that there's road
projects dispersed by region.
How do you prioritize equitable
investments per region.
I'll have the answer.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
it's a great question, and
actually we'll.
but we're gonna talk a little
bit about that in the next item
on the agenda.
The Department of Transportation
uses um
They use a we use a process that
fundamentally considers a number
of factors when identifying
roadway priorities.
And um after this too, I'd like
to share with the entire
committee, uh, a slide that kind
of captures all those measures.
And they fundamentally include
safety.
They include pavement
conditions, bridge conditions,
economic development conditions,
uh, traffic counts and volume
counts a number of measures that
essentially flow priority
projects to the top of the list.
And to be sure, when we're
doling out our federal funds and
our state maintenance funds,
we're looking at equity across
the state, but understanding at
the same time in some regions of
the state or in one area of the
state, we may have a project
that's just critical as it
relates to crash data, pavement
conditions, bridge conditions,
etc. and so, um, and economic
development to that end,
including the creation of new
lane miles and so, um, I think,
um, we would be open to
entertaining a measure that
talks about that, but
Um, I, I believe what we can
show you is that there's a
significant amount of thought
and process to identifying how
projects are.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Secretary.
So that thought process, that
thoughtful process is happening
internally.
And we may not see that unless
we ask for it.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, we
can actually show you that
process, right, for the projects
that we're moving forward and so
what I can share with you
immediately, uh, before the
committee's over is um a table
that shows those metrics that
we're looking at when
considering project selection
and what I've asked the team to
do as they move construction
projects outward to you all
through tears is we need to have
that project selection complete
on all of them so that we can
stand by what we're seeing is
because of the process, we move
it through.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Enex, we have a
representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, presenters, and
it's always good to see our
chair on the other side of the
fence, um.
So, I asked this question once
before and let me ask it again
because I think that it's
important, um, when you do your
RFPs, do you have a local
option.
Um, for local contractors.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um,
We unfortunately for federal law
purposes cannot do that with
federal funded construction
projects and so it won't allow
for that local. We have
flexibility to do so when we
have state funded projects.
However, the bulk of our state
funds are dedicated to
maintenance projects and
operations.
And so the way we um handle
maintenances we issue
essentially RFPs for maintenance
agreements, right? And so much
like GSD would do for price
agreements for state entities to
utilize.
We have a list of maintenance
agreements that um include our
local contractors.
And we also allow for those
maintenance agreements to be
used by locals as well because
our RFP process mirrors that of
the GST.
And so in short order for state
funded projects, we can do that
and all of our projects through
maintenance are typically done
through those maintenance
agreements, but uh for federal
projects, we cannot because it
intersects with CFR.
Well, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that and thank you for that.
Um, secretary, I'm glad to hear
that because I think that we
need to keep our folks working
in New Mexico as much as
possible and, and I know
sometimes for the large projects
we contract a lot of out of
state folks just because it's
the nature of, you know, maybe
the skills, and I think that's
just a message to our local
contractors that maybe um you
know, kind of stepping up that
um.
That skill set in order to to
ensure that
Um, local contractors can
You know, be the ones that are.
Selected in in the final.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, we can provide you with the
figures of local versus out of
state contractors and we'll be
it'll it'll be a proud thing to
share that the bulk, the
overwhelming majority of our
projects are done by state
contractors and so speaking for
our contracting community, we
work with very closely. They,
they continuously express the
capacity to do more work for us,
um, and, um, we appreciate that
when we need them, especially
for emergency projects or
On the fly, they're they're
available with the, with the
personnel power to get those
things done.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Next we have a
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr.
Chairman, I wanted to ask you a
couple of questions about
section 4.
Of the budget, I'm looking at
page 2.
First question I had is, are we
still budgeting cash balances in
this department.
So, um
Mr. Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, we had as the
consensus group, uh, a
discussion on that very issue,
the department was comfortable
with, uh, budgeting $30 million
of cash balances, and that's
included in, uh, in the
amendment.
Mr. Chairman, I'm also looking
at page 2. I'm looking at the
debt service.
And we talked a little bit about
what that debt service is on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Lundstrom, so those debt service
payments are for bonds that have
been issued by the department
already up to this point. So,
uh, for example, the department
just this last year issued
what's called refunding bonds.
So they paid off some old debt
with some new bonds and um and,
you know, lowered their debt
service a little bit through
that process. So these are
outstanding bonds that the
department currently has, and
that's the debt service level.
OK. And then, um.
Mr. Chairman, if I may just add
so that.
Uh, bond started in 2004.
The one that is represented on
page 2.
Yes.
So Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr.
Secretary, if it goes back all
the way to 20004, is that what
we're saying?
Those aren't grip bonds, are
they?
Um
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
yes, the 2003 legislation, um,
authorized 1.5 billion. That
funding was leveraged over the
course of 17 years, the last uh
dead issued was in 2021 in the
amount of 234 million.
And so our debt services, uh,
we're expected to uh pay off
that debt in fiscal year 32.
So, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary,
does that also include all debt
associated with the rail runner.
Mr. Chair Representative, it
would include all debt
associated with the Roadrunner.
So, there was one other question
I wrote down here and I'm trying
to find it. Oh, on page 6, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Secretary.
Percentage of section 5 is
budget adjustment authority.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative, can I just
clarify, do you mean section 5
of the general Appropriation
Act, Section 5 of the
Appropriations Act, Mr. Chairman
and Representatives, Section 5
of the General Appropriation Act
won't have budget adjustment
authority. This particular
language, if the committee were
to adopt it and that were to be
uh uh rolled into House Bill 2
as the substitute for House Bill
2 and 3. This would appear in, I
believe, section 13.
Of the of House Bill 2, which is
the um
it's excuse me, Mr. Chairman
Representative. It's either 12
or 13. I can't remember the
exact number, but I can get that
for you. But so there's two
sections in-house Bill 2 of
budget adjustment Authority, one
for the current fiscal year and
one for the upcoming fiscal
year. The um if this
recommendation is taken, it
would be in the, the section 5
of House Bill 3 would go in the
section for the current fiscal
year, Section 6 would go in the
section.
For the coming fiscal year.
That's all I had. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, uh, next I have a
ranking member, bro.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary.
I'm just trying to um.
Process the amendment.
I know what I read last night in
preparation for the committee.
Uh, could you show us where?
Um, things changed.
From the the base bill.
For, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, if you actually
look at this packet here, um,
you've got should have a packet
there. And I'm going to actually
refer you to page 5 of them.
And this, um, Mr. Chairman and
uh Representative represents the
Um
The, the work that the consensus
group went through and shows
changes. So, uh, the consensus
group started with the executive
recommendation, um, as a
starting point, and that was,
um, also the department's
request. Um, so you can see uh a
lot of these things were that
were mentioned by the chairman,
in his opening remarks, like,
for example, the first line
under every program shows
adjustments to the personnel
category to make sure that the
department has the personnel
resources they need to continue
filling those.
po s ition s and and the hard to
staff positions.
Then you can see some additional
items like, for example, I'll
show you on the project and the
project design and construction
program down. You can see an
increase for the transportation
project fund and local
government road fund. So that
11.8 million for local and
tribal road projects. That was
due to the department projecting
some, some fund balance
available in that fund for those
projects. And so the consensus
group added that, um, to the
recommendation. Um,
The the chair mentioned
additionally, the 5.561 for
additional road projects in, um,
100% road projects in the
project design and construction
programs, as well as the $3.7
million for the grants to local
governments. So, as I say, this
page has a, has a breakdown of
all of the different changes
that the consensus, uh, group,
uh, with.
Thank you for that answer.
chairman.
Um, who uh serves on the
consensus group.
Yes.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown,
so that's staff from uh LFC, the
Department of Transportation,
the Department of Finance and
Administration and the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee.
So it looks like um the uh
operations budget for fiscal
year 25.
Was basically.
Like a billion.
80,000 million.
And we're doing about a $21
million increase for the coming
fiscal year. So we're looking at
a state transportation budget of
about 1.3 billion.
So we do see some there.
Sure, I'm I'm glad to see that.
I want to talk, Mr. Chair, a
little bit about um the federal
funding of.
It's usually just care less than
50% of our overall budget.
And that pattern uh persists.
That is correct.
And uh Mr. Chair and um Mr.
Chair, it looks like uh the
state road fund is mostly used
for highway maintenance and the
federal funding awards are used
for construction and debt
service. Is that accurate?
Mr.
Mr. Chair Representative,
absolutely State Road fund
maintenance and operations. OK.
And then, um, I know we're uh
we're just on the amendment, is
that correct?
That's correct, yeah, I'll
reserve.
Thank you, uh, Representative Do
for this for a second time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Secretary,
for the second question. So,
I didn't realize you were
starting with the executive
budget. Does that mean that the
request for $12 million for the
rural air service enhancement
was.
Was was now included Mr. Chair
and Representative, I'll I'll
just uh point on that. So that
that recommendation from the
executive was, um, in the
special appropriations, which
aren't in this bill, but there
was a question last time about
what were the recommendations
for the special appropriations
and that, and we provided that
information to you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um I'm
not sure if this is a an
amendment or uh a bill question,
but I think it goes across the
board.
Um, it talks about in the fiscal
analysis report.
Uh, the department is
forecasting slower growth in the
future due in large part to
rising fuel economy economy
vehicles.
s t ag n ating gasoline tax
revenue as road users transition
to low or zero emission
vehicles, a smaller share of
road users will be paying
gasoline taxes, and I'm sure
that is very concerning to you
all, but I'm just wondering what
the thinking is for the future
as the road fund may decrease.
You're right,
And there's been a lot of
discussion.
There hasn't been any
legislation suggested yet but
allow of discussion, and I'd
like the uh secretary who's been
in on a lot of these
conversations, expand of, of,
you know, what we see in the
crystal.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair Representative, I wish I
had a crystal ball.
It's more those crazy 8 balls
and uh and maybe we'll have
flying cars. I don't know. Uh,
so Mr. Chair Representative.
We believe like other states
that fundamentally the state
will have to move away from the
reliance on fuel tax to a more
consistently stable revenue
source for roadway, um.
Revenues. That's, that's just
what a lot of states are doing.
And so, as few as vehicles
become more efficient and
entirely electric in the future,
whether it's electric or just
more efficient.
Um, there's an option if uh with
fuel tax that you either really
raise it really high or we find
another mechanism to generate
recurring revenue.
And there's consortia of states
that are working on um policy
around road user charges,
meaning that the revenue is tied
to how many miles vehicles are
driving on the road as opposed
to how many gallons of gas
they're using while they're on
the road.
And so, um, in short order, we
have a bill that's going to be
presented to you all as a
measure that helps support road
infrastructure investments for
the next 10 years or so.
But we're dedicated um to
continuing discussions that we
had in the fall into the next
year about some policy measures
that could help us sustain
infrastructure revenue for the
years to come. Um, the one time
appropriations are, are welcomed
and appreciated.
But that's the now and we've got
to work on the later.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary. I think this
is an issue, and you know, as a
planner, I always think in the
future, um, I think it's an
issue that we need to start
really uh uh putting on the
table and discussing.
Um, maybe in an our in
committees, um, because.
You know,
These cars, whether they're, um,
you know, electric or or or not,
they still wear and tear on the
roads and, you know, having that
shortfall.
It could be pretty significant.
Especially as time goes on and
and if we're trying to meet the
zero emissions, deadlines that
were set.
Um, I think it's imperative upon
this committee and others to
think about.
How are we gonna make up some of
those revenues. And so I just
want to put that on the table,
Mr. Chair. Thank you. One of the
things that I'd like to remind
the committee and and also.
To the audience present and on
whip.
Yeah
Electric vehicles weigh more.
And so that weight on those.
roads means more maintenance.
So it's not as if you're just
replacing.
A gas vehicle.
With an electric vehicle, it's
all the same, it's not, it
actually means more maintenance,
so I appreciate that comment.
German secretary, do you wanna
add?
Representative Armstrong?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
hence even more um reason for a
transportation trust fund.
Or we, I mean, we're doing it
for everything else.
Why would we not do it for
transportation.
And um
Uh, as far as the miles driven.
Uh, I think I've said it once.
I've said it 100 times. I have
120,000 miles on my 1921.
My 2021 vehicle.
I live in rural New Mexico, have
the largest house district in
the state.
So
It's an issue when you drive a
lot of miles and never before
until I was a state
representative.
Was I picky about where I bought
gas. Well, guess what? I buy gas
in my district.
Every single time, because that
gas tax goes back.
Districts
So, it's food for thought.
Mr. Chair, just to comment on on
that if I could, um, and I, I
think that also we need to be
thinking about multimodal um
transportation, and I'm sure you
all talk about that on a regular
basis, but you know how we move
people from point A to point B
in maybe larger.
Um
Sums I guess, um, so just a
thought.
Mr. Chairman
Uh, the notion of the trust
fund.
It's a great notion and I, I can
tell you there's been history
where we've introduced those
trying to do just that. I, I
think it needs it reminds me of.
of uh Representative Lindstrom's
P3s sometimes you just got to
keep going back until you get it
done.
Thank you, Chair.
Thank you. I don't see any
further discussion, uh, going to
uh representative.
My apologies.
Representative Harman.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. uh, Mr.
Chairman and members, and just
wanted to add, um, my thoughts
to the discussion quickly.
After serving as your prior
transportation chair, one thing
that came.
Um, apparent to me was the fact
that transportation a lot of the
time in our states budgeting
processes and afterthought.
And, um, one of the struggles
that you will now be having, Mr.
Chairman, is to kind of change
the ethos and that, um, we
should not be looking at these
expenditures, its costs.
And, um, you know, for every $1
that we do not put into
maintenance preventative or
otherwise, that's $5 more
dollars that we're gonna be
having to put down a new roads.
Later on, um, and so I just
wanna echo the the sentiments in
my comments, I hope that in the
interim, perhaps we can continue
to do more work on talking
about.
Stable, more stable funding
mechanisms, um, for the state, I
I know that are in contiguous
states, they fund transportation
in a very different way, um, and
to do this ad hoc.
Every year coming back,
reevaluating line iteming
projects into the budget bill,
it's exhausting for everybody,
um, one of the things that I
think about constantly is how.
So many of these wonderful
people from the Department of
Transportation have to take off
at least 30 days a year.
Every, every other year 60 days
to come up here and advocate.
spending and for their budgets
when they should be at the
Department of Transportation.
And so, um, you know, I really
do hope that we can, you know,
through the vehicle of the trust
fund or something else give DOT
the stability it needs to be
able to know with.
certainty that the money will
always be there for projects
whose timelines often extend 5,
1015 years, and I hope that we
can kind of um change the tide
here, um, to, to again.
help folks realize the
transportation should be one of
the first things on our, I know
it's not sexy. I know it's not
fun to talk about, but it is one
of the most important things
that we do.
At in the roundhouse and uh
people don't notice it until
it's not there or it's not
working the way they want it to.
So, thank you. I'm off my
soapbox now.
Mr. Chairman, I, I like that
soapbox, uh, and.
I will assure the committee that
Vice chair Latta and myself have
been having quite a few
conversations of how we try to
uh.
Change the, the
Maybe morph a little the role of
this committee because we agree
that.
road maintenance and our roads
and bridges are foundational.
What we do in this state,
economic development and
otherwise. And so there'll be a
lot of discussion and hopefully
we can bring something to the
committee as we move forward.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, seeing
Signal for uh uh discussion, uh.
Oh, do we have someone?
No, oh, I'm sorry, my apologies.
This
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
for the committee's information.
I do have another like it's my
3rd year now.
Just put that out and also just
kind of adding to the
discussion, Mr. Chair.
You know, the motor vehicle
excise tax is.
Derived from sales of vehicles.
And we have
gone back and forth whether
What at least what percentage of
that should go into the road
fund.
I, I'm just still a purveyor of
the notion that we need to take
all of that, I think are.
Purchasing public expects that
the tax they pay on a vehicle
will go into the roads, but a
lot of it goes in general and
it's vacillated through the
years a little bit, but I think
that's one area.
Sorry. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, so no further
discussion, uh, Representative
Romero.
Thank you, I moved to adopt the
amendment.
We have a motion to adopt. Do we
have a second?
Seconded by Representative
Borego.
Oh
We take a please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Borrego.
Yeah
Representative Brown.
Representative Doll.
None.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Yes.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Senator Romero.
Vice chair lotto.
Yes
Cruise, yes.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, you
have an amended bill.
Thank you, Chairman members and
if I know if we can proceed with
the, with the uh presentation of
the amendment bill amended bill,
please.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. I'm
gonna turn it over to the uh
secretary please.
So Mr. Chair, well, I, I'm gonna
allow for Joey to kind of talk
about the amended bill that's
OK.
I don't have anything else to
add.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Chairman, we,
you know, the amendment pretty
much struck most of the bill and
replaced it. There are some,
some header sections that are in
there that um basically require
it to conform with the general
appropriation Act and, and
issues like that. I'm happy to
answer any further questions
that uh members might have on um
on the amended bill.
Thank you Mr. Cha. it's, it's
uh.
Pretty much identical to the
last discussion, but we stand
for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, we
will go to public comment.
Is there anyone in the audience
who wished to speak in support
of HB 3.
Is there anyone online that we
wish to speak in support of HB
3.
No, Mister Chair.
Uh, thank you. If you could
please identify yourself and uh
a quick reminder that you have a
minute for input, please.
Is there anyone in opposition to
HB 3 in the audience?
Is there anyone in opposition to
HB3 in online?
No, Mister Chair. Thank you.
Or we'll go to committee now.
Mittee members, any questions on
HB 3?
Representative Leer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
looking at your spreadsheet.
Joy, and I assume that this is
the action we just took.
When you have the comparison
there. Uh, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, yeah, the
consensus column represents the
action you just took.
I think it's important, Mr.
Chairman, if you could.
When you're looking at uses.
Mr. Chairman, to talk about line
10 and line 11.
When you see those kind of.
A negative numbers.
What does that mean for the
public's understanding.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, so those uh
large negative numbers on line
10 and line 11 relate to the
breaking out of the different
Uh, funding sources online 12
through 20. So in the current
fiscal year 25, I'll
As well as the executive NLLC
rec, those items were all rolled
up into those um lines 1011 and
the amendment, the action you
just took broke all of those
out, so Mr. Chairman, when we're
looking at line 10.
And we only see in a consensus
number of 48 million.
Uh, we're actually moving those
dollars into something else
below that.
OK.
Um
And so the total for that
section of uses.
It's about a little over half a
million.
Difference.
643.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative uh on on line 10,
um, the difference, oh, excuse
me, I'm looking at line 21.
Sorry, I'm sorry.
Um
So, yes, uh, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, the
Uh, consensus is $52 million
higher than the executive
recommendation and the agency's
request.
And on the next page, Mr.
Chairman, I'm looking at line
25.
Can you tell us why there's a
reduction in.
The state road fund.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so the
State Road fund revenue growth
for fiscal year 2026 is expected
to be uh 2.1%, um, there were,
uh, we, we, as we, as we spoke
about, there were some um
Increases that the consensus
group made, particularly to
personnel. Personnel is
particularly heavy in the
Highway operations program and
so highway operations uh had a,
um,
Had uh some
Some of that money needed to go
to highway operations for
salaries.
So, Mr. Chairman, um, really,
when I'm looking at that also,
is there not, is there not some
correlation to the revenue.
The state road fund, I mean, we
heard, we heard that earlier.
We're not buying as much fuel.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, that's
absolutely correct. So the, the
revenue from
The, uh, from gas taxes is is
actually down year over year.
Um, some, you know, other areas
of uh revenue are a little bit
up that have, you know, a lot of
very small amount of growth in
the revenue. I also, um,
I should have pointed out I'd,
uh Mr. Mr. Chair and a
representative. So the fiscal
year 2025 operating budget did
include some fund balance and
that number was, I think, uh,
50, it was, it was more than 50
million last year. And so with
only budgeting $30 million in
fundal this year. That's the
number the department was
comfortable with. Uh, the total
state road fund number went
down.
Mr. Chairman, I'm also looking
at line.
34.
Isn't there a definition inside
of maintenance that part of that
funding can be used for
maintenance.
So, Mr, Mr. Chair and
representative of the
department's maintenance
program, uh, lives in the
highway operations program, um,
on page 3 of your packet. That's
where, uh, roadway maintenance
is, this is uh for various road
construction-related activities.
So it's my understanding, Mr.
Tracy.
And tell me that um when we
define maintenance.
That maintenance also includes
construction.
upset.
Has that changed?
Um, Mr. Chair, I representative,
I'm sorry, I don't know the
answer to that question. Perhaps
someone else might be able to
weigh in.
On that issue.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, so
in, in, so when we're talking
contract maintenance, we're
talking about preventative
maintenance type of programs,
um, you know, chip seal, crack
seal, those types of thin
overlays. And you are correct,
we do let projects that are
considered major rehabilitation
type projects, Millan inlays,
thicker millin inlays on I-40
and on Interstate 40, Interstate
25, for example.
As well as some bridge
maintenance activities that we
do, um, through our construction
program. That's what I thought.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh.
then
On the last.
Uh, pieces on highway
operations.
This year, uh, Mr. Chairman.
Did we do any kind of besides
the targeted um.
salaries, particularly for
engineers, was there a request
for salary increases this year
and representative, there was a
recommendation from both LFC and
the executive for salary
increases, uh, the executive
recommendation was, uh, a
little, a little more
complicated. There's some, some
things in there with longevity
pay and and issues like that,
um, but it came out to about
2.8% in the executive
recommendation, the LFC
recommendation for compensation
was 4%.
And uh the action you just took
on the amendment included an
assumption of 4% in DOT's
operating budget.
You know, I'm glad to hear that
with ice.
Mr. Chairman
Uh, when it comes to insurance
and other things for these
employees. I'm glad to see it
was above the 2.8.
That's all I have. Thank you
chairman.
Thank you, uh, ranking member
brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a
question on history.
Chairman and the secretary or
Joey, whoever wants.
It's um 150.
And this is for equipment
purchases.
Looking at about a little over
$10 million for that.
Is there, uh, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary Joey, um,
Also a special appropriation for
equipment.
Trying to think if I heard about
that.
Sure.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown
in the LFC wreck, the equipment
recommendation was $12 million
of specials.
In, um, our request for
equipment, we included it in our
ISIP request uh for the 10 for
an additional $10 million in
capital outlay for equipment.
And so if either of those
materialize, it would add to the
10 million we carve out in our
bud.
Thank you, I, I always feel like
we're somehow underfunding.
equ ip ment needs.
The numbers just so small.
Years.
if we
Someday I'm going forward, we
could, we could boost that. I
did want to ask Mr. Chairman
also about um
The transportation project fund
and the local government road
fund.
Uh, those, uh, terms appear
several times in the
spreadsheet.
Could you just give us the
summary of what's happening with
it. It looks like it's found on
for sure on page and other
places as well, and census
figures.
Just to talk about that a little
bit, please.
Sure
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Brown, the transportation
project fund and local
government Road Fund received
revenues from tax distributions
as identified in statute.
And so for the most part, the
consensus figures is arrived at
by adding a projection, the
projected revenue for each of
those funds and any carry
forward that is attached to
those funds. And so whatever
revenue was not used or
allocated in FY 25 was added to
the projected revenue for FY 26,
and it's the sum of those two
numbers here. Thank you for
that.
These are very popular funding
sources.
Is there some demand for
increasing. I mean, I'm glad to
see the carryovers but.
Are we hearing from local
governments that they could use
more.
Mr. Chairman.
I apologize, I couldn't help
myself. Go ahead, secretary.
Sure.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I,
I would say conservatively, if I
were to speak on behalf of
locals, they'd like for you to
multiply it by 20, if you could.
Um
So the the fund generates about
52 million a year now, that's
what we're projected to see.
Um, the LFC recommendation did
include an additional 100
million that would be one time
bringing uh FY 26, um,
allocations to about 152
million. I believe if I'm
recalling correctly just to give
you perspective. Last year, the
sum of all requests was about
170 million, and I can confirm
that uh in short order, um, and
so we're finding a little less
than 1/3 of what local
governments are requesting, and
that's understanding that
They're being methodical about
their requests because they
understand that our words are in
the space of 3.75 million to 1.5
million. And so if they were to
see that fund grow there um the
requests would grow
proportionate to that.
Yeah, thank you. I uh.
I know our 6 transportation
districts, the local government,
they're just so thrilled to get
this money and they do put it to
very good use.
And the match ratio is, is very
attainable.
For most.
Our request or so.
I think that's
Uh, next we have Representative
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I do appreciate all of this
discussion, um, and I just
wonder, and I think for the
gentleman from LFC.
Um, so,
According to the um.
The legislation we're supposed
to have by 2030, 45%, um, in
2050, 100% low or zero
emissions, um, so I just wonder,
have you done any projections
that would show um
The loss of revenue and
percentages.
Or the department
So, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative Brega, I don't
believe LFC has, but I think the
department may have and I don't
know if the secretary um has
those numbers, I think he
presented them the other day and
might have those handy.
Oh, I do, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, let me just
wing it. I believe that the
revenue projections are a 6%
increase between now and 2030.
Then from 2030 to 2050, a 9%
decrease.
Uh, I'm sorry, from 2030 to
2040, a 9% decrease and from
2040 to 2050, an additional 11%
increase.
And so it's about 20% decrease
over 20 year period from 2, what
did you say the last one was?
Sure, from 2040 to 2050, an
additional 11% decrease in
overall revenues.
Uh, so is that.
Is that inclusive 6% or 9%, 11%.
Does that inclusive, so that
would be a 26% loss total, Mr.
Chair Representative 15, so it's
a plus 6 and then a minus 20, so
about 15% total decline in
revenues between now and 2050.
All right. Um, can you provide
that to me, please.
When you have a moment.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
absolutely.
Any other questions from the
committee?
OK. Do I have a motion?
Mr. Chairman, I'll move a do
pass on House Bill 3 is.
There's been a motion by
Representative Romero to uh for
a do pass on HB 3 as amended. Do
I have a second?
second from uh Representative
Brown.
take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Orego.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Yes.
Representative
No.
Representative Hochman Vi.
Yes. Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero? Yes.
Represented or vice chair Latta.
Yes. Hera de la Cruz, yes.
Mr. Chairman
Yeah we do pass on the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members. Thank you.
And um representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Thank you, everyone. Next to our
next order of business.
We have rep representative.
And whip Hochman v. Hill with
with HB 145.
Additional highway project
Bundy.
Did I say
Bonding
I said he said bonding.
Bonding
Member, please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Give me
one second here.
get my
computer and comments
ready for the task here.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm excited to be
here presenting House Bill 145
in front of you this morning
with um Secretary Ricky Serna to
my left is my expert.
House Bill 145 provides
additional bonding authority to
the state transportation
commission, uh, it allows for a
total bonding authority of $1.5
billion.
Uh, which must be used within 25
years' time of being approved by
the commission.
We do have um 22 number it looks
like 230250.1.
If we may have someone
Do we have that?
We have a motion to, to move the
amendment. We have a second.
And we have a 2nd.
And are on discussion of the we
have it? I'm sorry, I.
We don't have the amendment yet.
Let's go ahead and proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, um,
the amendment is what we have
been appropriately referring to
as the guard rail component of
this bill. So, um, in
discussions this uh with the
governor's office and um
leadership in the legislature.
We just wanted to.
Give some more detail as to how
the bonding authority would be
access and controlled, um, and
so what the amendment does,
excuse me,
Apologies, uh, it does.
things
Um, it requires the uh
transportation department of
transportation to include a
report.
On highway project selection and
priorities financed by this this
bonding, uh, in its annual
budget requests whenever you um
talk about what they're gonna
and so that report shall include
justification for the selection
and priority ranking of each
product, product to project,
which includes traffic counts,
accident rates, and the expected
improvements in ranking of the
payment and substructure and
substructure conditions.
an assessment of economic
development impacts and other
information deemed significant
by the department, the expected
life of the proposed project,
the amount of revenue required
to pay the outstanding and
proposed bonds based on a 5 and
25 year.
Forecast of the State Road Fund,
and the effect of the bond.
Thank you. Members' questions on
the amendment.
Representative Borego.
Um
Mr. Chair and uh and uh leader.
Whip
And uh
Department director, the
assessment of economic
development impacts, what does
that mean exactly? Does that
mean jobs or?
Um
How would that be?
Um, measured.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
again going back to the the
metrics that the department
utilizes and so that can vary
from new lane miles added, um,
and the extent to which the
projects that we select are
going to facilitate economic
development for a specific
region.
So how it would impact the
community, certain communities.
Mr. Chair Representative,
exactly.
All right, thank you.
Ranking member Brown.
Yes, thank you.
Chairman and Representative
Secretary.
I'm very pleased to see this
amendment, I I want to, I would
like some assurance to know
that.
And the use of this revenue.
is
Or anything that you can give us
assurances about.
Mr. Chairman and ranking member
Brown, thank you very much for
the commentary and so yeah, I
agree with you. And um part of
the the thought process behind
this amendment was to set up a
process. The commission itself,
as you know, is comprised
represent each transportation
district throughout throughout
the state, so inherent in their
processes, of course, um,
consideration of that
representation, but by filing
the report, this I think would
better help them evaluate and
make sure that those projects
that are being approved are.
representative of each district
throughout the state.
I'm, I'm sure Mr. Secretary
would want to add to that as
well.
Chairman Representative, that's
actually the, the point I was
going to make is you know the
uh.
Department of Transportation is
attached to 4 several oversight
measures, a state transportation
commission.
The legislation House Bill 145,
not specifically the amendment,
but 145.
Authorizes the commission to
issue bonds.
Therefore, the commission, each
of which represents a
transportation district is that
first layer of assurance that as
a consensus group are going to
fund projects that represent
their respective needs based on
their feedback from local
governments and constituents.
And so we fundamentally start
off with a process that uh
brings the district
representation to the table in
order for those bonds to be
issued.
you, um,
Chairman representative Mr.
Secretary, so.
I want to get a sense of
stakeholder input.
Uh, we have this committee, we
have the overall legislature,
which will be voting on House
Bill 3 or this bonding bill, I
mean, see it there.
We have the transportation
commission. We have the Mexico
Department of Transportation,
so.
makes the ultimate decision.
As to which projects this money.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
believe that it would really
rest with the state
transportation commission. The
fundamentally going to receive
recommendations from the
Department of Transportation
leadership.
And they'll fundamentally
authorize the finance authority
to issue the debt. And so the
action and final decision.
Leading to the issuing of bonds
would rest with the state
transportation.
Man, I'm really
Mr. Chairman and uh.
members of the committee, if I
could also add, so one of the
most interesting things ranking
ranking member Brown about this
committee is the relationship
between the transportation
commission and this committee
and the legislature generally,
so statutorily, the commission
is envisioned as that specific
interest that is tasked with
developing the project
priorities.
Uh, throughout the state,
because essentially they're the
ones that are closest to the
needs of each transportation
district, so that's actually my
statute, one of the commission's
tasks is to develop those, those
road priorities and then come
back to the legislature, inform
us of the work that they have
been doing in concert with the
Department of Transportation and
then ultimately we vote up or
down on that priority list, but
I think over the years, Mr.
Chairman and and members of the
committee that.
has been lost or muddied over
time and that it's very clear in
statute with the commission, so
I what I like about this bill is
it's kind of.
Reinvigorating that um
responsibility and reminding the
legislature that this authority
is exactly where it is supposed
to rest, which is.
Thank you. I think it's been
very illuminating to hear that
information.
And again, I really do
appreciate this amendment.
Without it, I would have similar
uncertainty about supporting.
A pill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Looking at the amendment and,
and I'm glad to see that it does
create some guardrails, and I do
have some uh some concerns about
it, uh, in general.
Because I'm trying to look at
the amendment as it compares to
the fiscal impact report.
And just looking as an example,
one a traffic counts, accident
rates and the expected
improvements to traffic flow and
health and safety.
It would seem to me that
When you talk about traffic
counts is gonna be in the
highest populated areas in the
state.
Which means it's not rule in
Mexico.
When I'm looking at page 2 where
it says other information deemed
significant by the department,
that's incredibly discretionary
to me, Mr. Chairman, and we know
that within a year and a half,
we're gonna see different people
in these positions.
Also, Mr. Chairman, on page 2.
Where it says the amount of
revenue required to pay the
principal and interest of
outstanding and proposed bonds.
We just heard that over we're
going to have a loss.
Of revenue.
In 15 years.
Um, so if you're scheduled as a
later project, the likelihood of
it being done is probably not
there.
Because I'm looking, Mr.
Chairman, at the revenue piece
on the fiscal impact report for
FY 26.
The non-reoccurring amount of
money that would go into this
626 million.
FY 27, it's 85 million FY 28
it's 101 million and FY 29, it's
95 million currently, and I know
the department has been looking
at what those losses are gonna
be.
What we're talking about here is
we're at, we're actually
authorizing debt.
for this department.
And if we have just heard in the
previous presentation that
there's going to be a loss of
revenue.
In the next, I guess, 15 years.
We have a problem in River City,
Mr. Chairman.
Because that means that these
projected numbers here are
probably not going to be what we
think they are today.
So I, I guess I'm, I'm glad to
see the amendment, and I'll vote
for the amendment, but I, I do
have some concerns about the
overall bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
So
I support the Bill.
I'm signed on to the bill.
But all along I've had
Uh, concerns, and I shared that
with the representative and the
secretary and I had that same
discussion with both vice chair
and Representative.
Lunch
So Representative, one of the
components and maybe you can
help me. I'm right now reading
it.
The concern is that
There is so much latitude to
move money despite the
identification of a particular
project.
emb ed d ed and approved by the
commission that.
At some
Juncture should.
Governor who hires a secretary.
Or the secretary on their on
their own volition.
would elect to just move money.
Despite the identification of
the project.
How will this amendment address
that
representative
I will also answer the question,
but in my mind, having uh served
as a member of the chairmanship
of.
Representative Lindstrom, I
mean, there are certain
processes in place that would um
require legislative requests,
you can't just move large
amounts of money like that, um,
without letting LFC know that
you intend to do so and then
having that request people uh.
Reviewed and then denied, so
that's part of the process.
Um, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Chairman, it, it is a great
question, and I think, um,
expanding on the response about
the role of the commission, I
think is underscoring the role
of the tiers committee in the
interim, which has a
responsibility to ensure that
the agency is over a period of
time remaining consistent in how
it's addressing the projects
contained within our step in our
overall transportation plan for
the state of New Mexico.
It's also important to note
that.
Um,
It takes a tremendous amount of
time.
Effort and resources to get a
project to construction. I, I
think that's something that
we've done a fairly good job of
communicating to lawmakers is
that when we break ground on a
project, the, the work that's
done prior to that can include 2
or 3 years of study, design,
right away acquisition, etc. to
get a project to construction.
And so as you look at the
ability for a secretary or a
governor to identify on a whim
that we're gonna do this today.
It, it could really just ignite
a 2 or 3 year process to do
something today. And so I think
given the nature of the work
that we do, the relationship
with the Trump's transportation
infrastructure revenue
subcommittee.
And the report out on an annual
basis of how this project
addresses the metrics that are
in the amendment creates that
public transparency piece that
really, you know, creates not
just guardrails, but I think
public accountability for what's
being selected and what's being
done. And, and if I can address,
you know, representative
Lundstrom's concerned about some
of the measures is when we talk
about traffic counts, we're not
talking about just roadways with
the highest.
accounts, we're talking about
volume relative to the road's
capacity, right? And so we're
talking about the need to take a
two-lane road to a super 2 with
passing lanes based on traffic
counts and volumes. We're
talking about taking a two-lane
road to a 4-lane road, um, or,
or we're talking about the need
to add acceleration or
deceleration lanes to existing
infrastructure. So traffic
counts don't necessarily say
we're going to go to where there
are more cars as much as we're
going to go to where traffic
counts identify the need for.
increased capacity in
infrastructure, but that's but
one measure within the
guardrails.
Um
1 2nd, representative.
So
I appreciate that there would be
due diligence.
that that due diligence would
include the identification of
the project based on the merit
of your system that identifies
that project.
But a hypothetical
It doesn't always require a 3
year study.
As an example, if you've already
studied.
5 projects
And they are at some level of
almost engineered ready to
shovel ready.
And then at some point,
Are either an arbitrary
secretary.
Or on the whim of the governor.
Could that money be moved
because it's already been
studied. It's already been
engineered even, let's say.
That's what I think is at issue
and
I'm not gonna speak for
individual members.
That's happened.
And it's happened in our area of
the southwest of Albuquerque, so
very near and dear to our
hearts.
That's, that's what we're afraid
of, that there is there a guard
rail that once you identify
those projects that arbitrarily
it can be moved because somebody
said this this other one seems
to be more important right now.
What is the
The process that would say.
Yeah, it is more important.
I agree, as an example, the
Gibson to real Bravo project,
right?
They're both important, they're
both vetted they're on and on.
But what prevents that from
happening. And then, and then to
give comfort to to the electeds
to say.
Yeah, you know, I expected that
project to happen.
But I get it, that bridge is
gonna fall down. We got to get
there first. That's legitimate.
But how do we get to
understanding that there is a a
way to make sure that there
there is a real way to have that
occur. That's, that's the
concern.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we, we
understand the concern, and I,
and I can relate to the concern
because I think going back again
to representatives comments is,
you know, it's inevitable that
in a year and a half there'll be
a new secretary sitting here
identifying his or her
priorities for the agency and
leveraging this legislation to
get those priorities done.
And to that end, you know,
looking at a measure that says,
you know, something the
department could present and
say, you know.
This is that bridge that's ready
to fall down that isn't on this
list, right this minute. Can we
come to center on why we're
going to move in that direction.
But again, there's, there's
measures tied to
5 transportation commissioner
saying we are not going to
continue to approve all the
investments in this part of the
state. We just can't, right?
And so I think from the
commission to the committee work
and relationship we have with
lawmakers and the annual report
out about what we're doing
really serves as both a public
accountability and inclusive
process for lawmakers, but also
an accountability for a
secretary to come in and say,
Guess what? We haven't been
talking about this at all for
the last 5 or 6 or 8 months, but
all of a sudden it's near and
dear to us, and we're going to
do it. And, and that starts a
conversation about the intent of
the legislation relative to the
intent of some kind of, you
know, short sighted decision on,
on the part of the executive.
Representative Lindstrom.
I appreciate it. I, I guess, Mr.
Chairman, and we'd heard
earlier, we're still paying debt
service on grip bonds that were
issued in 2004.
I happen to be one of those
legislators that voted for the
grip program.
And I think about what the, what
was identified there and some of
it was done and done in a good
way and done timely and all the
other, but that money did get
moved. Some of it did get moved.
Mr. Chairman, I, the other issue
that I have is that.
Again, I'm looking at the fiscal
impact report for the bill.
We are, if this bill passes as
it is, we're basically saying in
these fiscal years we're going
to be able to get
non-reoccurring funding.
Well, maybe the appropriations
Committee and Senate Finance may
say something different.
Uh, we're saying we're setting
aside for FY 26 $626 million.
Um
And that's fine. And that's
probably gonna be a good number
since we've got a lot of money
in the state budget now.
But my concern about it is is
those out years um.
Particularly out years for non
reoccurring funds.
I, I, I think we, we need to
look at that, um.
Mr. Chairman, because at the end
of the day, the basic function
and everybody who's served under
me in HA HAFC knows this, the
basic function of the New Mexico
Legislature is the
appropriations process.
And what we're doing with this
bill is we're giving that to
somebody else.
And we've done that with many
other programs in the state,
whether it's the water trust
board.
Make a lot of money to pass out
public school capital outlay, no
legislative process in that.
That's an administrative
executive process.
All those people are appointed
by the whoever the governor has
to be at that happens to be at
that time.
And so think about how much is
in public school capital outlay
outlay.
A lot of money that goes into
public schools for buildings and
so forth, but we don't have any
say in that.
Because it's a committee.
I know the commission
fundamentally has this role
also, but.
Um
We are looking at out years.
I still need to have a better
handle on what that looks like.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative and
Unless the committee has
heartburn, I'd like to roll the
bill.
And work on it a little bit
more. I think we get it back
fairly quickly.
Uh, and maybe modify, strengthen
up the language a little bit.
That's what we're gonna do if
that's OK, representative, your
bill.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. I just a procedural
question issue, we are still
technically on the amendment. So
what we consider the amendment,
get to the bill itself and then
obviously open to rolling it,
but we'd love we'd love to have
just a little bit more
conversation on the bill bill,
and then I opened a rolling,
sure, absolutely, but hoping.
We have a motion, we have a
second.
We have motion in 2.
Go ahead and
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Barrego.
Yes. Representative Brown? Yes.
Representative Doub
Representative Franklin or uh
Hernandez? Yes.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Is Chalata
Yes.
De la Cruz. Yes.
Thank you. We haven't been a
bill to the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, so
now to the amended bill, um, I
don't know if the committee has
more specific questions or if
you want us to just make a quick
statement on some very salient
points that have already been
brought up.
Represented Borrego.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative and the
department secretary.
So I do have some concerns, um,
And I was thinking
As our previous conversation
about, so what is your bond
rating?
For your, your funding.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
excuse me, I'm not trying to be
rude, but I just had that um
texted over.
We were in committee just the
other day.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
we have an S&PAA plus rating,
Moody's, uh, AA2 rating and ro
AAA rating. OK, so that that's
great, um, but I'm as I'm
thinking about um 2035 and 2050.
Which, you know,
Sometimes been known to live in
the future.
Um
I think about the losses, and,
well, first of all, I think
about your fun and your bond
rating, and you're getting
probably compounded interest on
your on the money that's being
invested and so you're in a
sense you're your your budget is
growing in a sense, but.
And I also think the reverse of
that, Mister Chair and, and
deputy and representative is as
your um losing money.
Um, and, and maybe the finance
person might want to weigh in on
this, but I think that you're
also losing compounded interest
as you're losing revenue in all
of those funding areas,
capacities, the federal, the
state, etc. um, and so.
You know, and Mr. Tara, I don't,
I'm kind of thinking out loud
here is like I feel like I'm
not.
Operating on full information,
because I'm not being able to
see those projections in front
of me.
And I'm voting on something
that.
Makes me a little uncomfortable,
frankly.
Because, um.
I would like to see.
Some numbers that would come to
this committee that could
actually show us.
What those revenues are going to
be and what, what I know we
don't have a crystal ball.
But we can, we can talk about
percentages and losses in terms
of percentages of what that
budget might look like.
And how many cars are projected
to be um electric by 2035 and
how many cars in New Mexico are
projected to be um electric by
20.
2050. So, you know, I, I would
like if, if.
If possible, and I know this is
a kind of a, you know, but I, I
look to studies, and I looked at
numbers and especially when I'm
making this kind of a I and and
I I do support this just so you
know.
But I also need to see.
The projections to tell me that
I'm moving in the right
direction.
Oh
There is a tremendous amount of
information that's available, so
representative, if I could ask
that you offline get with the
secretary and even uh.
Joey
Uh, that way they can walk you
through some of that information
because I, I agree, not
everything can be.
placed right in front of us at
the moment.
But let's, let's go ahead and do
that, we're gonna roll this
bill.
Presentative
Also, Mr. Chairman, I don't know
if you were planning on taking
public comment now or you want
to take it when we roll it
later, it's up to you.
Yeah, unless you have something
else to add, we can go ahead and
go to public comment.
Uh
We have ranking member Brown
first.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chairman. I
You know, I just, uh, any
spreadsheet with.
Revenue projections or whatever
we're looking at for the future.
I'd like it to include a note
that we already owe $575 million
I believe.
In debt obligations and we're
paying at a rate of about 111
million a year, so we have to be
mindful of that and um.
We'll have this paid off
apparently 7 years from.
But that's part of the, I'll
just say Mr. Chairman and
Representative. I
I prefer to use
All this excess money that we
have primarily because oil and
gas is has been doing some.
so much revenue.
Generation for the state, uh, my
initial.
God is always, let's use what we
have on hand and a lot of that
money has been tucked away and
grow category and all those
things.
But rather than borrow, I prefer
to do that, but.
I also want projects to get
done.
I
realized that without additional
help wherewithal to do those
projects.
Actually make the progress that
I think we're all hoping for, so
I'm ambivalent.
About it, I did sign on to the
bill, however.
And I agree with what's been
stated, Mr. Chair, that it'd be
nice to see a little more
financial data predictions so we
can.
Take those into consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I appreciate it and I apologize
because I've been a little um.
fancy to kind of talk a little
bit about all of these things,
if, if I can just if you'll
indulge me, it's like 18 pages.
I'll, I'll be quick.
Um
So, um,
Just to give you context about
concerns, right?
So this past fall, we assembled
a task force that was aimed at
researching strategies for
sustained road infrastructure.
And the team was comprised of
DOT leaders, financial and bond
advisors, federal and federal
infrastructure policy experts
and representatives from the
contractor community.
And so in many instances, we had
to consult with our counterparts
in other states across the
country.
And we really just had two
things we were trying to do. One
was identify and evaluate
strategies that other states
have deployed for sustained
revenues.
And identify and evaluate
strategies that we've already
considered in New Mexico so that
we could take some time to chew
on them a little bit more
methodically.
And so we evaluated a whole lot
of stuff ranging from increases
to taxes.
Uh, associated with the state
road fund, the value of toll
roads, trust funds, road user
charges, and even the creation
of surcharges that are attached
to like services that intersect
with roads, for example, and I
think I shared this before,
there are states that have added
surcharges to third-party
deliveries, meaning that if you
order something online, there's
a surcharge and that revenue
goes to Rhodes, assuming that
that's going to get to you by
way of a truck on a road, right
in Minnesota and Colorado are
doing a lot of that.
And so generally, there's a lot
of states and they're moving
slowly in a position that
reduces their reliance on gas
tax.
Um, to other revenue sources,
right? Like uh road user
charges, things like that. And
so New Mexico needs to move in
that direction. There's no
question. But in the short term,
states have leveraged what they
can do by way of moderate
increases to recurring revenues
to support debt service much
like this bill is going to do
right now.
And so this strategy is not
foreign to New Mexico, but it's
22 years old. OK, just to give
you a little bit of history and
representative Lindstrom alluded
to it.
In 2003, during a special
session, the legislature
approved then House Bill 15,
which was sponsored by the
Speaker Ben Luhan.
The bill authorized the New
Mexico Finance Authority to
issue state transportation bonds
for road construction projects
for a total aggregate principal
amount of $1.5 billion well,
$1585 million. So just a little
over 1.5.
Then beginning in 2004, it took
the OT 17 years to issue the
entirety of that $1.5 billion of
authority, and the last issuance
of bonds occurred just in 2021
in the amount of 234 million,
right?
And so
What's important to know, right,
is that at no time.
Is the Department of
Transportation going to get a
check for $1.5 billion and start
paying back that debt.
So House Bill 145 today is much
like the 2003 legislation.
And what we're proposing started
with this task force, right?
We eventually presented this
recommendation to the state
transportation commission and
they supported this effort
through a resolution that they
took action on a few months ago.
And so what it really does is it
authorizes 1.5 billion in
transportation bonds which are
payable by both federal funds.
Road funds, which means that the
reliance on debt service
wouldn't fall solely on the
state road fund.
It's important to also note
this.
Current statute provisions that
the total aggregate outstanding
principal amount of bonds issued
by the commission cannot exceed
1.1 billion. OK, so what does
that mean?
If House Bill 145 were enacted,
the commission would have the
authority to issue bonds in the
amount of $1.5 billion over
time. OK, so you could consider
the 1.5 billion a line of
credit.
But the commission could not
borrow more than 1.12 billion at
any given time.
So it would issue debt, pay down
debt, issue more debt, and pay
down debt as long as they don't
exceed that 1.1 billion ceiling.
So why is that important?
It's important because to
Representative Brown's point in
FY 26 are outstanding debt is
going to be $500 million
roughly.
And right now we're expected to
pay that debt off in 2032. And
so if this bill were to pass and
get signed into law.
Technically speaking, come July
1 of 2026 FY 26, the commission
could borrow up to 600 million.
That's it, because the 5 plus
the 6 and they hit their debt
ceiling, but that's not going to
happen, OK? The agency would
borrow closer to about 200
million initially, OK? As we
work through priority projects
and then it's estimated between
2027 and 2029, we'd be prepared
to spend an additional 700
million and we probably exhaust
the 1.
5 billion somewhere around 2033.
OK? So, in short, it would take
us 8 years, approximately to do
what took 17 years back in 2003,
and why is that the case? The
Federal Highway Administration
back in 2003 started indexing
cost of construction. And so
they baselined it at 1.0, cost
of construction, a million
dollars a mile on average.
Today that index is 3.1 3.1.
What does that mean? That it's
3.1 times more expensive to do
construction today. So
fundamentally, this 1.5 billion,
OK, is like 500 million.
When you compare it to 2003 in
terms of what it costs to do
construction, right?
So the authority fundamentally
is given to the commission.
The commission then determines.
OK, you have projects?
Do they meet the spirit of the
bill now that it's amended. What
are they? What is it going to
cost? And they're going to ask
two fundamental questions.
If we borrow for those projects,
are we gonna go above our debt
ceiling of 1.1 billion.
And 2 is, can we afford to pay
the debt?
And what we'll likely tell them
in the next 7 years is we're
already paying the debt.
As was pointed out by
Representative Brown, our annual
debt service now is $110
million. We're already paying
that right now.
And if you do the annual debt
service on the 1.1 billion over
20 years, it's 18 million.
And so if we borrow 1.1 billion
today.
We'd be paying it back over 20
years at less than what we're
paying now for our existing debt
service.
And so if we work with you all
in this session or in the
upcoming session to grow our
recurring revenues by just $108
million. That's it.
We want more, but I'll take 108.
That's enough money to pay this
debt.
In perpetuity and at the same
time, it would relieve us of the
110 million we're paying now.
And so it's basically like
saying, I'm gonna give you a
raise and you're gonna make an
extra $400 a month.
And you're gonna use that $400 a
month to buy a car that cost
$390 a month.
And the money that you're saving
now goes to some other bill. And
so that's fundamentally what
we're doing is we're saying
we're paying this amount anyway.
But if over time we can get this
debt service, the money we're
paying now becomes capacity for
the agency, right? And so, going
to your point about can you
afford this? I would say with
all due respect, we better cause
we're paying it now.
If we can't afford it, then we
can't pay our debt.
And we are paying our debt. So
in theory, we're extending our
our existing debt service by
another 14 years.
And if we can work to get that
$108 million in new revenue then
we're getting it paid for and
adding 110 million of capacity
back into the agency's operating
budget. So I appreciate, Mr.
Chairman. I figured I stayed up
late typing this all out. I'd
give it to you.
Uh
Secretary, I appreciate.
That analysis and that dialogue.
I think it was excellent.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
before we roll, I also want to
say, you know, this is like we
have spoken about earlier part
of a.
Multifaceted plan, multifaceted
scheme to reexamine how we fund
the department, this is just one
of several bills that I know
that are circulating through the
process right now to reimagine
this funding, and so we look
very much forward to continuing
on the conversation with the
committee, there are some
incredible minds on this
committee that have a lot of
knowledge, and we hope that um
we can tap that with each one of
you after we roll the bill to
have a continue these.
Conversationss to uh get it to a
place where it's ready to roll.
Ready to go, not roll, rolling
now I'm not gonna open it up to
public uh.
I'm not gonna open up to public
discussion at this time or.
Or or against only because we
don't have a bill yet. As soon
as we do have a bill, we're
gonna roll this bill.
You're OK with that?
uh we'll be back and we'll have
public comment at that time.
I'm gonna go ahead and close
with uh.
Representative Landstrom.
And um.
I guess I'm one of those old
fossils that remembers a lot of
this about art and it's now
coming back to me, Mister, uh,
Chairman, what I do remember
about the first grip bill and it
went into many, many years of
$162 million debt payment.
We paid $162 million annually.
Or the debt payment.
And I also remember Mr. Chairman
with that we, we had to
refinance it because what it
was, what was happening, it was
it was filling our construction
budget because we bonded against
federal dollars.
And I think now when you and
because of inflation and bonding
against federal dollars under
grip.
And because the feds were
constantly passing, continuing
resolutions, we had a hard time
with that.
Inside the department.
So I, I think we need to, we
need to dig a little deeper in
this, um.
If it hadn't been for the
refinancing, I, I believe that
there were many, many years.
That the department had little
construction money.
Because it was all taken up in
debt service.
So I wanna, I wanna get closer
to it and and understand it, so
we don't fall into some of the
same issues that we had with the
2003 bill.
And I do remember, Mister
Chairman and the staff can
correct me if I'm wrong. One of
the projects that was listed on
there was 491 that never got
done.
It never got done until later.
Outside of grip.
With non-reoccurring and other
highway funds that the
department had.
So what they had to do, and
we've seen this happen even with
this administration is the
combining of funds from
different sources to finish
projects.
But I want to understand what
that does to debt service.
Anyway, I appreciate it. This is
a complicated bill, but we do
need to be looking into the
future, we do need to be looking
at how we use debt and if we
can't get a trust fund going,
this is the 2nd best, best way
to do it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative.
I think how we pay down the debt
service is important like what
you've offered is is viable.
Uh, but to the point of, of
representatives, particularly in
the federal dollars, I think
that could be a little dicey.
Especially in these times, uh.
I know we've discussed different
methods of paying down the debt.
Maybe we can keep that
conversation going a little bit
longer. At some point though,
we're going to bring this bill
here and we're going to vote yes
or no. It'll be up or down.
So no further business.
