Representative Nibert your.
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Scott you.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend Here.
Chairman queen or.
In the.
Questions comments and
absence from the committee
before we begin.
First up we have Sen bill twenty
six excess oil and gas funds to
severance tax on
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning good morning members
thank you for.
Going in and let at the house
this morning this bill
let me begin by saying this bill
is a result of a year long study
between the LESC and the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee that oil and gas
revenues were point six billion
dollars in FY sixteen yet in FY
twenty two they were up to one
point three billion dollars and
they are only expected to more
than double to two point eight
billion dollars in FY twenty
four yet oil and gas production
will peak in less than three
years estimated.
The ten year to ten years
estimated our current revenues
are high but we know revenue
revenues will soon decline once
again into the future this bill
does not affect the early
childhood trust fund or the
budget process and solves two
problems the first one being
that it makes budgets less
reliant on oil and gas and
second it repaired the state for
the eventual decline of oil and
gas.
Starting in FY twenty five this
bill will capture only new
windfalls from oil and gas
generated through the oil and
gas emergency school tax and
royalty production for
production on federal lands the
federal mineral leasing payments
to the severance tax permanent
fund beginning once again FY
twenty five in doing so this
bill prevent general fund
revenue from declining in future
years despite declining oil and
gas production due to the
interest earned on deposits to
the permanent fund we know that
the Energy suggestion is in fact
coming in this bill prepares us
for that future with that Mr
chairman and committee members
we will stand for any questions.
That is there anyone in the
audience who would like to
provide supports business for.
There any opposition.
You're going online if you would
like to testify in support of.
Senate bill twenty six please
raise your hand.
JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good morning this
is JD Bullington speaking on
behalf greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce over the
last six to seven years of state
wisely chose to capture what oil
and gas revenue accesses for a
few important purposes to create
a true rainy day fund to better
insulate the state against
future crashes and energy
revenues and to support the
ongoing expansion of early
childhood programs in a
sustainable and responsible way
keeping this access revenue out
of the general fund has also
help to keep our fiscal
dependence on oil and gas and
chat with a massive new surplus
we're experiencing however we
need to capture and send still
more oil and gas revenue to the
severance tax permanent fund and
this is a wise approach because
investing these excesses dollars
today would generate a healthier
and more substantial revenue
stream and the future and the
greater Abakaliki chamber of
commerce urges your support
thank you.
Thank you the.
Is there any additional support.
Is there any opposition like to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
Casing then we will go to the
committee question from the.
The question.
Would
you with the best in the second.
Discussion if you take the.
Representative Griego.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert yeah.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small
Representative Townsend yes.
Thank you.
Chairman queen yes eight zero.
To the best thank you Mr and
that be remiss if I did
introduce my expert witnesses
Izzy is mailed or as chief
economist on the legislative
finance committee thank you Mr
the committee but without him
you'd never made.
We have.
Create lazy prone to is
interest.
Though.
Senator are you expecting.
I was.
Your tax dollars.
The message share.
Whenever you're ready center
thank you Mr researchers bill
money this is a project that
should.
Number of years the problem.
The rest of the.
This is a very significant piece
of legislation.
Allows you to.
the match well as Argentina.
In the a few million dollars.
So that's the worst.
A hundred million dollars this
is up to five.
Is expensive that we can expand.
In the near future it also says
more from.
seven dollars.
use those issues.
This is where we're going.
Education that measures through
all the way to the issue of a.
You for sure support all
state so.
we have.
Hi seventy distractions
statutes or.
And intervention.
This research for the dollars
street to orange.
One of the.
Researchers these are out of
state medical experts are
structured approach legal
counsel they may want to add
additional comments as we go.
Of the is this supported by the
ministration.
Very racially much for a few
years ago I had hopes of
getting.
Issue No our economy.
Oil prices and.
It was
ended up not having the
knowledge.
The government dollars which is
basically the.
The one point eight in the
special session.
District is very up to industry
observation or.
That all of us.
counsel to address.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Sarah
Cottrell Propst and the
secretary of the Energy minerals
and natural resources department
and.
Of this bill has been a priority
for us the governor this summer
officer trying to pull both
conservation and agricultural
Trust Fund advocates together
and put together one unified
proposal rather than the answer
competing proposals that we have
been all seeing for the last
couple years and that's what you
see before us that the it's been
a a lot of delicate coalition
work over the last few months
and they're really grateful to
everyone who has come together
to support it I know it's been
tempting to to work on some of
the underlying statutes but we
really are as senator Neville
said trying to find sustainable
conservation funding for
existing programs in the state
statute it Dylan futures are
general counsel and he's also
here available to help with
questions thank you.
I think that's numbers to take
questions.
So
of students and what shows up in
the.
So review the public comment
There's always a lot of interest
in this bill are going to twenty
minutes per side.
Lasted people keep their
comments to that then that half
ninety seconds will we'll have
people will start to start with
opposition I have people come up
and use the money your online.
So twenty minutes aside ninety
seconds first if you're shorter
than the people.
opposition first with a my
speaking of such.
Good morning chairman Philip
Committee members my name is
Bronson corn with the New Mexico
cattle growers and this is this
is a sad moment that I have to
find a good deal due to the fact
that it's this is a conservation
bill and I would like to keep it
as a conservation bill and not
have any land acquisition and
and I know that it doesn't state
in the bill that there's land
acquisition but the problem is
is whenever it goes into the
game and fish department.
protection fund that is going
into that allow us with the
acquisition of private property
that's the problem that I have
with this bill everything else
about it.
Is is putting funds on the
ground to do conservation work
and that's what I want to keep
this bill as I don't want to
turn into a land acquisition
bill now with that being said I
I do stand in a respectful
opposition of this bill thank
you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name's Taylor
Reagan's on behalf of New Mexico
oil growers and we also stand
opposed to this bill our biggest
concerns are the use of
appropriated funds for land
acquisition and a lack of
accountability Fund usage at the
very least fund should only be
used for the purchase of fifty
acres per year but entries land
acquisition is something we
would like to see completely
removed from this bill the
intent of the bill is funding
for on the ground conservation
efforts and a framework for
accountability for fund usage
only strengthens the syntax
thank you.
Is there any other opposition in
the room.
Yeah we're going online if you'd
like you can opposition to this
bill please raise your hand if
you're here to speak in support
please and then.
Kevin this are you in opposition
or support.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee I am in support of
this bill with the amendment.
We're doing this right now.
Okay no further opposition every
to support
So I don't all rush at once but
I would like to hear from some
of the younger folks just please
formalized.
Okay so so we're not able to
hear from all of you
so just keep that in mind.
So it Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is James hurt
my team including myself consist
of multiple generations a rapper
Act course list and ranchers.
And we're presenting on behalf
of an agency public schools
Senate bill Nye would
appropriate initial Lujan
million dollars towards six is
this existing agencies and the
protection of our outdoor
environment and economy.
Senator million dollars be split
to two separate funds.
The first one to begin making
disbursement starting the fiscal
year twenty twenty four to the
six existing departments.
The second one would be a
permanent fund managed by the
state investment council this
entry for the interest from this
permanent fund.
Will be disbursed agencies
approve success and to under
funded programs.
This yes this funding would be
of great benefit in all these
agencies but also to the state
of New Mexico thank you Sir.
Thank you what what we that's
totally your female colleagues
step up as well yeah.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Sydney
Blanchard with eighth graders at
the Santa Fe girls school year
from the city of Santa Fe Santa
Fe County in Pojoaque K. public
here to speak on behalf of the
land of enchantment legacy Fund
we are just one more group among
the farmers ranchers landowners
and conservationists
environmentalists who support
this inspiring and common sense
bill.
I.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is lily
Laughlin the land of unchecked
enchantment legacy fund would
provide high quality existing
state programs the fund would
have two parts a wallet in the
savings account which would
provide a consistent funding
every year the wall it will give
access funds no matter what the
fluctuations in the stock market
well the savings account would
help our money grow insisting
this currently state agencies
must receive funding annually.
Wasting state employees time and
making long term projects
planning and possible once this
one is in place the state
programs can do what they were
and counted to.
Published.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and member of the
committees I am still.
I am Leger Jedi because New
Mexico haven't hasn't been fully
funding many of these programs
we have been missing out on
federal funds funding the
federal government to agencies
like N. R. C. and F. S. and
we'll match state funds for some
programs more than a dollar of
federal money for each state
dollar so the more New Mexico
puts aside for the land of
enchantment legacy Fund.
The the more money we will
receive to find that these
wonderful programs.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Chloe
freeze Wyoming created the
Wyoming natural resources and
wildlife fund about fifteen
years ago which operates in a
similar way to how intervention
the legacy fund what the Wyoming
legislators seeded the fund with
fifteen million dollars and they
have added more over the years
with federal funds from sources
like and R. C. an FSA as well as
other converse a up conservation
organizations Wyoming leveraged
five additional dollars for
every state dollar.
It's hard to believe but in the
last fifteen years Wyoming has
funded close to a billion
dollars in environmental
projects through their fund this
shows that the Senate bill nine
is in a safe investment with
amazing returns.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I am mentally super I
want the noxious weeds and
Knox's weeds Act through the
department of agriculture to
have consistent reliable funding
invasive noxious weeds
challenger farmers and ranchers
as well as in Roach on our
beautiful public lands it
benefits us all when this
program has the funding it needs
to educate New Mexicans and ate
them in dealing with these
harmful plants.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Bobby
Fernandez and I want the river
stewardship act to have
consistent reliable funding.
This program aims to stop the
root causes of pollution in our
rivers and wetlands riparian
areas are where our ground water
soaks into our soils and might
become our well water.
Our rivers are precious to us
New Mexicans and they all need
and they need all the help they
can get as we face this long
term job.
But if you've spoken if you
could sit there I would
appreciate.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm Kelly Clemente one
of the programs the land of
enchantment legacy fund would
provide consistent reliable
funding for is the outdoor
equity fund through the
Economic Development Department
this funded children outdoors
hunting fishing and camping I
cherish the time I get to spend
outdoors and not Trajan have had
the opportunities I have had and
one if we don't fund this
program generously.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is grace
Driscoll and I'm excited about
the forest and watershed
restoration act administered by
EMNRD this act is New Mexico's
main defense against our people
climate changes bringing
it conserves wildlife habitats
and water sources and protects
us from floods droughts and
wildfires my generation is care
for ourselves and our future
generously funding the land of
enchantment legacy fund will
help us prepare and stabilize
New Mexico.
Mr chairman and the members of
the committee my name is Sophie
Longley yes I'm scared of
pandemics in school shootings
and injustice my whole
generation as but how can I even
worry about those things with
our plan is changing so fast
when wildfires are out my back
door when funds to catastrophic
damages how one might I have to
move because there isn't enough
water New Mexico.
What are we supposed to do about
climate change.
Mr chairman members of committee
my name is Frances Anderson we
all feel the same as Sophie but
we also have help we believe in
democracy we believe that you
need to stay because you want to
make Mexico more stable and
secure it will give me help in
New Mexico joins other western
states in putting cease to
sustainable funding toward
environmental programs that
matter so much please be the
people who who will with power
who do something about my
generation's greatest fears.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is a remote
cement and we are all asking you
to vote yes on Senate bill not
use your influence to maximize
funding for the land of
enchantment legacy I.
Our goal and the goal of all
stakeholders here is three
hundred million dollars.
The federal funds we could
leverage with that think of the
landscape we can repair the jobs
we can find and the disasters we
convert.
New Mexico is the land of
enchantment vote yes to keep it
that way.
Gentleman thank you for getting
back in line I think me for you
all have to sit down I was just
trying to mix it up a little the
server
Mr chairman members committee my
name is Linda McDonald.
I believe Senate bill Nye will
dramatically help by signing
over existing departments
including the department of
energy mineral national resource
department of agriculture and
part of the game and fish my
family as well as I've been
lifelong ranchers and farmers we
actually use these departments
and programs such the RCS FSA in
department of agriculture.
Which all directly connected to
Senate bill money I'm an avid
supporter anything that will
help our culture in the state of
New Mexico and I believe Senate
bill money will.
They permits fund all
departments and programs
directly connected with Senate
bill money for here on out have
a state issue money to fund
them.
With the station money I believe
Senate bill nine will help
preserve are few are will help
preserve New Mexico for future
generations as well as helping
occurrences since.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Rick
Sanchez Senate bill nine would
benefit the for she division's
current situations and would be
beneficial for future
generations to come one of New
Mexicos most value natural
resources is water.
Ultimately jobs have been
detrimental to New Mexico for
the past years does not only
affect the state's water
availability but they also
contribute to the destruction of
our state's worse land one of
the prescribing at schools is to
prevent and manage wildfires the
watershed Act and programs then
as water availability which a
during drought.
Due to our conditions there were
two hundred and eleven wildfires
reported from January to April
twenty twenty two.
This resulted to two hundred and
thirty thousand acres of
wildland being burned increasing
the funds up each program and
act would benefit each other in
the state.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is David heard
a fourth generation rancher from
southern New Mexico I believe
this bill will help farmers and
ranchers from around the state
I'm in support of Senate bill
nine because it increases
findings funding for programs
that aid in the conservation of
our water land and wildlife we
will do anything our farmers
ranchers rely on land and
livestock for our livelihood we
will do anything to preserve it.
However we do not agree with any
funding being given to New
Mexico game and fish to be used
to purchase private land this
money is intended to fund
programs that already exist not
for the use of purchasing
private producing agricultural
lands overall we believe certain
aspects of Senate bill nine are
essential to preserving the
great state of New Mexico for
future generations to come.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
house and the Senate it is not
is that before you today my name
is a John is because they're and
I'm here to speak to you about
Senate bill nine.
As a lifelong resident of New
Mexico I've had the privilege of
experiencing the natural beauty
of our state first hand I have
camped and fished in many of our
state's breathtaking
destinations from the heavens
mountains to elephant Butte lake
unfortunately over the years I
have also witnessed the
devastating effects of nature I
relived state from low water
levels to mud slides and the
burn scars wildfires these
negative changes are taking a
toll on our communities and our
environment as someone who has
seen trees burning just minutes
away from my home or the one
swimmable river nose right up it
is both scary and seventy this
is why I implore you to support
permanent funding for the
conservation legacy we need this
funding to begin and complete
projects to provide and lessen
the effects of these ongoing
natural disasters this includes
efforts to clean floors floors a
bio mass and to fund water
conservation and education
programs we must conserve and
protect our land and rivers so
we can continue our traditions
and future generations can
understand the sacredness of our
life giving rivers we cannot
allow our water ways to become
extinct rivers are forced to
become desert's our our heritage
to become footnotes of forgotten
history we must remember that
this is not just another dried
up or landscape but the life
blood of our land.
We must act now to ensure our
environment is preserved and
protected for future generations
please support build land and
help make New Mexico a better
and safer place thank you.
Morning chairman and members of
the committee we are C. repent
retains and that is from the
eight high school students we
are here to explain why we
support New Mexico house bill
number nine first and foremost
we feel that this piece of the
legislation is a vital step
towards creating a better future
for state we feel that this bill
should get passed and
implemented as soon as possible
in order to ensure not only
driving environment New Mexico
but also enable the contribution
of our rich culture and
preservation of our many
historical sites the best way to
do this.
This through educating the youth
and increasing preservation
efforts that the bill would make
possible.
Students in elementary and
sometimes middle school have
field trips that relate to
nature and wildlife such as Rio
Grande nature walks the world
famous Albuquerque zoo and the
aquarium and botanical garden
gardens we believe high school
students should also properties
to engage with the environment
Citrix is very close to the
voting age and can affect the
future of our environment
sooner.
Some hopeful outdoor activities
environmental opportunities I
wouldn't refuse would be fishing
clubs internships in any of the
departments adjusting this bill
for increased accessibility of
environmental related courses in
court high school curriculum to
just judge years systems
children should not only include
leisure activities such as
visiting historic sites nature
hikes reply activities and site
cleanups it also simultaneously
address why students much like
us should care about the
environment a signal you becomes
more advances increasingly
accessible to teenagers the
disconnect between majors and
care of it grows exponentially
it is important to instill the
idea of environmental
conservation in our youth and
even adolescents because the
plan is suffering from man made
pollutants and disruption.
You hopefully armed with
knowledge and passion there were
public pair some damages and can
help maintain the environment
for generations to come this is
one of the reasons of this bill
so vitally important.
Our hope is the use of the state
is that these activities will
make an impression on other
students and as far legislative
interest magnificent environment
within the state.
Within the next year they'll be
more wildfires possibly new
direction in government and
changes in school curriculum
what what what what change
however is a desperate need of
preservation for historic sites
which also preserves New
Mexico's culture and rich
history that dates back to some
of the first Spanish settlements
in America preservation of
wildlife would protect some of
New Mexicos extraordinary
species of plants and animals
careful consideration of game
populations may also provide
more hunting opportunities in
New Mexico which is an enjoyable
experience to many including our
youth environmental and
historical preservation concepts
are best introduce and retained
when students are younger.
Students need to understand
environmental causes and effects
and what role they play in the
maintenance and protection of
the environment and our
historical sites New Mexico's
culture is special.
We are known throughout the
world for native American
culture and anthropological
sites are incredible food are
spending heritage and that's
just to name a few we feel that
this is something with
protecting and we hope the house
vote can reciprocate our
sentiments thank you.
It just sure hands Cassie who
also wants to talk.
Okay so we're not gonna get to
everyone I would like to get a
few more members of the public
thank you to all of our young
people.
Thank you chairman acquitted
morning chairman and committee
members my name is Christian IC
registered lobbyist for chevron
chevron supports SB nine as it
is currently written without any
amendments chairman Stansted in
partnership with the
administration and agencies
departmental organizations and
conservation groups and
supporting this bill we
appreciate senator Wirth and
center renewable for bringing
the bill forward.
New Mexico is one of the only
states in the west that does not
have a dedicated fund for land
and water conservation we
believe it is time for bold
action on conservation this year
chevron supports fully funding
this bill with the three hundred
fifty million dollars being
request by conservation
advocates and we thank you for
the opportunity to speak in
support of Senate bill nine
again I'd like to reiterate as
it is currently drafted with no
amendments thank you for your
time.
I think for our people.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee risk of error with
the Serra club you're gonna
chapter representing a thirty
five thousand members and
supporters throughout New Mexico
we strongly support SB nine and
the creation of the let land of
enchantment legacy Fund this
investment in every corner of
our state means safety and
security for the unique quality
of life we have here this fund
helps protect us from climate
driven disasters and it's
crucial to protecting the places
that sustain and inspires we
want to think of the governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham and the
sponsors for making this long
for it sorry for making a strong
investment in conservation
protecting the beauty of natural
resources The New Mexico thank
you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I'm working
Kearney from the land I found
the kind of ironic that the
cattle and the sheep growers are
against any public funds going
to purchase land to me it's just
a simply supply and demand if of
the public buys land up their
land is more valuable so I'm not
sure why they're objecting to
that but I do support this bill
thank you.
Good morning members of the
committee my name choose the MS
yes Gonzalez I served as a rock
climbing structure with this and
we are project our communities
have long been left out from
having outdoor experiences
having a permanent fund to
provide support for these would
allow us to reconnect with
nature and possibly affect
future generations and this is
why I'm here standing asking for
some more support the committee
to pass SB nine thank you.
Good morning John Crenshaw to
New Mexico wildlife federation
thanks for your time R. what can
we do this are these young men
and women are not grand
children's ages
I which I hope we can leave them
a genuine legacy to mitigate
some of the negative legacy that
we've left them I would also
like to point out that my
understanding is that about
eighty five percent of the land
in New Mexico as part of lock
stock at some time if you're.
The small amount of marijuana
meniscal meniscal tiny
percentage of the land the code
and paste Department for
wildlife.
It is not.
For using Google for this bill
which we can strongly support.
Well what is an economic
recreational and intrinsic value
it does that and we support the
bill as it is thank you.
Thank you very J. two people
online first up we have Ambrose.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes.
Please Mr chairman and committee
members thank you very much we
stand in full support of Senate
bill nine for all the reasons
that have been stated more than
I can certainly state and my
name is camera I and I'm here to
represent the New Mexico food
and cultured Policy Council
permitido in the rocky mountain
farmers union and again on the
stand for the support of this
bill as it is stated thank you
very much Sanchez we hope for
your support thank you.
Thanks that we have Kevin Bixby.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members can you hear me yes okay
thank you
we support this bill but only
with a simple one word amendment
as currently one of my name is
Kevin Bixby by the way I'm
executive director of wildlife
for all in Los crucis.
As currently written the bill
allocate funding to the
department of game and fish to
carry out projects for the
protection of publication of
game and fish game is not the
same thing as wild out again is
to provide state law very
specifically the definition
includes various types of
mammals birds and fish that are
listed in the staff in total
includes about ninety one
species out of a total of eight
hundred and sixty one rate of
species so in many of the game's
spaces are not even not native
to the state so is written this
bill will do little to address
the urgent need to establish a
funding source.
For the conservation of the
ninety percent of New Mexicos
wildlife species that are not
considered game animals funding
that will be needed to match the
recovering America's wildlife
act if it passes Congress a
simple one word amendment
substituting the word while live
pregame would remedy this defect
thank you.
Thank you and thank you to
everyone who's participated at
all does it is that we didn't
get to including there are still
several online just in the
interest of time we need to work
up before we get to the
committee with the centers will
consider worth hello would you
like to add anything or
especially since you were four
years earlier thank you Mr yes
thank you Mr chairman I
apologize for just being in
another meeting couple minutes
late.
this bill is an extraordinary
opportunity and we have our.
Young New Mexicans here this
morning testifying I think puts
it in perspective
the beauty of the bill is that
it's not creating new programs
these are programs that we all
work through on the books I
know it Representative Rubio is
one of her programs and up to
rectus hear a bill that I
carried with Senator with
Representative bandy to force
the watershed restoration act
this committee worked on is here
the prescribed burning Act Mr
chair that you worked on are
just two examples of existing
programs that we put on the
books it's simply have not had
recurring funding and that's
been the challenge I've been in
the legislature for nineteen
years and very rarely do you
have opportunities like this I
believe in two thousand six we
took ten million dollars and one
point for outdoor funding but we
just have not been able to
figure out how to do this and I
think this bill.
As it has found the sweet spot
is it absolutely perfect no I
think part of the beauty of
compromise is that the advocacy
groups on both sides absent of
the table and they have worked
out their issues I want to give
Center Novello huge shout out
for his leadership in.
I have steering this over the
years.
And together we have.
Kind of agreed that what we've
come up with is what we really
believe should pass I know there
are some amendments and we can
talk about those amendments I
know there's some frustration
with the process that existed
but the reality here is that we
have a chance today and with
this bill to do something
extraordinary for the state that
really will have a legacy.
And I want to thank also
chairman small who sponsor on
this bill but has done something
that in itself is is the key to
this bill surviving and working
in that's getting more funding
in the house bill two there's a
hundred million dollars in house
bill two so far I will let
everyone know that I think there
should be more money put into
house bill two we've got a two
tiered structure in this bill a
permanent fund and then a
spending fund and I really think
that we need to work to
ultimately get that permanent
fund up to three hundred million
dollars or three hundred fifty
if we could do that spinning off
a five percent total return
which is how endowments work
would mean that the targeted
distribution twelve and a half
million a year could potentially
go up to fifteen million dollars
a year and the beauty of this is
that will be sat in perpetuity
unless we change it but it's
done using nonrecurring dollars
so we're creating a recurring
revenue stream using
nonrecurring dollars and we have
that chance right now in a way
I've not seen before so happy to
be here Mister chair I
appreciate you very much you
leading the the young New
Mexicans testify that doesn't
happen very often but their
voices you know report.
so so we're here and happy to
all stand for questions thank
you members of the committee.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you
chairman thank you Senator well
we're.
Bring in this legislation
forward
couple questions
Mr chair on the investment
income I noticed that the bill
has
eight five million dollars.
limit.
And
so side Mr chair aside from from
the.
The end distribution.
Of like just a minimum of twelve
point five million there's also
going to be in a fusion.
on the
from the investment fund.
The five million or access.
Of that five million Mr chair
and.
So Mister Mister I'd be happy to
take a shot that that's okay
send a bill so I think the
language you're looking at is up
on page three and so the way
this is structured is that there
to funds there's the legacy
conservation legacy permanent
fund and the the language you're
focused on is the triggering
event that allows for
distributions to begin happening
which you're correct that a
hundred fifty million dollars
that's when we begin the process
of distributing out of that fund
and it would pour over into the
land of enchantment legacy fund
which is the spending fund and I
think the whole peer Mister
chair representative is that we
can get fifty million dollars
park in the land of enchantment
legacy fund which allow for
spending for a four year period
or sell of the twelve and a half
million dollars and as we build
up this permanent fund we want
to get at least two hundred
fifty million because right now
the way it's set up if we have
fifty million dollars and it
gets split between the two funds
there's not gonna be any money
coming out of the permanent fund
as I understand it until we
reach that hundred fifty million
dollar trigger threshold so
really that's the reason that we
have the the twelve a half
million for the next four years
and I think what we need to do
as a body is get as much money
to the permanent fund this year
and then come back next year I
would like to them at least a
hundred million dollars in there
two hundred million dollars next
year our million dollars in in
two years and all of a sudden we
have our recurring fund but I
think the formula you're looking
at is designed so that we don't
what we don't want to do is
start spending on a permanent
fund and basically brought up
the principal and Justice line
set up threshold as we build
that fund up thank you for that
Chair Senator Wirth and the
lastly
and maybe up my.
Coach is Jr
is alive math
calculation I.
On page four section in front of
the departments that are.
Access
I.
From that problem twelve point
five million dollars but I
noticed that the percentages
that up to a hundred if we
combine all the.
Other departments together it's
it's that you know why is that I
don't quite understand why and
all the departments together
don't understand
But we're taking a certain
percentage we're getting this in
the Senate rejected from each
department
But the total it up to a hundred
percent so I I don't know what
formula you're applying but if
you could explain why that is Mr
Chairman.
I think they do at a Mr Chairman
representative
Here's the numbers twenty two
and a half to EMNRD that goes to
various things twice and have to
an NDA so that's a what we have
forty five and then we got ten
to NMED's so that's a fifty five
and fifty more is seventy and
then we've got to.
Eight and twenty two years
number thirty two hundred.
Mr chair but what about the
fifty percent.
Please.
That's sorry Mr.
Representative that's a within
the fund thank you so thank you
twenty two and a half percent
that is split at fifty fifty
would not fifty fifty whatever
the number is fifty percent goes
to certain programs so that
within the twenty two.
Those are separate percentages I
see I understand you thank you
thank you.
There is a Representative
Montoya was your hand up.
I.
sure.
That.
Yes first and get back to you
yes.
Percent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam.
the one comment that I heard
from.
Young people have the workers
will go to like this part about.
Land acquisition would you care
to address that and why on the
two separate cages.
The bill which tried to the
manage strict strict the ability
to practice twenty at.
Why that wasn't accepted and.
What does that mean to you guys
and just.
If you would please if if I
Martin Senator Wirth may have
some discussion as we've done
this several years to the big
sticking points we every time we
try to write a bill.
we would need a.
Set up a whole new system of
some kind and when you do that
then everybody wants to have
their own version of what that
system is supposed to be other
sponsors to spoke to spend
whatever so the way this bill
the way we got everybody to kind
of come together on this bill
was not touching current
statutes yes a couple agencies
have some authority to purchase
land that should given there's
no secret there we did not right
in the statute we didn't change
the and they bring it here
inactive I'm sorry the
neighboring legislation on the
statutes the game and fish
department's good example they
do have the authority to
purchase land we didn't tamper
with their.
Authority of god on I've got the
word games a state that's not
their intent to use this money
this money is for their game
protection activities and so
forth.
So
that we didn't tell David Fisher
run the show we didn't of
Department regular runner showed
until the EMNRD had run their
ship.
We left everybody's operation as
it is on the books and we said
here's money we want you to use
of conservation the proposed
what they want to do but we
didn't ask them to change their
whole game plan as it were and
we didn't write new rules or
statutes to to make this money
go a certain way because we had
we done that then somebody would
have said well I want to do it
this way and then you get into
the battles we try to avoid that
so and some given to sorry and
if I could just And I appreciate
question because it's a good
question and I think the reality
is there's members on this
committee would like to add an
amendment.
The that are opposite of each
other and what we've done the
whole this question groups
together is even Center novella
I might disagree on some of
these if there hasn't been
agreement by both sides we
rejected the amendments on
giving example of one we did put
on that I'd certainly I thank
you you your free to eminent
domain that's something we're
both sides.
Said you know we don't want to
have any provision in the
statute to allow eminent domain
we did put an amendment on that
did that but unless we had buy
in from both sides
we didn't move forward I think
that's why you have you know
some frustration from folks that
normally would be aligned more
on my side that what senator
Wirth weren't you agreeing to
put in this language that would
specify you know wildlife
instead of the game fund the
weights drafted and the answer
is because.
Doing that would tip the scale
and I think we've managed to
pull this together which is
which is unique that's been a
huge challenge with this bill
over the years ascent of el and
I've worked on it it's just
trying to hold the group
together.
Appreciate that chairman and
Senators.
It seems like that is the real.
Speaking.
You heard it from the young
people to be heard it.
What I call the stewards of the
land.
The raptors.
At that one these.
This year it would probably go
with.
Can you tell me who was supposed
to.
laminating the purchase of.
Specific names I can't that are
working with the reception I I
think the probably some of the
environmental groups were
opposed to tampering with game
and fish statutes or rules.
That's my guess there's a
there's a working group this
been going on all year and I
wasn't involved in all the
meetings and so forth they
proposed some of the things we
put together this bill what they
could live with what they
basically all had agreed to at
some point.
There has been some
disagreements since in the we've
got ninety percent of the groups
that we dealt with I agree with
with this bill is put together
at if I could just real quick Mr
chair I think that there are a
number of groups that would like
to add in to all the statutes
the ability to purchase land you
know and that's the problem is
that we've got both sides and
and I think the beauty of this
and the reason this is worked is
that we're not trying to re
write statutes would just try to
hold these are the laws that
we've all passed on the books
and this will now create funding
streams for the laws that are on
the books and unless we got
agreement we basically if not
amendments.
I appreciate that I hate to keep
beating a dead horse but
Chairman of the.
Secretary that I really don't
have.
Choice would it be possible.
To consider.
Eight dollar amount for land
purchases would it be possible
consider.
West legislative approval.
And purchases I mean.
That is a sticking point for
many of my constituents the.
I trust that they have and and
Bob and the of the.
This and this and that.
I think it is a huge sticking
point with several others and so
I'm trying to find common ground
if you are.
So I I I'm.
Continue this and.
Reserve money always the.
Opportunity to come back for
seconds but the.
Senator I think that something.
right now.
And act on them thank you Sir Mr
just real quick if I could
because I think it's important
in the Senate we have the exact
same discussion there's a bill
that's been reduced by Senator
share ceremonial center diamond
legislative approval for certain
land purchases for thirty nine
so to separate tracked and
that's the way it ended up
addressing this issue I was just
trying to bring use that are one
of the state senator I like.
Sure that the state can envision
had promised to.
I had told you I don't know
where to thank that wasn't there
in the end so it's that wasn't
their intent.
And you understand that and I
understand that and all of the
environmental groups understand
that.
It should not be problematic to
meet at the oval because
everybody understands.
What causes me concern is when
everybody understands that they
won't write it down and I know
you understand thank you.
Thanks Senators.
Representative Montoya.
Mr chair Senators
That actually was.
Sure.
One issue.
The whole presentations shares.
I don't.
The.
For the
I.
All.
Alright.
musician all yes.
This is here.
In that case.
From the.
I.
That.
This that could be used for.
Staff will do.
Are they.
Awesome other lines.
Mr chair.
Is this by.
A lot.
Access.
On.
I see.
there is last.
Sure.
Is.
You may yes.
Session.
It's it's
yes
And.
Yes.
Every those.
One hundred percent.
I think everybody should.
This is.
The cost
is.
yes it is what.
I see shares.
Mr chair representative Lente I
just noting that I'm given fish
as the
the minutes you were talking
about here and they would be
authorized to acquire fee
interest in real property for
conservation of wildlife but
that acquisition is subject to
some some constraints anyway and
purchase requires at that the if
they are using federal funds
which they almost always are
involved yellowbook appraisal
and meeting federal standards
those standards often deter
prospective scholars from
working with game and fish
because of how burdensome they
are so it can be a hurdle from
the from the start the over to
please all generally has come in
below asking price and game and
fish cannot pay more than the
all of the price that they can't
get into a bidding war.
The directors here as well but I
think that's and and and and and
that's all thank you Mr chair.
That Mr Chairman I have done
deal with reasons they are hello
there are terrible and they will
very strictly establishing
market value it will be a
updated for your very for.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
if I could.
There are groups that are not
opposed to the.
That are supporting this bill
you heard from to but there are
others that are on the side of
this bill as written and so are
conservation district is one of
the.
They get significant funding in
this they also go to the ranches
cattle growers will growers at
work conservation programs in
grazing programs for commercial
forestry all wildlife and
answered all those kind of
things will happen so just to
point out this it's not an
absolute.
On that particular segment there
are groups that that group which
so I want to make that clear
thank.
Thank you Mr chair right in
senators actually Preciado to.
Something in the state.
Centers are taking a little heat
from all sides.
Not sure just that
big sellers to secure.
This past.
so Mister chair Senators of I do
appreciate that.
By more efforts to force down
the line as you can see.
Difficulty.
Parties happy on.
Still on the.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair
Senators.
I know that you would probably
have me of your we could deal
with the land acquisition H.
Yeah looking at it I came up
with a point last night the
state to the debate the very
first probably eleven.
I think would solve the problem.
And I will do that the.
At.
Senate finance committee
substitute
bill which I hope is the right
one.
Well the last page.
Why so.
Representative the was inserted
at some point in the process of
has been a member of.
Word of.
What we're in a domain.
I would suggest that you just
Senator yes Sir the acquisition
There's a difference between a
portion of what works for it
were to be the acquisition of
land for the exercise
Amendment of bill money.
That the issue is you would like
the agencies to be able to
acquire easements licenses and
other
spend some money to access lands
there I would add three working
the acquisition of the title to
land for the exercise of
remember and that way you would
have some flexibility to.
What our rights of way easements
licenses to go on the properties
to engage in these conservation
efforts but not.
What are the underlying feet
title.
So.
I think that that would address
some of the.
I.
Members of the audience as well
as some of the members up here
on the committee.
I just go that out there for you
to consider
because I think if we get there
that serve a long way to engage
some of ours.
Have any further questions
one of my best suggestion I'd be
happy to do the math if they're
so inclined I'm not gonna be
able to track.
Mr chairman you know how the
process works as well as I do if
you close it and passes that we
accept
we are at this point raise
amendments.
Mr chair Senator are rarely do
money movements just.
But you would agree to.
Representative Nibert this got.
T..
Mr chairman Senators.
To the.
Sars.
Representative to the overall
size Mr chairman that correct
technically no.
So if you will just.
Earnings or additional
contributions.
The the.
And I'm using this feature
chapters.
Changes.
I will choose.
She started to alternation.
Million dollar change.
To.
Mr chair Senator true.
Leverage federal money.
The acquisition of land and that
is she.
Okay.
This committee.
Or
the petition Act.
Chairman Senators in these
programs
the.
An aspect that these that this
piece of legislation which.
Mr chair representative that the
amendment about eminent domain
was addressing a gaming station
forty
that they can use eminent domain
in very limited circumstances.
Mr chairman and showed to this
question.
Already in this.
Making the land solution.
Prohibited land acquisition in a
manner similar.
Of the appropriations.
And
so Mister chairman and
Representative Scott
The difference as I think we
explained up front is that the
advocates that all worked on
this bill on both sides all
agreed to that provision and
just back to Representative and
I brought suggestion that would
solve the problems that one
group of you have.
But it's not.
Going to solve or it's going to
create problems with different
parts of this coalition that's
been put together and that's our
challenge and that's the
difference between eminent
domain and what's being proposed
now is that there was an
agreement by everyone to make it
clear eminent domain would be
used.
Everyone is not on agreement.
With respect to this issue of
acquisition I think the decision
being made to leave the statutes
the way they are versus trying
to.
Open them up some more
and and noodle
in different ways.
And if I could the proper way to
change the authority of an
agency is a separate piece of
legislation where you deal with
that agency and what they're
authorities
Not this bill this is a funding
dollars it's not that was when
we are not the appropriate place
to change the overall function
and purpose of what to get.
Or any other agency for that
matter.
Yeah Mister chairman Senator we
have section the.
Second we have what.
S. and.
Bill.
We have Mister chairman Senator
section the large.
Okay and so we.
Thank you Mr chairman H. all
right.
Small thank you very much Mr
chair thank you senators thank
you Secretary Mr chairman
senators were this sort of the
breakdowns and we got through
these but
the the thing New Mexico
department of agriculture gets a
significant amount of funding
from this
press secretary since you're
here at with energy and minerals
can you give us just a sort of a
flavor of some of the programs
that would be that the existing
programs as the centers of
specified also what federal
matches are available out there
potentially so that we can get a
taste of what.
This fund can help accomplish.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative small and I think
that the the students did a
great job running through some
of the programs but I want to
highlight some for you for the
from the energy minerals and
natural resources department of
the natural heritage
conservation act program which
funds conservation and
agricultural easements and land
restoration projects projects
are selected here through
competitive processing grants
are awarded to the state
agencies tribes and non
governmental organizations it
does
have the opportunity for each
dollar of federal funding could
be leveraged by a dollar of an
H. C. A. funding so one to one
R. for programs that require
that sort of match that includes
the land and water conservation
fund to the farm bill and state
and private forestry programs
funded by the bipartisan
infrastructure law
we also have
we have the forested watershed
restoration program under the
force of watershed restoration
act this project the project
proposals are reviewed by an
advisory board there as well and
have public benefits including
water source protection wildfire
risk reduction in fish and
wildlife habitat conservation
that program as well
a dollar towards the far
projects could leverage up to
three dollars in federal funding
through the bipartisan
infrastructure law and other
federal funding initiatives I
will go ever through every
single one of these but there
are similar opportunities across
the
the the different agencies and
we really the timeliness of this
with the bipartisan
infrastructure a lot having just
passed really makes it makes the
timely and imperative that in
the next few years we be able to
to bring those down NMDA you
mentioned I'm still water
conservation districts you know
one of the only programs I can
put dollars directly on to
private lands in the state so
incredibly important
opportunities there a dollar in
federal funding can be leveraged
by every dollar in state funding
for SWCD is.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary and I think that the
as you said are the incredible
presenters here today and I
especially given Big Ben to
superintendent Cushman's and
folks up from from down in the
most biologically diverse part
of New Mexico down in the NMAA
area
it's great to see you all
It gives a I think this is an
incredible opportunity can
really starting a one to one
match going up to three to one
and higher really highlights how
this Senator Wirth as you said
it's you know sort of
nonrecurring now money that will
be recurring future money
in in really it's on different
ways so
The the river storage program I
think is particularly exciting
and building on the outdoor
equity fund and our trails
grants is been particularly
successful in all the
requirements and a big thank you
to to W. the others from salt
water conservation districts
your so thank you senators thank
you Secretary
it's great to see and I think
the balance sort of on display
in our conversations and today
seems like a balance that is
fully they're ready for
significant future.
Thank you Mr.
This
discussion from the committee
before just.
Mr chair.
I just have a couple comments.
Share.
Alright.
Thank you.
Again that number is.
And I know that and
You were.
it's really hard to make it.
Happy and.
I think it's very clear based on
everything that the.
From all
that and all of this.
More.
That.
Here is the issue really is that
officials and.
That there's another okay.
Which you all have been very
clear that.
We
are and conversations that are
happening right here and that
the only one that is the real.
And are you know.
We
need to decide on this one.
Members of the committee about
this
that was the issue that we need
you are looking at.
Each year is.
Nine.
Have.
I.
That Mr chair that members the
committee so we have been
through at you know year of
discussing this we had a G. O.
bond effort last year that that
failed to make it through the
legislative process but working
with the agencies we've been
refining all year how much we're
currently spending in the
programs what the appetite is so
you know if it's a grant program
how many applications do we get
versus dollars that go out the
door what does that mean and for
the command what is the capacity
of the agencies to to handle
more money and and get out the
door in a responsible timely
fashion so a lot of discussions
about that also with stakeholder
groups in our geo bond after the
game and fish piece was was very
small I think it was a five
percent last year and a lot of
advocates thought that that was
way too low and we needed to
right size that and there were
some good data for game and fish
about matching opportunities and
and wild life support and other
things that we we bump that up
so it was a very carefully you
know crafted
Set of numbers that we think are
are defensible reasonable and
will
it will not cause us to revert a
lot of dollars in these
programs.
And.
Centers the secretary I
appreciate that answer
The answers from you because
there were no legislators
present.
Correct.
Mr chair we try really hard in
the interim to bring together
stakeholders and bring things to
the legislature there have a lot
of the Kinks worked out so that
was really what we try to do
during this and around we do
appreciate that you invited our
department to present to to
interim committee and general
council until infuse presented
to that committee and it it the
percentages in particular I
believe are pretty similar to
what you see in the bill so we
you know always to agreed to
present when you enlighten us
and I think that's that's how I
would would add that and we've
certainly had high level
conversations with R. Sanchez
throughout the process but in
the interim you we think it's
incumbent on ourselves to to try
to bring people together work
out the Kinks and then bring you
something that is well thought
out indefensible.
As a secretary at a appreciate
that because.
Yeah levels are are and it's
difficult to fix in session.
That being said.
I think the legislature has
ruled.
And I'm hearing on this bill
that we can't play that.
That we can't have entered on
this bill.
Because it would.
Upset the advocates the.
At the.
Under the guidance of the exit.
The trouble that.
I think the legislature has a
role to play I think it hasn't
played that role in this but.
Senator would you like to
respond that no I'm happy to
respond to that and I think the
the challenges always finding
that right balance and this bill
senator Neville
various versions of it have gone
down in flames once you know the
groups and the legislators got
involved and it just went right
off the tracks and I think that.
You know the the specifics of
the different funds in the
percentages.
I think certainly the process is
the process and we had
amendments proposed on the other
side that were brought to a vote
on the Senate floor one of them
because a sponsor didn't felt
very strongly that that should
happen on the Senate floor the
amendment didn't pass that's our
process and I think you know we
understand that there could be
more amendments here I've seen
some different draft amendments
and that's the process.
Representative Nibert talked
about a possible amendment he
certainly has the right to bring
that process and we and we vote
on it but I think what's unique
in the reason we've been able to
get as far as we have quite
frankly for the first time on
something like this is because
of that work that went on.
All luminous time that it takes
to get different groups to sit
around the table and talk to
each other and that's what's
unique I appreciate very much a
Representative Rubio said
because again we've seen this
before forcing water shed
restoration more parties here I
mean I can remember those just
tortured interim committees I
chaired some of them water
natural resources we're just
folks that just won't even look
at each other let alone talk and
so I I think when you have a
situation like this where.
After multiple years parties
that dollars play well together
sat down and through a
facilitated process were able to
come up with with a framework.
Not perfect per se but it's a
framework that works for all of
them I respect that and we're
part time legislature and that
the idea that you know one or
more of us are going to come in
and insert ourselves into that
process to be able to dedicate
the time I think it's the
challenge of our of our system
and we're having that discussion
to now about the role of the
legislature but I don't think
it's just that to say that we
didn't.
You know we have center
developed I have have kind of
together scented and less the
parties can can agree on the
amendment we're not going to
support it
and so and that I think it's
gotten us to this point but the
point you raise is is is
certainly a valid.
Discussion to have but I think
in this particular case we have
an unbelievable opportunity and
trying to create.
The perfect bill potentially
could de rail what's an
extraordinarily good.
If I could Mr chairman
We've been working on this for
like six eight years I'm not
sure exactly start so to say
that we haven't been involved
can be accurate because we have
been formulating I have my ideas
and our ideas ideas we got
together we started trying to
pull together cohesively.
It's it's a very difficult
process you know to get
something that is this brought
to get everybody to agree on
something and that's kind of
where we're at but I've
certainly been working so our
conservation district and other
agencies EMNRD and so forth to
try to get some kind of program
together this evolved into this
is more than I started with but
it is certainly involved I was
involved in many many
discussions over the last eight
or ten I got a problem sixty
years something like that
longterm.
the bill you have a different
experience.
what we will be asking about
some of the opposition to this.
Senator should be talked about.
I mean people together and yet
we still have groups that are
essentially saying they want
their slice they don't want the
other side.
Can you address that because I'm
troubled by.
It's kind of the way things work
around here Mister chairman
unfortunately we can't all agree
on everything so we come up with
the our best efforts whenever we
put together a plan on any bill
we work on
when we go to committee I have
one shut down yesterday that's
the way it works and.
I think I'm too down so for for
the that voted against those
bills.
The kids okay.
That's where we do around here
Mister chairman and I respect
that I think that's the that's
the way the legislature's work
and we sat down we we debate
haggling negotiate and bring in
the party's best we can we try
to come up with plans
This is.
It's not perfect I grant you
that there's things I want to
change that I'm not going to but
the system because I want to see
the end result it's better than
what zero what amount to and
that's coverage I'm sure Senator
Wirth say the same thing.
Senator let's
The acquisition
certainly.
I'm a different point of view
than live call.
this bill band acquisition I was
with.
I think acquisition is critical
tool in conservation.
Under limited circumstances the
rights are.
Senate senators would you agree
with that.
So if it's a Mr chair that
A member on our side who
articulated that the best the
senator Munoz.
And during the hearing and
Senate finance where we got
exactly the same discussion
about acquisition and he's also
sponsoring the bill I mentioned
with Senator share but he also
talked about the value and the
legacy that open space can
create and so he managed to
thread the needle in the way
that he presented that I I just
sat back and said.
This is someone who.
You know as food opinions on
both sides of these issues but
if you frame it in such a way to
certainly discuss that the
benefit of that and help our
ranches and a lot of discussion
on the Senate finance side we
talked about that a bunch
and so again I think that
absolutely there's a role for
that
and again I think that.
What we're doing here in the
challenge here is.
You're right if we if we put in
the language you'd like in this
bill.
We probably also end up with no
little bill and that's really
the challenge is to just
deferred that discussion working
thank you you had a different
bill that would have done that
I know that there's another
bills with the required
legislative approval before
acquisition those are
discussions we need to have I
just don't think they need to
happen here.
So Senator is to me acquisition
comes in different shapes and
sizes and different interests.
help our.
At its own.
Language either in the that
probably in the budget I mean
that.
Was a large acquisition the
funding we're talking about
here.
Least for the foreseeable future
would never support acquisition
the size of the.
Different state.
But there are still other
acquisitions that.
We are sold in the best
situation for all concerned.
Yeah access is.
In the affirmative.
It.
Consolidating landholdings in
the landscape that's fraction.
Which is what we have.
Yeah voluntary sales voluntary
purchases no bidding wars is we
don't engage in bidding wars.
Legally part of the.
I mean that to me is an
important tool.
Ten the language in the bill
that.
That I had proposes to amend.
The natural hair dispensation
Act.
Also opens that up to other
political subdivisions.
Land grants the state is cities
counties towns.
And that's something we
essentially don't have in this
bill.
Because those entities as
political subdivisions.
Probably aren't in the choir
conservations easements or
agricultural these.
They probably should.
So we I.
Skipping the acquisition keys.
We also.
Near the opportunities for other
purposes subdivisions.
And I and.
Yeah if this is our flagship
conservation.
Yeah we're we're even that out.
I just.
It really bothers.
So let's talk about.
Language in the bill talks about
protection and propagation of
the game.
We hear constantly from the
department and others.
That we can't pass musician you
wildlife agency.
Because there funding is limited
to.
And here we have money that
doesn't come from hunters
there's.
Which I think is for our right
so for.
Funding agency through licenses
and fishing licenses yeah I mean
that money should be reinvested
in hunting fishing I get that.
Here we finally have we
recurring funding returns or.
For the department that's not
tied to that any of the language
still ties.
Why can't we fix that.
Mr chair.
I don't Mr Sloan's here not the
two game fish I understand the
statute under came to stay have
the properties are the duty
ideas for other.
non game species within their
current statutes.
I'm not an expert in that I
don't know if the directors here
not maybe the legal counsel for
this year.
Mr chairman the committee the
Senators correct that under the
wildlife conservation act we
have the ability to research and
work on any species in the state
and to regulate species that
we've identified as being
threatened or endangered and so.
We do that work now with the
limited funds that we have we've
identified that it would take
thirty six million dollars
annually
to do all the conservation work
for this species of greatest
conservation need that are
identified in the statewide
action plan so this is a good
start director just please keep
your sure.
Thank you.
So.
I I understand that they do some
other.
Not be.
I get that.
But here we have funding the
state department chart.
The purpose is game and fish.
So other legislation other
duties that we impose on the
part of it.
You could make a pretty good
argument that they're not
allowed to use this funding for
those of their purpose because
the language in the funding
schemes.
Mr chair the language that was
chosen as we drafted a
propagation propagation came in
fresh references seventeen dash
one dash one of the New Mexico
statutes which establishes the
purposes and policies of the
department so it language that
picks up there and that section
then goes on again which framed
in the protection and
propagation of game and fish to
then clarified that that is what
that's wide ranging authority as
the director just said under law
to protect the Broadway of
wildlife species in New Mexico
and so the choice was
intentional of those terms there
to reference how it's codified
under existing code how the hell
the terms are used and what the
existing statutory framework up.
Provides and I would also know
the way the funding is
structured here future changes
changes like in Senate bill four
thirty nine and other things
like that would automatically
flow through to these funds as
they were you deployed in future
years.
So Centers.
I think it was Representative
Representative Montoya said
something to the effect that.
If your intention is one thing
why don't we reflect that
tension in the language of.
in.
I don't think it's reflect that
there I take them at their word
that that's their intention also
recognize that our current.
the issue that the department
game fish always be the.
Leadership in the governor's
office on there's either we will
always be.
They were leaving the door open
for for.
Future leaders of that
department to say oh well no
this money is actually just for.
I think there's.
And I one last point.
I've heard that
Senator Wirth you've been here
twice as long as I've been here
this is my ninth year
I was trying to think this
morning.
For all the term all the times
I've heard we'll come back and
fix it next year how many times
has actually
And I could not some of the
things.
We come back and fix things when
we meet in the state.
Something that worker we.
Something we we do that.
But in terms of the sort of fine
tuning that we talked about
like.
Changes program changes in this
language I can't think of a
single instance what we're
seeing that.
So I'm happy to give you one
because it's something that I
carried the conservation
easement program.
When I got to this legislature
it was barely used it was not
transferable and.
With no push from any group
other than something I had
learned about dropping Bill and
we were able to increase the
funding make that a transferable
easement program and I think
that's an example of one that.
Definitely improved based on
what we did does it still need
more work probably it does so I
do think that there's examples
and I just you know these
underlying purpose.
I think what's exciting about
this is that again if we can
actually get them off the ground
it's great we feel really good
when we come and pass a bill and
Representative Mandy and I
passed that forcing watershed
bill and then I can distinctly
remember the response from the
Senate from the legislative
finance committee what could
take the money out of the
firefighters.
And we sat in this room with
every firefighter ready to take
our heads off you know the just
was no there was no money what
we're trying to do and we
defeated the whole purpose I
think this this is that a
watershed moment because all the
work we've done all these bills
now we're going to get to really
see what can happen when you're
able to leverage and bring in
those federal dollars and and I
think it's incumbent upon us and
in the interim when you cheer.
You know the interim committee I
think it's incumbent upon us as
legislators to.
Bring all the different players
back and explain and understand
exactly how this is worked as we
as we roll this out and I do
think that it's if you're right
it's hard to it's hard to make
changes I'm not saying it's an
easy thing to do but I do think
it's something that it is
incumbent on us to stay on top
of.
Mr chair I want to add on the
natural heritage conservation
act I mean this is one that's
never had helped pass it in my
last year working for governor
Richards and didn't have any
money
and it hasn't had steady funding
ever sense and that's the kind
of thing that we are coming to
you and us to try to fix this
year with this bill.
Centers secretaries my knowledge
is never has.
I recognize that I also.
centers do you have any closing
thoughts before except the
motion.
Just just one thought Mr
chairman is brought to my
attention that given issues only
make two purchases one of those
eagle nest lake and I don't
think there'd be too much of
direction for that purchases
that is I was actually going to
be I was going to happen to it.
Maintained in ownership and it's
a great fishing lake I've been
up there a few times and it's
something that I think was a
good acquisition I don't know L.
R..
The committee Mr chair.
The past.
This is the second from small.
Start to.
Representative Borrego.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
A lot of.
Representative Nibert.
Good luck.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend not.
Thanks for sharing your the.
Chairman in the left and the
yes.
Five to four.
Given the past five for thank
you thank you.
