Not only the forever chemicals
that are part of this process,
but um also the potential.
Harmful of, uh, chemicals that
are part of this process, we
just want to know what it is.
Um, and that's what this bill
seeks to do, um, Mr. Chair, with
me is Senator Steinborn, um, and
Tim, and you're gonna have to
introduce yourself from uh Wild
Earth Guardians, um, general
counsel with them, um, to help
us, um, with any technical
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Good to be with you. I
used to be on this committee for
many years when I was in the
house, so thanks for uh getting
up early to hear this bill.
Mr. Chair, committee.
This is a, a really important, I
think, foundational bill for
where we're at in the
development of oil and gas and
the development of considering
use to produce water, um.
I'm really excited about this
bill for two reasons, and I
think it's super important for
two reasons.
Number one, this is the public's
right to know.
Um, the oil and gas industry use
billions of gallons of water,
much fresh water that they're
injecting in the earth.
With exposure to our water
supply, our communities.
And we have a right to know
fundamentally what chemicals are
being put into the earth.
We have a right to protect
ourselves as well.
You know, I am served, I've
served as a past chair of the
state's radioactive and
hazardous materials Interim
Committee. How's that for a sexy
interim committee name. One of
you may get assigned that.
It's actually a really cool
committee because it deals with
national labs, it deals with
Uh, a lot of issues all over the
state, but in that.
role you learn about
contamination across the state
and what I can tell you is that
we are fighting a losing battle.
Of contamination, whether it's
chromium and Los Alamos that
we're going to be dealing with
cleaning up for 15,000 years
that may threaten tribal water
supplies, whether it's PAST that
we're reading about this
contaminating the Pecos River or
um wildlife that hunters eat,
um, by Hollman Air Force Base
and let alone we know what's
happening in Cannon and Clovis
and threatening potential public
water supplies there, so you
kind of get an understanding
that we need to do a better job
of putting a regime in place on.
The front end
And that's what this bill would
do, Mr. Chairman. This bill kind
of deals with chemical
disclosures and freeways. It
does ban PFAS, which the oil and
gas industry has said Namoga has
taken a position saying we don't
use PFAS, we're cool with that.
What it also does, Mr. Chairman,
is it says when it comes to
fracking fluids, which the
industry has to disclose right
now.
They do have 45 days after they,
they drill. This would say they
have to do it before they get a
permit.
That's it. The other thing it
does is we require a new type of
chemical disclosure that doesn't
exist now at all, which is for
all non-fracking down hale oil
and gas, so we would have to
create a chemical disclosure
process.
Within um Ener.
Um, so that's what it does. It
does not violate trade secrets
because we don't say you have to
tell us your trade secret. What
we say is if you want to use the
chemical in New Mexico, you have
to tell us what it is.
We're not forcing them to use
any particular chemical, we're
just saying if you're going to
use it in the state of New
Mexico, we require that
disclosure so that we have that
knowledge.
And finally, Mr. Chair, I would
just say this is a super
important missing piece right
now in our regulatory structure.
I think part of the concerns we
see about produced water is that
people don't know what's in it.
And they're paranoid about how
harmful it can be. We're
spending millions of dollars in
fact on a produced water
consortium to characterize it,
but we're allowing it to remain
secret.
So what this does is it says,
OK.
That is an opportunity.
And to be on that side, but I I
want full disclosure. We need
full disclosure so we know what
we're dealing with and it's in
the public's interest to know
it.
And be in a position to protect
themselves before contamination
happens. So that's what this
bill does irrespective of any
other bills, we need this in New
Mexico.
And thank you Mr. Chair for
allowing me to make that
statement.
Mr. Cherry just wanna um.
Introduced him so you have his
title and and we also have
Melissa on Zoom for technical
questions.
OK.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is Tim
Davis. I'm a lawyer with Wild
Earth Guardians and uh here to
answer any questions you may
have.
Thank you for letting me join
you this morning.
And I believe Melissa Troutman
is also on Zoom for any
technical questions.
Melissa, could you raise your
hand, please?
Do we need to recognize her now
or we're
um.
We'll go to the audience, uh,
first just a show of hands who's
here in support of this bill.
Uh, who's here in opposition to
this bill?
OK, um, so we will take, uh, 3
in sport and 3 in opposition
that will take a couple online.
Let's do opposition first, and
you have 2 minutes.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman. There's the committee.
My name is JD Bullington and I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, which
respectfully opposes this
legislation, basically because
the chamber feels the
legislation is just written too
broadly and there are too many
uncertainties in the bill.
The impact on production, the
bill is unknown. The chamber
doesn't believe any other state
has taken the lead on this, so
New Mexico would probably be the
first.
And then also there is
rulemaking going on right now
that will that is addressing
this issue.
Which were dramatically change
the need for legislation like
this. And the chamber, you know,
references the
The statement from the Energy
and Minerals Natural Resources
Department that basically says
the bill is too broad. So it's
for those reasons that the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce is opposing the bill.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 180 member
companies.
Nimoga opposes House Bill 222
because all the interested
parties on this very issue went
through a week-long rulemaking
process with many months of
preparation where experts
testified about the proper scope
of a POS pan, and the commission
is set deliberate on that
process in short order.
Enacting this bill by bypasses a
very democratic process that
included a great deal of public
participation on both sides of
the aisles, which should not be
ignored by the legislature.
The additional disclosures pose
the risk of frack focus no
longer being the repository for
chemical disclosure in New
Mexico.
This is important because the
oil conservation division has
stated they do not want to move
away from racko and could not
and does not have the staffing
or tech technology capability to
do so.
Removal of the ability for
supplies to provide a product
with trade secrets, likely what
was likely will result in use of
older chemicals to preserve
their trade secreted green
chemicals. Thank you.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
with the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce here to oppose House
Bill 222.
By mandating the disclosure of
proprietary chemical formulas,
this House bill undermines
intellectual property
protections and could force
companies to abandon cutting
edge technology. No other state
has imposed such a blanket band,
and this puts New Mexico at a
competitive disadvantage.
The Oil and gas industry funds
many programs including
education and infrastructure.
The uncertainty created by this
bill discourages investments and
could lead operators to shift to
other states that have more
friendly regulations. Finally,
the bill duplicates existing
regulations, OCD already
requires chemical disclosures
while protecting trade secrets,
and for these reasons, we urge
you to vote no. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online. If
you would like to speak in
Opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
OK. Seeing none online.
Um, we'll come back to the
committee room for support. We
have uh
If you'd like to speak in sport
we'll take 3. They stepped
forward.
You have 2 minutes?
Good morning, Chair and
committee members. This is
really ironic. Nimmogai with New
Energy Economy on behalf of 5000
members. It's really ironic
because Nimmogo's position in
that hearing was, you can't do
it in this regulatory body. You
gotta go to the legislature,
which is why we're here today.
Um, so I just wanted you all to
know that that is the exact
testimony under oath by Nemoga.
The other testimony that's
important that you should know
under oath by
mo ga was that this wouldn't
hurt the industry.
That's what they said. They said
we could do this, um, and then
the other thing that you should
know is that, um, with all
respect to Mr. Bullington, in
fact, Colorado has done this.
And California has done this. So
we wouldn't be a leader, we
would be following their lead,
and they've done it
successfully. There's still
fracking in California and
Colorado. So let's do it here.
The last thing I'll leave you
with is that James Kenny,
Secretary of the Environment,
says,
Repeatedly, we must disrupt the
pathways of further
contamination.
That's what this bill does. This
bill says we are going to
prevent further contamination of
PFES. We must do that. Thank
you.
Um, hi, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Alyssa Kenny
Guyer. I'm a volunteer with the
Sierra Club, uh, Rio Grande
chapter representing 35,000
members and supporters. We are
here in support of the bill, the
large majority of fossil fuels
extracted in this state are
publicly owned and extracted on
public lands. The terms and
conditions of of the sale of
those resources belong to the
people of New Mexico. PAS
contamination is costing the
state untold amounts and the
compounds and fracking fluids
are unclear.
Let's set the health and safety
terms for extraction in our
state.
Morning chair. Excuse me. Good
morning, Chair, committee
members. My name is Colin Cox
with the Center for Biological
Diversity. The center supports
this bill. It would ban
dangerous and unnecessary
chemicals from fracking fluids.
I mean, it would allow the
public to know what's in the
chemicals that are being
injected to the tune of hundreds
of millions of gallons a year
underground, and they're being
spilled to the 3 to 4 times a
day on, on our, on the land, and
we should know what's in these
chemicals or what's in these
cocktails and that's why the
center support.
this. Thank you for that. We'll
take 2 online, uh, in support
first up we have Zoe Kraft.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee. My name is Zoe
Craft, and I'm here on behalf of
Earthcare, a community-based
organization dedicated to
environmental justice, education
and community well-being. We
strongly support House Bill 22,
because we believe that every
New Mexican has the right to
know what chemicals are being
used in oil and gas drilling and
how they might impact our water,
health, and environment.
We work with families, parents,
and educators across Santa Fe,
many of whom live in communities
that have already been impacted
by water contamination. The
experience of families in La
Cienega whose wells have been
contaminated with POs serves as
a tragic reminder of how lasting
and devastating water pollution
can be. There is no way to undo
this kind of contamination once
it happens.
House School 22 requires the
full disclosure of chemicals
used in oil and gas operations,
ensuring transparency and
accountability. It prohibits the
use of POS in drilling
operations, preventing another
generation from being exposed to
these dangerous toxins. And it
protects drinking water sources
and public health by insurance
companies cannot use
undisclosed, potentially
hazardous chemicals underground.
We know firsthand how
devastating it is for families
to lose access to clean water,
and we've seen the fear and
uncertainty that communities
experience when they learn their
wells might be contaminated.
This is a matter of basic public
health, environmental
protection, and government
accountability. New Mexicans
deserve to know what's happening
in their own communities. And we
urge lawmakers to pass House
Bill 22 and put the health of
New Mexico's families, children,
and environment before corporate
secrecy. Thank you so much.
OK. Next up we have Chaplain
Lorenzo, I, I think.
Jan, are you there?
Yes, sir. Thank you. Thank you
so much. Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Jose Agua Diega.
I represent thea de la la la
grant Association.
And it takes.
You know, I'm gonna just lamera
meta like my mother would say,
I'm gonna tell you what it is.
You know, if the industry has
nothing to hide.
Then there's no reason to oppose
this disclosure.
Knowing what chemicals are being
used allows for proper
monitoring, regulation, and if
necessary, intervention.
This special for holding
companies accountable when
contamination occurs,
the people liketeico deserves to
know what is in their water, and
who is responsible for keeping
it clean.
The contamination of our water
in.
In the language on Pueblo lands
is not a is not a hypothetical
issue. It's happening right now.
My blood is contaminated because
the PA, the firefighting phone,
my water that feeds my family,
my gente.
In my community it's
contaminated because the DOD
side.
Family is Santa Fe County and
across New Mexico are dealing
with this, uh, devastating
consequences of pollution.
Otherwise, water is life.
But right now, our water is
under attack.
So let us stand together and
demand better past bill 2222
protect the people of New Mexico
from this reversible harm of
FIFA's contamination. A CS, like
my grandpa would say, it's done.
Mucha gracias.
Thank you, sir. Uh, that's gonna
end our public comment, uh, for
the record, there's a number of
other people with their hands
up. Uh, thank you for, uh,
participating today.
Uh, with the sponsors like to
add anything before we get to
the committee.
Um, I think just a couple of
things, uh, Mr. Chair was
touched on that the um.
Rulemaking process is not law,
um, what we're trying to do here
is ensure that this is in
statute and perhaps not changed
by the rulemaking process, I
just wanted to put an accent on
that, and then, um.
Uh, just on the, uh, disclosure
piece, um, that this that this
opportunity here on disclosure,
um, is for not only the
communities that this practice
is already happening and um but
could help us on the front end
of clean up, um, when we're
potentially dealing with, um,
you know, various causes, um,
for what, what we don't know,
isn't it currently, so for first
responders and others that may
be um looking at uh a a
situation with which they had to
go into.
Currently without disclosure, we
actually don't know what we're
putting health and safety
personnel into that situation
with, so I just wanted to touch
on that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, if I could quickly
add.
The reason we need to put this
in statute outside of rule being
sufficient, we've had rules
specifically related to chemical
spills be overturned. I would
refer you to the pit roll under
the uh Richardson administration
that was then overturned during
the Martinez administration,
specifically to line pets to
deal with chemical spills. So,
um, that's why we need this in
statute and a little
misstatement was made that this
would make frack focus go away.
Rack Focus will still be used
for fracking.
For the existing practice, what
we're creating that would be new
here is a chemical disclosure
for non-fracking.
Down haul operations that would
be kept with the division, so.
Thank you. OK, thank you very
much, uh, going to the
committee, Representative
Montoya.
I want
Yeah, said Murphy.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Steinberg, nice to see you,
experts.
Um
I'm a little confused, um,
we're, where is PAS being used
in the oil and gas industry,
because, um, based upon my
knowledge and experience and
discussions with service
companies and, and everybody
else, um, it does not appear to
be used in the oil and gas
industry, as a matter of fact, I
think everybody is avoiding it,
and not because of what we know
about it, but perhaps because of
what we don't know about it,
which is at times even more
scary. And so, uh, the question
directly is, where in the
industries is it being used?
A Mr. terror expert.
Mr. Chair Representative Murphy,
um.
The answer is we actually don't
know, but.
We do know certain things just
from disclosures that have been
made to Frack Focus. So the
physicians for social
responsibility released a
report.
I think a couple of years ago
that looked at racko disclosures
in the state of New Mexico from
the period of January 1st, 2013
until September 29, 2022.
And during that period, there
were 2 separate Pfast compounds
that were disclosed to have been
used in New Mexico fracking
operations, and those are PTFE.
And I'll do my best with this
next one. It's floral alcohol
substituted polyethylene glycol,
which, um,
I've heard it used uh referred
to as FPEG the SPEG is the
acronym.
Uh, during that time period,
Oil and gas companies in New
Mexico injected 227 wells with a
total of 2,605 pounds of PTFE,
which is a PAST compound, and 34
wells were injected with F-pe,
another PAS compound with a
total injected weight of 6400
pounds. So that's what we do
know. Um, what we don't know is
what a lot of the
Chemicals that were also
Disclosed as trade secret
chemicals actually are. So
during that same time period,
roughly a decade. Um,
9,066 oil and gas wells in New
Mexico were uh injected with at
least one fracking chemical that
was uh a trade secret.
And so what that means in the
fact focus disclosures is their
columns. One of those columns is
for a CAS number. I've heard it
also referred to as a cast
number, that's a chemical
abstract services number, and
that's a column that
You put a number in.
That is a unique chemical
identifier. Uh, it allows you to
know exactly what that chemical
is, and instead of putting a
number there, uh, it's either
blank or it'll say proprietary
trade secret, and so, uh,
These
Trade secret
Chemicals were injected across
11 counties in New Mexico.
And during that 10-year period,
Uh
There were millions of pounds of
trade secret chemicals that are
injected, and we simply don't
know what those are. Um, so we
do know that they've been used
in the past. I have heard
representations that they're no
longer used, but um the
The issue that this bill would
be getting at one of the issues
in addition to just banning a a
harmful substance that EA
compounds.
would be to actually know.
What's being injected.
Into the ground in New Mexico
and spilled on the ground in New
Mexico.
So, Mr. Davis, that was a very
informative answer, but I will
ask you to keep your answers
brief.
I will, I will do that, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
So, I think by your own example,
I got a couple, I have a couple
of points I take from that, Mr.
Chairman, uh, senator and
experts.
That by that very example,
Um
Focus worked.
Um,
We don't know exactly.
Uh, what those chemicals are or
what their impact is. My
understanding, Mister Chair and
Senator and experts is is that
there's literally thousands of
different types of PASs.
Some may be very, very bad. Some
may be very benign, correct? Um,
uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, Senator,
um, and experts.
Um
But
If there are, if they have been
used and they've been used in,
in the oil and gas industry and
they've been used in other
industries as well.
Then why only focus on the oil
and gas industry. Why not focus,
uh, HB 140 and perhaps other
bills out there focus really on,
on, on what is the danger, where
is it coming from?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Murphy, um.
So I would say that this bill is
seeking to include
Uh
The oil and gas industry, which
we know have used PAS, at least
in the past, into that broader
PS man.
And the reason that's important
is that these chemicals.
are dangerous and um
You know, we recently had the
EPA promulgate.
drinking water standards for 6
of these compounds, and there
are thousands of them.
But the reason that the EPA prom
will get a drinking water
standards for those sixes
because those are the 6 that we
have sufficient toxicological
data and I don't believe that
it's any coincidence that those
6,
that we have data on are all
hazardous to human health at
very low concentrations.
Mr. Chairman and Senator and
experts, um, what is the source
of the PFAS contamination at
Lainnega.
It's not part of this bill, um,
Mr. Chair, for I, I understand
that the source of that is um.
I mean from a federal program.
Um
Madam chair, I believe, um,
senator uh expert, and I, I, I
understand it's not part of this
bill, but has been raised during
this hearing and so I think that
my point being is, is that there
are no oil and gas operations in
in the La Senega area, is that
correct?
Um, that's my understanding, um,
Mister, uh, Chair, uh
Representative Murphy, um, and I
think that's part of the point
is that we don't actually know
often where the sources of these
are coming from. And when we do
know what, where they're coming
from, Mr. Chair, Representative,
we want to ensure that not only
are they disclosed, but
prevented from use and certainly
um understanding any other
hazardous materials that could
be used in a process that are
known, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, in
addition to what the lead
sponsor Representative Romero
said.
If there's no other industry
that uses as much water that I'm
aware of.
In terms of
Injecting it in the ground,
exposing the public to this
level of environmental risk,
water risk, as oil and gas. And
so that's why it's a logical
place to focus efforts, Mister
Chairman Senator Murphy, can I
interrupt you for a moment?
Absolutely. So, so my apologies,
uh, we do have a committee sub.
which we failed to move we're
passing that out now. I'm told
it has been distributed to the
committee.
Sorry, I'm told it has been
distributed to the committee.
OK. And representing Romero, do
you have a copy of the
committee? Can you read the 230
number 822.1.
I'm sorry.
230822.1 and this committee sub
is available online.
everyone on the same page now?
OK, so we should have taken care
of that at the beginning of the
hearing. I apologize, uh,
representative Murphy back to
you.
Sorry, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
So, um,
Sinner and experts, um.
Oil and gas industry does use a
lot of water, but I, I believe
that.
Based upon the numbers that I've
heard that it pales in
comparison to the agricultural
industry or industrial and
suburban areas as well. And I
think that goes to my broader
point and, and that is, is I
feel like that.
This is a very narrowly focused
bill that's in search of a
problem.
That
May exist here I don't, I don't
believe it does uh because we're
industry is not intentionally
using these materials.
But where we do know it's a
major problem.
is at the DOD sites such as
Hollman, um, perhaps at La
Senega, perhaps in other areas
where aviation retardants.
Have been used and tested in
that sort of thing, so.
Um, with that said, I'll move on
to my next question and, and,
and if you could.
Um, Senator, because I, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator, um,
talked a little bit about the
rulemaking process. I have not
been deeply involved in that
rulemaking process, but it
sounds like
It has involved multiple
stakeholders as they usually do,
uh, expert testimony and so
forth.
And through that process, there
are, there, there is a rule
being developed and quite
frankly,
Based upon agency's own
analysis, this would be very
disruptive to that process.
So, so my question is, doesn't
this sort of take us back when
we've already got a process
moving forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Murphy, so again,
the, the point of this exercise
is to ensure that these types of
chemicals that could be um.
And we know are harmful requires
disclosure in law. So again,
superseding the rulemaking
process, um, this is the
democratic process that we are
all a part of to ensure that we
know that this disclosure um
stays in perpetuity. um, all
that to say, um, in response to
your previous comments, um, 60
billion gallons of New Mexico's
water being used in the fracking
process. So when we're talking
about disclosure within that
process, that's the
world with which we're, we're
just, we're talking about
disclosure, um.
For uh what chemicals are being
used, um, and so that's why
we're using this approach, um,
versus, um, having to do
anything with the rulemaking for
today, Mr. Chair
representative, I just kind of
want to disagree with the way
you characterize it. There is no
voluntary compliance when it
comes to some of the worst
chemical.
Pollution that's occurring in
New Mexico, including DOD.
We're having to sue the
Department of Defense to protect
our lands to get funding to find
out what's in these waters.
We're doing environmental
sampling, discovering the
highest levels of PAS
contamination ever found
allegedly in the wildlife around
it, so there's no voluntary
process. We're having a fight to
protect our environment.
Being fought currently in the in
the OCD rulemaking process, and
we're taking that effort here.
Um, so this is very much
additive to it and as the
representative said this, we
caught a fight in statute, which
really gives higher level of
protection to New Mexicans.
Thank you, Senator, and Mr.
Chair, just a few more
questions. Um,
I guess the uh
Let's talk about frack focus a
little bit and why.
Let me see if I understand the
concern.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, experts.
Under rac focus, um, the
industry through um a long um
collaborative process with
interstate oil and gas compact
commission of which the state
has representation, um, there's
a water agency of which the
state has representation develop
fact focus together with, with
the industry and it appears even
by your own testimony that it
seems to be working in terms of
the disclosures, perhaps.
Um, with a concern over trade
secrets.
And my understanding is, is that
under the agency analysis.
Um, they already have access to
that information and I.
organize this correctly, I
should be able to find the
citation.
Um
Um
And I, Mr. Chairman, I know you
don't like us to read things,
but it says here division
division has authority required
disclosure of trade secret
information when necessary under
1978.
NMSA 70-2-12A13.
And so if they already have that
ability, why is it a a concern,
uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
uh,
Sorry, can you just go ahead and
give me that citation once
again, is it the citation once
again.
Uh, NMSA 70-2-12.
Period A 1 through 3.
And it's on page.
These pages are not number but
it's on looks like page 4 of the
agency bill analysis, uh,
prepared by uh.
In NRD in red.
Mr. Chair, um, representative,
so.
While there is disclosure on
frack focus, there's no
requirements within the realm of
quote unquote trade secret.
To disclose to um our state
government, what is involved in
that trade secret.
Um, so
While they're um is that
opportunity that's essentially a
loophole that we're trying to
close here, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, it's.
The, it's, it's a
non-disclosure, disclosure,
essentially, right? Um, so when
we look at 70-2-12. What I
understand is that's a subpoena
power, um, for a specific
purpose, um.
As we're looking at it to
solicit or compel production of
this information, um, is
required is a is a requirement
of law, so there has to be a
proceeding that precedes that
need to subpoena, um, Mr. Chair
Representatives. So what we're
asking for is rather than have
to litigate these situations, we
just want it to be uh
preemptive, um, disclosures
that's well known within an
industry practice as a practice,
Mr. Chair Representative.
Experts, um, you get in, um,
you're talking about trade
secrets and once again, I know
that
Another agency analysis actually
says that um this bill will
violate various aspects of of
state law and with respect to
protection of trade secrets.
Um, but I'll move on to my next
question, uh, Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator, uh, the last one is
what sort of, let's talk about
what Frack Focus does and what
it doesn't do. And it sounds
like what you're concerned about
perhaps is is that it's
reporting things after the fact.
And if I understand the
testimony and and and so forth.
is that there's not a
pre-reporting, um,
Process for the types of fluids
that are used in the oil and gas
industry. And Mr. Chair, Senator
experts to understand the
concern correctly?
Um.
Mr. Chair, senator, and experts,
um,
In every permit, drilling
permit, injection permit, uh,
every, uh, agency processing
hearing that I've ever been
through pre or post fact.
Those disclosures are always
made. I can tell you, uh, from
the
Volume of, of, no, we operate
primarily on uh my company
operates primarily on federal
lands, but the state
requirements are very similar.
The permits are quite
volumes.
And um they go into the types of
drilling fluids that we used to
go into the types of chemicals
that we, we, we plan to use and
then if there's any exceptions
to those, we have to go through
a sundry process and get that
revised. So Mr. Chairman and
Senator, um, I think that
Um, the pre
use
Process is fairly robust, and if
it's not, could you explain to
me how it is not.
Well, Mr. Chair, it's based on
the rule. The rule is 45 days
after the activity commences. So
notwithstanding what practice
may occur from time to time,
what we're doing in this bill is
proposing a new practice which
is that prior to beginning a
prior to be giving a permit,
they must make this disclosure.
12, as we point out, there are
huge loopholes um that the
representative spoke to that we
have a need to know, we have a
right to know.
And so, and number 3, of course,
we're adding.
Um, non-fracking chemical
disclosure, which doesn't exist
right now at all, Mr. Chair,
Senator, now what I'm talking
about is, is the permitting
process that leads to the
approval of the permit, those
sorts of disclosures are made.
At that time,
Um
I, uh,
I'll conclude by by the
following is, is, as I say, I
think that this is a solution in
search of a problem. I think
that, that we need um a larger
and broader effort in this, in
this regard, and I'd certainly
um am concerned as, as all
around I'm sure are about PFAS
and what and where they are and
what they're doing. And, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I'll conclude my
remarks. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Rosanne Rashi.
They're members of the
committee.
in Monto.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
Representative Senator, um,
We've had a lot of discussion,
um.
In this committee that you are
not
You don't have, uh, you weren't
privy to.
Um, and I, and I would, I would
ask the chair to allow me to.
And just a brief bit of
discussion on that, um, because
I think it's important to, we're
talking about.
Phos in the water, and that has
been brought up and I and and
the other day I know um
Representative Small was given a
little bit of latitude on this,
and I'd like to have the same if
that's possible.
Yeah, reference his smallest
comments weren't brief, if yours
could be brief, I would, I would
appreciate it.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. So,
uh, we did have a, there's
another bill, just about banning
PFOS because it's in
All water
All drinking water in New
Mexico.
And the reason that it's there
in particular and the big
problem is
It's in makeup.
Um, and as you know,
Daily routines are
Usually in the evening, makeup
is washed off.
And it goes into our sewers,
which go back into the sewer
system, which then goes into the
water treatment plants and ends
up back in the water.
PFOS is an issue.
But
It seems like and to to I wish
representative Small was here,
but to quote him, it's, it's
unfair.
To blame an industry.
It has not shown that this is
Where the contamination is
coming from.
Our big issues appear to be with
PFOS.
And fire suppression.
And that's a problem because we
have fires.
And are a lot of our
A lot of that chemicals there
and it's not even being done
away with.
The the discussion, Mr. Chair,
Representative Senator.
Beyond that
Points out the fact that.
The big, uh, lawsuit that we
have currently with uh with the
Department of Defense.
is because of, of those big
Uh, distribution of of
He fought through fire
suppression.
The pro the further problem we
have, Mr. Chair, is that the EPA
has not designated PFOS.
We know there's been studies,
but it has not been designated
by the, by the EPA is a
hazardous.
Chemical
It has been, that is the reason
that we're having trouble with
DOD.
And once again, that was from a
longer specific.
Debate and presentation to
eliminate PFOS, and the big
problem is
Even in this process, we know.
Where PFOS is getting in our
drinking water, but even in that
bill,
had a whole list.
Of items that we know that have
POs in it that we were excluding
from being able to be
Uh, to not
Be able to regulate them out of
Um
Being able to get to the public.
And in reality, if we, if we
regulated that here, folks would
just order that online.
And bring it in.
So, the reality is,
We know that, and I'm, I'm gonna
finish this statement, Mr.
Chair. We know that PFOS is in
our drinking water.
In all of our communities.
We know that fracking is not
happening at all of our
communities.
We know
Fire suppression
Has been in all of our
communities, and we know makeup
is used in all of our
communities.
That being said,
To take and
From the um
From the fiscal impact report.
Looking at the Attorney general
and, and the concerns that the
Attorney General's office is
That
Collecting that information.
Could be fine, but
The potential of having to
disclose that information would
put us
Uh
At at odds with the
Uh, uniform trade Secrets Act.
So, I mean, that's
I, I don't know what I see head
shaking there, but I, it's in my
FIR.
Um
To my first question.
Once again, that's a big
statement.
But to my first question,
I'm curious as to why the data
collected was from 2013 to 2022
when we know that Frack Focus is
collecting that information
today. Why, why is this not more
of an up to-date, and why did we
have to go all the way back to
2013.
Um, Mr. Chair.
Uh, to go ahead and and get this
data.
To your point, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, that's a, that's
about a 10 year period of data
collection that that study that
you're referring to.
Uh, relies upon. So 2022 is
actually quite recent uh for a
report to come out, um.
we are relying on a longitudinal
series of data points that I
think we're referring to, um,
and then going back to the
fracko use, Mr. Chair,
Representative.
Trade secret is the response on
many of these situations, so
when they do craft a response to
what is being used in this
process, as Tim alluded to
already, the, the loophole there
is that they can just list trade
secret, and it could be PAS, it
could be a number of different
compounds at this point that we
don't know what they are. We're
requesting the disclosure in
order to understand what those
chemicals are. Um, so, so as to
prevent any hazardous materials
being used.
used in the fracking process.
So and Representative, would we
not have to undo.
Part of the trade secrets Act to
be able to then require.
them to provide trade secrets?
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
to clarify, this bill does not
force anyone to disclose a trade
secret. It's completely
voluntary by the industry. What
we say is if you want to use
that chemical here in New
Mexico, you have to tell us what
it is.
So it's their choice if they
want to disclose it or not, and
really the choice is whether or
not they want to use it here. If
they do, they need to tell us,
um, but we're not requiring them
to
per se.
So.
We're not running afoul of that
law. I'm not seeing how this is
voluntary.
And whether or not they want to
use it and that's the voluntary
part.
Boy, that is a man, Mr. Chair,
kind of a circular argument that
I just cannot.
Follow that we're requiring.
Disclosure
But they don't have to disclose.
I don't understand.
Well, Mr. Chair, they, they have
options as to what they, what
chemicals they use.
And if they choose to use a
trade secreted product, the
state of New Mexico, we, we
require every chemical under
this bill, we require every
chemical used to be disclosed.
It was their choice regardless
of the Trade Secrets Act.
So the trade Secrets Act does
not go away.
More requiring disclosure.
Regardless of the Trade Secrets
Act.
We are, we're, it's a voluntary
system for the oil and gas
industry if they choose to use
that chemical, they have to
disclose it under this bill.
It's their choice.
I'm thank you, Mr. Chair. I
don't believe that will hold up,
uh, legally, but
Um, I am concerned about the
2013 to 2022, I, I think I also
heard that two companies
Uh, used great volumes of this,
but I did not hear that it was
widely even during that 10 years
by a bunch of companies.
Do we have any idea whether
those two companies, Mr. Chair
and Representative, are still
even doing business in New
Mexico.
So I know that, sorry.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montoya, we, we know from the
PSR report that one of the
companies, the company that
injected the FPEG as EOG
resources.
Um, I believe they're still
doing business in New Mexico.
So thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. So if we know
that, why would we not go to
current disclosures to see if
that's what they're using. That
seems like a pretty easy.
Not very in depth process to do
is to go look at a
Frack Focus
even if it's a minority of
actors.
With where PAS is being used was
not the disclosure of that
party, it was through a
disclosure within the study that
was conducted, so we don't have
mandatory, not only disclosure
and any sort of sense if trade
secret is being used as the
disclosure, um, and secondly,
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
We're asking for the banning of
that of that practice entirely.
So those companies like.
Um, the two that were mentioned
that are still using this
practice would no longer be able
to use that practice in New
Mexico.
And they're currently still in
operation.
So Mr. Chair and representative,
why would this not just be a
PAST?
Ba alone. Why would we, why
would we then go and Mr. Chair
and Representative.
Then go into you, you also have
to provide, which is already
being provided to Frack Focus.
Why would we require to go that
far? Why not just a straight
man?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
as we're continuing to learn
about what goes on in the
fracking process, um, we're
learning from our neighbors in
Colorado that not only who have
also adopted a Trade Secrets Act
and also have this disclosure
requirement here that the
process with which these various
chemicals that are being used in
compounds that are being used
are hazardous, uh, Mister Chair
Representative. So as we're
getting this disclosure and
understanding from our neighbors
to the north.
We're understanding that there
there's more in this practice
that could be potentially
hazardous and certainly we would
want to maintain the health and
safety of this, the folks that
are involved in this practice
and the environment surrounding
it.
That's why we're requesting this
today, Mr. Chair Representative.
So, um
Different question, Mr. Chair.
Um
Why, um,
Doesn't appear at the very least
that Mner is not.
Necessarily
I'm not saying they're against,
but why are they not in support?
Why are we not seeing support?
Remembered on this. Is it
because they're currently in a
rulemaking process. What would,
what would you?
Or would you know? That might be
an unfair question. Would you
know?
Uh, Mr. uh, Chair, uh,
representative, so the CS that
you have in front of you was
engaged directly with Ener, um,
in order to make sure that there
this bill was in line with um
not only current practice, but
certainly have the review for
them, that's why you have the CS
in front of you, is directly um.
Engaged with the, with the
department itself, why they're
not here today, it's 8 o'clock
in the morning on a Saturday,
perhaps, um, I can't speak for
them as to why not Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Chair and representative uh
it.
Has been communicated to us that
That
They're not standing up in
favor. It doesn't mean they're
sending up in opposition, but it
does not appear as if they're
standing up in favor.
Um, we're, we're all here for a
60 day, I cannot imagine that
the governor's office would say,
don't worry about it, it's a
Saturday.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, I'm just
I'm very concerned. There is.
Reporting taking place, we are
able to our our our
Regulatory
Uh, divisions are able to get
that it appears as if
What we're asking to do here
could
Violate
Uh
Are the
Trade Secrets Act. It does
appear as if it
It at the very least gets very
close to violating the Trade
Secrets Act.
At least the point where
lawsuits could potentially come
to us.
I would rather see.
process that is going on,
continue.
As it has input from
Industry
Industry should be able to have
input.
If they're going to be
regulated, especially uh when
they're contributing so much to
our economy. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
Representative Senator, and
expert, um, I have a simplified,
um.
Outline of questions, so thank
you in advance for indulging me.
My first question, Mr. Chair
Representative Senator and
expert is, um, I know that the
OCD will be required to adopt
the rules and manage the
disclosures, so has OCD been
consulted on this?
Yeah
If I can real quick, um, Mr.
Chair Representative, thanks for
the question. Yes, when, when
this legislation was first
drafted, OCD was reached out to
to understand what was their
chemical disclosure, what would
be required to bring online new
disclosure, learning about the
need of developing an online
module and how industry reports
and how they would report this
new
Non-track focus, non-tracking
chemical disclosure. Yes, they
were consulted, having said
that, they are in a judicial
mode right now and so one thing
about separation of powers is
you don't engage.
Judicial entities that are in
the middle of a rulemaking
process on that level as far as
the division goes, oh yes, there
was, um, communication and fact
finding and research and now we
have an amendment with the
division that oversees them.
To further uh put the bill in
alignment.
Mr. Chair Representative Senator
and expert, um, do you know if
they stand behind the bill?
I know they're not allowed to
participate right now because of
the rulemaking, but.
I, I just what I think you've
been told, Mr. Chair
Representative. OK. Um, Mr.
Chair Representative Senator and
expert, um, the bill does narrow
the definition of operators, so
how will this affect OCD's
implementation of other sections
of the oil and gas Act.
Chair, representative that was
directly an Mnerd request to um
ensure that this uh version of
operator is actually in line
with current state law, um, and
that was a request made by Ebner
directly to have this uh.
Definition in there.
OK. Thank you for being so
gracious. I still have some more
questions, I just want to make
sure that I'm understanding
everything, Mr. Chair
Representative Senator and
expert, um, this is really
simplified, but is it true that
PFOS is just a group of
chemicals that are resistant to
heat, water, oil, and while that
may be true, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, there's,
it's also true that it causes
cancer, res very destructive to
the human body, um, when
concentrated, there's a number
of other things I could say
about it, so yes, uh.
Mr. Cha
So wouldn't it be more likely to
come in contact with PFOS in our
everyday life.
than a drilling site because
it's in, it could, it could also
be released in a Tesla battery
fire and water bottles, kitchen
utensils, clothing, makeup, and
you mess with makeup, that's
really my arena, so wouldn't we,
to go back to that question,
wouldn't we come in contact with
PFOS.
More in our, on our daily life,
then in that drilling site.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative, I
think that depends on where you
live, what you're engagement is
with these chemicals at what
concentration, um, and I think
when we're talking about health
and safety as a practice for an
industry that we know is using
these compounds certain
practitioners are using these
compounds that we would want to
ensure that at any level of
concentration that could be
harmful.
To human life to uh
environmental life surrounding
that we would want to prevent
the use of that from happening,
knowing how destructive, how
absolutely devastating, it could
be um to human health and safety
and environment surrounding.
So Mister Chair Representative
Senator and expert, so.
Is Phos in the drinking water.
Mr. Chair Representative, again,
I think that depends, but as per
testimony, there is a
possibility that constituents do
exist in drinking water, yes. Is
it Mr. Chair Representative
Senator expert, is it in the air
we breathe?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative.
Uh, possibly, yes.
So has the EPA developed health
advisories for POS.
Mr. Chair Representative Senator
and expert.
I would say that the
EPA, Mr. Chair, has greatly,
greatly increased its limits of
how much.
Uh, how much PFAST exposure can
be very toxic to humans, so in
fact they have um issued updated
regulations recently.
So my, I guess my next question,
I'm almost done, Mr. Chair
Representative Senator and
expert. So why is it not focused
on other industries as well as
POS is everywhere.
Well, Mr. Chair Representative.
There is no other industry.
That I can think of that uses
billions of gallons of water in
there.
Operations that are injecting it
directly into the earth.
Uh, and that's why it's it's a
unique situation that calls for
Specific protection and
regulation.
OK, I have one more question,
Mr. Chair Representative,
Senator, and expert will this
legislation supersede the
rulemaking
if enacted, depending on when
the rulemaking is affirmed, it
may.
So Mr. Chair Representative
Senator and expert, would it
then make the rulemaking process
irrelevant.
No, Mister Chair Representative.
Chair representative. We don't
know what's going to happen with
the role.
And what we do know from
previous experience that
governors in different
administrations, they appoint
new OCDs.
New members and they literally
can turn over rules.
Particularly related to this
industry, particularly uh
related to trying to prevent
pollution and we saw this with
the pit roll from the Richardson
Martin era to the Martinez era
where they literally overturned
the pit roll.
So we have, we have a need to
get this done here.
For all those reasons,
specifically that we don't know
what OCD rule is going to do,
and even if we did, we wouldn't
take any comfort from that
knowing that we're going to have
a new governor in 2 years.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair
Representative Senator and
expert for indulging me.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative.
Good morning, thank you.
A chair, thank you, Senator
Representative, and
Our expert.
Tim, could you please remind me
of your last name?
Davis, Mr. Davis, thank you so
much for being here. And thank
you for bringing this
legislation to our attention,
um.
I think I, I'm understanding
this and I wanna say that I
appreciate this language. Um,
I've gone back in previous
presentations regarding PFOS
about best practices. I've
talked about how that impacts my
community, my district, and um
at the end of the day, I think
my position is that if you want
to do business in Albuquerque,
you want to impact our water,
you want to touch our water, at
least let us know what you're
doing with it, because at the
end of the day.
I have to live here. My children
have to live here. My
grandchildren have to live here,
so I appreciate this, um, just
quickly, can you tell me how
This will this have a positive
or a negative impact on the
environment.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
I, I, as far as.
We can tell we don't, we don't
know what the impact would be
again, the disclosure of what we
would then be able to understand
what was being released into the
environment or being used in
these various environments would
help us, um, actually know what
impact it it may be having or
could anticipate based on those
that compound disclosure, um,
what the expectation would be,
Mr. Chair Representative. Thank
you. I ask because currently if
you come to my house and um if
it's not a good week and you
turn on my water faucet, it's
gonna be the color of.
of this wooden.
area that we have. Thankfully, I
have a water filter filter tra
filtration in my home, um, but
unfortunately some individuals
don't have that also in other
areas, I think of wildlife and
their exposure to this and how,
um, unfortunately they're not
able to understand that this
could be in the environment, so
I'm also asking about that. Is
this, this legislation that
you're proposing, will it
benefit wildlife, will it
benefit the medicinal plants in
my area?
Will it have an impact to help
improve their livelihood? Chair
Representative.
Again, we, we don't know what
impact it's having, because we
don't quite know what's in the
water at the moment, but if this
is passed, will it, and we would
be able to understand and
anticipate, Mr. Chair,
Representative, what?
The impact is and certainly
whatever is happening currently
in those areas, we would be able
to unpack and understand if
there was an impact. OK, thank
you. Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator
Representative, and Mr. Davis,
uh, my last question is.
The the trade secret concern,
um,
I don't
quite see the, the violation of
that, if there's one, can you
help me understand it? If not,
just clarifying that would be
great for me. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, again, we've seen that this
is a practice in Colorado, um,
where they both have a um a
trade secrets, um.
Law in place and um also ensure
that these disclosures need to
be made. Um, we don't see a
conflict in that, in fact, you
know, again, this was this was
enacted in 2022, um, in
Colorado, so watching that
closely, we don't see any
conflict with these laws, Mr.
Chair Representative.
Thank you
for the war.
About trade secrets is it's
problematic, Mr. Chair and
Representative, it's.
Is that they can call a trade
secret anything they want and
there's literally no way to even
challenge it.
So it's
Uh, again, it's all voluntary
though I think that's the thing
to keep in mind about what
we're.
What we're putting
Thank you, chair, thank you,
Senator Representative and Mr.
Davis that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative for
Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Representative
and Senator for.
Bringing this initiative
forward.
Um, you know, the, uh, oil and
gas by implementing state of the
art.
Um
strategies
Uh, really elevated.
The industry
Uh, never has never seen before.
And one of those strategies was
the fracking process.
And um
Uh, and I feel that, uh.
That that type of development
that really.
Blossomed the industry in.
And profits.
Um
Um
I feel that
This
What you're bringing forth.
Um
is a consequence.
Of that kind of development and
growth.
That needs to have a check and
balance.
You know, um,
kind of upset.
That blossoming and development
and growth of the industry.
And I think it's only fair.
That the industry take into
consideration.
That there's this portion.
Of the processing of oil and gas
that needs attention.
And I think you brought that.
Forward
In the best possible way.
Uh uh, I imagined.
Based on your understanding.
Of what's going on and
we move forward in terms of
rectifying.
You know, what is not going on.
Which is the disclosure.
That
So Mr. Chair
Usually a sponsor when they
bring forth a sub.
is for a reason for a purpose.
And that's what I want to
address in terms of my
questions.
And I feel that you're bringing
this up may be based on.
Some
Uh, issues with the FIR.
Uh, I don't know. That's what my
questions are wanting to.
To to resolve and to kind of
bring to light.
So my first question, Mr. Chair,
is.
Uh
The sob
On, uh, page 4.
Um
In the bill
Uh, you have
Item N.
The term additive.
But then in your sub, you
basically delete.
The term additive.
What was the reason or purpose
for that?
Uh, just to repeat a little bit,
Mr. Chair, Representative, we,
um, consulted directly with
Enerd um, on this revision. Um,
so the sub before you is in
direct collaboration with them,
um, and then we'll talk about
the.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, the deletion of additive
as a defined term was in
response to uh input from inner
and that is because the term
additive is commonly understood
term in the industry that they
thought was not necessary to
define it.
OK, thank you for that.
Um
And Mr. Chair, the other um
A point on that same page.
Is that in the bill.
Uh, the original raft you had
item Q.
Uh, terminology.
Uh, downhole operation.
The bill deleted that term. Why?
Sure.
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia
for the exact same reason that
Mner requested you
so that that that clarifies
that.
Also, Mr. Chair, um,
In the sub
You've added.
On items
Um
And uh
Why, why was that?
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
did you say item S?
The definition of pro.
I know.
Um
Hold on.
Excuse me, Mr. Chair.
In the bill, uh, uh.
Excuse me, Mr. Chair, for.
Not being specific on that item,
but in the bill.
You have um
Items
Intentionally added
In the son of you deleted that.
Why?
Mr. Chair Represented Garcia,
the same reason as the
definitions.
OK, so we'll we'll move off of
the terminology.
And we'll go into um
Um
Uh, page 5.
On page 5,
Under Section 2.
Um
You've deleted.
Uh, item D.
Which is the fines and
penalties.
Uh, description.
At the sub
Doesn't have that.
Why was that?
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
the uh innerd also requested
that change and the fines and
penalties would now just follow
the regular provisions of the
Oil and Gas Act and its
implementing regulations, so a
violation of this uh new section
would just be like any other
violation of the Oil and Gas
Act, right?
That clarifies that, Mr. Chair.
Also, uh,
Under Section 3.
The sub added um
Uh
A denial of permit under item 8.
Uh, that was not included in the
original bill.
But the sub added basically that
that.
Paragraph A
Which is the denial of permit
for nondisclosure.
Why was that? I mean, why did
you have?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garcia, this is just to ensure
that the disclosure happens.
Prior to issuing a permit, just
to ensure that.
These provisions are followed.
OK, so Mr. Chair, you're kind of
being specific in terms of
The language regarding.
That
There has to be a disclosure.
Yeah
Thank you for that. Also, uh.
Just 2 more items, Mr. Chair,
um.
On page 7 of the sub added.
7.
Um
Why was that?
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia,
this again was in response to
feedback from Mnerd which was to
delete.
The subsection F under the
original bill, uh, and put that
certification into um
Subsection C which
The reason that there's a
certification here is to help
inner with Forsa.
Uh, if you certify that
something's going to happen and
it doesn't happen, it simplifies
enforcement procedures.
All right, thank you for that.
And lastly, Mr. Chair.
Um
In the bill, you had an item.
Uh, this is on page 7.
In the pill you had uh item F
AJ.
Uh, on the bill.
And the subgle at that.
I.
The reason for that.
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, that uh deletion of the
the
Operative part of that and now
appears in the C7 provision that
we just discussed.
Thank you Mr. Chair. You know,
Mr. Chair, I think the.
Sponsors have kind of been.
Um, it's pretty upfront in terms
of some of the
Uh, analysis by the department
and the AG.
In terms of trying to really uh
grapple with maybe some of the
uh
Kind of um unintended uh.
Um
Uh, issues with the bill that
That weren't fully covered and
addressed in the original
legislation.
So I think that makes the
legislation uh.
A lot, uh, meaningful.
Like direct
And uh worthy of passage of this
committee, Mr. Chair thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Representative and
expert. I just have a couple
quick questions and
representative Montoya sort of
alluded to it already. We've
heard a couple of POs bills, in
fact, last Saturday.
Um, a lot of them were
eliminating EOS or at least
trying to eliminate them.
Um, but during that testimony,
One of the comments, uh, it was
going to hurt an industry and so
even during that comment, the
secretary said, well, that feels
like a reasonable uh exception
to the people.
So I guess my question is if
we're targeting PFOS and yet
we're going to give exceptions
across the board.
to so many industries, why would
we just target oil and gas, EAs?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, the.
topic of this bill is about um
fracking specifically because of
the use of water in the process
and because of the
ha z ard s potentially, um,
caused by the use of not only
PAS but other undisclosed
chemicals, so um, you know, when
we're talking about the realm of
60 billion gallons in New
Mexico, um the potential use of,
you know, other produced water
in other contexts, etc. Mr.
Chairs representative, we feel
it's important to have that
disclosure in place, knowing how
harmful these chemicals um are
and maybe.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chairman
Representative, the exception
that was given that day was
actually for agriculture, which
I would assume is a is a pretty
heavy water involved.
Uh, industry
So, again, it might not be
billions of gallons, I
understand that, Mr. Chair,
Representative and Senator, um.
But there's obviously heavy use,
and I would assume there's a
heavy impact on the environment
if that's going to go straight
into our
Drinking. So if that's an
exception.
Why then would this stop?
If that other legislation
passes,
Which it moved on from this
committee.
Could oil and gas then ask for
an exception if they were using
it, which, which I think as
Representative Murphy said, it
doesn't seem like they are,
they're actually have moved on
from it if they.
The few examples y'all had, but
it didn't seem like a heavy use.
Would they be qualified for an
exception?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
not if this statute was to um be
put into place.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. Why would this
be the only industry targeted to
not be able for an exception.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
because we know that not only is
it a practice for at least one
company currently in New Mexico,
um, but that we would want to
prevent the use of that
happening.
Um, in the context of
understanding.
What we know to be true is that
this, the use of PAS is harmful.
Um, the
So we were we're trying to
prevent that here, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, and I think
that's going to continue to be
my question is, is we're
targeting oil and gas for not
being able to have an exception
because we know the harm.
And yet, I believe in that
testimony, Maine, I think was
one of the ones that have put a
POS in and already given 2400
exceptions to the PFOS rule.
Also in that testimony, it was
stated that we don't want to
harm economic development in New
Mexico, so they'd already given
quite a few exceptions to Pete
Foss here in New Mexico, it
before the world was even
passed.
Because they don't want to deal
with economic harm.
Do you think Mr. uh Mr. Chair
Representative, this could do
economic harm to oil and gas
industry.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, we
have no reason to believe that.
Miss, representative, I would
add.
Economic studies by
organizations like Headwaters
Economics and others that look
at land use, know that people,
in fact, we just had a
presentation on this in the
let's say Finance Committee,
what's really driving economic
development nationally is people
moving to areas with quality of
life.
So I think contaminating a
community, contaminating its
groundwater is a sure way to
destroy economic development.
Yeah, we might be looking at
this one industry which our
economists in the state of New
Mexico tell us we have a good 10
year run. What then?
You know,
trying to divers.
Uh, Lee County and others so I
think we need to be very.
protective of that greater
economic ecosystem. And again,
as the representative said, we
don't know, um, this is agnostic
to
Um, what happens after
disclosure is made because we
don't know what we don't know
and so.
Um, it's not designed to be
economically disruptive. It's
just designed to provide
disclosure because it's in the
public's right to know.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, I guess I'm
gonna just kind of stay right
there though, um, because we
don't know that this would be an
economic harm.
You've cited Colorado quite a
few times on implementing this
process. Can you tell me what
has happened to oil and gas
industry in Colorado over the
last 5 years.
Mr. Chair, Representative Henry.
Um
All indications that I have are
that.
The oil and gas industries still
producing in Colorado. I'm
unaware of any um
Big repercussions from
Uh
Colorado's implementation of
this policy. I don't have any
specific numbers for you though.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative and expert.
Actually, it looks like
Colorado's production has
greatly declined over the last 5
years.
You also cited California as
implementing this rule. I
believe California has just had
a major industry, major player
within the industry move itself
from California. So I do think
that there would be major
economic development
implications as if this was the
past.
And I would just like to
understand what the difference
between oil and gas.
And all the other exceptions or
exemptions that were already
said would be possible through
prior legislation.
I have Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Small.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Representative.
Um, a number of questions have
been asked, uh, that I don't
want to go back over, Mr. Chair
Representative, I do want to
focus on the um
I guess the
One of the potential very large
upsides for this. There's a
number of questions around
So yeah, so I won't go into too
many of the other questions, Mr.
Chair, Representative, uh, very
clearly you sort of some of the
Potential upside. Do you agree
is that we uh understand more
clearly what's uh in produced
water and allow ourselves to uh
both scientifically and also
socially, uh, embrace, uh,
potential reuse options. Is that
Fair, Mr. Chair, Senator
Representative.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Miss, I would just add, um, Mr.
Chairman, it's one of the
sideboards needed.
To quantify and build trust that
we know.
This resource and that we're
protected from it if we're going
to reuse it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Representative, I, I frankly see
a great deal of logic in that.
Mm, uh, alongside Mr. Chair,
Senator, and Representative, uh,
I, I do share some similar
concerns that sort of singling
out an industry around PFOS when
PFOS is in so many other areas,
clearly DOD is right now what we
know to be the largest polluter.
That doesn't squarely fit, but
Mr. Chair, Senator
Representative, um,
Very big believer in focusing on
the upside. So, Mr. Chair,
Senator Representative, would
you all be
Open to working with the
environment department and with
M nerd.
Um, to add a provision that uh
sort of
looks and goes back through,
tries to fine tune on some of
the comments, but makes this
fundamentally contingent upon
water quality control commission
approval of treated produced
water, uh, treatment and reuse
outside.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
we've been open to any comments
at this point, um, coming forth
to improve this bill, um, all
that to say is that I'm not sure
what the what that provision
gives us, um.
Certainly, um, you know, as
again, as we're suggesting the
use of and reuse of this um
various in various other
industries as well, if it
strengthens the health.
That disclosure gives us um.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
think there would be a
willingness to Mr. Chair,
Senator, thank, uh, thank you.
That's great. I think this is a
way to look at sort of two
pieces, raising the bar.
Um, and providing new
opportunities, both
economically, but most
importantly, to reduce
dependence upon fresh water,
expand our ability to utilize
non-fresh water for economic
development, which I'm excited
about. I think, Mr. Chair,
Senator Representative, um, I'm
very interested in working
closely on that. I, I don't
wanna
I know that nothing is
guaranteed in
So that's a fair point. At this
point, um, I'm not able to
support moving through this
committee, but I'm very
interested in working
immediately on that and
appreciate you all's work, uh,
and, um, bringing this forward
and providing new opportunities
for us to look at things, Mr.
Chairman.
I just kind of wanna answer the
last question, uh, represents
small, um.
I believe this is a missing
piece. This is a missing piece
of how we talk about produce
water, how we treat produced
water.
A missing piece of protecting
New Mexico's water and
environment and fundamental.
Citizen interests in their
environment and their water.
And their families and their
communities. So I think
Irrespective, we don't know what
other legislation's gonna
happen, I think for me this is a
bedrock right.
This is not
Contingent on us we're using
this, we're going to extend this
right.
This is a recognition that this
is a right.
But I do think
Rather than um.
Yeah, and I think, you know,
again through the discussion of
using produced water, I would
recommend they consider amending
this into that.
To be able to successfully build
comfort in doing that. That's.
But this is foundational stuff
in my point of view and I just
wanted Mr. Chair, Senator, I'm
totally fair and, and deeply
respected, Mr. Chair, Senator,
Representative, I think, um.
I think there are a number of
things that are moving forward
that deal.
And sort of the confluence here
of rulemaking and legislation,
which
and I, you know, serving in this
capacity, I think it's our
purview and oftentimes our
responsibility to provide as
much clarity and sort of clear
guideposts. So
Maybe
They're absolutely are ways to
bring some of the rulemakings
together we're not prejudging
science. This would, you know,
the WQCC Mr. Chair, Senator, in
what I'm
of thinking about, they have
They full ability to do their
work, as do uh our experts in
NMED, but Mr. Chair, Senator,
Um
Going from where we are now,
which is where there's no uh out
of oil field uses.
Uh, and raising sort of some of
these disclosure requirements.
It seems like the two really go.
you know
They, they, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I think they can go.
Together at the same time, and
Mister Chair, Senator.
You know
If we don't include this here.
And there is this requirement
for uh a pre-disclosure.
That in my mind, Mister Chair,
Senator, and Representative
leads us to whether intended or
not.
Likely outcomes where there is
extensive litigation to stop and
reduce production.
by in a fair way that that is
certainly every individual and
and entities, right, Mr. Chair,
Senator and Representative, but
to explain super clearly,
Reducing that.
Attacking that production.
Disallowing innovation and
economic growth through um
Uh, through scientifically based
work.
I
I think it it, Mr. Chair Senator
Representative, it harms New
Mexico deeply in both ways. It
reduces our revenue in the very
near future. And Mr. Chair,
Senator Representative, it
eliminates our ability to uh
reduce dependence on fresh water
for new economic opportunities.
So, Mr. Chair, Senator, and
thank you for that opportunity,
Mr. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, representative small
representativerola.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you uh experts on bringing this
bill. I have a couple of
questions and it's just for me
to clarify, Mr. Chair, about
what I, the conversation that
I'm been listening here, the
debate, um, this bill is about
transparency.
That's my understanding.
Um, and I understand that we
don't know what we don't know
yet. And on those basis, do we
have any and again, it's just
trying to paraphrase what I
heard, Mr. Chair. Do we have any
um
cost in health
economic cost, environmental
safety, that
How much will that cost if this
is not implemented?
Mr.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think at least contamination of
PAS that has been referenced
numerous times, um, as per the
Department of Defense and
communities across New Mexico in
various capacities, um, the, the
cost safety is immense. Um,
we're talking about the cost of
human life, we're talking about
the um, an inability to use um
certain areas right now that are
so contaminated that um.
situation and are trying to
prevent wildlife and other um.
You know, circulation in these
areas from from happening, um,
so as far as just wanting to
have that transparent approach
to what is happening is is used
as a preventative tool, um, for
us and in ensuring that we don't
put anyone in that place of of
of being contaminated or being
um subject to to that risk.
Thank you for your answer. Do we
have any evidence that
transparency reduces those
risks?
cost
Um, as far as just, are you
looking for like a dollar
amount, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Mr. Cher, I would say any of
those areas will be important,
um, economic, health,
environmental, I think those
are.
pretty high cost that we are
taking a chance and I want to
make sure that transparency
helps on this.
Correct, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, again, when
we're talking about anyone that
has to work or operate in these
environments, including those
that live in surrounding areas,
um, that would be subject to
potential contamination, um,
that's what we're trying to
prevent here. And again, when
we're talking about the cost of
human life.
There's, you know, that's a,
that's a priceless component of
what we're discussing, um, as
far as having to do cleanup, um,
we're looking at some of the
contamination surrounding.
These various sites, this also
helps us preempt any problems
that we may have when we're
we're thinking about cleanup and
in particular, Mr. Chair,
Representative, one of the
reasons why this is so critical.
If there was an issue in real
time, um, and I'll say it again,
the, um.
The folks that would go in as
first responders have absolutely
no idea what they're going into.
So again, with the
constituencies that we're saying
PAS may be in fire retardant,
um.
Mr. Chair Representative, we
don't know what else they're
interacting with chemically that
could potentially be averse to
their own um.
You know, response. So, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative, that
disclosure in the context of an
emergency is really, really
critical as well for, for what
that engagement looks like in
order to respond to the best of
our abilities.
Thank you, Mr. Sir, in case of
an emergency, that's huge and it
also scares me when when I hear
we don't know what we don't
know.
And Mr. Chair and panel here,
um.
I'm just thinking in so many
histories.
facts in New Mexico that we
didn't know.
And it was too late.
But that's really something that
concerns me deeply. Thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you represent gorilla, um.
I had a couple comments I want
to make.
Um
for us
Champion and makeup.
I mean, that's frightening that
it would be in something that
you're applying to your skin.
And that should be a concern,
uh, it shouldn't be in water.
The champion Freckle.
And to me, this is
You know, we, we've been through
this before.
You know, we went through this
with lead. We went through this
with DDT. We went through this
with CFCs. We went through this
with asbestos.
We have industrial materials.
That
perform their function very
well.
And have these
Severe adverse, unintended
consequences.
Yeah, I think we're in the
process of
Um, phasing out PFAS.
And that that that movement is
building, and this is part of
that.
Um
So I don't view this as singling
out the oil and gas industry.
I view this as including the oil
and gas industry.
And I'm troubled that I, I hear
both.
That
The oil and gas industry doesn't
use this and then
They need an exception so they
can continue to use this.
I think the answer is they
shouldn't use this.
Um, that would be in support of
this bill.
Uh, that being said, uh,
Representative Senator, uh,
would you like to roll the bill
to continue working on it, uh,
with Representative Small.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, yes, I think that's the
context of which we want to
explore the opportunity to
strengthen the bill if we can,
um, I don't know a lot about the
process with which that um.
Water quality board, um.
Component would work, but I'd be
happy to entertain that, Mr.
Chair Representative.
Mr. Chair before.
Before you do that, I, I just
would like to clarify something.
May, Mr. Chair, I don't believe
the industry is worried about uh
getting an exemption for PFOS. I
think the big issue is having to
disclose disclose trade secrets.
That's what I've heard from the
folks that I've talked to. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And Maia, I
appreciate that. That's not what
I heard what I heard for Henry,
I heard him arguing for an
exemption because there are
other exemptions.
So
And
Um
Briefly.
Mr. Chairman, my argument wasn't
necessarily just for the
exemption from oil and gas. My
confusion was on prior
legislation.
We were looking at exemptions
for industry. I was curious why
this industry was the only one
targeted for PFOS, whereas
everyone else.
Had nothing to do with just POS.
It was that.
Reasoning
OK, and we have multiple other
bills dealing with POS. So I, I
again, I don't think they're
being targeted.
Um, but we have an agreement to
roll, so we're gonna roll this
bill.
And move on
Normally,
Get up and leave and we switch
sponsors, but not, not today,
so.
Uh, our next bill is House Bill
291, uh, recycling in the
state's circular economy also
with representative Romero and
Senator Steinborn.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we believe
there's some different handouts
for you as well that correspond
with this bill, um, the
Environment Department.
Sure, or maybe they're just on
the website.
Uh, I'm not sure if we have
handouts. OK. That's OK. We can
talk about House Bill 291
anyways, um, and our experts
here today with the Environment
department, um, I love this
bill, Mr. Speaker, this bill,
um, helps us strengthen what
many of us know as the circular
economy throughout New Mexico,
when we're looking at
opportunities and alternatives
to the waste that we generate
and create, this puts into
statue and provides the impetus
for not only entrepreneurial
activity.
Um, but better support to the um
environment surrounding um the
various ways we which we create
waste wherever human is, I think
there's a a waste component
there, um, so with that, um, Mr.
uh Chair and um.
Members of the committee, that's
what this bill does. This is
create that circularity for how
it is that we deal with that and
puts it into statute for those
that want to help us solve those
problems, um, provides them the
impetus to do so. Um, again,
Senator Steinborn here,
um.
To talk about the villa and then
we'll introduce our experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. One thing that I've
been advocating for for a long
time is recycling and waste
reduction, um.
Sadly, um, our.
While our Environment department
has just.
done amazing work and protecting
New Mexico, one area that
We have kind of eroded in the
area of solid waste, uh, waste
diversion and then recycling.
this bill does 3 important
things that I've worked on the
last few years, um, it actually
does a 4th 1 championed by the
administration, by the
Environment department, which I
very much appreciate. We have
our new bureau chief who's just
doing a great job and ready to
really move New Mexico forward
and it's so good to have her,
but it
creates two new positions out of
the raid fund. We have a raid
fund that's collected in the
state usually has about a
million dollars balance, so we
create two new positions that
are needed one, a recycling, um,
coordinator education position
but also a position to uh focus
on the circular economy of
trying to find products for the
use of recycled materials and
actually create a um circular
economy.
Um, the other thing it does is
it updates the rate act itself,
which was created for tire
recycling when we created this
fund initially was to deal with
illegal dumping and tires. We
have old language in the law
right now that says 75% of that
fund has to be used for tire
abatement when in reality this
is our state's primary recycling
infrastructure fund for the
environment department for
community. So we need to get rid
of that old language, which it
does. And then the third thing,
Mr. Chair, which is really new,
is the circular economy mission
and building that.
into it and hiring a position.
Um
The two new positions we're
creating, beautiful thing for
you, Mr. Chairman of the
Appropriations Committee. We're
not using new money and you
another appropriator, we're
using existing funds from the
raid fund itself. It sits at a
million dollar balance a year to
create new positions in the
environment department. So it is
a really exciting bill and I
know we've got some experts here
from the environment department.
Mr. Chariff, you'd like to hear
from them.
yourself.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Shirlene Sitton.
I'm your new solid waste bureau
chief for relatively new, um, I
come with 22 years of municipal
solid waste program experience
of delivering programs and
various municipalities, so I'm
really.
excited to um bring that
experience to the state and uh
update our programs and better
support our regulated community.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee. I'm John Roderick,
the Deputy Cabinet secretary at
New Mexico Environment
Department.
Um, we
are very happy to see this
legislation we think it is a
huge.
Benefit to the state and another
tool in the toolbox that will
assist.
Not just the Environment
department but our local
communities in dealing with the
illegal dumping issues including
tires.
Um
I think an important point is to
note that one of the changes is
removing the restriction on the
funds that says.
75% of it has to be dedicated
to.
Recycling tires.
The reality is that we have a
fund balance that we have
because we don't get enough
recycled tire projects each year
it dispense all of that funding
and we're prohibited from.
75% of the fund if it's not
tires, it can't be used.
So this allows us then to make
that funding available.
We both tires, which is still a
very big priority, but also for
other illegal dumping, which is
what really impacts many of our
communities.
And it, and it impacts our state
in ways that we, you know, I, I
come from the water background,
and I have to say it's been my
experience over the years to see
what illegal dumping does
whenever you have what I call uh
short duration high intensity
rainfall events and you get
flooding.
And it's bad, but whenever
couches and mattresses and other
debris blows down and and
normally dry.
Water
Feature and arroyo and plugs
culverts and then it backs water
up into homes that's an issue
and that's a huge piece of the
illegal dumping.
That this will allow communities
to apply for an address.
Another issue is it opens up who
can who can apply for these.
Grams
to
Other federally recognized 501c3
organizations currently most of
it has to be applied for through
existing solid waste facilities.
This opens that up to involve
more players in the game of
cleaning up the state.
OK, thank you very much. We'll
go on, it's uh by show of hands,
who's here in support.
Who's here in opposition?
OK, so let's just take, if you
would like to speak, we'll take
3 people to we would like to
speak in support.
Uh, you have 2 minutes.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Scanlon,
registered lobbyist for the uh
tire manufacturers association
and we uh commend Representative
Romero for this bill, and we
certainly support the concept
and the idea behind it, we
represent the 11 major tire
manufacturers in the United
States, um, we share the, the
idea of sustainability and the
circular economy, although we,
the concern we have and I've
discussed this with the uh with
the.
and and with the sponsor, um, we
are concerned we wouldn't like
to see the deep prior
priorurization of um of
abandoned and illegal uh tire
uh.
Uh, stockpiles, um, in 2023, New
Mexico had.
Approximately 1.5 million.
Um, tires in abandoned or
illegal stockpiles, 3rd in the
country behind Colorado.
And Texas so um we support.
We support where this bill is
going, but we, we don't want to
lose uh.
sight of the tire scrap tire
problem and stayed in New
Mexico, and I appreciate talking
with the department, and I
appreciate the conversation with
the representative Romero.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz,
registered lobbyist for South
Central Solid Waste Authority.
We manager collections, waste
transfer activities, and
recycling throughout the
authority's service area, which
is Donana County, Sierra County,
and Otero County. Our mission
has always been to divert waste
from landfills and prioritize
recycling where possible.
We support the modernization of
the rate fund and the concept of
circular economy is gaining
traction nationally, with many
companies looking to operate in
a way which minimizes waste. It
is a model of production and
consumption, which involves
sharingly seen reusing,
repairing, refurbishing, and
recycling existing materials and
products as long as possible.
We appreciate both sponsors and
the governor's office for
prioritizing and recognizing the
importance of diverting waste
from our landfills, and the
needs to develop.
Uh, recycling and reuse markets
in the state of New Mexico,
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Alyssa
Kenny Guyer. I'm a volunteer
with Sierra Club speaking on
their behalf, and there are
35,000 members and supporters in
support of this bill, the key to
reducing waste is ensuring that
upfront products don't end up as
waste because of lack of
planning from the start, by
developing a circular economy
program and plan, we can
encourage manufacturers to
rethink their product design.
The bill brings the staff needed
to support these efforts. It
allows the raid fund to be used
for local recycling
infrastructure.
Instead of pre-designating
percentages of the fund to uses
that aren't always fully needed.
Thank you so much.
OK, we're going to take one more
punk.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sarah
Pierrepont. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Recycling Coalition. We're a
statewide member-supported
non-profit organization and our
mission is to inspire New
Mexicans to rethink, reduce,
reuse, and recycle. Our members
consist of about 230
municipalities, tribes, as
federal entities, businesses
that work throughout the state
to recycle more and reduce
waste. We strongly encourage you
to support this bill because it
will free up funds for our
members to
Secure state funding, which is
greatly needed to do the job
that they're trying to do, to
recycle more and divert more
waste. Thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in sport, please
raise your hand.
Jeanie Lugston.
Good morning. Um, thank you
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jean
Loxton. I am with the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico. We
enthusiastically support this
bill because we believe that
solid waste is a problem and
that there are markets that
can be developed to recycle, uh,
what is now waste into something
very, very useful. Therefore, we
are eager to uh lend our support
to this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone
online who would like to speak
in opposition.
Please raise your hand.
OK. Ting then, uh.
Do the sponsors have anything
they'd like to add before we go
to the.
Um, just two quick things, Mr.
Chair, um.
One, when the bill was dropped,
one thing that was not intended
consequence was that numerous
entrepreneurs came to my office
and celebrated the opportunity
to do business in New Mexico
with this bill being put into
place to be able to solve
numerous waste problems because
of this bill, very exciting, um,
and across uh numerous um uh
jurisdictions including in
Siarron, um, and other areas,
the other thing I would say is
that because of the um
unfortunate impediment.
the funding right now, we had
over 2 million in grant
applications that could not be
awarded to folks that were
perfectly qualified to be able
to receive those, but those
funds would not, um, were
restricted, so we could not fund
these projects, um, that, um.
We're
Again, on merits could, could
have had that opportunity to to
get to work. So, um, with that
Mr. Ter will stand for
questions.
OK, thank you. Go to the
committee. First up, where
representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um
Representative, um,
The, the, the current fund, I
understand that there was a
dollar figure, Mr. Chair, uh,
that is in the fund currently.
How much of that fund is being
used today.
On an annual basis.
Mr. Chair, um.
Representative Montoya.
Uh right now the fun balance is
about 2.9 million. Um, that
includes what is obligated to
the grants that have been
awarded for this year because
their reimbursement grants, but
the fund has built up because
there's not always enough tire
projects to award the 2/3, so,
um, we believe there's plenty of
money in the fund to give more
recycling projects.
Continue to give tire projects
and fund these positions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um.
I
I'm concerned.
Uh, with
Most of what's been striked out
on pages.
17 and 18. So I'm gonna.
I'm gonna
Keep most of my questions
specifically to there.
Um
It
I, I guess let's start on the
back page first.
Um
Starting on uh item on on line
11.
But been stricken there is
abatement of illegal dump sites,
money of this, the money of this
fund is appropriated to the
department for the abatement of
illegal dump sites.
Or processing, transportation,
or recycling of all recycle uh
recyclable materials and scrap
tires or providing funds to the
public landfills in New Mexico
to offset the cost, um, of
collecting or recycling tires.
I'm concerned because it appears
as if we're taking out the
ability.
Of landfills.
To do this. I mean,
It's, I know what we're saying
that anyone can apply, but it
appears that currently our
landfills are the ones doing the
bulk of this, and they are
recycling.
And they're not, they're not
putting him in the ground.
So I'm not sure why we would
strike that language. It appears
as if we're
Going away from our
municipalities.
And are
Whoever has whatever community.
Landfills there are which they
also have the mandate to
recycle.
It appears as if
If there's not priority to that,
and if we're striking that
language completely, I, I, it
does appear as if the our
landfills that are currently
doing this could be harmed.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
so, um, many of, much of this is
in brackets, so I, um, what I
wanna just clarify, and I think
I'm following you on 17 and 18,
is that these this now um gets
replaced with the definition, so
it refers back to what we've now
defined, which is more
encompassing for.
that, so I'll just put you to
page 3, which talks about what
how he defines circular economy.
Um, and add that definition to
the statute in order to be able
to talk about.
What that investment goes to and
which essentially replaces
what's in brackets, so we don't
actually remove that law, um,
it's just now replaced with that
new language.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. I, I appreciate
that.
It just appears as if now the
folks who have been doing it.
Kind of disregarding.
The place of priority.
Which
The average person in my
community.
wants to take care of if if they
have a day or two each year that
they might be able to go take
care of what they have. I know I
clean out my garage and my
backyard.
Probably twice a year.
And I go to one location.
If we then
are allowing anybody to apply.
Without giving priority to the
folks who had been doing the
work for such a long time.
It does appear as if
We, this might be
counterintuitive. I'm going to
give you, Mr. Chair, and
representative an example.
Our landfill for the longest
time.
I took a refrigerators, washers
and dryers.
Um
uh,
electric ranges, microwaves.
Um
I
Went to go.
Take all of my my on one of my
twice annual trips.
And I was turned away with those
items.
In a rural county like San Juan
County.
Someone could be frustrated with
that.
And it would actually increase
illegal dumping.
I, I am concerned with
But this essentially does, and
and and not to be labored. I,
I'm gonna really encompass all
of what's stricken at the back.
For the purpose of this new
Uh, definition.
is that we are now going to take
folks who have been doing it for
the longest time and where
people are already expecting to
go, and now we're putting in in
competition potentially for the
same dollars.
So I would reiterate.
Something that was stated by um
Mr. Scanlon.
I would still like to see
priority given.
For the purpose that this has
been, I don't like to see the
purpose removed.
And I would like to see.
This bill at least put priority
for those who have done it
before.
Especially landfills.
Because I think if, if you're in
this position,
I see it in my community, um,
Mr. Chair.
Uh
When I come to Santa Fe, I see a
very robust recycling that takes
place.
In other communities, I don't
see robust even though it's
offered.
I, I'm worried that because that
is not in the mindset of
everybody at this point. I would
rather see our recycling as much
as possible in our landfill.
Only because
That's where people are going
already.
Once you start to make it to
where they're going to multiple
places.
I believe what I, what we've
seen, we've seen since at the uh
in San Juan County anyway, what
we've seen is illegal dumping
going up, even though there's
other locations to take
refrigerators.
It it's just interesting that
since they stopped taking those
things, those are the things
that we're starting to see
illegally dumped, not tires,
because they still.
But
Those other items are starting
to show up.
In the county. So
It's a concern. I, I understand
what you're doing here.
I think that when you just.
When we now want a
Allow equal footing, and I think
that's all this does is equal
footing.
To to nonprofits who currently
Today, at least, maybe not by
the end of this session, but
currently today this could run
afoul of the
Anti-donation clause.
But
My concern is
You make it more difficult for
people to easily
And quickly deal with refuse.
That
Illegal dumping goes up. And so
I don't believe that's your
intent. I know, uh, Senator
Steinborn and I have had several
conversations about these
things, so I don't believe
that's the intent.
I'm concerned that that could be
an unintended consequence, and I
am, I'm concerned with that. It
looks like.
You want to respond in no way do
we change the recycling
component to this and what's
accepted at a landfill, it just
merely refers back, so you still
have recycling, we add the
circular economy and illegal
dumping act, so all of those
still receive the same amount of
funding. Uh, we have no reason
to believe that anyone would be
preempted from funding. In fact,
we're hoping to be able to
spread the love around New
Mexico for the areas with which
may be lacking in the recycling
facilities for what exactly you
discussed.
Maybe your community had applied
for a grant, maybe it was one of
those $2 million opportunities
that we could have invested in,
where they had to be denied
because the the fund is
currently restricted from being
able to do that if it wasn't a
tire project, um, so.
That said, Representative, um,
Mr. Chair Representative, we
have no reason to believe that
this would stifle any ability or
create unfair competition
between any of this. It's just,
it's just adding to the ability
to do more, um, in the context
of what's happening today in New
Mexico. Well, thank you, Mr.
Chair and Representative, I
I do know the discussions that
we've had with certain folks.
That is the concern, and I don't
know if we can alleviate that.
Um, I, I don't know that that's
something we'd necessarily
address, but this goes on, I
would definitely
Want to
Talk
A little bit more with the, the
folks, at least in San Juan
County.
And what they've seen, I, I
I just don't want to see people
have to go to multiple places if
that
happens to be the outcome, and I
think there might be some
protections we could put in
here.
Um, that are not currently in
here, uh, for landfills.
And I would like to see those
going forward. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Senator Cortez.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair
Representative, Senator, and
experts. I have a Marietta
foundational questions, so who
makes the determination about
the grants.
Mr. Chair Representative Cortez,
thank you for that question. The
rate alliance is created by the
Raid Act, and it is made up of
stakeholders that represent the
solid waste and um retail
industrial community and they
make the uh the yearly
evaluations about the rate
grants against the goals of the
Raid Act.
And that would continue.
Um, but under this they'll be
encouraged to work with us to
make a circular economy plan and
then um within that plan and the
state solid waste management.
Goals then they use that to
create your legal goals for the
rate grants. OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, experts,
does this actually increase the
money or just who can apply for
the money?
were
Mr. Chair Representative, we're
expanding.
Well, we're removing.
The same group can really apply
to it except we are adding 51C3s
because there's great groups
like the New Mexico Recycling
Coalition, the.
be very helpful in education and
actually just help.
Make us all more successful, um,
but we're, we're, it's the same
group of people we're just
removing that.
kind of um
Limiting 70 language that
requires 75% of it be used for
tire recycling.
OK. Which, which has caused the
balance to build up because
there aren't enough of those
kinds of projects but meanwhile
other recycling infrastructure
projects for your community that
are needed, maybe it's uh uh
paper baer or something like
that, they can't get funding
for.
That brings me to a couple more
questions, Mr. Chair, Senator,
and experts. I'm curious if the
recycling market markets for
recycling, are they foreign like
out of the country or are they
local here in New Mexico.
Mr. Chair Representative Cortez,
both, um, but we really only
have one manufacturer in New
Mexico that um actually recycles
um.
Cardboard and, and then that
goes to more cardboard. So, uh,
they're in grants and um they
are uh a company that takes, so
if you live in Albuquerque and
you put your cardboard and your
curbside cart, it gets
collected, it eventually ends up
there. It's one of the major
employers in grants, um, and,
uh, and then it goes they make a
product that then goes to a box
plant becomes a box, might come
back to your house. We want more
of those, um, kinds of
manufacturers in New Mexico.
And so we're, we're hoping
through this to attract more and
keep our resources in the state,
but recycling markets are
commodity markets and um they're
both uh they're both national
and international.
So Mister Chair, Senator
experts, is it because recycling
hasn't been successful in New
Mexico.
I'm sorry, is it because
recycling hasn't been successful
in New Mexico because the
adoption rates are very low.
Thank you, that's, uh, that's a
great question, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Cortez, I
wouldn't say it's not
successful.
Um
We have a smaller population, a
rural population, um, and so
like anything else, recycling is
a business, and in order to make
that business thrive, we, we
need economies of scale.
So
It's a chicken and the egg sort
of situation, the more
infrastructure we can build to
collect recycling, the more we
can attract companies like
McKinley Paper, um, and grants
to come locate here and create
jobs and keep our resources in
the state. OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, senator, and
experts.
Of all the entrepreneurs that um
approach the presenter and maybe
she would have to answer this.
Were any of them capable of
recycling electronics.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Cortez, I don't have the answer
to that question. OK, maybe I
can chat with her later. I thank
you so much, Mr. Chair, Senator,
and experts. Um, so where does
the money come from that will be
distributed through the grants.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Cortez, the money already is
allocated from vehicle
registration fees and so we get
about 25 cents, um, from those
fees that comes into the rate
grant fund that's already been
established and we're not asking
for any changes to that. OK. Mr.
Chair, Senator, and experts, how
does this benefit Southeastern
New Mexico, where I come from in
Hobbs because the nearest tire
recycler in Hobbs is actually in
Texas.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Cortez again a great question
because like I mentioned, um.
Recycling is a business and its
economy of scale when we have a
smaller cities with more rural
areas in between them, it's a
little harder to um amass all of
the um.
All of the commodities.
But by um
Looking to increase our
recycling infrastructure and
combining those, creating hub
and spokes, uh, things like
that, it, it will benefit the
rural communities, um, hopefully
and to make um.
Just tires, but more things
accessible.
Representative, um, Mr. Chair,
so this is going to help your
community and in several
important ways. Number one, it's
going to give more flexibility
in yours as well, represent
Montoya. It's gonna get more
flexibility in what they can get
funding for. This is the primary
municipal um grant program from
the state for local governments
for recycling infrastructure.
It's going to unlock this one
that we're all paying into that
is limited by the 75% thing for
other kinds of recycling
infrastructure they may want.
So that's number one. They're
more likely to get that help
grow their program and be
successful.
Um, number 2, what it does so by
hiring those two staff people
again from the fund from the
same fees that we're paying,
it's just kind of sitting there,
um, they're now going to have a
recycling education coordinator
that can assist your community
in those missions and also a
circular economy position who
can maybe help look at what's
going on in your marketplace to
see if there's any economic
development portunities and
bringing together the region to
leverage the resources, the
commodities to help create some
industry. That's I think that's
that whole goal of this bill.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
Senator, and experts.
Thank you, Representative, um.
Anyone else on the committee
before I go?
OK, represent Murphy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
experts, um,
I'm always interested in why
approaches are taking to the
bills and um and looking at this
is primarily, it seems like you
need to be able to deploy
funding.
That you can't deploy because of
the 2/3 requirements for tires
and 1/3 for other activities.
And so I, I see the senator or
not, Mr. Jared Senator Notting,
so I think I've got that part
right. Why not just simply
change the distribution formula
of what your, your recent
experience has been.
Mr. Mr. Chair Representative uh
Murphy, that's one thing we
certainly want to do in the
bill, but there's other
optimizations we can make in
this bill like the hiring of the
staff people.
Uh, so, um, like the circular
economy piece, so it's just,
that's a great piece, but
there's, there's more that we
can do and we're excited to do
and that's why those other
pieces are in the bill.
And Mr. Chairman, Senator, and
experts, thank you for that. I'm
gonna draw your attention to
page 17, um,
Sub item I think it'd be B if I.
Doing that correctly, the line
16 through 19, um.
That appeared by striking that,
um, it appears that
Um, it's sort of encourages um
the recycling of materials from
out of state.
Which, um, I, I guess I don't
understand. Could you explain to
me, Mr. Chair senator.
Experts.
Mr. Chair Representative Murphy,
thanks for that question.
Really, all that does is it
Um, so we have like a, a
landfill, solid waste, um,
operations in the southern part
of the state. They do receive
waste from out of state, but
they are located in New Mexico,
um, this keeps them from being
able to apply for grant funds,
so we're just trying to open it
up so that an important uh solid
waste facility can, can operate
correctly and get the
infrastructure they might need
as well.
Mr. Chair, Senator expert, so
it'd be a facility that would be
located maybe perhaps near the
state border.
And in order to get economies of
scale or whatever.
Um, you then begin accepting
that material, is that correct?
Um
Mr. Chair, Senator, expert.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Murphy, I really, I think they
have economies of scale, but
they can't apply for uh the
recycling or illegal dumping
grants because of this
prohibition.
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you for
that, for that explanation. Um,
And it questions on unintended
consequences.
Um
Purpose, it appears.
is you're expanding to what I
think of as NGOs, nonprofits.
Won't this
Won't this pit those against
public entities going after the
same funds. Um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Murphy, we, um,
we have, um, some great
nonprofits like the recycling uh
New Mexico Recycling Coalition
or New Mexico Swana who might be
able to um partner with uh or
create um like a recycling
coalition is createdhub and
spoke, um, recycling, um, places
around the state, so.
We don't expect just any
nonprofit to apply, um, anyone
applying for the grant would be
evaluated by the rate alliance
against the same goals, so we,
we really, um, we really only
think our, our partners in um
solid waste management might be
able to bring some things to the
table.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I appreciate
that. I guess.
My concern is, is that if the
pot of money is essentially the
same.
And you have primarily local
entities, um, cities, counties,
whatever that are going after
that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, experts,
then by expanding that you're
basically, you still have the
same size pie. You just have
more hands that are going into
it, and does that not the ute
the the the the public entities
ability to really address and
and access the funds that they
need to serve their local
communities, sort of in the same
vein as, as Representative
Montori's question, I think
about the one stop.
stopping, so to speak.
Mr. Chair Representative, it's,
it's a great question and a
legitimate concern. Um, it's a
logical kind of a question. Um,
I think there's enough money to
do it all basically, and I think
the the raid board will right
size an appropriate smaller
grant for somebody whose
situation, I think we're going
to still be able to do it all.
We're going to be able to hire
the positions, we're gonna be
able to give more total money
for.
diversity, recycling
infrastructure grants and maybe
there's a maybe there's a seat
at the table for an NGO that
might be providing some.
Some glue and some and some
education and some other
services that will help with
overall ecosystem.
I think there's enough money to
do it all. Mr. Chair, Senator,
experts be my last question. Um,
I think the other unintended
consequences I see is it, it
naturally will favor.
Urban areas of rural areas to
represent the senior Cortez's
point, I believe.
And the way I see that is is
that you do have to have
economies of scale. Those
economies of scale are easier,
easier to obtain in urban areas
I would presume.
And, and by the way, I hope by
this question you, you recognize
that I would like to see the
recycling areas expanded in into
these rural areas and the
question being how best can we
do that and does this help us do
that? Thank you very much. I
conclude.
Thank you for the question, uh,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Murphy, um.
Again, I, I feel like, uh, just
reiterating, um, being able to
regionalize and, and, uh.
Create more infrastructure even
within those rural communities,
um build those hub and spoke
systems.
Find, find, um, find ways to um
maximize how we can get those
things out of those areas that
that will help rural
communities, opening up just
taking away the 2/3 requirement
just opens it up for those rural
communities to ask for more
infrastructure. Maybe they need
a bailer. Maybe they need a
truck, um, or, uh, you know,
maybe it's something a little
larger, maybe they need
education in their community.
But anything that improves the
uh equipment and infrastructure
they have or outreach they can
do will start to be able to um
increase how much they can
collect and then again feed into
those hub and spoke systems
coming from the rural.
communities
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
senator and experts, um, I, I'll
just conclude by saying that um
I'm afraid that the areas that
that have the most robust
systems are the ones that need
more expansion. I mean it's
probably probably expansion
everywhere is good. We certainly
know that rural areas have very
limited programs and uh I'd be
very supportive in seeing a bill
targeted to those areas. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Senator and experts.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Henry. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Senator, experts.
I too much like uh
Representative Murphy. I would
love to see something like this
from Artisia, Hobbs, all those
types of areas. The having and
spoke system. Can you help me
understand that a little more.
Chair.
Um, thank you for the question,
Mr. Chair. Representative Henry.
So hub and spoke system, what
that does is when when you have
um more disparate uh more
dispersed communities, um, you,
you build a hub where um where
the smaller communities that
somewhere somewhat close right
regionally um centrally located
where materials can be brought
and then um then there's enough
of those materials then to be
shipped to uh a larger market.
That's basically the description
of a hub and spoke system. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Senator, and
experts. I, I guess that's where
I get stuck, um, because in
Artesia Carlsbad, many of these
areas that I'm familiar with.
That's where we get
Kind of bogged down, right, is,
is we can collect it, but then
we have to get it to, I think
the closest one for us is El
Paso.
How does this help us?
Um, Mister Chair, uh,
Representative Henry, um, thank
you. I, I wanna bring in, I
wanna bring in another um aspect
of this bill too is that um uh
one of the changes that would
allow us to approach the
environmental improvement board
with innovative ideas and so um.
Other, other than uh.
Funding um more recycling
infrastructure grants, we can
also, uh.
Go through the rulemaking
process, um, maybe look at, uh,
rules, uh, or procedures where
we can work with manufacturers
of companies or other kinds of
very open, we don't know all the
answers. We want to open it up
to creative ways to address, um,
especially hard to handle
materials, so, um, there's a,
there, there's more than one way
that we're trying to open it up
to uh address the problems,
especially in rural New Mexico
and I wanna say I think the rate
alliance has a.
Good track record.
Of um trying to.
Focus on these rural areas and
places that have more need than
the urban areas to award the
grants throughout the history of
the rate grants.
Thank you, Mr. Chair of senator
and experts.
You know, some of the firsthand
I I've dealt with on this is in
Eddy County when I was a
commissioner, fires are a major
issue, right? You find those
just tossed out wherever you
want.
At, at some point, so this kind
of goes along with what
representative Montoya was
talking about, you had to take
those tires to the actual dump.
On Eddy County shifted that and
made it to where you could go to
a convenience station, all of a
sudden we weren't.
Our argument was you're going to
pick them up regardless. Let's
just get them.
So the one stop shop, the easy,
how do we easily get folks to
take their things, whether it be
cardboard, plastic, it's got to
be easy, unfortunately.
Um, so I, I would very much be
along his lines of questioning
of how do we make sure, because
if it's not easy.
They just leave that tire on the
side of the road. They just
tossed that plastic in the.
And it goes away and they don't
think about it anymore.
So I guess for rural areas I'm
very interested in how, what do
we do to not get so many hands
in the pot, but also solve the
problem.
Um, of, of what we're all trying
to, I think, do.
I'm gonna take a stab at it
Representative Mr. Chairman.
And this really is about
infrastructure, right? This
grant program is really about
infrastructure. It's about we're
going to buy you a piece of
equipment to help recycle and
help process it.
When you come to a successful
waste diversion programs and
people having an ethic about
recycling, um, it goes much more
beyond that or litter pickups,
we have a whole other grant
program in the state in the
tourism department called the
Keep New Mexico Clean and
Beautiful program.
And uh they give out grants for
like community cleanups and
things like that. So those kinds
of things if you're talking
about that, that still exists
but then you've got solid waste
authorities and meeting the
needs of their constituents and
a lot of probably what you're
talking about maybe what you're
talking about representative or
really programs that are being
handled by your solid waste
authorities to meet the needs of
the community because it's in
their knee just like Carl's bad
to the Carlsbad just passed a
plastic bag man. Kudos to them.
We all applaud them up here
because there
Spending millions of dollars
having to clean that up. It's
getting stuck, but they made a
local decision to do that. The
final thing, Mr. Chair, is
education, which this doesn't
really deal with, but you know
that NGO example we use can help
with.
Education is the single most
important thing you can do with
your constituents.
That we can do as a state.
He
Instill a kind of a an ethic of
not littering in our public and
in our youth.
This is and this is what the
national experts say from.
You know, keep America beautiful
and tread lightly and all all
troops, um, and this is why the
governor started the anti-litter
campaign, which was so
desperately needed in the state
of Texas, they've had a killer
campaign called Don't mess with
Texas since the mid 80s, if
you're aware of it, hugely
successful.
So these are various pieces of
the puzzle. This is really just
about infrastructure and this is
gonna help all your communities
with that piece of it, but the
other pieces are also there and
they're needed at a local level.
Thank you for letting me give
you my philosophical.
Multi-pronged answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, that's
all.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Henry. Any further questions
from the committee before I go.
Represented Montoya for a 2nd
time very briefly. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, something that uh that I'm
confused about, Mr. Chair, and
Senator was
I believe some of these funds go
towards
Helping to clean up illegal dump
sites, is that?
Why would we strike that
language? cause I don't believe
that's in the, I don't believe I
see that in the
In the circular, is that still
allowable? It doesn't expressly
say so.
Uh, on the very last, well, on
page 17 and 18, it's, it's
mentioned twice on page 17. It's
13 and 14, the first priority
for funding shall be abatement.
Of illegal scrap tire dump
sites.
And the recycle of scrap tires
and then on page 18.
Uh, lines 1 and 2.
1/3 of the budget grant money
shall uh go to uh allocate to
abatement of illegal dumping.
And recycling other solid waste.
So it it does appear as if
We've removed
Something out of here that I
don't know what was intended as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Montoya. It, it
is not intended to change the
focus of
The raid grant funds, I think if
you, if you read it, what's left
is carrying out the provisions
of the recycling circular
economy and illegal dumping Act.
Right? And, and it's the
recycling and illegal dumping
act and so those provisions are,
are throughout.
But it was definitely not the
intention to change the focus of
the raid grants from cleaning up
illegal dumping and recycling
infrastructure.
OK, just curious. I, I see.
So I, I'm looking at um
On page 17.
Uh, purchase equipment form, OK,
development and recycling
structure.
It looks like it switches it to
vendors.
I, I'm gonna, as this goes
forward, I'm gonna have to sit
down with you, uh, Mr. Chair,
and, and
Um, and Senator.
Um, I just want to make sure
that that they're that we limit.
Unintended consequences. I
assume this is going to pass out
of here today, but I know it's
going to another committee. I'm
gonna look a little closer into
this to make sure one, wanna
make sure that we do not harm.
What we have in place
I, I think
As to was, I think alluded to by
um representative um.
Murphy
Maybe we reduce or change the
percentages. I don't see that we
did that. We just opened it up.
I'm, I'm very concerned that we
maintain percentages.
I would hate to see a vast
majority of our of our
Effort go to
As on page 2, adding in the
language to promote a circular
economy, so that's education. I
would hate to see education.
Be in competition with abatement
of the illegal dump sites.
So I, I might want to see the
education portion limited to a
certain percentage of the fund.
And guarantees of a certain
percentage of the fund going.
75% maybe too much or or 6 66%
maybe too much.
But I, I look forward to working
with you before it gets to the
next committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, so
we're just, we're gonna move on.
OK, so seeing no one else on the
committee, um.
I have a question.
How do you make grants to
nonprofit?
I would thank you to, it's a
service grant, right? It's the
same thing we do.
up here,
you know, for dance programs
for, I mean, I could probably
there's a billion of them of
NGOs that are qualified to
receive funding, but there are
funding that goes flows through
a state agency for a service to
do it every day. OK, so, uh, I
think that's mostly correct.
Um
So the language at the top of
page 17.
Uh, I think is, uh, violates our
Constitution, uh.
Making grants directly to the
nonprofits. Uh, you can make
grants to public entities, they
can enter into contracts with
nonprofits.
Uh, this is the 3rd bill that's
come through this committee that
Has
In my opinion, pretended the
anti-donation clause no longer
exists.
Uh, it does.
I would move to strike.
The underscored language at the
top of page 17 or federally
recognized nonprofit
organization incorporated in New
Mexico.
I said that
Mr. Chair.
Uh, in a small home, hold on a
second, let me see if it's a
friendly amendment.
Well, the expression on your
face is not friendly kind of
flush this out a little bit
respectfully, Mr. Chairman,
you're an attorney and I respect
your legal mind and knowledge.
Um
We have done this and we do do
it and we did it particularly
when we had COVID and we gave
half a million dollars
specifically.
The businesses, they were
granted they were under a
certain rate of return or
certain agreement with the NMFA,
so I, I don't see this language
is problematic.
But I defer to the committee. I
mean, I, if there's a different
way to do it or, you know,
that's just my. Yeah. So not
super friendly.
Seems unnecessary but uh it's
what we're trying to do is have
to comply with the Constitution,
Mr. Chair, that's, that's my
opinion on it, but I welcome
other people's opinions
represent a small discussion on
the proposed amendment.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Um, and Mr. Chair,
Senator, not being an attorney
myself, I guess I would just
ask.
Does the striking of this
language, does it substantially
impact the bill, or is it
Uh, is there, yeah, as for a
little bit more feedback, or is
there a way to include other
language, Mr. Chair, Senator.
If this were to be struck here,
yeah.
Um, that moves more towards the
purpose because Mr. Chair,
Senator, it seems like the folk
one part is really emphasizing
education for communities doing.
to unlock the potential of those
communities for people to want
to,
I mean.
One of two ways we can handle
this if we're looking at a legal
issue, you could strike it now
and we can work together to try
to find language that works.
And revisit this
Or we could not strike it now
and then insult and then visit
it if we have to later.
Whichever is your preference,
either way, I'm cool with. I do
think there's a value there. I
also appreciate the comments
made by represent Montoya to
make sure it has its place in
the program, but we're not
subsuming, you know, the
infrastructure main priority, so
maybe there's a way to do both,
uh.
So it's really your pleasure.
I'm not, it is obviously not the
most important part of the bill.
There's a nonprofit back here
that probably would say, hey,
don't strike it, but uh, but I
understand if, if you would feel
more comfortable taking it out
now so we can move the bill
along and then we can look at
this. I probably.
fine with that.
OK.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Is there further discussion on
the amendment?
him.
Present the beta. Thank you,
my question is.
Also along the lines of uh.
Representative small is um part
of the component of this was
also the education and I'm
concerned about how striking
that which was added to help
with the expansion of education
and to make sure this gets to um
a lot of entities and
organizations, especially in
rural New Mexico that I also
serve and represent um and
concerned that by removing that
we may be removing entities that
are helping with this effort.
Thank you.
To, um, represent a beta, if I
may respond, the
Public entities can enter into
contracts with nonprofit or
service.
So a local community, local
government that receives a
grant.
could contract with a nonprofit
and say, we want you to go out
and perform the service, and we
will pay you to do that.
So uh professional service
agreement, fee for service.
That's lawful.
I don't think the state can give
a grant directly to a nonprofit.
So it sounds to me like, uh,
Senator Steinborn.
Um
Recognizes that we can do this
uh contractual process, but the
language of the bill.
To me it looks like a direct
grant to a nonprofit, which,
which I think violates the
anti-donation clause. Any
further discussion on the
amendment.
OK, let's, let's take a
vote on the amendment.
Representative Abeda.
Yes, Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya.
Yes
Representative Murphy? Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Yes.
Representative Small.
Representative Henry, yes.
Vice er, yes.
Chair McQueen. Yes.
OK, the amendment passes, uh,
you have an amendment, amended
bill.
Um, thank you for that.
I, I think it's, it's something
we need to pay attention to and
uh.
You know, part of my, in part.
My mind thinks, oh well, it'll
go to the judiciary and they'll
fix it.
And well, this bill is not going
to the judiciary and there's no
guarantee judiciary fixes it, so
I think it's uh coming on us to
do it in this committee.
Uh
So, uh, with an amended bill,
what's the pleasure of the
committee?
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm about to pass
on house bill.
291 as amended?
We have a motion to pass as
amended. Do we have a second?
OK. Let's take a look on that.
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Grola, yes.
Representative Henry, yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes, I would like to explain my
vote. Representative Murphy.
Yes.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Yes.
Representative small.
First year.
Yes.
Uh, so you have a due passes
amended represent Montoya to
explain this vote. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. The Senator, um,
I
I do agree with what we just
did, and I think that it does
allow for now that you've opened
it up.
I think it does allow for those
landfills and other folks that
are already using it to then.
Contract with nonprofits if it's
for. So I don't know that this
needs to be fixed between now
and passage. I think what we did
today.
get you to where you want to be.
It just has to be communicated
to those.
Uh, those public entities that
they could use some of this
money for education now. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Steiner for a
long morning.
This great morning. Thank you,
Miss Chapman. I appreciate it.
OK, E.
Our next bill is House Bill 295.
Tax on property owned by
Rita
Presents small whenever you're
ready.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair,
committee, uh, great to be on
this side, uh, Mr. Chair,
Committee, House Bill 295
clarifies uh our tax code to
align with the practice and
expectations of the renewable
energy transmission Authority,
Rita's standing as a
governmental entity, Mister
Chair, committee, um, Rita is an
incredible catalyst for economic
development and clean energy
development all over the state,
Mr. Chair, um, and
spurring over $10 billion of
economic activity, uh, House
Bill 295. Make sure
that we adhere to the purpose
and intent of uh the founding of
the renewable Energy
Transmission Authority, Rita, it
will protect jobs in rural
communities, Mr. Chair,
committee. It will protect very
important revenue streams for
rural communities and also Mr.
Chair, committee, it will ensure
that
we developed the world class
clean energy resources in New
Mexico.
Um
I'll defer to uh uh Lynn
Mossettler.
Uh, and we also have Jeremy
Turner here for any brief
comments before uh we stand for
the pleasure of the committee.
Thank you, Mr.
Uh, good morning, Chairman
McQueen, and, uh,
representatives, um.
As noted by Representative Small
Rita's successes in assisting
transmission development in New
Mexico I had it transformative
effect on renewable energy
development in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, Rita
currently has 5 transmission
projects under acquisition
leaseback agreements with
private developers.
At the time those agreements
were negotiated. Everyone had an
understanding that the project
improvements would be exempt
from property tax.
We have recently determined that
a section in the property tax
code appears to conflict with
the intent of Rita as an
economic development catalyst.
And puts our private partners at
risk for double payment of.
Property tax and.
Community benefit packages that
were negotiated with the prior
understanding of the law. House
Bill 295 removes the
improvements acquired by Rita
and leased back to developers
from the definition of
improvements under that law, it
can be assessed property tax.
Importantly, to date, no
counties have collected property
tax from reader project
improvements acquired by Rita
and therefore counties will not
be losing existing sources of
revenue.
This amendment does not take
property out of the tax base,
the counties have budgeted for
and expected.
Finally, uh
Sara McQueen and and members.
These kinds of tax benefits are
common economic development
tools, and this property tax
exemption is a tool that Rita
and its private partners have
believed it has had for years.
This change in the property tax
code is critical to readers's
continued success in spurring
the significant investment in
renewable energy development
that New Mexico is currently
enjoying and is needed for the
energy transition.
We stand for questions.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Turner, did you want to
say anything?
Mr. Chair and committee members,
um, Jeremy Turner, I'm director
of New Mexico Project
Development for pattern Energy.
You've got enough on your
questions. OK. Thank you. Um, by
a show of hands and audience
who's here in favor of this
bill, OK, is there anyone here
in opposition?
OK, we're gonna take 3 in
support.
And you have 2 minutes.
Hold on, you'll get Mike.
Chaman Queen and members of the
committee. My name is Jake
Sarno, and I work for Pattern
Energy as a construction manager
for New Mexico for Sons of your
Transmission.
I'm here to support HB 295 and
give a picture of what the value
of Rita projects are for New
Mexico.
I was born and raised in New
Mexico. My family has been here
since Mexico.
Was New Mexico since before New
Mexico was New Mexico.
My son Lane also works in the
wind industry as a wind
technician for Geon Western
Spirit wind. I can tell you
firsthand that the more than
2000 people working to build
these projects are having a
positive impact in the local
communities around the project.
Every day I see both project and
individual workers spending
money and boosting local
economies.
In Torrance County total gross
receipts are up over 600
million.
In the first two months of 2024.
In taxable grocery seats are at
136% in 2023 levels for the town
of Corona, gross receipts are up
399%.
For these communities that don't
have oil and gas revenues, this
economic investment provides an
additional lifeline to local
businesses and families.
Please ensure reader can
continue to invest in Mexico by
clarifying the intent of the tax
code with HB 295 and taking time
out of work from the
construction at Sunsia right now
to be here today in support of
this legislation. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name's Chase Taylor.
I'm seeing your environmental
manager of compliance and
strategy at Pattern Energy. I'm
also a lifelong New Mexican from
Lee County.
I'm proud to work on projects
like Sunsia Transmission that
are improving the lives of our
residents and making the
environment a top priority as
well.
I get to witness every day how
the creation of an expanded
renewable energy industry in our
great state is creating positive
economic impacts for our
communities and our towns. My
responsibility specifically is
to lead the team who is
redefining the gold standard for
how large infrastructure
projects and the built
environment coexists with our
natural environment and our
people.
You heard from my colleagues on
the increased tax revenues that
have been associated with the
project's construction, and I
can tell you we are making
substantial investments in the
environment as well.
For example, we've purchased
1200 acre farm with senior water
rights that will be transferred
to the US Fish and Wildlife
Service.
Along with the budget to
maintain the property for years
to come, which will provide new
and necessary avian habitat to
protect the mini cranes and
other migratory waterfowl
species at the Rio in the Rio
Grande Valley.
Not only these types of
innovation programs and
investments are only possible
because of our partnerships with
Rita.
Not only am I one of thousands
working on these projects. My
wife also develops renewable
energy projects here in our
great state and we both have had
the privilege of seeing the
positive impacts we are a part
of.
This is our home, and we intend
to leave it better than we found
it.
I'm here today to ask for your
support of House Bill 295, but
we may continue improving our
state and bringing our fellow
New Mexicans.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, member,
members of the committee. My
name is Ricky Lee Chavez. I'm a
contract lobbyist for Inner West
Energy Alliance. Inner West is
the regional renewable Energy
Trade Association headquartered
right here in New Mexico. We
represent roughly 40 of the
largest wind, solar, storage,
geothermal and transmission
companies in the world.
Inner West stands in support of
House Bill 295. We appreciate
the work of Rita and Chair
Small.
In order to continue the growth
of renewable energy in New
Mexico, there is a significant
need for additional transmission
capacity.
Clarity for all stakeholders is
provided for in House Bill 295.
We encourage the committee to
support this bill, and we thank
you for your time.
OK, we're going to take a 4th in
the audience.
Uh, Rico Gonzalez with El Paso
hold it OK.
Um, and, and I know I'm the 4th
and you said 3, and so I
apologize about that, but uh I
represent El Paso Electric,
which serves uh Otero Donana,
uh, more cows and customers in
Luna and a little bit of Sierra.
And as we move through our
transition from from our
perspective or, or my
perspective as a utility, we're
in a cul-de-sac of energy.
And building out
Transmission uh from the
southeast out from the west is
something that we are gonna uh
need desperately as as loads
continue to show up and pop up
in our territory, our territory,
we have about 2400 megawatts of
of of uh uh annual peak load,
about 500 of that is in New
Mexico, and we have had around 2
gigs of requests for
Uh, uh, uh, energy in our New
Mexico territory. That's not to
say anything about our Texas
territory, which is 80% of our
load.
Um, and so, as, as we begin
this, this, uh, um, energy
transition.
Uh, in 2025 to 40% renewable. We
are hoping that for our
customers' sake, there is an
opportunity to be able to use
the, the, the talents at Rita,
which Lynn uh exemplifies and uh
be able to use the tools to get
our customers some some
opportunity, uh, um, to, to take
advantage of building out these
transmission lines that are
gonna be desperately needed.
So, uh, we stand in support of
this bill from that perspective,
and giving them the tools
necessary to help uh retail
customers in New Mexico moving
forward. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, is there anyone
online who would like to speak
in support of this bill, please
raise your hand.
OK, is there anyone online who
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill, please
raise your hand.
OK, Jing Nan, um.
Uh, to the, uh, a small, do you
have anything you'd like to add
before we go to the committee?
No, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee.
Ribs in Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative.
Um
I'm just wondering the, the, uh,
ability to go and negotiate this
within the counties this in any
way interfere with that, uh, to,
to
Uh, get abatement from taxes.
Laerbes, uh, Mr. Chair, Montoya,
no, this, uh, keeps the process
that's going on now that seems
to have worked.
Well, for counties negotiating
those. So this only affects the
state. Uh.
Sher McQueen, uh, representative
I tell you, no, this would not
have any impact on um state
revenues.
So Mr. Chair and Representative,
I'm, I'm confused as to who this
affects. If this doesn't affect
the state, then it affects the
municipalities and counties.
And would this not then remove
their ability to negotiate IRBs.
Mr. Chair, I, uh, deferred to um
Uh, then and to Jeremy also, but
Mr. Chair, saying this is the
current.
This is ensuring that the
current process which is
followed, which is local
counties and or municipalities
negotiating IRBs continues to be
followed, Mister Chair
Representative, um,
It, it does exempt from the
property tax, those
improvements, but the the
process that's being used now
that values those local
improvements for IRBs, um.
For local communities continues.
So Mr. Chair and Representative,
I that's really not how I read
this. The only thing that
they're negotiating, Mr. Chair
and
uh representative is for the
long term value of the
improvements or any
infrastructure in those
properties. So I'm
Confused as to how this doesn't
interfere with that.
Miss Chairman Representative,
um, I think we're talking in two
separate issues, the industrial
revenue bonds are typically used
for the wind developments and
although transmission lines are
authorized, that is where that
negotiation takes place with the
individual county or
municipality in this instance
what this bill is referencing is
Rita's project where Rita as a
governmental entity owns the
underlying property and is
Leasing that back to a third
party in this case, Patty, so
there's two separate things IRBs
are still negotiated. This is
simply on the state-owned for
transmission line.
So thank you. Um,
Mr. Mr. Chair and
Representative. So,
So this does affect the state
dollars.
Uh, Sher McQueen representative
Montoya, no, there is no impact
on state revenues
exemption, there's a separate
statute that provides for the
exemption for IRB transactions
and this.
Change does not impact that
statute at all. OK, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
And uh representative. So I'm,
I'm a little confused then by
the
Uh
By the report from taxation and
revenue, they seem to flag that.
Uh, this bill, I'm just gonna
read it. This bill, uh,
A proposal may be
unconstitutional because the
constitution does not exempt
property leased.
From an exempt entity from
property taxes.
So this affects property taxes.
So taxes.
Without
Any
Negotiation, property taxes will
be abated, and I'm, I'm just
confused how
Somebody's losing money here.
And
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative Montoya, this
money is not being collected
now.
There, there is not a loss of
money.
It's a clarification moving
forward, Mr. Chair Montoya the
As I understand it.
Uh, the property owned by Rita
and leased by them. There's,
there are not property taxes
being collected on that.
Um
Revenue on on that property.
So, so it's not a loss.
So Mister Charon
Representative, I would imagine
there's not a loss because
there's not been an improvement.
But if there's an improvement
and taxes are not created, then
there would be a loss.
Uh
Sher McQueen represented
Montoya. That that is correct,
prospectively, um, there is a
potential that that the property
tax would be abated on
improvements, but what I wanna
focus on is the lack of clarity
in the law. What we're trying to
do is.
Because we believed that Rita
acquired projects would function
much like IRB transactions.
That's how we structured our
deals.
And
I think the uh fiscal impact
reports demonstrate how unclear
and complicated this particular
36-4 is and so what we're here
to do is to clarify our
understanding of the law so that
we can uphold our agreements
with our project partners and
that so that they're taxed as we
anticipated.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
Representatives. So based on the
IRBs that are in place, there
was an assumption.
By Rita, that.
Future
Uh
Projects or future improvements
to the project.
would also be covered.
I, I think that's
Not a fair assumption.
Um, no, nobody else has that
assumption that
They get an abatement on
something that
Future improvements would not
be.
Covered. So I'm, I'm, I, I do
agree with the uh uh department,
department of Tax and Revenue
that
Uh, I do believe this also uh
has constitutional issues.
Um, so I, I'm gonna have a hard
time supporting it. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Further questions from the
committee.
Murphy.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
representative and experts,
thank you very much. Um,
If I understand this, so you're,
what you're basically saying
that if a private entity goes,
uh, Mr. Chairman, uh
representative experts, a
private entity goes and puts a
piece of equipment or some sort
of improvement.
And
There may be some ownership
sharing agreement or whatever.
That private entity is not
exempt from property taxes and
so what you're trying to align
is that that private entities.
Fractional ownership.
In that improvement would be
tax, would not be taxed.
Correct.
Chairman McQueen, Representative
Murphy, yes, that is correct.
Thank you, I, I, it took me a
minute to wrap around the
private piece of it. And so, um,
in essence then.
Doesn't this bill basically give
a tax exemption, a very targeted
surgical tax exemption to a very
small amount of companies that
might find themselves in this
position, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
defer to the experts, but I
would say the purpose of Rita,
Mr. Chair Representative is to
unlock and open up development
of clean energy resources, so it
encourages private sector folks
to work with Rita, which is, as
we're seeing, bringing thousands
of jobs and developing these
energy resources.
Um, thank you, Representative
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
in addition to that, I think the
ultimate um before transitioning
to the private sector, it was
always designed as what has been
successful. What is a result of
the transmission lines unlocking
is the wind development.
So for example, on Suns wind
where we are, we will pay $303
million meant load of taxes for
the industrial revenue bonds
that the counties issued for the
wind.
Without the transmission, we
cannot build that Western spirit
wind we are. So as an economic
development tool similar to what
the I originally to do, Rita was
set up something very similar.
It is, and we are seeing that
direct benefit at an energy
alone in New Mexico
in large degree because of our
partner.
And Mr. Chairman, uh
representative and experts, um.
So perspectively,
If these taxes were collected.
They would go into.
Local municipality, um, county
commission, wherever property
taxes are are collected locally.
Is that correct, Mr. Chairman
Representative?
Expertsen represented Murphy,
that is correct with the caveat
of or possibly correct, let me
put it that way because of the
lack of clarity.
N4.
Um, Rita has been has been
determined to be a tax-exempt
entity under the New Mexico
Constitution and we hold both
under our agreements, the right
of way and the improvements we
own those those properties and
so because of the lack of
clarity, what we're we're trying
to achieve with this amendment
is to make sure that that.
Exemption is concrete.
Yes, and Mr. Chair
Representative, and I, I
understand that we're, where
Rita itself.
by legislation, I presume was
granted a tax exempt status for
the purposes that that you all
are talking about. That was one
of the tools that was that would
make it viable and and uh
So forth. I, I guess I'll, I'll
wrap this up because I promised
the chair I'd be quick. Uh, Mr.
Chair Representative, what is,
what are we looking at
perspectively.
In terms of taxes or value, in
terms of value that could be
taxed and and and actually the
number I'm really trying to get
to, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the value that
won't be collected by these
local entities as a result of
this change.
Assuming the projects are
complete, they're valued.
Um, I mean, we're talking
Hundreds of millions of dollars
or
Mr. Chair Representative, do we
have a a financial, some, some
idea of the financial impact to
local economies. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chairman representative, uh,
for the question.
On Sunsia transmission alone, we
are estimating that is the
amount that we uh given reader's
ownership of those assets.
That is not a number that would
be required to pay because Rita
is a governmental entity similar
to the state of New Mexico owns
the underlying real estate and
improvements, and so that's but
because of the lack of clarity
in this because that is being
leased back to pattern to
operate over that, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, experts,
thanks for that clarification. I
guess the number I'm really
curious about is, is, and, and I
don't believe it's 150 million,
it's probably be some part of
that 150 million that would go
to
Your private partners in the tax
abatement.
Is that fair, Mister Chairman
represented.
Uh, Miss Sherman representative
that would actually not go back
to the private parties because
that is that abatement has not
been.
Factored in at this time because
of the Rita ownership.
So that is the way that the
transaction has already been
structured is we've.
Issued $11 billion. We have the
IRB pill payments.
Factored into the wind portion
of this and on the transmission
we've never envisioned having
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, I won't labor to
the point. Thank you. Thank you.
Any further questions from the
committee before I ask a few.
Um,
small, uh, the muscular.
Uh
Who who is charged the tax, uh,
Rita or
Um
Private entity that's leasing
the property.
In noting the lack of clarity in
the law if
If 4.
Does apply to our lessees, it
would be assessed on the
lessees.
OK.
So I, I think that's an
important clarification that
Rita is tax exempt.
Uh, but under certain
circumstances, a tax exempt
entity.
That leases property to a
non-tax exempt entity, that real
property is subject to taxation.
That's the basic idea. Is that
correct?
Uh, Chair McQueen, that is
correct.
If, if
The law is clarified in the
direction you're leaning or your
question leaning, um, I think
there's an argument set forth in
the uh.
FIRs that indicates that all of
36-4 has.
Constitutional concerns.
Um,
Uh, Ms. Moeller, I agree, uh.
That that statues to mass.
Uh, and, and this.
verifies it for you. It doesn't
clarify the statute.
Um
And
Uh, if, if I recall correctly,
you're an attorney. Is that
correct, Miss Mosteller?
Uh, Chairman McQueen, uh,
members of the committee, that
is correct. And are, are you
familiar with the El Casillo
retirement case.
Uh, chair Queen, which is the
committee, I am not.
OK, so, uh, El Casilla
retirement versus Martinez.
This is a 2017 New Mexico
Supreme Court case.
Um
And it held, let me just read
you a couple of sentences just a
few short sentences, uh, Rosa
Murphy if, if you'll allow me.
um.
Article 8, Section 3, which is
the tax exemption for exempt
entities such as governments and
churches and schools. Article 8,
Section 3 operates as a limit on
the legislature's power to
redefine categories of property
which will be exempt from
taxation.
And then in the next sentence
next paragraph, they say, no
constitutional authority has
been granted for the legislature
to exempt real property by
statute.
So my concern with this bill is
it looks like it's exempting
real property by statute.
Uh, Chairman McQueen, uh,
members of the committee I've
talked with numbers of of
attorneys about 36-4 and not one
of them can reconcile the case
law.
said.
Uh, it's been written about this
particular statue.
And if you're, if the case you
just quoted from is correct.
The section that we've talked
about that gives the IRB
transactions.
An exemption.
would also be unconstitutional.
And I think that would create
true chaos for a lot of.
Transactions that the counties
have really counted on and it
has really spurred a lot of
economic development in New
Mexico.
Um, this muscular, I, I don't
disagree.
I, I think there's some, some
real um significant uh questions
that we have, we have built into
the law, um, but I am.
Mindful of
Direct us from our Supreme
Court, um, and what I see before
me is a is a bill that exempts.
Uh, property from taxation by
statute.
And
You know, 2017 wasn't that long
ago. This is like a 1940s case
with
Um
Sort of different set of
circumstances, that directive
seems pretty clear to me.
uh, so for the committee and a
small, I had a, a different
constitutional concern in the
last bill, which we could fix
with an amendment.
Uh, this goes to the heart of
this bill.
I mean, either we can exempt
this property by statute or we
can't.
And I tend to think that we
can't.
Um
Uh, I, I feel compelled to vote
accordingly.
Um, would you, would you care to
address that before we go to a
vote. Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank
you, members. Um, respecting
very much the sort of the legal
Uh, questions that are raised,
Mr. Chair, uh, members, the
reason why I'm very comfortable
bringing this bill is that we're
operating under a system that is
working all across counties all
across New Mexico with the
industrial revenue bond, um, and
then specifically here, Mr.
Chair, committee members, we
have thousands of New Mexicans,
some of whom are here from
today, from all across the state
who are making great living,
supporting their.
in developing our clean energy
resources.
I firmly believe this bill
supports them, their families,
and the continued development of
those, um.
Clean energy resources.
Uh, and that's why I feel very
comfortable bringing it forward.
Uh, we're being specific, um,
we're supporting the Mexicans
and their families, making good
livings, doing great work all
across the state and that's why
I feel very comfortable bringing
it, Mr. Chair, I would also only
say it seems like the, the
solution lies with a broader
statute.
Uh, that this is clarifying that
statute for one entity for
renewable energy transmission
Authority. So better for us to
look at fixing the whole statue.
But today, again, Mr. Chair, we
have the ability to protect
jobs, to continue development,
uh, by being very clear what the
statute is it.
OK.
Thank you. Uh, what's the
pleasure of the committee, Mr.
Chair, just a bit further
discussion on that.
Ribs and Mr. Chair, I think the
difference with the IRBs is that
they've been long established.
And have not been challenged.
I believe uh what you cited.
Uh, specifically carving out a
single.
Um
Uh
Beneficiary, I think is the
problem, and Mr. Chair, I would
suggest that the ability to go
and negotiate this for an IRB
abatement with the local
community still exists. So, um,
I would agree with your
assessment, and I think that is
where taxation and revenue
department is coming in. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
We've a motion for Du pass and
the second, Mr. Chair, I have
questions. I have questions.
Representative Garcia, we
In the debate, um.
Several minutes. OK.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia.
Um
So we have a motion for you to
pass.
Um, you take the vote, please?
Representative Abeda, yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gorola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya.
Represented Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez,
no.
Represent a small.
Vice Chairana.
Germ Queen. No.
So you have a due pass, 6 to 5,
um, I, I think this bill raises
some really difficult issues.
Uh, there's another bill on the
Senate side that takes a similar
approach and raises the same
issues. Um, I don't know how to
resolve them, but they're out
there, so thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
OK, our last bill of the day.
Uh, house 328 repeal clean fuel
standards.
Um, represent Pettigrew whenever
you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you committee for.
your time today.
An effort to be briefed the very
specific thing that the
Department of Justice wrote in
their analysis.
And I leave it up, ask me the
reasons why if they choose to
want to know.
And Representative Pere, I'm
gonna ask you to summarize that,
not really. I will.
This bill repeals the clean
transportation fuel standards
passed in 2024 makes
coordinating amendments
throughout the article.
To prohibit the EIB from
adopting or continuing the
effect of any CTFS rules
listeners with that, Mr. Chair
and committee at stand for
questions.
Yeah.
Questions from the committee.
Um, you see.
I'm always gonna forget
something, show of hands in the
public who's here in support of
this bill, uh, who's here in
opposition?
OK, so we'll do uh opposition
first. Uh, we'll take, uh, no
more than 3.
Uh, would you like
Um, would you like to, um,
Speak, 2 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Melissa
Kenny Dyer, a volunteer with
Sierra Club representing 35,000
members and supporters and
respectfully opposing this bill,
the state is on the brink of
entering rulemaking for the
clean fuels program, which
passed the legislature last
year. This program will drive
the economy towards less
polluting fuels, including
electrification between the
clean fuel standards and the
clean cart rules and EB tax
credit passed last year, we will
bring more EVs to the state.
reduced transportation emissions
and save EV drivers money.
Casing no one else in the room.
If you would like to speak in
opposition to this bill online.
Uh, please raise your hand. Alex
Eubanks.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair,
committee members. My name is
Alexans and I represent the
Southwest Energy Efficiency
Project.
We believe that repealing the
Clean Fuel Standard would be a
step backward for New Mexico.
Uh, the Clean Fuel Stan drives
investment, creates jobs, cuts
pollution, and moves us towards
energy and dependence.
HP 328 would eliminate this
progress, would stifle clean
energy growth. It would increase
pollution and undermine our
climate goals.
It really sends the wrong
message to businesses and puts
public health at risk.
We urge you to keep New Mexico
on the path to a cleaner,
stronger future and respectfully
ask that you vote no on HP 328.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, we'll
come back to the committee room
for support.
Would you like to speak in
sport?
Do we, do we have that
microphone?
Hold on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Winchester with
the Independent Petroleum
Association, um,
Just for a little history, IPM
did oppose the clean fuel
Standards bill every year that
it was brought forward because
we feel that it's simply a clean
fuel gas tax that does not help
the environment in any
measurable way.
It's a California idea later
picked up by a handful of
progressive states only to
backfire.
Each state that is implemented
the clean fuel tax, has
acknowledged that gas prices
have gone up because of this
standard and some have even said
that on their own state
websites.
This increase from pennies per
gallon to potentially upwards of
50 cents per gallon is
estimated, is regressive.
In a disproportionately hurts
the poor.
And those in rural areas.
We strongly support the repeal
of this standard, there still is
time to discontinue this before
it actually hits New Mexicans.
Is there anyone online who would
like to speak in support, please
raise your hand.
Singan
Uh, represent pedigree, would
you like to add anything before
we go to the committee?
Mr. Speaker and and committee,
uh.
To the deacon for years.
I've been asked to uh
To uh
Preach in front of
Congregation and it's funny, Mr.
Speaker and.
Uh, committee.
You know, you start on a message
that you think that you're being
led to talk about in the
morning.
Of
The day that you preach.
God sends you an entirely new
message.
Mr. Speaker and committee I have
pages.
And I had
Probably a 20 minute.
Lead into this, and I really
felt, Mr. Speaker and committee
that it's just simpler to like
the committee ask whatever
questions and I'll pull the.
I've got the data in my head, so
I can, I can, I can answer the
questions as we go instead of
trying to sell a job, sell
something.
I'll just answer questions thank
you appreciate that, uh, members
of the committee.
Ribsana.
Mr. Chairman, what are the
reasons behind prohibiting the
environmental improvement from
regulating. I can't.
Mr. Speaker in committee, I'm
deaf in one ear and and can't
hear out of the others so.
Alright. What are the reasons
behind prohibiting the
environmental improvement Board,
EIB from regulating
transportation fuel standards
and what alternative measures,
if any, are proposed to address.
Um, fuel related emissions.
Mr. Speaker, and, and
Representative, can you repeat
your question?
Go slower. What are the reasons?
Behind prohibiting the EIB.
From regulating.
Transportation fuel.
And what alternative measures,
if any, proposed to address
fuel-related emissions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you Representatives.
There's a couple of different
reasons. Number one, we have
rulemaking processes within the
state of New Mexico and Mr.
Speaker and committee, we are
one of the few states out there.
And and even the federal
government level that the
legislator.
Rulemaking
body in the state of New Mexico
has no review over rules.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
first.
Answer to that is because we
should not, in my opinion, have
rulemaking that we do not get
control over at the end of the
day.
Number 2, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, if you recall from 2.5 to
years ago EIB went into
rulemaking without legislation.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, um.
I, I really truly appreciated.
The comments from.
The House of parliamentarian on
on.
On the democratic side comments
with respect to rulemaking.
They are not statutory.
She made that very clear on the
reason why they're bringing
legislation today because rules
are not statutory.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady with
respect to that, the EIB went
into rulemaking with respect to
percentages of vehicles that
would be sold in the United
States, uh, or.
Go over the next several years.
The rulemaking that they have
now will not end until August of
2025, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, we have the ability to
stop that and legislate it not.
Let bureaucrats control it.
Um, did you
Chairman, um, representatives,
did you answer the second part?
Um, what alternative measures
are to address fuel-related
emissions. These emissions are
pollution, they're.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
appreciate that question as
well.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, a
year ago I'm not,
Mr. Speaker.
Uh, do I keep saying that? I
apologize.
Mr. Chair
We're gonna elevate you today,
uh.
Coach uh chairman, um.
Chairman and gentle lady.
We all know that less than a
year ago, the Biden
administration pulled back their
telpape mission rules.
They stepped back
Very hard
On what that is.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, do,
do we need to control this? Yes.
Is there an issue over the long
term of CO2e plus emissions.
I'm not gonna argue that.
We'll tell you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, the science, the
fact-based information is if we
implemented tomorrow 100% of the
Paris accord.
We would change
The the temperature in the world
by 0.17 °C or 0.3 °F.
Over 150 years.
Right, so I am I confess I did
not hear the question, but if
we're talking about the the
Paris climate accords, I suspect
we're off the bill.
Mr. Speaker and, and uh our
speaker, Mr. Chair, and uh.
Representative Paris Court
actually does deal with CO2
emissions E plus emissions, pipe
emissions are one of those items
inside of there.
Represent Peer, I, I appreciate
that. I just, I would ask your
answers to be brief. OK, thank
you.
With respect to that.
Do we need to address 12 pipe
emissions in New Mexico, yes, we
need to.
Address first.
The availability
accredited
Energy in New Mexico, yes.
We do not have the energy. I can
go through supplier by supplier
on with respect to energy
emissions that come from the
demand that will come with
respect to the battery pool.
In New Mexico.
None are at capacity now.
None of our suppliers can meet
full capacity demands.
Right now from our, our, our
majors to our rural electric co
ops.
We need to take a step back and
figure out, Mr. Speaker, or Mr.
Chair, and Representative, we
need to go back to the drawing
board with respect to the right
way to get this implemented to
get to 2045.
And carbon free.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Representative, could the repeal
have an in particularly in
communities already affected by
pollution
and uh representative, I
appreciate that question. You
know, the only town that we have
in the state of New Mexico that
has rules different than the
rest of us is Albuquerque.
Their pollution
With respect to.
Otto emissions.
Are above reproach with respect
to the Mexico Environment
department because they have
their own rules and their home
rule.
We can address that in
Albuquerque.
With respect to continuing to
push for.
Different electric vehicle
mandates.
Whatever we want to do.
But when we start looking at
this on a statewide.
Mr.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
I would propose to you based on
the documentation that.
Multiple committees heard this
summer none of our electric
electric suppliers are ready for
this.
We have, you know, economy
versus environment versus health
issue, yes.
Yeah, I'd be dressing that. No,
no.
What might the Mr. Chairman and
Representative, what might the
repeal
What might this rapill effect?
Businesses and workers in the
clean energy sector within New
Mexico,
can you repeat the last part?
I'll do the. How might this
repeal affect businesses and
workers in the clean energy
sector in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, I suspect that
um.
When private business.
Is is Caesar mission sees a.
Rejection of the way business is
going, private business finds a
way to get in the middle of
that.
Private business finds a way to
make that profitable.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
what I will tell you is we step
back.
We set our goals.
Kind of like building concrete,
Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative.
If I write a specification that
determines the water cement
ratio, this strength.
And controls the rock and sand.
I completely block.
The ability for a concrete
company or for us or a
contractor.
Be able to economize what he's
doing.
Right now, Mr. Chair and uh
representative, I will tell you
that the state of New Mexico is
doing is blocking the economy
and the environment and the
efficiencies in which private
business can get things done.
No more questions.
Resent Henry.
You don't, you don't have to. I
just have to, I'll make them
quick.
Mr. Chair Representative, the
one question I really have is,
is.
What enticed you to write this
legislate?
Thank you for the question.
and, and representatives.
What in with respect to where
this bill leads.
It leads us to a.
Opportunity for very few people.
To get very wealthy.
As we all know, the carbon, the,
the clean fuel tax requires when
fuel comes in if it doesn't meet
a certain.
Certain requirement
There's gonna be a fee
associated with that. There's a
cost.
So much emissions
There's a cost associated with
that, for that, for that
supplier.
Most of which are out of state.
There's only one in-state, um,
for that supplier to be able to
continue to do business, they
have to purchase carbon credits.
There's a very limited amount of
those on the market.
And those are controlled by a
very limited amount of
corporations and businesses.
One key issue
Does not
Create equality
the the carbon credit process is
is.
Probably one of the best Ponzi
schemes out there.
Do whatever you want, violate
every rule out there, go pay for
the money and so and and charge
it back to the to the end user.
Let's go about this the right
way. Let's let let's figure out
the right way to get to the 2045
goals without government
mandating how it gets done.
accept the goal, let private
business take care of it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. The other quick
question I have.
kind of relates to the EV.
Cars.
Mr. Chairman Representative,
obviously we come from an area
where EV cars aren't practical.
With the amount of training we
have to cover and everything
else.
If this continued on the path
that we're going.
What happens to our local
Auto dealerships, what happens
to our local people that that
don't seem to be buying into the
EV.
Um, I'm not saying it's, it's.
EVs aren't
Don't have their place.
Um, but, but the path that we're
going right now, how does this
help that?
Mr. Speaker, uh Mr. Chair and
Representative, um.
Great question because where we
live.
Border states.
We purchased across the state
lines that has no impact.
Right now, my company purchases
leased vehicles.
Through
Um, program this controlled by
Enterprise.
Nationwide
They don't come from here and
that does not fall under the
clean fuel standards.
So the 78 new vehicles that we
bring into our lease next year.
Won't be impacted at all.
The majority of industry is that
way once you get to a certain
number of employees, the only
way to control your fleet is to
release vehicles.
None of this is going to have
any impact on that with respect
to the impact on our local
businesses will, will be the
loss of cells.
We're gonna have those loss of
cells.
Do I think EVs have a place.
Yes, I do. Matter of fact, I
have 3 daughters all adults.
I've told them all that they
should buy hybrids.
Perfect vehicle
For their uses.
Uh, I just, um.
You know, one of the things that
this will really have an impact
on as we continue to increase
the number of VVs uh is the is.
One of the largest drivers in
small rural towns.
For economics
Zato repair places.
And this discussion with several
of our secretaries.
In in our state government.
Um, how do we, how, how do we
offset that?
Because we're not gonna have the
same thing.
With respect to the sciss, a
huge issue on that local
economics.
Mr. Chair and and representative
to to deal with beyond.
Those businesses.
Mexico DOT is not ready for
this.
I build roads for a living.
That's one of the many things
that I do.
None of our designs, none of the
current projects.
Coming down the pike
Are designed for the 3 for the
additional 2 times weight on a
personal vehicle or the extra 5
to 10,000 pounds on a semi.
None of our roads are designed
for that ADT.
The ADT calculations aren't even
in place for that right yet.
We can go through that. We don't
have the accredited capacity.
We have one supplier in our neck
of the woods that has a little
supply of about 4500 megawatts
right now.
Their expansion to meet current
needs is over 3000.
Because of the of the
requirements.
In our statutes with respect to
the percentage of of renewables
that are in there.
By 2030, which is the RPS
requires a 50% renewable.
Without expansion that will go
through PRC sometime this year.
Because they need an extra 3300
megawatts.
They'll have to apply for over
4000 so they can have the
accredited accredited capacity
they.
Hopefully that answers your
question.
Sir, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That's.
He was in gorilla.
tape to tape of this bill?
We have a motions at table. We
don't need a second.
Um
Someone want to step out and see
if they can grab represent
Montoya. I think he's in the uh.
OK, we have a motion to the
table, um,
Uh, could you take the vote,
please?
Representative Abeda.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gorola, yes.
Representative Henry
Not a table
Represented Montoya Represented
Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez,
not to table.
Represented a small
Viana.
Chair McQueen.
Yes.
Thank
This
we are headed to a cliff.
That's gonna have to be dealt
with at some point in time by
this body. Thank you.
So that does it for today. Uh,
we will get it now for Tuesday,
uh, either today or first thing
Monday.
Uh, thank you all very much. Uh.
later today.
