Representative more here for
sure I'll from here.
Your.
Here.
Thank you members we have one
bill before us today I am I am
going to pass
that Representative Castellano
bring his feel for before the
committee thank you madam chair
a manager before we get started
is there any way we can wait for
Representative be self a little
bit too must be present of the
committee or something and I
know what you just read that
there's just.
For.
Yeah I'm just I'm just their
members we have to get out of
here at nine thirty so I'm
trying to and that can be
Representative without a lot of
course thank you okay.
Members of the committee you
want me to go through everything
I went through around Tuesday or
disincentive million well I
understand you might have and
then when you
Two zero two numbers two two
five zero zero point one.
Chair.
Live far rules for all
committees whenever the
management is that.
twenty four hour rule and we did
not receive that I've got this
ammendment this morning in the
stated right here.
On the analysis that was
received this morning yesterday
afternoon I went over and
analyst office because I had
this to do with Representative
Castellano affected and
management done we did not get.
According to our rules it's a
twenty four hour and twenty two.
And and I recognize that
Representative Ezzell but
committees are making amendments
in number one but but but the
rules says the only thing we as
Republicans have and I'm going
to step up because it's always
relevant to us what we do have
an amendment that does.
Little bit later in the bill is
it up to the next committee so
now I'm not going to.
That this one I been in other
Representative Ezzell and then
another committees where they
amendment the last minute.
It to accept that in the I was
just a few days after Mr.
I'm not finding that level of to
have it I don't have a there is
this is just on analysis.
For this to happen and that next
to the.
From the bill of the binder in.
That's another five minutes at
all.
Rep.
The.
That we're going to go on with
this I will excuse me.
Thank Representative.
Of the chairman of the is the
members of the commission on the
amendment.
Yes I am asking.
Amendment.
House bill two nine eight on
page one of the lines twelve
after the second occurrence of
the strike during the money
struggling to include requests
and insert their for wastewater
construction loan.
On page two like to after the
strike the remainder of the line
and insert in the move their of
wastewater facility construction
like.
And the third one I've chair
members of orders on page two by
three strike to twenty twenty
three and insert the Lou there
of twenty twenty four Madam
thank you the chairman and madam
chair.
Meanwhile a motion to accept
them in a with a collect call
Representative.
excuse me
that I propose it those on the
committee in favor this
ammendment.
K. as saying no objection the
amendment is accepted thank you
present your bill
Representative.
Committee.
House Bill to ninety eight The
New Mexico finds Authority
public project revolving fund
appropriations bill I am
currently station on behalf of
the NMFA's legislative oversight
committee which voted
unanimously to endorse the bill
The bill appropriates a total of
fourteen million from the PP R.
F. two for identified funds the
first one is three point five
million to the drinking water
state revolving fund which I
think we just change the name on
the right thank them for it
comes.
Okay safe drinking water up to
million to the local government
planning and administered.
By MFA for the purpose of
funding local government and
other qualified entities Senator
tease planning documents for
infrastructure water water waste
public projects asset management
plans and economic development.
And the one on the amendment is
a three point seven madam chair.
Is a water facility
constructional fund administered
by the New Mexico environment
department appropriation be used
as a state match for annual EPA
capitalization grant for the
clean water state revolving loan
fund.
The final one madam chair
members of the committee is five
million to the cultural affairs
facilities infrastructure fund
hello Department cultural
affairs The appropriation would
be used for capital improvements
for various in state facilities
owned by the department with
them and share I would like to
introduce my expert Marquita.
Thank you
CEO Russell we'd like to hear
from you thank you for thank you
madam chair members of the
committee this is the annual
build that the finance authority
puts forward the
The bill that authorizes or the
law that authorizes governmental
gross receipts tax to go to the
public project revolving fund
also allows for the legislature
to appropriate out about thirty
five percent of that
governmental gross receipts tax
each year so this after after
our bonds are paid all our
reserves are topped off the
money not needed can be
appropriated out so this bill
appropriates at about thirty
eight percent in order to make
federal matches for the claim
are it's a revolving fund in the
drinking water revolving fund it
suits our local government
planning fund which provides
funding to local governments for
water wastewater preliminary
engineering report local
economic development efforts
lands metropolitan redevelopment
plans that sort of thing and
then since twenty twenty it's
also allowed for of funding to
go to the cultural affairs to
fund part of its capital
improvement plan I think they
annually have about twenty
million dollars of plants this
covers just a portion of their
needs for the next fiscal year
so that is the bill in front of
you as amended the amendment
basically makes a technical
correction we had picked up the
incorrect name of the fund for
the clean water doesn't change
the amount of nor the purpose
it's just a technical rep
correction to the name of the
funds our policies for that
oversight and I'm happy to
answer any questions and if I
may madam chair committee I
think there's a.
Confusion that this is a water
water bill it's not a water bill
this is a need for structural
that we talked about in in the
fade the oversight committee so
it has nothing to do with water
at this point is not a lot of
just for clarification.
Okay are there into asking the
members of the audience
how many people are in favor of
this bill.
Signify by raising at how many
people are opposed to this bill
okay we'll start with the people
a post for them.
Chairman committee member I am a
strong supporter of the bill due
to the fact that right now I
have not seen in this nonfederal
line I I can't tell what is
second of all they're not aware
of this committee well and I
would ask you those
circumstances that this role
will not only we can see the
analysis we can the amendment
but that you have a quorum to
operate on the state of.
Thank you and members in favor
of this bill.
Hello Representative deputy
cabinet secretary for the
department of cultural affairs
as Marquita said
and we department of cultural
affairs which owns and operates
hundred ninety one buildings
across the state over a hundred
of those buildings run hit areas
to start street this bill helps
fund a portion of the capital
needs that the department has
across the state we and we
receive one percent of G. G. R.
T. massive out four hundred
thousand dollars for.
Miss we also receive statewide
which in the current policy at
recommendation is.
So we rely heavily on this money
in order to provide much needed
resource capital.
Excuse me cap would prevent
projects across the state.
Thank you and the next the
person speaking in favor of this
bill.
We have several industries.
Yes provided these are.
Thank you anybody else sure I
recognizes the chief financial
officer we appreciate your
support.
Anybody else.
Well I am any members of the
committee would like to
Ask a question Representative
Matthews and thank you madam
chair I'm I'm a little confused
here.
This is a this is a match for a
federal program that provides
money for.
Anymore.
You madam chair there are two
matches contained in the bill
one that goes to the finance
authority to service its match
for the drinking water state
revolving fund and one that goes
to the environment department to
serve as its state match for
basically the sister program the
funds the clean water that's a
waste water side of the the
federal proprioceptive so there
are two state match is contained
in this bill.
Thank you thank you madam chair
of well we're confused about the
is.
This according to the audience's
involves
helping the department of
cultural affairs and what is
your relationship I'm sure
they'd like to.
And so forth but this not thank
what is the next.
Madam chair back there are seven
authorized funds civil according
to the New Mexico finance
authority act the legislature be
appropriate to seven identified
funds contained in that act
three of them are operated by
the fire department three of
them are operated by the NMFA
and one is operated by the
cultural affairs department and
that's that that's the the five
million dollars that they're
talking about that help support
their prudence to their
facilities across the state.
In fact thank you for the answer
madam chair of so.
Is the five million that
cultural affairs will get does
that relate to water.
For does it relate to.
You madam chair of this of the
defer to the audience but it's
it's an infrastructure
infrastructure improvements so
they could be heating they could
be up up.
Yet restoration that there could
be a number of improvements.
Share this is pursuant to the
federal match requirements not
the state I mean this is a
federal program this is you can
use the money this way madam
chair of the The appropriation
is coming from the public
project revolving fund which is
a state fund operated by the
NMFA and that gets of of influx
of candle dollars and once those
dollars are not needed to pay
bondholders then the monies are
are a eligible to be
appropriated by the legislature
so it is a state program the
funding of which can help fund
state projects for service
federal match.
And chair.
Thank you for states to success
these federal programs are
always.
Interesting.
I any more questions from the
committee.
Well and if I may once again.
Madam chair say that these are
funds are loan funds for certain
projects you know where there's
a wastewater project that
they're there are many
departments putting off and
cultural affairs so it's for the
structure so it's not.
Once again a lot of those for
funds that MFA lands for
infrastructure for water waste.
Well I would just like to share
with you I have to say in in my
district which is a historical
site passed a bill a couple
years ago that they took it into
the overall New Mexico
foundation for for are muted the
New Mexico museum foundation
they were able to incorporate
that and they've got an award
for a a national heritage site
this place is this beautiful gem
in the middle of the Espanola
valley and I forget how many
acres it is I can you tell me
I think it's like a hundred and
twenty acres it is a gem it was
the site of the first court
house in New Mexico it has
an incredible history and I.
It's such a beautiful property
and
Bill Richardson under his tenure
turned it over to the film and
just stay in the used at first
sight but that no longer worked
out and then we changed it back
into it a historical using for
that for our state it really is
a jam I just want you all know
it's such a gem they have a
group of farmers and ranchers
that actually volunteer and come
over to this property to keep it
up because it's such a huge
thing they must have like I
don't three thousand apple trees
on the on the property of the
whole community gathers there in
the fall we have this apple fest
and then they have this group of
farmers to kind of go and
support this place the fruit
trees that you know plant crops
in the fields they have a
animals there in and then we
wrote in America or Graham I
just want to tell you that
because we have a lot of kids in
the ranching and farming
families that are land rich cash
poor right so they couldn't you
know they wanted to go to
college they really didn't have
the money to go we put together
americorps grant hired of that I
think ten or fifteen kids I
think they got like.
Twelve to fifteen thousand a
year and I'm sorry I can't
remember all this but that
enable them to work at that and
most of severance pay twenty
hours a week and then they have
twenty hours a school and then
when they got through that two
year commitment they got another
two years of the scholarship
funds to finish their education
so what they did is they help
keep this property and and shape
all these kids know how to drive
tractors know how to work and
back new have a parent trees
because they're from ranching
and farming communities so the
whole community got together we
did that americorps grants us so
that we can hire local kids from
farms that we're really having a
hard time making that transition
to college just catch flights
and and we also the college
worked with this and setting up
programs that would help these
kids get the credits they need
and work out a program to a four
year degree so I just that's our
story that's one small story in
in cultural affairs and happens
all over the state these these
these places are usually in
rural districts they're usually
pretty isolated and
I just think they're they're
just kind of the future of our
state in terms of tourism and I
don't think people understand
that and and if I may use be use
the purpose of the chair to ask
Miss secretary of them Assistant
Secretary to explain where these
where these places are located
throughout the state.
Chair thank you for the
opportunity and for your kind
words our state to located
throughout the state starting in
the north we have a in all calls
in those service historic site
payment is historic site hema
springs we have Coronado
historic site in the Leo we have
mostly Redondo at Fort Sumter
Sumter we have four children in
committee rooms we have we can
export Santa Fe County and those
of the historic sites we have a
historic sites across the state
and eighty CM and cultural
affairs infrastructure to
provide cover at are you
throughout those locations so
you know the waste water and
water things again these are
very real sites to provide
correct and and if we don't if
we don't have good water systems
in these places they'll just go
down that's all there is to it
you know you can imagine for for
a a community gathering of five
thousand people in the apple
festival success we bring in you
know tons of portable portables
so that.
Four four communities so that's
what we do and
And it's important I think that
we keep these historic places in
New Mexico I think it really is
a future current some our state
we have to keep these things
going on at that I guess with
that'll close and I'll entertain
a motion.
Chair.
If it is respond quickly also
there is a wonderful department
I don't have any problem with
that question about issues that
we have with.
A program that is Jennifer
water.
And I was just trying to clarify
that I guess that in terms of
cultural affairs this may or may
not go to walk they go to other
kinds of things designed to
stand for the purpose.
That's what the that's what that
is allowed under the federal
program and that's what what's
laughed I I just was kind of
curious about how that.
So but I didn't really
understand that these
necessarily have anything to do
with putting in drinking
fountains or whatever at we
could be any kind of of fifteen
that correct the city kind of.
For sure Madam chair for the
funds that come from the
cultural affairs they could be
any capital improvement and I
would note that government gross
receipts tax goes to a couple of
different agencies one of the
most of the finance authority
for the public project revolving
fund but the cultural affairs
department does receive an
increment of the governmental
gross receipts tax it's simply
not anywhere close to enough to
help fund their system so this
is consistent with government of
gross receipts tax and the way
it's distributed it's just that
they'll be able to get more
money as a result of this bill.
Mannschaft I'm fine with that I
just wanted to understand.
Mr yes our move the roots of the
loan okay the second okay just
then a motion to adopt the
amendment with the second and
with our coverage.
Did.
Representative Marshall.
Representative Kate's yes.
Reserves all.
Representative Lara yes
Representative Matthews yes.
Of the more a.
Representative Allison yes.
Here is yes.
And the okay the bill is that as
amended is on the table the
general managing emotions Jr.
I voted to pass on house bill
two ninety as amended.
Hi second
Has been
moved for adoption and seconded
and the critical role.
Representative Marshall.
Representative it's yes
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Matthews yes is
amended.
Representative Zamora.
For more also yes.
The.
Yes Senator Representative
Castellano you have about from
thank you guys for sport thank
you members see everybody on.
To date
yes.
