Mr. Speaker, good morning.
Give us a second. I jumped the
gun, everybody.
roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. Good
morning. I move that we go to
the next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
I'm gonna have everybody rise,
um, for today's invocation on
this very special day, uh, led
by the gentle lady from Bernardo
Representative Parajon.
Almighty God, we recognize you
as the Most High and most true.
Thank you for your blessings and
for so many of us inspiring a
beautiful AAP INH Day done the
proper way.
Honoring your diverse creation
and bringing us motivation to do
as you have commanded us to act
justly, love mercy, and walk
humbly with our God. Amen.
Members, please remain standing
for today's rendition of the
national anthem.
Brought to us by Myra Tompkins.
See
But
What's so
whose stripes
to
Or
parts
We're so.
Hm
through
That
It was
See
Oh
Has remained standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Led by the gentle lady from
Donana, Representative Gallegos.
And for the pledge to New Mexico
flaggen lady from Valencia,
Representative Mirabal Moya.
Gentle lady from Bernardino.
Mr. Speaker.
Young lady.
As unanimous consent that
miscellaneous first.
Mr. Speaker, I now move to go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business,
good morning.
So that beautiful rendition of
the national anthem was brought
to us by Myra Tompkins. She's an
11 year old 7th grader at the
Albuquerque Academy. Ethnically,
she is a mix of Southeast Asian,
Filipino turkey, Indian and
African American. She plays the
sitar, violin, clarinet, piano,
and just completed the Allstate
choir this past weekend.
Myra won the state competition
for vocals this year.
Congratulations. She's on the
swim track and dance teams. She
has featured, she has been
featured in many local
commercials, including Bewell
and M. Thank you, Myra. Thank
you for being here.
young lady from
Berlio
Mr. Speaker, I now move to go to
the next order of business,
introduction of legislation.
It's an objection. It is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Bornillo.
Mr. Speaker, and I, I now move
we go to the next order of
business, announcements and
miscellaneous business objected.
Gentlemen from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you very much and good
morning, Mr. Speaker, and one
more round of applause for that
young lady. I couldn't have done
it 11 years old.
Beautiful, beautiful, um,
Rendition, Mr. Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that House
Memorial 12 be removed from the
speaker's table and made the
next order of business. Has
Memorial too.
I showed 12.
Mr. Speaker, House Memorial 2 or
House Memorial 12, the 4H
Memorial. You are correct.
No. See objection is ordered.
Mr. Speaker, would you give me
to that point that action is
deserved place in House Memorial
12th and final passage has been
taken and it is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Mr. Speaker, before we go into
debate, I'd like, uh, permission
to, um,
Introduce guests on the rostrum.
Yeah, let's go ahead and do
that. Do you have the names of
the guests on the rostrum. I've
got some names here, but if you
have them, I'll have you do
that, Mr. Speaker, I have the
names of the guests from Lee
County on the rostrum, and I
also, Mr. Speaker, have been
given a list from uh
Representative Henry, which is,
who is now still in committee.
OK, so we have, um,
In the gal well, first of all
I'll go to the gallery. We've
got guests from Lee County 4H.
If you're here, please rise to
be recognized. Welcome to the
house.
And uh we also have, and I
believe these folks are on the
rostrum, we have Gechen Ball.
Hadassa Langley, JT Hart, Julian
Dosey and Dalton Hip. Welcome to
the house.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I also believe you have
a list from um Representative
Henry.
A Shali priest.
Do you have that list, sir? I do
not have that list.
Mr. Speaker, uh, depends on how,
how much time you want to give
me with respect to this. I have
bios for each and every person
on the uh on the rostrum if you
are so inclined. Go ahead.
Mr. Speaker, from, from Lee
County I have Tegan Halliday.
It was inspiring veterinarian
and agricultural leader.
He's a freshman at uh
Sorry, she is a freshman at
Tatum High School.
has a passion for ag, public
speaking, and academic
excellence.
I apologize for that. We had a
shift at the end and I, I forgot
to shift.
With 5 years and 4 and 2 in FFA,
she has gained experience in
livestock judging, wildlife ha
habitat evaluation, consumer
decision making. There's a 4-H
club president. She showcases
strong leadership and community
dedication.
Mr. Speaker, next.
Next on the last one is Miss
Olivia Hart from Lovington, New
Mexico.
Enjoining 4H programs as a young
clover bud. She was developed
and grown many important life
skills such as confidence.
Public speaking.
And leadership skills.
She has worked her way up from
chaplain to song and rec leader
and now VP of our club to
president of the club and VP of
the county council.
Confident she has gained in
herself, has grown tremendously
and hopes to be able to spread
that knowledge and experience to
the youth of today.
Mr. Speaker, next on the, on the
rostrum is Mr. Nathaniel Aguilar
from Hobbs, New Mexico.
Mr. Aguilar is proud to say that
he has grown in character.
One way that I have built
character since being in 4H is
in the shooting sports project.
Learning to be a team player,
learning from the stakes and the
ability to take instruction.
All the qualities he continues
to grow and carry with him
throughout his life.
Mr. Speaker, next on the rostrum
is Mr. Atley Ball from Eunice,
New Mexico.
As a member of 4H, he has been
given the opportunity to compete
in many 4H projects and occupy
County council officer
positions, as well as holding an
office in his 4H club.
Through which he has been able
to discipline himself.
And with these experiences I've
been able to be held accountable
for maintaining the straight
schedule for his livestock
projects and attaining all
required meetings.
As well as extracurricular
activities that he is needed at.
This is how 4H grows.
Mr. Ball
And responsibility.
Mr. Speaker, last but not least
from Lee County.
This last year we have been, we
have been blessed with a new
interim county director and for
each agent.
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to
introduce Chelsea Wilson to the
rostrum.
Miss Wilson grew up in Lee
County where she showed
Just about every livestock there
is according to this, uh, missed
out on horses, but swine,
poultry, rabbits, lambs, goats.
Also working in doing projects
and selling bacon, woodworking,
and welding.
Chelsea graduated from Lovington
High School in 2010.
And went on to New Mexico
Military Institute where she
graduated in 2012 with an
associate's degree in science.
She continued on into 2015
Oklahoma State University
graduate with a bachelor's
degree in soil science and a
minor in agricultural
leadership.
In 2017.
Chelsea chose to serve her
country by joining the Oklahoma
National Guard, attending 10
weeks of basic training at Fort
Jackson.
South Carolina after completing
training, she went through 10
weeks of specialty training as a
generator mechanic, Mr. Speaker.
Very cool.
She was employed by the SGS
Vanguard Sciences as a
microbiologist.
In 2019, she became a national
environmental Policy Act manager
for Oklahoma Military
Department.
Miss Wilson is married to
Michael Wilson. They together
have a 2 year old daughter named
Sloane.
Che Chelsea recently made an
incredibly tough decision not to
enlist in the Oklahoma National
Guard after 7 years.
Mr. Speaker, we are so blessed
in Lee County to have leadership
like Ms. Wilson and uh I and our
leadership team that's up there,
I wanted to showcase them today
for all of the house to see just
as I have that.
pride within me for what our 4H
does. I know every member has
that same level of pride.
Mr. Speaker, would you like for
me to read the, the list from uh
Representative Henry's area.
Before you do that, we're going
to go back to introduction
because this memorial has not
been formally introduced, so I
will introduce it and I will
come back to you generally from
Santa Fe, Mr. Speaker, I move we
go to that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
to read.
House Memorial 12 introduced by
Representatives Pettigrew,
Mason, Vincent Brown, and Henry.
A memorial declaring February 4,
2025 as for each day in the
House of Representatives.
Whereas
Memorial 1200 by tidal is order
not printed and placed on
speaker's signal.
from Mr. Speaker, I mean we go
to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Back to the gentleman from Lee.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
apologize. I thought that was
written in the other day.
Mr. Speaker, from, uh, Mr. uh,
Representative Henry's district,
we have a Shaylee priest.
Mr. Speaker, Shaley Priest is
from Curry County, 17 years old,
and a junior at Melrose High
School.
Shows livestock.
She was involved in 4H and FFA.
When she, uh,
she gets older, she plans to
attend Mexico State University
and get a degree in education
and become an agriculture
teacher.
And for each some of my biggest
achievements, her biggest
achievements were winning the
grand champion Do Dorfer and uh
New Mexico at the New Mexico
State Fair.
One of my achievements, one of
her achievements is winning the
trip to National 4H Congress in
Atlanta, Georgia, where she
learned so much in 4H and wants
to continue to grow.
Thank you for being here today.
Mr. Speaker, we also have Samuel
Prada.
Mr. Speaker, Samuel Prada is a
junior at Los Alamos High
School.
His dreams after high school
going to college at New Mexico
State and study in media and
communications.
His achievements are being
elected to serve in the 2024,
2025 New Mexico State 4H
leadership team.
As your state song and rec
leader.
Some of the things that Mr.
Prada does includes varsity
track.
Los Alamos High School for age
and running cross country. Thank
you for being here today, Mr.
Potter.
Mr. Speaker, next we have
Savannah Daniels.
Mr. Speaker, Savannah is a
program director in 4H
Agriculture agent for Hidalgo
County Cooperative Education
Service. She's been in Nodalgo
County for 6 years, overseeing
the program.
Savannah has served as the New
Mexico 4H leadership team
advisor for 2 years.
From
Daniel's greatest
accomplishments while serving as
an adviser has been to help
guide an elite.
Set of views to gain life skills
and achieve goals that they have
set not only for in their 4H
career but in their personal
life.
Another highlight of serving as
an advisor has been the
opportunity.
Opportunity to assist two
different teams.
On a trip to Washington DC.
With New Mexican Secretary of
Agriculture Secretary Whitty.
Susanna enjoys leading her for a
youth.
To many personal growth
opportunities as well as
advocating and educate and
educating the agricultural
community.
Thank you for being here today,
Ms. Daniels.
Mr. Speaker, that includes my
list for today. Um, I would open
up to debate if uh, if you so
desire, sir.
We already did that.
Gentle lady from Lee and Eddie
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentleman from Lee, please
yield.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
Happily.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, members
of the body, I have 3 very
special guests to introduce this
morning. Let's start with the
New Mexico State 4H president
for 2024-925. His name is Danny
Turner, and if you'd please
stand there he is.
Uh, Danny is a junior at Texaco
High School where he
participates in football, FFA,
and National Honor Society.
Upon graduation in 2026, he
plans to combine his 4H speaking
skills with his love of sports
and pursue a degree in sports
broadcasting.
Denny is an avid horseman and
has expanded his skills through
4H projects that allowed him to
train a yearling Philly and two
young colts. Denny is proud to
represent Curry County in the
New Mexico 4H Youth Development
Program. Please welcome Danny
Turner.
Mr. Speaker, my next guest is
Kate Dion Lamont, if she would
please stand there. She is on
the rostrum.
Kate is 17 years old. She's from
Santa Fe County and currently is
a senior at Albuquerque Academy.
After graduation she is headed
to Fort Collins to go to college
at Colorado State University.
She will be double majoring in
animal and equine science and
we'll be showing horses for CSUs
and collegiate equestrian team.
Uh, Kate will be showing horses,
uh, as I said at CSU's, uh, team
and she has always dreamed of
being a livestock vet, and we
sure need those, Mr. Speaker.
And uh her goal is to go to vet
school after getting a master's
degree.
In animal science and this is
her 10th year in 4H.
And she has always been very
passionate about the program.
Mr. Speaker,
before age.
Kate has um shown horses,
poultry, and goats competed in
shotgun and does many indoor
projects including woodworking
and boiling water canning.
Uh, she, as she gears up, uh,
for the show season um, she
shows competitively in this show
jumpers as well as the hunter
jumpers and she has dedicated a
large portion of her life to
showing.
In July, Kate was elected as the
New Mexico State 4H secretary
and since then she's had the
opportunity to work with 9
teammates to promote 4H and plan
for each events for the rest of
the state.
Outside of 4H, Kate also loves
to climb and go backpacking with
her friends and family. Please
welcome Kate.
And my third guest, Mr. Speaker,
is Nadia Nearco.
She is currently the New Mexico
State 4H STEM ambassador go
stem. It's a program I think
most of us love and she's a 17
year old home school senior from
Donna Anna County. She plans to
double major in electrical
engineering with a concentration
in computer science.
And microbiology plant genetics.
A few interesting facts about
Nadia are that she is a national
champion.
In the team horse demonstration
division ranked 4th in the
nation in wildlife habitat
management and has been a part
of the 4H program for 10 years.
Nadia is an amateur
herpetologist and she enjoys
repairing vintage electronics,
especially 1970s and 1980s
arcade machines, Mr. Speaker.
These are very accomplished
students who have bright futures
ahead of them. I think all three
of them for being here with us
today in the chamber. Thank you.
for the debate, the gentleman
from Chavez, Eddie and Lee,
Representative Mason Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Uh, with the
gentleman from Lee yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Cha Chavis,
Eddie, and Lee.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I have 248 or
14H member in the
Yeah, yeah, on the floor here
today, Ethanys would stand up,
Ethan.
Ethan is a 5th generation farmer
from the cottonwood area in
Artesia.
He's, he's had the opportunity
to grow up living and working on
his family farm.
Ethan joined 4H as a third
grader and began competing in
shotgun trap competition as a
novice and junior.
As a senior this last year, the
13 was able.
So I had skied in sporting
plays.
To his roster
Placing a district in the
county, 80 county shotgun team
winning at state level, his
team.
was able to attend the national
48 shooting sports competition.
48 shooting
Also introduced him to a love of
archery.
And as a 4H member, he says that
serving his country and state is
a privilege that we should all
enjoy.
Each year helping different
organizations and charities grow
and understanding of more
understanding ways to serve and
to help.
Others locally
Thank you, Ethan.
Also setting beside him here is
his mother Muritha Lyles.
She's been a volunteer for a
leader for 7 years.
And she says she's carried
hundreds of flights of ammo.
But she does qualify that at one
flat at a time.
She's gone through
As all the parents of the
shooting sports kids.
No telling how many earplugs and
coaching the kids to slow down.
And do their best.
Having kids involved in a sport
that pri primarily mental and
extremely meticulous.
Watching them flow is incredibly
rewarding.
As I said, his team this last.
Got to go to the national
shooting competition.
So they will not be able to go
again, so his love of archery is
gonna take over any shooting
sports it sounds like.
She says watching her child give
a demonstration to his 4H group.
On how big how big Baylor works.
In answering his peers is
something that's been fortunate
to experience.
As parents, we look forward to
all the ways 48 contribute to
the growth.
Of our son and the ways our son
will be able to share our love
of agriculture.
Thank you, Lucretia.
And
is
the final statement, I
Just like to say we applaud all
of the 48 from every city, every
county in the state of New
Mexico. It's a great
organization.
I actually joined 4H in 1959
myself.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Further debate on the memorial,
the gentle lady from Katherine
Socorro Valencia and Sierra
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from Lee Yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady representing the
largest district in the United
States.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, kind gentlemen. Um, I
just wanna rise, um, to
recognize a few guests, but also
to, uh, just let everyone know
about my support for 4H across
the state of New Mexico. This is
uh an entity that has been
around for many, many years
that, uh, teaches.
youth across New Mexico, um, how
to deal with different
circumstances and so I, I really
am truly honored to be a 4Her
and to support the 4H, uh,
groups.
Uh, I think there's a sea of 200
I heard in the Capitol, so I
love that, uh, Mr. Speaker, I'd
like to introduce Brody Montoya.
Uh, he's from Magdalena, New
Mexico. Whoop, whoop, so yeah,
uh, goes to school with some of
my grandkids over there in
Magdalena, uh, he is a proud
forageer, one of his projects is
archery, uh, 4H is shown, uh,
has grown his self-discipline
and uh he wanted to win the
county. He knew it was gonna be
hard and had to practice every
day, so around 6 a.m. every
morning, he got out and shot 5
sets of 6 arrows, 20 to 25 m
away from his target and he.
did that for around 3 straight
weeks, and he ended up winning
the county and district, so
welcome, Brodie.
My next guest, uh, Mr. Speaker,
is Cora Marta.
Uh, she's with the West um
Winston Leggins, uh, her 4H
projects include leadership,
posture, and range, sheep,
cattle, rodeo, and shooting
sports, well rounded young lady
there, uh, she has been part of
this 4H group for 2 years. She
is currently the song and
recreation leader for the 4H
Club, providing fun activities
for all of her friends and
members of the 4H, uh, she loves
learning new leadership skills,
and she loves getting to know
new people.
Welcome, Martha, uh, Cora Cora
Marta.
My next one, Mr. Speaker, is a
Don.
Martha
Uh, he is, uh, from Winston as
well, uh, if people don't know
where that is, take a look on a
map. It's in the middle of
somewhere, not nowhere.
Uh, leadership pasture and
range, sheep, goat, rodeo, and
shooting sports, uh, since 4H in
his time, um, he's learned
leadership, teamwork, and
responsibility, uh, uh, he's an
active member and current
secretary of the Winston Leins
for H club. I am also he's also
the proud secretary for the
county 4H council. He loves
different opportunities for each
provides him as well as a
lifelong friends that he's
connected with. Please join
me in welcoming Adan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady for the
debate on the memorial, the
gentleman from
Colfax, Curry, Harding, Quay,
San Miguel, and Union
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, like a lot of the
other folks, uh, on this floor,
I was in 4H when I was a kid.
Uh, it taught me responsibility.
It taught me a little bit about
record keeping. It taught me a
lot of the things that I use in
my life today. Now this morning,
Mr. Chair, uh, does a gentleman
yield?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
kindly you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, all with my story this
morning I left kind of early
because I had a bill in
committee.
And I missed, uh, some 4 acres
that come by and they're,
they're the Curry County bunch,
and I think they're in the
gallery. Would it be possible
that they could stand and be
recognized. If you're in the
gallery for each students please
rise to be recognized. Welcome
to the house.
waved at you.
You didn't see them, but they
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I just, uh, end by
saying this is an awesome
organization. It teaches, uh,
good skills to young people, and
we appreciate their being here
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you
gentlemen. There's further
debate, gentle lady from Donana
Sierra and Socorro,
Representative Doo. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Does the gentleman
yield?
I would happily yield, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you very much. I
get to rat on some of the 4H
members from my district
starting with Sierra County.
Oh, the Justice Lead Justice
says that uh 4H has taught him
how to run a meeting and the
responsibilities of different
roles and positions. It's shown
him how to work with others
better than he ever could. Uh,
he is
Obviously addicted to being a
winner, but he got the county
bred goat, first time champion
he was ever and seeing an animal
that you've worked with for
almost a year pay off as well as
it did, it's an exciting time.
One of his biggest, it was one
of his biggest goals that year,
and it really added to his
experience.
The Justice.
Next is Tony Aguirre. Please
stand up, um, he, um, he's
learned to work better as a
team. He's with the Array
Wrestlers, and they have new
members every year and he's
always willing to help them
understand what 4H is about and
to help them become comfortable
with the process, and they work
together to make their club
successful. He got 3rd place in
the Rabbit show last year and
2nd place in showmanship. Um, it
was in the round with people who
had lots more experience than
him and showing rabbits. It was
his first
first time owning a rabbit, and
he was proud of what he learned
and accomplished in such a short
period of time. We're proud of
you too. Thanks for being here
today.
Next is Jamie Aguirre, and he is
also with the Array Rustlers,
and he's met a lot of people and
it's taught him how to open up
and not be afraid. He's gained a
lot of confidence, and he's
currently his representative for
the for H Club for the 2nd year
in a row. He won grand in
reserve champion for his
broilers. He'd never taken care
of chickens before, and he had
to learn to keep them clean and
keep their water and food clean,
keep track of their weight, and
he learned a lot of
responsibility.
with chickens and learned a lot
from them. Thank you so much for
being here.
Next we have a couple of folks
from Socorro, Wyatt, Wyatt
Cortez.
He is with the tumbleweed Club,
and he has learned the value of
leadership and the importance of
continuous self-improvement.
This is some deep stuff from
some young guys, right? It also
helped him develop skills for
leading effectively in group
settings. For example, during
Basque Conservation Day, he
guided a group of elementary
students through various
stations, ensuring that they
stayed on schedule and engaged
at each stop. His proudest
moment was participating in the
county contest for his rifle
project. It stood out to him
because it was first, his first
time competing and he was
thrilled to earn 5th place. It
was a great accomplishment for
his first attempt. Thank you,
Wyatt, for being here.
Madison, I hope I get your last
name right. Fassett? OK, great.
She is also with the Tumbleweed
Club, and she was 9 when she
joined 4H. And back then, she
had a habit of hiding behind her
parents to avoid conversations,
but within the last 9 years,
she's learned so many important
leadership and public speaking
skills. She utilizes them every
day from 4H projects to
memorizing speeches to running
for officer positions and
working with my peers, I've
learned the importance of
leadership and how to be a
leader in my own community.
She's, um, done
a lot of the workshops for New
Mexico 48 stage etymology
ambassador entomology
ambassador, and she loves her
time at 4H County, 4H Council,
helping in plan and lead the
events in Socorro, and she's
proud of what she's learned and
that she's represented for each
on the national 4H conference in
2024 in Washington DC. Thank you
so much.
I do have one more, uh, for
each.
I hope I can get through this.
A special guest, and he's not in
uniform today because he didn't
know he was gonna be on the
floor, but Pinon, would you
stand up? This is Pinon tores.
I'm a little bit about him. He
is from Winston, New Mexico,
where he's lived with his
grandparents since he was 3
weeks old.
He's in the 3rd grade and he
intends to your scene. He's a
member of the Winston Leggins 4H
Club. He shows goats at the
county fair, and he plans to add
pigs to his exhibitions this
year. He likes to spend weekends
riding dirt bikes, tossing a
football with his papa and
playing outside. He has a horse
named Yellowstone. He has a
border collie named Stella, and
he has big dreams. He wants to
be an elk guide just like his
papa.
which he'd like to add would be
the coolest job ever.
But what since Pinon apart.
is for me.
The community that rallies
around him, and this is what I
want to thank the 4H volunteers.
This is a volunteer club.
Every club is managed by parents
and community volunteers, and
many are alumni themselves who
rally around students and help
them succeed and reach their
best individual potential. The
amount of volunteer time in the
mighty compassion that this
community is poured into opinion
on. It's why he's thriving today
and it's what makes 4H so
special. He has a passion for
politics. He, he brought, I know
this not all this body will like
this, but his show until one
week was a six-foot cut out of
President Donald Trump. Um, and,
uh, he's, he's got a lot of
passion. It's no surprise if you
see him run for office in the
future, and he does expire
generation of kids. Pin you're
an inspiration to me, and I want
to thank your grandparents for
pouring into your life as well.
Thank you.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero, Representative Vincent.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. This is a
gentleman Ye.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero County. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Pinon and that's a cool name.
I like that.
Small but mighty, Mister
Speaker, I just wanted to remind
the body of exactly what the,
the 4H kids do.
You know, the 4-age kids, Mr.
Speaker, they're into science
and technology, engineering and
math on one side of the, of the
table and then they do
leadership, the public speaking,
uh, on another.
And then they, they take care
of, uh, they have healthy living
and nutrition, fitness, mental
well-being, and they also do a
lot of civic engagement, Mr.
Speaker, and
I wanted to share a story,
gentlemen.
Have you ever shot sporting
clays with a 4Her.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
and I raised 3 girls through 48
shooting sports.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Were you
ever able to beat one of them in
shooting sports.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen now,
matter of fact, my Browning
stori is now my oldest
daughter's gun cause she shot it
better than I did.
Thank you for that, Mr. Speaker.
So I'm not the only one, and I
blame it on, I, I feel like I
still have cat-like reflexes. I,
I feel like my, my eyesight's
OK, but I think there's just
better and they have an edge on
me. So I, uh, I appreciate all
the shooting sports and Mr.
Speaker, we go to the
Whittington Center, we watch
these kids shoot thousands and
thousands of rounds without any
accidents, and I appreciate you
being safe and
respect and firearms like that.
Lastly, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, tomorrow.
is going to be FFA day. However,
I do have some of my kiddos from
Lincoln and Otero Counties that
are coming up that are 4 acres,
and they're gonna feed this
body.
One of the best brisket lunches
that you've had in a while, so I
hope everybody enjoys. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen.
further debate on the memorial,
the gentleman from Grant.
Catherine and Hidalgo
representative Terazas thank you
Mr. Speaker, with a gentleman
from Lee please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman from Kari Grant in
Hildalgo County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You
know, gentlemen, this is an
interesting, uh, group of of
kids and volunteers at uh
throughout our state we have uh
tens of thousands of kids that
are, I think between 300 and
40,000 kids that belong to to
this between the ages of 5 and
up, uh, we've got about 2000
volunteers, uh, adult volunteers
to come and do that and show
them, show them all the things
that the former representatives
of that that spoke give, you
know, the what.
do what the former
representatives said that they
do, but in addition to that,
they just show them simple
things that will they'll they'll
pay benefits for them, uh, in
the, in the future just as
simple as a handshake. Yes sir,
no sir. Thank you. You're
welcome. Excuse me, and I think
that is a wonderful thing, uh,
one of the things that I was
reading is the 4 H's, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I wanna, I
don't know if I wanna put you
on, on, anyway, I'll do it for
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen is
head, heart, hands, and
He is thinking and learning to
think making decisions,
understanding why gaining new
and valuable insights and
acquiring knowledge, the heart
being considered with the
welfare of others determine
determining values by which to
live and learn how to work
together.
I'm gonna pause for a second and
then hands learning new skills,
improving skills already
developed, instilling pride in
work and earning respect for
work accomplished and health.
Practicing healthy living,
protecting the well-being of
self and others and making
constructive use of leisure time
that is amazing. Do you have
anything else to add to this,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, there was a
time when I knew that by heart,
and I apologize to, uh, the
youth here today that I still
don't know that by heart, um, it
is our it it is what our 4Hs
stand for. It is the way we, we
grow, they grow individually and
as you listen today.
to the different bios, each of
them in some way talked about
Leadership
Learning
And how to deal with public
presentations, not only in that
presentation can be from
shooting sports as
Representative Vincent talked
about, or it could be from
shelling a lamb, a rabbit, or it
could be from uh different
projects like welding and
sewing. So many different
things. Each and every one of
those has to be presented and
there's a story behind each of
those are 4 acres carry a, make
a book each year as well.
And uh I, I think it's just very
Very symbolic of what 4H truly
stands for because it's not just
about doing a task, but it is
very much so about seeing a task
all the way through.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
just, I, I was.
Reading that the the health of
of the four heches and when I
got to health it really made me
think, Mr. Speaker, what I tell
my kids, my children, is loving
God.
If you love the Lord and I've
always told him if you find
someone that loves the Lord.
They love themselves, they
respect themselves, they respect
and love others. And then they,
and they're, they're meant to do
something in life with the gifts
that they got from the Lord. I
think this is a wonderful, uh,
organization long has been it's
an all 33 counties, and I'm just
glad that I got to speak a
little bit about it. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
There's further debate. You
don't met from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman kneel?
Mr. Speaker, I'd gladly yield to
the gentleman from San Juan
County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. um, I
too rise in support of 4H years
ago, um, and, and this has been
a long time ago, Mr. Speaker,
um, I actually had to ride the
horse to the, the, um, 4H just
to show the horse that's how
long ago it was.
You, you said it yourself.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, I did. Um,
this is a great group of young
men and young women. I got up
this morning, I ate breakfast.
I'm grateful to farmers because
I didn't raise that food myself
maybe this afternoon or tonight
I might have a piece of meat and
so I'm grateful for ranchers
that raised that, um, and how
grateful I am, Mr. Speaker, um,
representative Ortiz talked a
little bit about chickens
yesterday. Um, I had 18 chickens
of mine that were killed by my
neighbor's dog yesterday or a
couple.
years ago.
So when I get home, I'm gonna
use my sporting shooting
sporting to good use.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you for what you young men
and women do.
Thank you. Seeing no for the
debate. Gentlemen, close.
Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud to
be able to, to carry this this
year, um.
The blessing with, with working
in this group, uh, of the House
of Representatives as we share
multiple things that are very
common and the people that get
to carry this bill for each day,
FFA day, uh, changes from hand
to hand each year and uh just so
happy to be involved with this,
Mr. Speaker, one thing that was
not brought up today.
Mr. Speaker, did you, do you
know what the largest youth
development program in the world
is?
For each
Mr. Speaker, you're right on
target with that. And that talks
so much about what we do, Mr.
Speaker, concern that I have is
4H is one of the CTSO programs
that we have and there's
discussion floating around this
roundhouse that we should
combine leadership trainings
between all the the CTSO
organizations. Mr. Speaker, each
and every one of them has a very
specific thing that they do with
respect to training their
leadership from CTE.
to 4H. Mr. Speaker, I hope that
if we see legislation that does
that this year, that we do our
very best to make sure each
organization stays strong.
On their own and work off their
own merits.
Mr. Speaker, with that, um,
I moved the House Memorial 12 do
now pass.
With unanimous consent of the
House and the record be shown
that the role has been called
and all members voted present
and in the affirmative.
An objection is so ordered.
final passage of House's
Memorial 12. The board is now
open.
Boys are closed by a vote of 69
in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. How Memorial 12 has
duly passed this house.
Congratulations for age and
until very recently for H Berlio
County was actually in the
middle of House District 11,
which is downtown Albuquerque,
so as urban folk, uh, until very
recently, uh, had our share of
amazing 4H work and 4H students
in our community.
Gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan, Representative
Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and members of the House and
guests today we are also
celebrating Santa Fe Indian
School Day here in our house and
before I introduce my special
guests on the rostrum.
I'd like to share a few
highlights of Santa Fe Indian
School and why I'm so proud and
support uh our school, the Santa
Fe Indian School and its
predecessor institutions have
been providing top notch
education to Native American
students for over 130 years
since 1890.
The Santa Fe Indian School
consistently and proudly
graduates 98% of their students,
Mr. Speaker, compared to an
overall New Mexico student
graduation rate of 77%.
In 2022, the school received the
renowned cognia Distinction
Award. This renowned accreditor
Cogia Awards signifies that
Santa Fe Indian School excels in
high academic performance. The
school does so in an environment
that respects and values tribal
communities, their culture,
tradition, and life ways.
Graduates are academically high
performing students who are
committed to maintaining their
Native American cultural values.
Making these successes possible
are the students, teachers,
administrators governing
trustees, staff, and parents of
the school, Mr. Speaker.
Today with us from Santa Fe
Indian School or Christi Abeda,
Santa Fe Indian School
Superintendent.
Robin Aguilar, board of trustees
President.
Gerry Lujan, director, trusts
land management.
Mr. Speaker and members of the
House, thank you for helping me
congratulate and welcome our
guests from Santa Fe Indian
School representing their
student body
we see in this building in, in,
in Washington and elsewhere uh
our alumni of the Santa Fe
Indian School, which is
wonderful to see. We have a, a
gym here in our midst. Thank you
for that and welcome Santa Fe
Indian School.
lady from San Miguel and
Torrens, Representative
Gonzalez. Um, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you to my
colleagues. Um, I just want to
take a quick minute to introduce
my uh special guest seated with
us on the rostrum today. Um, I
want to introduce Ms. Lyne Faith
Hearts, uh, Miss La Faith Hearts
is our, is the secretary for the
New Mexico Asian Family Center
board and they will be
celebrated later on today in
joint session, um, but she was
so excited and I was so excited
to have her. We had her as part
of our house session this
morning also. So, um, just want
to
recognize a true champion for
equity for disability advocacy
for education, um, and just
thank you for joining us today
in the house.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you. Welcome to the house, uh,
gentlemen from Montero,
Representative block.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I
have an announcement to make. A
member of our body, it's their
birthday today, the gentle lady
from Chavez Curry and Roosevelt,
representative Reeb.
Has turned 21 for probably the
2nd time, Mr. Speaker.
That it was the first time, 21
for the first time, uh,
gentlemen from Otero to lead us
in a rendition of.
Lasitas happy birthday, Mr.
Speaker Lasanitas would be
better, but I'll defer to you,
right.
123, happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, dear gentle lady
from Curry Roosevelt and Chavez.
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, gentle lady.
Welcome, welcome to the house.
And the announcements that lady
from Valencia, presenter of
Moya.
Thank you, Mr. uh Mr. Speaker,
um, I have a couple of very
exciting announcements, uh,
while we will be getting
barbecue from uh the
representative from uh Lincoln
and Otero County tomorrow.
Valencia County Day is going to
be on Thursday, so you will get
Matanza outside, so, uh, yes,
icharrons and they are going to,
so, so my crew from Valencia
County will be coming up and,
and making us some good food.
Also tomorrow night is um is
Agfest.
So that's another very exciting
thing, uh, so remember that is
um 5:34 uh rep for, for
legislators, 6 o'clock for
everyone else and it is at the
Santa Fe Convention Center.
Thank you.
you members say no, gentle dy
from uh Valencia Socorro
Catherine Sierra Representative
Armstrong a point of personal
privilege real quick, Mr.
Speaker. I thank you. I, um,
wanted to let people know the
consequences of not having
trapping on public lands right
now, uh, in the middle.
of Albuquerque, uh, on the ditch
bank where my daughter lives
now, uh, her dogs were attacked
by a coyote this morning.
Uh, her little dog did not
survive.
And uh
This is, this is a a situation
as what's happened, uh, Mr.
Speaker, because we've done away
with public trapping on pub uh
uh trapping on public lands we
can trap on our private
property, which we do, and we
don't, it's not about getting
rid of every single coyote. It's
about control and when they're
starving to death that they come
in and kill a small dog along in
that same order, Mr. Speaker.
The wolves that have been
released back onto the, the, uh.
Public lands and and they don't
know fences. They get on the
private property. I have many
ranchers, Mr. Speaker, in the
state of New Mexico and in my
district that have lost several
hundreds.
Of baby calves completely not
eaten, just killed, and along
with that is wildlife in the
state of New Mexico. So it's not
just about farming and ranching.
This is about the hunting as
well. So, Mr. Speaker, I just
want to let people know what
happens in the state when we
pass legislation like this, that
how it hurts New Mexico. So
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I've got a few
more guests to introduce and
then we're gonna go into joint
session. Guests of
Representative Little.
In the gallery from evolvement
youth advocates escorted by Sam
Colombo and Chelsea Casso. I've
got Andrearipaga of Cuba High
School, Maria Marquez of Health
Leadership High School
Illuminata Heim Penasa of El
Dorado High School, uh, these
youth advocates, uh, work or
advocate with evolvement, which
is a youth-led movement creating
positive change in New Mexico by
decreasing the harmful effects
of nicotine and vape products.
These students have led projects
and events that.
to educate and engage the public
on important issues related to
nicotine use and promote healthy
lifestyles, creating a
meaningful and measurable impact
across the state. If you're in
the gallery, please rise to be
recognized. Thank you for being
here.
And members, there is lunch for
the reps in the lounge, grab and
go, sponsored by Siyuri Yamada
and the McCune Foundation
members take note, gentle lady
from.
B in Leo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm so
excited to announce and
celebrate Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian day
with you all today.
It is amazing to see the New
Mexico's Asian community
students from so many
backgrounds in the building
today meeting with legislators
and performing in the rotunda.
And as you know, um, we will be
meeting for that joint session
on your desk, I would like to
announce you have a handout from
the New Mexico Asian Family
Center.
This has some data and
information on our
Asian-American population here
in New Mexico.
And um we also have a gift box
sponsored by Rep Skopansky, our
leader.
Uh, um, prote Stewart, the Asian
business, uh, collaborative and
the Asian Family Center and
Tallinn Market.
Uh, the fantastic lunch from
Santa Fe, uh, is provided by
chef Brett Jung, who will also
um be here today and you can
pick up that lunch rate outside
the house lounge, uh, lounge
just as you mentioned, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you so much.
Happy New Mexico Asian American
Pacific Islander Day.
You're a leader from Santa Fe.
I Ask unanimous consent that the
speaker appoint a committee to
invite the honorable lieutenant
and honorable members of the
Senate to meet in joint session
with the house in this chamber
for the purpose of being
addressed by the Honorable Judge
Linda Vansey in celebration and
recognition of Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian day in the New Mexico
legislature. the chair will
appoint representatives Garrett,
Rubio, and Mirabal Moya.
To invite the lieutenant
governor and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the House for
the purpose of being addressed
by our distinguished guests.
Mr. Speaker
The chair recognizespresentative
Szanski. I ask unanimous consent
that the House stand in recess
subject to the call of the chair
and that the rules be suspended
to allow the seating of guests
in the chamber during the joint
session.
will send a resets subject to
the call of the chair.
Mr. Speaker, the sergeant at
arms.
The Honorable Howie Morales,
Lieutenant governor.
And the honorable members of the
Senate, the sergeant at arms
please escort the Honorable
lieutenant Governor to the
rostrum.
Mhm
Yeah
Um
Thank you.
joint session of the House and
Senate will come to order. What
is the pleasure of the joint
session, Mr. President. The
chair recognizes.
Representative Seanski, I ask
unanimous consent that we
resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole House and
Senate for the purpose of being
addressed by the Honorable Judge
Linda Vansey in recognition of
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day in the
New Mexico legislature. no
objection. It is so ordered. The
committee of the whole House and
Senate will come to order.
In recognition of Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian day here in the New
Mexico State legislature.
The Speaker and I
have agreed to have the honor of
recognizing.
Representative Rena Saansky to
preside.
Over today's joint session.
Can we please have
Representative join us up here
in the chamber.
Welcome senators and
representatives and honored
guests to our 2nd ever joint
session celebrating
Asian-American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day in New
Mexico.
Namascara, that is a formal
greeting in my first language,
Malayalam, just one of over 2000
languages spoken in Asia and the
Pacific Islands.
Today is a recognition of the
histories, the cultures, and the
contributions of our brilliant
and diverse New Mexico AAPI NH
Communities.
I want to thank House and Senate
leadership for passing me the
gavel to preside over today's
joint session.
And I'd like to thank our staff.
In particular, Babak Parcham and
Ashley Watson and Angela Pacheco
Chavez, as well as our sergeants
and building services for making
today possible. If we could give
them a round of applause.
Today is also the result of
nearly a year of work by many of
the community organizations that
you will meet today.
We are here to honor the roots
that are AAPINH communities have
set down right here in New
Mexico.
To cherish the families that
they have nourished from the
same New Mexico soil that all of
our families have drawn strength
from.
And to celebrate the many ways
that our communities have made
this state a more vibrant and
prosperous home.
The theme of today's celebration
is belonging with all of its
complex facets. Who belongs
here?
How do we feel belonging in our
daily lives?
How do our children begin to
feel a sense of home in our
beautiful state.
And for this legislative body,
how do we make sure our many
communities all know that they
belong in our legislative
process.
I imagine that each of you can
recall a time when you felt that
terrible feeling when someone
made you feel like you did not
belong.
And I know too that we all have
memories, some of our best when
we knew we were right where we
were supposed to be.
When we felt a sense of
connectedness and a sense of
being seen.
That's a feeling that is allowed
Americans to achieve incredible
things for 2.5 centuries.
AAPI NH Communities are diverse
and spread across all 33
counties in this state.
But they are not unique in
striving to belong and to be met
in turn with that sense of
welcome and support.
I am so grateful for all who
have joined us today in the
chamber and in the galleries and
to all of our AAPI NH
communities. I want to say
welcome.
You're in the people's house
today and you are right where
you belong.
New Mexico is fortunate to have
leaders of AAPINH Heritage in
every field and in every corner
of our state. And so I'm going
to start by recognizing a number
of the guests with us today.
I'm pleased to introduce the
director of community engagement
from the New Mexico family,
Asian Family Center, Wang Wen.
Dance instructor for Chinese
American Citizens Alliance,
Doctor Mamie Chan.
President of the Asian American
Association New Mexico, Justin
Rogers.
Co-executive director of NMan,
Laura Lynn Violanta.
CEO of CAZA and volunteer
executive director of the Asian
Business collaborative,
Cryselarza Moon.
Executive director of the New
Mexico Asian Family Center,
Sachi Watase.
Executive director of the New
Mexico Developmental
Disabilities Council, former
cabinet secretary and director
of Asian Family Center Board,
Alice Lou McCoy.
Policy director at Center for
Civic Policy and former
Albuquerque City councilor Lan
Senna.
CEO of Presbyterian Healthcare
Doctor Rishi Sikka.
Chair of the NMSU Board of
Regents, Amu Devastali.
United States Attorney for the
District of New Mexico,
Alexander Ubala.
And he's accompanied by his
wife, executive director of New
Mexico Voices for Children, uh,
Gabrielle and their 3 children
Adelaia, Inez, and Amato.
They're off to the side there.
Thank you.
Secretary for the Department of
Workforce Solutions, Serita
Nayer.
former chief judge of the New
Mexico Court of Appeals, the
Honorable Judge Linda Vanzi.
President of Kazuna Strategies
and chair of Anchorum Health
Foundation, Sayuri Yamada.
And her daughter Miyuki
Matthews.
Program manager for the next 100
coalition, Jonathan Terrell.
Executive director of Santa Fe
Dreamers Project miles to Canal.
Policy and community coordinator
for Friends of the Oregon
Mountains Desert Peaks, Kya
Navarro.
UNM student regent Randy Coe.
Executive director of NMESA and,
uh, Asian Family Center board
member Ling Faith Hertz.
Executive director of New Mexico
Center on Lawn Poverty's Sarisha
Mann.
playwright and activist Nikki
Nojima Lewis.
Former mayor of Las Cruces, Ken
Miyagashima and his wife Rosie
Miyagashima.
And a former member of this body
and board member of, uh, Change
Lab Solutions, Kunga and her
daughter Rya.
Director of UNM Community
Engagement Center and vice
president of Asian Family Center
Board, Kieran Kaira.
Korean American artists working
with the greater community in
Albuquerque, JP.
Community storyteller Connie
Enojo and granddaughter Mayumi
Alapatt Martinez.
Program coordinator for family
and community education at Asian
Family Center through Chow.
Guest of Representative
Christina Parajon Chiangoo.
Willy Luke.
And Leo Sue.
And I want to acknowledge all of
the students we have in the room
today. Today we have AAPINH
students representing the Bosque
School.
Please stand.
have
Welcome students.
Students from the Albuquerque
Academy.
Students from ACA Karate.
Diksha University.
And Noria Suda Dance Academy.
And in the gallery we have AAPI
community members from across
the state with heritage Spanish
heritage is spanning the globe.
With the members of the
following communities, please
stand. Our Afghan and Iranian
community, please stand and be
recognized.
Our Palestinian and Arab
communities.
Our Chinese community.
Our Filipino community.
The Korean community.
The Japanese community.
The South Asian community.
The Taiwanese community.
The Vietnamese
Community
And the tie and Laotian
community.
Welcome. We are in the house.
And now, uh, the chair would
recognize Representative Chanel
and Yornu for an introduction.
Thank you very much Madam
Speaker. It is my immense
pleasure to introduce this body
to Sachihutase, uh, the
executive director director of
New Mexico Asian Family Center,
which is the largest and most
comprehensive social services
provider for the Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian population in the state
of New Mexico. The center
provides free case management,
individual and family
counseling, legal consultation
and representation, general
navigation services, youth.
and community leadership
programs, financial education
workshops and referrals to
trusted agencies before assuming
the helm of the Asian Family
Center, Sachi grew up in New
Mexico became a Fulbright
scholar and received her
bachelor of Arts from Pitzer
College in Claremont,
California. Over the last few
years I have been privileged
enough to get to know and work
with this remarkable young woman
please give a warm welcome to
Sachi Watase.
Got it. Um, hello and thank you,
Madam P Protem, Mr. Speaker,
legislative leadership and
members of the legislature. Um,
my name is Sachi Watai.
And I'm a member of the Japanese
American community, um, and
Albuquerque local and the
executive director of Mexico
Asian Family Center, um, which,
uh, representative of Earney
just wonderfully introduced for
um for us, so um our
organization is rooted in the
community, and working to
advance the visibility rights
and equitable access to services
and programs for Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiians families across the
state.
Our incredible staff are here
today.
Yay.
Um
Who provide um direct social
services to victims of crime.
Multi-generational family
community engagement programming
and work to uplift the voices of
our communities.
Um, also our com our fierce
community members, as we've
heard and stood earlier, um, are
also here and they come from all
over the world with powerful
stories to tell.
Um, I'm also joined by, as you
heard, a few members of um our
board of directors who work
behind the scenes to guide the
vision and mission for the New
Mexico Asian Family Center.
As well as review a lot of
Financial reports and things
like that. Um, so it is my honor
to introduce you today to one of
those board members, um, and
it's this year's API and HD
keynote speaker, the Honorable
Judge Linda Bay.
Some of you, yes.
Um, some of you may know her
just as V or VZ maybe you call
her Vansi or Judge Vancy, um,
some call her Vansy pants, um,
but I call her Linda.
Um, when I was preparing for her
introduction today, I texted her
and her response was, quote,
I usually tell people not to
introduce me. So just keep it
short and say whatever you can.
You whatever you want.
Which was honestly not very
helpful. Sorry, but um it
wasn't, but in that text, um,
she did reveal exactly who she
is. Someone who gives power back
to those around her.
Um, who centers community and
who makes space for others
before herself.
As you will soon hear, Linda's
story and journey to New Mexico
is not simple.
She was born in Pakistan to a
Muslim father and a Catholic
goin mother. Her family fled
Pakistan when she was 10, and
then she spent the rest of her
childhood in Hong Kong and
Singapore.
As a teenager, she immigrated to
the US and was naturalized at
the age of 16.
Since then, she has done many
things.
Including being an environmental
engineer and running a
restaurant, um, but what she is
most known for now is her
remarkable legal career.
Linda went to the Yunnan School
of Law, where she, where she
remembers being the only Asian
student in all three years of
her time there.
She went on to work as a civil
rights attorney defending First
Amendment rights, fighting
racial discrimination, and
ensuring justice for people
across New Mexico.
In 2004, she was appointed to
the 2nd judicial District court
and later to the New Mexico
Court of Appeals, where she
served for over a decade,
including as Chief Justice.
Um, in public office, she faced
threats and isolation.
But I know that throughout her
time on the bench, her work
meant so much to so many people.
She was a familiar face and
intimidating courtrooms, a
bridge for those who may
otherwise feel they don't
belong.
And she held a deep commitment
to considering the long-term
impacts of her decisions.
For the past 7 years, Linda has
served on the board of the New
Mexico Asian Family Center
because she understood how
easily the Asian community can
be rendered invisible.
She wanted to ensure that our
voices, our histories, and our
present in the state were
undeniable.
And with that, I will let her
share her story with you all. So
please join me in welcoming the
Honorable Judge Linda Vancy.
Thank you, Sachi.
Thank you all for inviting me
here today, Madam Protem, Mr.
Speaker, leaders and members of
the legislature and especially
leader Rena Kapanski, who
created this opportunity to
showcase and celebrate New
Mexico's Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian
communities.
I know anecdotally that others
who've addressed you on this day
have begun by identifying their
particular ethnic community.
In my case, the concept of
ethnic community is a little bit
complicated even for me.
Um, for others, it seems like
it's a bit of a conundrum.
For example, I recently learned
that some people have assumed
and have asked if I'm African
American. I apologize,
representative.
Um, most people from that I
encounter from my part of the
world, so to speak, give me the
look, right? A simultaneous
expression of
I recognize you, but
befuddlement of I know you, but
do I?
And people have actually asked
if I am Mexican, Italian, Greek,
and even Swedish.
The only people who are certain
they know me are the TSA and
customs officials, I have
accounted in the Americas,
nearly all of whom have treated
me as a suspect to be
interrogated and with any luck
detained.
Except for the customs officials
I have met in Canada who are
mostly Pakistanis and just waved
me along when I go through
security there.
So I've been asked to share my
story with you, and it begins
there in Karachi, Pakistan,
where my mother and her family
ended up after being displaced
from their home in the
Portuguese colony of India on
the west coast of Portuguese
colony of Goa on the west coast
of India during partition.
And it was in Karachi that she
met my Pakistani father.
Growing up, I swam in the
Arabian Sea, ate mangoes and
guavas off the trees and rode
camels on the beach.
And as a child I learned English
and math and Urdu from Irish
nuns who taught me at the
convent of Jesus and Mary.
I played after school at the
Bhutto home. Yes, that butto but
the Benazir Bhutto and her
younger sister, Benazir, who
grew up to become the Prime
Minister of Pakistan and who was
later killed.
And that was my life until I was
forced to flee Pakistan in the
middle of the night with my
mother and younger brother,
leaving everything I knew of my
life behind with nothing but one
suitcase.
As a teenager, we moved to Hong
Kong and Singapore two very,
very different Asian countries.
I regarded and experienced also
as my home, my world and all
that I knew.
Even today, I can smell the
tropical sweetness of a jasmine
flower. I can taste the spicy
noodles from the market vendor,
and I can feel the salty humid
air of the South China Sea on my
skin.
I didn't set foot in the United
States until 1969 when I was 12.
Please don't do the math. I can
tell you I'm old.
Um, when my family came and
spent 3 months in California
while my mother studied for the
test to become a US citizen.
At the end of those 3 months, my
brother and I stood with my
mother in a small, quiet San
Francisco courtroom and we were
sworn in as US citizens.
I did get to taste my first
milkshake, swim in a mountain
stream instead of an ocean and
traded a hockey stick for a
basketball.
But I actually didn't live in
the United States until I
attended college in New York and
I stayed on the East Coast for
quite a few years after
graduating, Working as such, you
mentioned as a safety and
environmental engineer for large
corporations.
Although I enjoyed the work I
did, I knew that where I lived
was not home. I did not have a
sense of belonging.
So I moved to El Paso where I
continued my work as a safety
and health engineer at a steel
mill.
while also doing graduate work
in biology.
During that time, I was a
frequent visitor to New Mexico,
enthralled by its natural and
artistic wonders.
My adventures at the time were
mainly in the southern part of
the state until I took a road
trip to Taos.
You know, for those of you who
live up north, they say that if
the Taos Mountain wants you.
It calls you there and if it
doesn't want you to stay, it'll
spit you out.
I can't say for sure that the
mountain called me. I can say
with certainty that in contrast
to everywhere else I had lived,
always by virtue of decisions of
others. I chose to live in New
Mexico.
It took a while before that
choice became conscious, but
when I was, when I did, it was,
I was all in.
For the first time living in the
United States, I felt like I
belonged.
Armed with absolutely no
relevant experience.
I opened a restaurant in Taos,
moved there and ran that
business for the next several
years until I decided to apply
to law school.
How I came to that decision to
go to law school is not entirely
clear to you, to me. I don't
think that the mountain spat me
out, um, but I do think it was
related to what I experienced in
Pakistan. Growing up, then a
country besieged by violence and
ruled by military dictators who
wielded their power not to
benefit the citizenry but to
subjugate it.
Including by striving to
dismantle any semblance of an
independent judiciary.
Although the violence I observed
was largely at a distance, I
have never forgotten the terror
of seeking shelter from falling
bombs during the India-Pakistan
War in 1965.
I left that troubled land, but
the trouble I saw has never left
me.
I was profoundly affected by my
experience bearing witness to
what happens when there is no
such thing as a fair and
unbiased application of neutral
facts law to facts, but only
arbitrary decisions based on
personal agendas and whims.
The Pakistan I grew up in was
not a land of opportunity,
certainly not for women.
I did not dream of what I could
do and do as an adult or even
think about it.
But my feisty and determined
mother dreamed for me.
She and my grandmother
repeatedly stressed the
importance of making the most of
each and every opportunity and a
finding ways to create
opportunities when it seems that
none will appear.
Even more importantly, she made
me understand that with every
opportunity comes the
responsibility to contribute to
the community.
Eventually I came to understand
and appreciate the singular
importance of neutral
decision-making based on laws,
procedures and principles
applied equally to all people,
and I knew I wanted to go to the
UNM School of Law, the only
school I applied to.
I heard somewhere once that life
is short, but it is wide.
On the wide path that I've
traveled since I came to live in
this country. I've been
fortunate to be able to find and
act upon diverse educational,
professional, and volunteer
opportunities, many of which
have enabled me to witness the
real world impact of the law,
even before I went to law
school.
For example, the impact of
safety and environmental laws on
workers and on corporations.
And if the laws affecting
immigrants and small business
owners.
Even though I was the only Asian
in the law school, the law
school gave me a new sense of
community and belonging that I
had not experienced before.
After working for a few years as
a practicing attorney, gaining
valuable experience, my mother's
admonition about the
responsibility to contribute to
the to the community, prodded me
to pursue the possibility of
serving the community as a
judge.
With a considerable help and
support of the community of
friends and professionals who
embraced me and my desire to
serve in this way. I succeeded
in becoming the first South
Asian immigrant, actually Asian
of any sort, um, to be appointed
as a district court judge in New
Mexico.
4 years later, I was really
lucky in 2008, um, to be the
first immigrant once again from
any Asian country to serve as a
judge, including as a chief
judge on the New Mexico Court of
Appeals.
That distinction still holds,
unfortunately, and I can't wait
for the next Asian-American
lawyer to be a judge on the
appellate bench in New Mexico.
So how does this all relate to
belonging, the theme for today's
event, or reflect New Mexico's
unique and distinct Asian
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian communities. Another
aspect of today's event noted by
organizers. I'll do my best to
address these, but in reverse
order.
There are, of course, as we can
see very many different
countries, cultures, languages,
and ethnic groups within Asia,
the Pacific Islands, and Hawaii.
The abundance of distinct
characteristics are striking
even within my own personal
experience growing up in a small
subset of Asian countries.
It is no surprise that the
country's cultures, and
ethnicities comprising the Asian
Pacific Island and native
Hawaiian communities in New
Mexico would be even more varied
than I had expected in my youth,
and I thought I was exposed to
most of them.
But it is apparent from my work
on the board of the New Mexico
Asian Family Center that this is
so and that the members of these
communities have divergent
perspectives and contributions
to make to the New Mexico
communities in which they live.
As well as needs requiring
attention and support from the
larger New Mexico community and
its lawmakers.
Asian Pacific Islanders, and
native Hawaiians living in New
Mexico and elsewhere in the
United States, feel invisible
because we often are so.
At the same time, there are very
good reasons why we fear being
seen, given the discrimination,
racism, and violence inflicted
upon us at different times
throughout history.
So then what is belonging?
Is it even possible for the
communities we celebrate here
today to belong to the larger
community of New Mexico in which
we all live.
Well, I'm hardly an authority,
but I will share a few thoughts
with you anyway.
I read somewhere a quote
attributed to the great actor
Lou Diamond Phillips. Some of
you may have heard of him, um,
who, by the way, is part Asian.
He said, ultimately I think it's
important for all of us
individually to know who we are.
To know where we came from, but
also to know where we want to
go.
And to add epitomize that
representation is a matter of
action, not explanation.
That resonates with me.
This resonates with me. I think
the experiences of belonging is
not possible without knowing who
we are, being who we are, and
taking action to get ourselves
to where and how we want to be.
All of that takes great courage,
including the courage to put
ourselves out there.
And that kind of exposure means
risk.
The risk of discrimination,
racism, and the threat or actual
infliction of violence, as so
many members of our communities
have experienced.
You must believe me when I tell
you that I understand the risk
that we put ourselves when we
put ourselves out there.
My own experience of taking
action to get myself to where
and how I want to be includes
not only being targeted and
interrogated by TSA and customs
officials.
But also the terrifying
experience of fearing for my
life when I was accused during
the primary election in 2010
when I was running to keep my
seat on the Court of Appeals of
being an al-Qaeda terrorist and
people threatening violence
against me.
You must also believe as well
when I say I understand the
climate in which we now live.
Fear does not and a lack of
safety does not help us feel
like we belong.
But despite my experience of
belonging as something that can
be ripped away from you the
moment someone else decides it
should be.
My experience has shown
something else.
That embracing our cultures of
origin can enrich not only our
own lives, but also the New
Mexico communities in which we
live. If we put ourselves out
there and share them.
And that endeavor brings the
possibility of belonging and the
recognition of our shared values
for all who participate.
In a very real practical sense.
No one really belongs until we
all do.
For me, the bottom line is this
belonging is something that is
created and and evolves through
action and undertaking that is
not without risk, but in order
to have a meaning, meaningful
life absolutely worth it. Thank
you all so much for allowing me
to speak to you today.
Thank you, Judge Vansy for those
moving remarks.
And now the chair recognizes
Representative Christina Parajon
to introduce our special
performance.
Thank you Madam Chair. I am
pleased to introduce
Albuquerque's Van Han Lion dance
team. One of my earliest
memories is daintily putting a
red envelope into the mouth of a
lion dancer. This is a
tradition, uh, line dancers
accept red envelopes or money or
wishes, and that brings you good
luck to yourself and any other
hosts in return. This diverse
group of New Mexicans are
feeding our state's cultural.
roots through the traditional
art of line dancing. Line
dancing is a performance from
China and other Asian countries,
most common around the lunar New
Year, which was observed just
last week. Line dancing is about
spreading joy and good fortune.
So we are fortunate to have this
visit in the roundhouse today,
and we ask that the lion dancers
accept these red envelopes that
should have been in your red
boxes.
Uh, except these envelopes of
good wishes for a productive
legislative session, please help
me welcome the Van Haan lion
dancers.
Mhm
Mhm
I want to recognize these
incredible students Jaden Ho,
Keon Tran, Nathan Ho.
Anthony Ho, Tory Long, Tommy
Long, support staff, Linda Tran,
Tuan Ho.
Thank you, lion
sponsors.
Thank you, colleagues. I want to
thank all of you for recognizing
the importance of Asian-American
Pacific Islander native Hawaiian
communities in New Mexico
throughout this historic joint
session in New Mexico, we are
one people from many origins. We
are at our best when we walk
together towards progress and
shared prosperity. When we stand
together against ignorance and
intolerance, and when we
envision a future with a place
to belong for all of us. To our
community members, thank you.
Thank you for your contributions
to New Mexico and to this
country. We are committed to
building a home for all of you
every day that we serve in this
legislative body. And with that,
I conclude our celebration of
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day and
turned the gavel back to our
lieutenant governor. Thank you.
Mr. Chair recognizes
Representative Spansky. I ask
unanimous consent that the whole
House and Senate rise and report
progress.
The joint session of the House
and the Senate will come to
order, Mr. Chair. The chair
recognizes revative Sapansky. As
unanimous consent that the joint
session of the House and Senate
is now dissolved.solve the joint
session of the House and Senate.
One more round of applause for
Mr. Sapinsky and all of our
celebrants today.
Seemed no objection.
It is so ordered. The joint
session has concluded.
Members, please stay in the
chambers. We will do a little
bit more business before we
recess for the day.
If you are a House member,
please stay nearby.
If you're a senator,
You can leave.
because I knew you were coming.
No
Did you get these?
Generally from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move
that we go to that order of
business committee report
objection. It is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Joint Resolution
3 has had it under consideration
report saying without
recommendation and then referred
to the education committee
respectfully submitted. Do you
want to Johnson, chair?
Mr. Speaker, move adoption of a
favorable report without
recommendation on House Joint
Resolution 3 of those in favor
say 9.
' s name.
You guys have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Bill 63 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. And it referred to
the appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
G Andres Romero, chair.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
adoption of a favorable report
in House Bill 63. All those in
favor, senior 5A9.
Posate, the SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee to him has been
referred House Bill 156 has had
it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted G Andres
Suerer.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
favorable report in the House
Bill 156.
All those in favor signified by
saying I.
I suppose
I have reported.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee team has been referred
House Memorial to has had it
under consideration reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Ganderer chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption
favorable report in House
Memorial to all those in favor
and I.
Bona, I have a report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee tomb has been referred
House Bill 127 has had it under
consideration in reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair.
Mr. Speaker, we adoption
adoption of favorable report
House 27. All those in favor,
signified by C9.
Opposed name.
The I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 182 has had it under
consideration and reports same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted, Christine Chandler,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, movement. We're an
adoption of a favorable
community report on House Bill
182. All those in favorse
probably say 9.
Aponey, the I have a committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 183 has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
183. All those in favor, enabba
na.
Aponey, the IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 53 has
had it under consideration in
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption. We're adoption of
favorable report in House Bill
53. All those in favor and
probably say I.
Also suppose same name.
have a community report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 72
has had it under consideration
in reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Elizabeth Thompson,
chair. Move adoption adoption of
a favorable committee report in
House Bill 72. All those in
favor of X and I.
Money.
Yeah, it's habit.
It was close. The ice habit
could be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 115 has
had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended, and
this referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair. Move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
115. All those in favor, say I.
Oppose
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Almost
Mr. Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 117
has had it under consideration
reports and with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair
adoption adoption favorable
report on House Bill 117. All
those in favor signify by saying
I.
I suppose say nay.
Yeah I saw it. Can we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
10 has had it under
consideration report, same with
the recommendation that it do
not pass, but that House
commerce and economic
development committees
substitute for House Bill 10 do
pass and then the referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen
Waigallego's chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 10, but a favorable
committee report for House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10. All those in
favor signify.
saying I.
On the supposed name.
The ASR be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been referred House
Bill 202,
has that has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation revenue Committee
respectfully submitted Doreen
Waallego's chair. Mr. Speaker,
of adoption report in House Bill
202, all those in favor
signified by saying I.
I suppose nay.
I believe how rules have been
broken. Sergeant at Arms,
please.
The I have a report adopted.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business.
Introduction of legislation. It
is ordered.
Has built 246 introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to labor
increasing the minimum wage for
certain employees, providing an
annual adjustment to the minimum
wages based on inflationary
measures, repealing a section of
the minimum wage Act, House Bill
246. House Bill 246 haven't been
read twice by title. His order
printed and referred to the
house Labor, Veterans and
Military Affairs Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 247 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to trade practices,
enacting the healthcare
practitioner Transparency Act
establishing advertising
guidelines requiring healthcare
practitioner identifiers
providing penalties. House Bill
247. House Bill 247 have been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
Houses built 248, introduced by
representatives Pettigrew,
Sanchez, and De la Cruz, an act
relating to criminal law,
creating the crime of unlawful
carrying of a firearm while
trafficking a controlled
substance, providing penalties,
House Bill 248.
House Bill 248. Haven't been
that twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, there's a House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 249 introduced by
Representative Sanchez, an act
relating to unemployment
compensation law, allowing the
Secretary of Workforce Solutions
to waive the one week waiting
period requirement for
eligibility for benefits in the
event of a federal or state
emergency or disaster
declaration. House Bill 249.
I was 249 haven't been there
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee events the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 250 introduced by
representatives Onanornu and
Parajon, as well as Senator
Duha, an act relating to hygiene
requiring correctional
facilities to provide free
menstrual hygiene products.
House Bill 250.
House Bill 250 have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 251 introduced by
Representatives Hall, Mirabel
Moya, Baca, Terrazas, and
Cullin, an act relating to
educational retirement,
providing additional options to
change the beneficiary for
retired members who have
designated a spouse as a
beneficiary. House Bill 251251
have been read to us by titles
or printed and referred to the
House Labor Veterans Military
Affairs Committee, then the
House Education Committee.
House Bill 252 introduced by
Representatives Herrera, Abeta,
Javier Martinez.
John Wanda Johnson and Ortiz, an
act relating to children
amending the aging and long-term
Services Department Act to
create the kinship caregiver
support pilot program, providing
pilot program participation
requirements, providing duties,
making an appropriation,
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 252252 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 253 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero,
Rubio, and Ortiz, an act
relating to court records
requiring the ceiling of certain
court records pertaining to an
eviction, providing procedures
for a petition to seal a court
record, providing a process for
petitioning for the unsealing of
a court record. House Bill
253253 haven't been written to
us by tilers or are printed and
referred to the house consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 254 introduced by
representatives Mirabel Moya,
Garrett Baca, and Gonzalez, an
act relating to educational
retirement, changing the period
of time that certain retirees
are able to return to
employment. House Bill 254. 254
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the House Labor Veterans
Military Affairs Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 255 introduced by
Representatives Thompson, De la
Cruz, and Gonzalez, as well as
Senator Maestas, an act relating
to children, renaming the
juvenile Community Corrections
Act to the juvenile Community
Connections Act, amending the
juvenile Community Connections
Act, providing that money in the
juvenile community connections
fund may be used to operate
programs that provide services
for educated delinquents,
children or youth, establishing
a local panel to determine the
next steps of a
delinquent sentenced to a
juvenile facility. House Bill
255. 255 haven't been read twice
by title is or printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 256 introduced by
Representative McQueen, an act
relating to the legislature,
amending a section of the NMSA
1978 concerning the introduction
of legislation. House Bill 256.
House Bill 256 haven't been read
twice by tilers or printed and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House built 257 introduced by
Representatives McQueen and
Ortiz, an act relating to the
oil conservation division,
providing that the division may
make rules and orders regulating
the transfer of oil and gas
wells, including limitations on
certain transfers. House Bill
257257 have been twice by tilers
or printed and referred to the
House Energy, Environment and
Natural Resources Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 258 introduced by
Representatives McQueen and
Ortiz, an act relating to
natural resources, providing
natural gas capture requirements
for the operator of an oil or
gas well or natural gas
gathering system, providing
exceptions. House Bill 258.
House Bill 258258.
I mean it was by title is order
printed and referred to the
house energy environment and
natural Resources Committee then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 259 introduced by
Representatives McQueen and
Ortiz, an act relating to
natural resources, increasing
civil penalties assessed for
violations of the oil and Gas
Act, increasing certain
application fees in the Oil and
Gas Act and adjusting them for
inflation. House Bill 259.
Is Bill 259. I've been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house energy not
oh.
Excuse me.
House Bill 259 have been rew by
titles or printed and referred
to the house energy,
Environment, Natural Resources
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 260 introduced by
representatives Gurola and
Chavez, an act relating to
public schools, addressing
allowable response to student
behavior, limiting the use of
physical restraint, prohibiting
other types of restraint and
seclusion requiring training,
requiring documentation of
behaviors and techniques has
260.
House Bill 260 have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Education
Committee, then the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Bill 261, introduced by
Representative Doo, an act
relating to regional spaceport
districts, providing that the
boards of regional Spaceport
districts employ the state
Investment council or state
treasurer to invest funds in a
local government investment
pool. House Bill 261261 haven't
been read twice by title is
order printed.
And referred to.
The house commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
Thence the house appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 262 introduced by
Representative Dao, an act
relating to advertising for
legal services requiring an
advertisement for legal services
that includes monetary awards to
a client for settlement or
judgment of a civil action to
include the monetary amount
charged to the client for the
civil action, providing for
enforcement, providing a
penalty. House Bill 262262 have
been read to us by title is
order printed and referred to
the House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 263, introduced by
Representatives Thompson, Anaya,
Silva, Sapansky, and Gonzalez,
an act relating to health care,
enacting the hospital price
transparency Act, requiring
hospitals to provide pricing
information on services and
items provided at the hospitals,
requiring the healthcare
authority to implement and
administer the hospital price
transparency Act, providing
penalties, providing civil
relief to consumers. House Bill
263.
Bill 263 have been reto by title
as order printed and referred to
the house. Health and Human
Services Committee, thence the
House Judiciary Committee.
I built
House Bill 264 introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to state
employees, providing for a
future increased minimum salary,
annual leave accrual rates and
paid parental leave, providing
for state employee recruitment
and retention, amending and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978. House Bill 264. House Bill
264 haven't been written by
titles or printed and referred
to the house labor, veterans and
Military Affairs Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 265, introduced by
Representatives Sapansky and
Luhan, an act making an
appropriation to the creative
industries fund of the Economic
Development Department for
grants. House Bill 265.
House Bill 265 have been res was
by titles or printed and
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 266 introduced by
Representatives Jones and
Thompson, an act relating to
licensure, amending the physic
physician assistant act to
eliminate certain requirements
regarding the supervision of
physician assistants by
physicians, repealing section
61-6C8 NMSA 1978 being laws
1973, chapter 361, Section 6 as
amended, House Bill 266 2.
66, haven't been read twice by
title disorder printed and
referred to the health house to
the House Health.
And Human Services Committee.
Then the House Judiciary
Committee.
Something like that.
House Bill 267, introduced by
Representatives Jones and
Thompson, an act relating to
licensure, amending the
physician Assistant Act to allow
certain experienced physician
assistants to supervise newly
licensed physician assistants.
House Bill 267. 267 haven't been
written to us by title, is
ordered printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 268 introduced by
Representative de la Cruz, an
act relating to the tobacco
Products Act, providing
definitions for snuff and timely
filed pre-market tobacco product
application, providing
enforcement authority to the
State Department of Justice in
certain circumstances requiring
manufacturers of electronic
nicotine delivery systems and
nicotine liquids to register
their products with the state,
establishing a directory of
electronic nicotine delivery
systems and nicotine liquids
that may be sold in the
requiring a surety bond in the
er in certain circumstances
requiring reports, providing
penalties. House Bill 268. House
Bill 268 have been by title is
order printed and referred to
the house, commerce and Economic
Development Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House built 269 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to healthcare requiring
the healthcare authority to
implement an open electronic
visit verification system that
is compliant with federal law
declaring an emergency, House
Bill 269. House Bill 269 I twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 270 introduced by
Representatives Armstrong and
Alan T. Martinez, an act
relating to the environment,
prohibiting the adoption of
certain rules relating to the
production and delivery for sale
of zero emission vehicles. House
Bill 270. House Bill 270 have
been by titles or printed and
referred to the house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee.
The the House Energy Environment
and Natural Resources Committee.
House Bill 271, introduced by
representatives Montoya and
Jones, an act relating to health
care, distinguishing healthcare
sharing ministries from insurers
as defined by the New Mexico
Insurance Code, House Bill 271.
I was 271, haven't been there to
us by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House.
Government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House Memorial 13, introduced by
Representative Thompson, a
memorial declaring February 5,
2025, Public Health Day in the
House of Representatives. House
Memorial 13.
As memorial 13 haven't been
written by title is order not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
House Memorial 14, introduced by
Representatives Vincent,
Armstrong, De la Cruz, Brown,
and Pettigrew, a memorial
proclaiming February 5, 2025,
FFA day in the House of
Representatives, House Memorial
14. Memorial 14 haven't been
read twice by title. I order not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee will be meeting at 2
p.m. in room 307 gentlemen from
Riva and from.
Sandoval and from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You're
house taxation and revenue
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning. Uh, we have 3 bills on
the docket and we'll meet at
8:30.
Remember note, gentle lady from
Bernardley or send up onion or
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development and all
that stuff committee will meet
tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 in
room 317.
Me saying no gentle lady from
Achilles San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, your house
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow, Wednesday 8:30 a.m.
3:05. Please be on time
gentle lady from Los Alamos and
Santa Fe, Representative
Chandler. Uh, Mr. Speaker, your
house judiciary Committee will
be meeting tomorrow Wednesday at
1:30, um, and.
Please be on time.
Why did you look at me when you
said that?
Paranoid, Mr. Speaker.
Members, remember take note,
gentle lady from Dona Anna.
Hidalgo and Luna Representative
Jones. Thank you Mr. Speaker,
members, I hope you enjoy the
delicious bottle of wine you
received on your desk. It's a
gift, an annual gift from the
Silver Spikes who faithfully
visit us every year to advocate
for the needs of Deming and Luna
County. They are proud as I am.
To represent the heartbeat of
New Mexico's wine industry,
which is home of two awarding
award-winning wineries and I
also extend an invitation uh to
their legislative reception
tonight at La Fonda from 5:30 to
7:30. Please come and join us.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and the
chief clerk and deputy clerk are
wondering where their bottles
went.
Oh no, um, I, I heard a report,
Mr. Speaker, that, um,
Representative Block might have
drank his whole bottle in one
sitting, so you might ask him,
he's probably on the lookout for
more. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
He's not even here to defend
himself.
Any other announcements?
Gentle lady from Santa Fe, oh,
I'm sorry, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, yeah, that could be me,
um, well, I hopes representative
Block did that before our CPAC
meeting, which will be in 5
minutes. Um, they make it really
fun and interesting. Um, also
our dinner is tonight for those
on the committee at 7 p.m. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
And if you're not on the
committee, can you still crash?
Uh, we will disclose the
location if you would enjoy
that. I would like you to be
there for sure.
Good answer. Jen lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.
Thank you, members and thank
you, uh, leader Suansky and, and
Parajon and everyone who was
involved in making today such a
special day, uh, Asian American
Pacific Islander, native
Hawaiian day. Uh, it was a great
day. Thank you all members for
your hard work today and I hope
you enjoy afternoon committees
and evening receptions, and we
will see you tomorrow at 10:30.
