To then we're gonna go to
because the
Representative Lundstrom is here
going here the course reduce
bill of four fifty nine they
were going to hear the
I don't know why the order is
different on the website last
night and it is on line but so
then if you don't mind will go
to the state engineers because a
lot of people.
Came in for state into their
thinking was going to be first
and then we'll go to both
veterinarians okay I think
that's okay so
the line.
The.
Of the I can I can we have a
motion
There were a couple things that
we did a couple well I think a
week ago I can't remember what
that was but we had
a Representative McQueen
spilling here that the the vote
was eight two zero and we did a
do not pass my back we should go
to table the motion so I am
getting entertained our motion
to reconsider age the three
forty six that from somebody
Madam chair of is that we could
reconsider three forty six for
tabling motion of the clerk to
take Ralph.
Representative Armstrong yes to
take.
Representative yes to table.
Representative.
Yes to table Representative live
yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative thousand yes.
Service yes I'm just so
everybody knows in the end I was
shared last last time but I
think we had all of I built in
that you know everybody could
talk as long as they want to
rural development and so I went
to the parliamentarian.
Yes you don't want them because
it leaves in limbo and what you
want ultimately as to have the
tabling motion I'm just letting
everybody know that and I I move
too quickly on that so I just
want to clean up the spill is
once we do a table in motion
then it goes into the record
section I can report the bill
out of committee.
So that's how it works.
Madam chair is there a table in
motion like what the dates
attached.
I will attention today what
could you make the motion of to
infinity.
They will have to check I I do
not know the also.
I'm gonna answer more money to
there is one we'll both make.
So I'm going to entertain
another motion Madam I move that
we reconsider household fifty
two okay I can call.
I'm is also in that mission.
Representative Lundstrom.
Now.
Representative K. yes.
Representative Ezzell now.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Zamora no.
Yes.
Yes said that motion passes for
free and
so I need a motion excuse me so.
Representative Ferrary complete
your table your bill on the
table thank you madam chair
we listen to the committee's
concerns and came up with some
changes that we think are
satisfactory to both everyone on
the committee and of also we
spoke to the office of the state
engineer and of got changes that
we.
Late last night that we want to
be on the next of committee if
we do pass and I would like
again my experts Christine at.
Chavis to be able to explain
those changes and then also we
do have the list of.
As of.
Representative Ezzell wanted to
know what communities this is
going to
that thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you for
listening to
to this bill again this morning
I wanted to talk a little bit
about some of the changes made
from the old bill and like
Representative Ferrary said we
do feel like admit it meets most
of the concerns on this
committee.
the first is that the old bill
mentioned that counties and
municipalities shall enact
ordinances the renewable just
focuses on this apologies.
the second is that a penalty was
added to the last bill we did.
With this draft.
We did on the populations to
make sure that we weren't
affecting rural communities so
for the nonfunctional turf that
shall not be installed for
twenty twenty five that will
affect populations of ten
thousand or more and we do have
a list that shows that there's
only going to be eleven affected
municipalities with that change.
we did get some recommendations
from the office of the state
engineer late last night and we
do have somebody here from the
office of the state engineer can
speak to that
addition but.
For the twenty thirty
requirements we were looking at
connections rather than
population served as a as a
recommendation from the office
of the state engineer and their
recommendation is that we look
at more you mispronouncing the
five thousand connection range
which would increase the
impacted municipalities to
twenty one so the way it's
written now it would affect
eleven and with that amendment
from the office of the state
engineer it was twenty one.
And before with the old bill it
was fifty four.
Us so we it is chairman I guess
I don't quite yet is substance
abuse we have a three days ago
yes the committee substitute you
should have okay we have that
now please the.
I need to yes so madam chair I
was making a motion that we
accept is to your amendment it's
committee seven substitute
discussion.
All right.
We have a second second.
Okay because the the committee
substitute is up for discussion.
So is madam chair is this the
bill that we have in here is yes
three fifty two is the committee
substitute yes it doesn't state
that on here.
I don't have anything else
falls.
Okay I didn't have this in my.
Is.
Madam chair is this fiscal
impact on this committee
substitute.
Can you have the committee is is
anybody else missing the
committee said.
It was email us at and and but
not it's not in the FIR is not
for of.
And madam my stores have four
still chair of.
Do you have a list of.
Representative of.
The.
Or Smith thank you hello this
is miss well.
Here is the list.
This is.
Okay.
Was the last.
We.
I'd like to see the list madam
chair.
Thanks.
Please
check.
Twenty
three copies.
I place a.
Be patient.
Just ahead locus explained.
I'm Madam chair on this it has a
twenty one that is being
suggested by LFC and then the
bottom with you go down to read
does so that would be here
eleven.
Okay can we wait until we get a
first.
This is just a practice.
I don't want.
This is a list of cities I am.
Okay.
Thank you.
The rest is coming.
The committee said health
experts down to.
Okay that's what we're
considering.
So I don't think we have to talk
about this because we're consent
okay yes and now I'm here for
people to get the committee
substitute that wasn't in.
Region of the state is that
members of.
Madam chair just for
clarification.
Representative.
We are considering this is this
bill at this point covers the
municipalities on the bottom
part of this list starting with
Albuquerque and ending with Rita
so correct correct okay think of
all the other information has
nothing to do with the bill that
is being presented today.
Mr chair Madison.
The Senators question on where
this.
Of the Representative structures
this.
Five hundred and I questions
again later on when we have more
discussion.
Really faster yeah we can have a
discussion lower rating for this
nice Representative staff thank
you madam chair.
Representative Ferrary can you
tell me is says this data was
obtained for the New Mexico
environment department drinking
water brands website it is
showing Ross will be in this
full water.
You have been fifty three
thousand eight hundred ninety
two.
Yes Madam chair representative
in south I'm sorry.
Madam chair I am approaching
with this because of the last
census Russell's.
Shin was over fifty thousand so
I'm kind of concerned for this
number did come from if we were
over fifty thousand we would be
able to qualify for more federal
funding for our area but we did
not reply to achieve that goal
of the lessons I'm concerned
there then at the bottom of it
these it shows population forty
eight thousand three hundred
forty seven the the water
systems that around there are in
rural areas so if you're
thinking that there is a problem
with the state that you're
selling this.
Madam.
You have.
Madam chair representative he
said this is
this is the data that we receive
for came out of the office of
the state here and in a database
that they had received from the
Environment Department striking
Water bureau so I need to.
Follow up on that
I don't know where the
discrepancies are or.
And madam chair I am.
I'm concerned about the.
Rid us of would be the same one
hundred and seven thousand five
hundred fifty seven connections
and the population service being
nineteen thousand one hundred
ninety five and madam chair and
representative for human Mr
chair of.
The majority of what we are
seeing with these numbers at the
end of time for the fireman
Department.
I'm gonna say the.
Over a third of that number.
Its part time residents.
So there is a discrepancy there
as well.
Now I can't attest to any of the
we'll see I've already done.
Rules that the legend has been a
do the they're taking into
account the.
Rural water systems that are out
there and it's not it's not
permitted to the cities
themselves so I I do have a
problem.
Thank you madam chair that's all
thank you okay
your bill I'm sorry for the
confusion everybody this
morning.
We just had a mistake the staff
on that so I'm gonna ask a I'm
gonna go to the audience right
now are there members of the
audience supported this bill
please raise your hand are the
thank you are the members of the
audience tickets is still.
Okay when we hear the speakers
in support of this bill.
Sir.
Madam chair.
Committee chair on the opera
stage here and we support this
bill water conservation is
always a good thing and help
conserve water and.
Full level.
Also all the issues going on
with two outs in.
The sun grand Albuquerque N.
drive issues.
Colorado rivers we we support
for help because for what.
saying the gentleman is that.
Or the executive director for
setting the chamber of commerce
also president of the next
generation water some.
For the past five years of the
summer and has experts from all
over the country and all over
the state Thomas about effects
of.
What used to be called around
five years ago is now just the
way things are going to be for
the rest of our lives and so.
Things like this in terms of
conservation or what we need to
really concentrate on
as a lifelong New Mexico I want
to tell my kids and my grandkids
a few years from now that they
have water dollars for values
have rear hatch Chile because we
had a long put in the family and
project in San.
I hope that you will.
Thank you Sir and the gentleman
against the fifth to just needs
a.
Committee chairs are Mexico
equipment for the Lee was is
preemption of local control
leave the house bill three to
four inches on local authority
and governance and.
Restricts the residents are
way and this is part of the
southeast Act ordinances to meet
provisions of the bill for these
reasons we perspective.
Thank you Mr measure now I hear
from the
of what remote sites so we're
gonna start with I guess we.
Okay two of a while ago.
But their hands are raised
similar turn it
back to the committee thank you
madam chair hello do you want to
summarize yes we just like to
say that a lot of of the power
in the adoption of the different
so.
Miscible statutes are
resolutions are at the
The house of the municipalities.
Okay so they are given the power
to to you know with this and to.
Okay.
That's okay we'll turn it back
to the committee and
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair so
Representative so they're given
the power by the by passing this
bill and say shall.
Yes.
Well so they're mandated they're
they're mandated how what they
have to do they're not given the
option of what to do how they
adopt them and how they enforce
them they are given that.
Okay thank you madam chair so
I really believe madam chair
that these entities especially
these top every single one of
these entities on this list have
the power to do this on their
own.
Will and and there chamber of
commerce's there are more
All there for their local power
they can do this without it
being mandated and just because
there's not a single one of on
here that I represent doesn't
mean that I would ever vote for
this bill
we do our own property in
Albuquerque.
commercial property where we
always try to zero skate as much
as we can but forcing me to do
that at my cost I think is is is
wrong now if the if the
municipality of Albuquerque
decides to do that on their own
of course we will always follow
the law but I really don't care
for mandating counties to do
something when they have the
power to do it already thank you
madam chair thank you madam
chair.
We have the.
That.
just quickly I just wanted if in
Albuquerque do have a.
I act program for terror he is
and I'm not sure how much it
some thought two or three
dollars.
Thank you.
Yes and also the reason we're
doing this at the state level
just because we want to
encourage communities to be able
to you know
In service and make it so that
we have more water for
agriculture and you know.
And for of residencies thank you
madam chair encouraging is not
meant.
Encouraging is going to the
county and state we would really
this is a great program would
not this passage at the county
level and and do it that way
this is not encouraging this is
Mandy thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Representative Lara thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative so I'm looking at
this list that was provided to
us and and I'm looking at number
fifteen in particular we have a
chart for all the term not in
this.
It's and when it's in the
corporate area County.
So I'm wondering from curious as
to why trump rules listed.
Madam.
Thank you.
madam chair I refer to my
experts.
madam chair members of the
committee that the language is a
little confusing I think it was
re record to try to make it more
clear because you have the
number of connections you have
population and so the the bill
actually references number
connections and it changes over
to.
Population food is a little
confusing but
I think hopefully the table is a
little bit more clear.
But the topless is the twenty
one.
Mexico that would be affected if
we were to send the bill for the
always sees recommendation but
you know we are only looking at
the eleven in the table below
for consideration for the way
that the bills are in today.
Thank you for that ma'am chair
Representative of.
So.
I am.
Concern that afterwards because
it was mentioned Madam chair
representative that these other
additional.
Entities would be added to the
list afterwards.
So is that going to be is are
these going to be amended into
the bill of that gets us many.
We don't have Madam chair
representative we don't have to
amend it we just heard that you
wanted us to talk to OSI in
that's what we did these would
be there recommendations that we
don't have to adopt.
Thank you madam chair that that
thank you thank you for that
Representative because you know
I I would strongly
recommend that we don't often
because that is I think we're
just you know I we in my opinion
Madam chair representative going
on beyond the scope of what was
intended or what was discussed
and IAD I have I have a concern
so I would I would be.
Very appreciative if we just you
know look at the connections
Madam chair representative I
also wanted to ask about that
because what is the difference
so you.
I don't see.
Your point is on this is that
some more about a year is now
with the sentencing connection
so what why why do we have the
the both the connections and the
population.
Aspect to it I was going to be
one of the other chair
representative.
Madam chair I'll refer to my
experts Representative.
Madam chair representative of
the.
The way back.
It makes those too
I.
Thank you could we refer to our
mothers and our.
Mr America.
Yes please.
Madam chair members of the
committee we.
What is the conservation your to
do with all this one of us
suggested connections because it
was more accurate
I see with this population was
ten thousand still so that might
be something needs to be
corrected.
Madam chair representative
Nibert.
They're using for.
My apologies one of Georgia
provide were says law law
supports is population.
Hey of lying nine twenty one.
Page two.
And learning page two with New
Line I so those I believe are
contradictory.
Of the user would
The representative madam chair
beginning fall two to amend the
bill in committee to reflect
that change.
Madam chair representative yes
what we can do is strike out of
the second one this is
population and put in
connections I believe.
I'm sorry the connection Madam
chair representative the
connections are about removal by
twenty thirty and population is
about new installations after
twenty twenty five so they're
referring to two different
things.
Okay thank thank you for
Representative earth stole.
So confusing and see.
Madam.
Yeah are you are you done.
We yes so the part of the north
if I have what I can come back
at the.
And
better care of COVID do not as
this is what they're struggles
of this bill if they need to
look at I I'm not going to
accept that motion which is at
do not passes is.
Hello to table thank you second
second.
The clerk to call real.
Madam
is there a chance we can go
ahead and make that amendment
now that we have
is the floor okay.
Representative Armstrong yes the
table.
Representative no.
Representative though yes.
Representative water no.
Representative.
More yes.
Say yes to table.
Representative
no of the the the bill has been
tabled
But the three to four so four to
thirty four excuse me thank you
Representative.
Reconsideration.
Yes.
Representative
Representative Lundstrom please
import.
We're getting here
H. B. four fifty nine our reader
distributions.
Good morning madam chair good
morning committee.
Thank you for moving us up and.
Madam chair I may help those who
are at nine o'clock we're we may
have trouble having a forum in
the other committee that if that
happens I'd like to ask my co
sponsor representatives LCS
allowed to help the committee
understand what we're doing
here.
I thank you very much I do have
my expert with with me speaker
centrist is here and that my co
sponsor of candy Spence Ezzell
Representative Ezzell and if we
need to know more about forces
we're forced to get the.
doctor Pantages in the office of
the audience sees offered to
talk about forces that you know
that four.
So if we may
Madam chair what this bill does
house bill four fifty nine
devises the distribution of
funds rate our creators in New
Mexico.
The bill then sections of the
force racing Act to increase
distributions allocated to the
New Mexico our creators
Association to twelve percent
for owners stallions that sar
first place winners at our races
the amendment increases the
distribution by five percent as
the current statute allocates a
distribution of seven percent
for those readers if I may madam
chair I'd like to ask money
expert to say a few words and
and Michael foster.
Madam chair good morning members
of the committee my name is
Raymond Sanchez Attorney in
Albuquerque New Mexico
Representative New Mexico our
readers Association in addition
to that the I was a sponsor of
the breeding Act way back in
nineteen seventy eight.
Put in the language to create a
free.
This situation for the New
Mexico forces all this bill does
nothing other than change that
percentage for our the breeders
the idea is we've lost a lot of
stallions standing in New Mexico
we feel that by changing this
percentage will encourage more
people bring their status in the
state and stand here together
with the more that we have and
create a better environment for
breeding all the breeding all of
New Mexico horses really been
significant over the years in
fact in the renewable so sales.
We sell more bowls New Mexico
falls out of state all over the
United States but we need to get
those stab wounds to stay here
if we can bring more readers
that's the purpose of this bill
it's something that was
envisioned years ago by people
who may not remember but of.
All aware of anybody members
were
Most of you locally too young to
do that but Murphy's around we
backed them of Bronson
Springstead
was a good group of people who
put this together of that's the
purpose of this bill it's simple
it's not controversial nobody's
posing that that I know of thank
you very much madam chair and
members of the committee if I
may madam chair.
Turn the bill over to Michael
sponsor I think I'm gonna have
to thank you excuse myself thank
you for coming thank you very.
Ation of the bill all right job
educated state your call of
where it would ensure call
Representative is down there's a
chance to speak with.
I love that because.
Thank can.
Thank you for your presentation
now turn to the audience how
many members are in favor of
this year by well it's just me
of course one more thing.
I was like to bills that I
on on to all to make sure that
they're right I did take the
time to call the forestry
association of miss merry barber
who had set up to see executive
director on that I acquired
about this why they were
choosing to go this route and I
understand exactly what they're
trying to do here it is to
encourage.
Dalliance.
With this incentive that we are
offering in this bill to remain
here in New Mexico and it will
help The New Mexico Fred.
Forces that are here in
Christine more hope for founders
I New Mexico Fritz to remain in
the state of New Mexico with
that madam chair we will stand
for questions thank you so much
for your presentation members of
the audiences and paper bills
raise your hands.
Who's to get okay Sir at and I
can choose who's APS's bill.
No hands okay Sir we recognize
you in the front row
of eight votes on our own.
In favor.
Thank you saying now
No comment on the screen and
turn it over to the committee
are there any questions the
Representative Zimmer madam
chair and the presenters thank
you for bringing this bill
forward.
This also helps with tourism in
the state of New Mexico my
correct madam chair and
Representative small right now
the horse racing industry as a
whole is ranked number three in
the state as far as revenues
paid into the state it is in
excess of over five hundred
million dollars and.
And that's all my questions
chair thank you.
Any other questions.
Representatives of
Learn thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
Of this bill makes a lot of
people happy but.
So I just want to thank you for
bringing this forward and I
think this is really for two
benefit us it's all part and
thank you thank you Mr thank you
our mission manager I'd like to
move it to pass.
Second by representatives and
somehow manages.
Seeing no opposition.
Everything else thank you madam
chair committee have a wonderful
morning thank you to.
This.
Having an echo of the H. two
four eighty nine state engineer
I don't see the Representative
For more options.
Because I have this.
Well I just heard the news that
we're gonna roll
for seventy four
you want to do a little more
work and I I really appreciate
that I'm gonna say I like.
We likely bills to come before
this committee so there there's
not a lot of.
For this and so I appreciate
members that willing to roll the
fail and so I do not see
Representative Andrea
I don't know if anybody can call
the committee staff to see if we
can get a hold of her and I
Joanne Ferrari has the other
field I don't know if she's
outside waiting to present the
years she has okay so we're
rolling four eighty nine yeah
we're gonna roll.
No no we wrote that one just
waiting now we're going to hear
from
Ferrary on the house bill four
fifty two veterinarian as health
care practitioner thank you
madam chair for trying to get
don Duncan.
she said there's no money for
funeral.
For her to be.
My witness my experts.
Okay what.
If you hold up we should.
The folder of and and we were
over to the and.
If not I can go ahead other
she's.
She
you of.
I can hear you it looks like my
cameras of about to activate
maybe I'm not sure if we
we can't we can't activate the
camera but we can't hear you
clearly okay.
Please present your bills thank
you madam chair
of health before fifty two
came in response to
That areas in our community who
want to help supply our support
a emergency clinic in Los crucis
people here in Los crucis have
to go all the way down to el
Paso if something happens is an
emergency with their path and
often times they expire between
and that drive and I hear from
Santa Fe people to that the same
thing can happen trying to get
down to Albuquerque because they
don't have emergency clinics so
what we're trying to do is
include veterinarians and it is
real simple add to the other non
compete
The list and you know it
remained for non compete as you
know health care practitioner
and it's a health care
practitioner for animals and we
have a lot of people in our
state to care very much about
their pets
almost as much as children but
you know it's something that we
need to be able to provide that
kind of here and with that I'd
like to introduce of doctors don
Duncan and she is the founder
and chair of the animal
companions of Los crucis and
Would you like to go ahead Dawn
and safety words.
Sure
there are and I'm sorry I can't
see you today but thank you very
much madam chair and committee
for allowing me to speak today.
I first became aware of this
problem when I had a serious
emergency with our dog who was
bleeding out post surgery the
night before on a Saturday and
he almost didn't make it and I
thought well.
when I found out and did
research as I would as a
professor for twenty five years
that we lacked emergency care
and have since twenty eighteen
and that this was a nationwide
crisis but is particularly bad
in New Mexico and particularly
bad and onion County and
southern New Mexico
that I could complain right to
do something and so we founded
animal companions of Los crucis
we brought all the veterinarians
together and began to work to
address this problem the first
notion was that we could create
a consortium of veterinarians to
provide emergency care it
quickly became apparent that
that would be impossible because
of non compete clauses that
would not allow some of these
veterinarians to work outside of
their own clinics work in
consortium with others I
actually flown to Fargo North
Dakota to learn how they created
the Red River valley emergency
hospital for that region those
are familiar I've been professor
up there.
And was quite helpful into line
aren't of this problem.
Not only can our vets not work
and consortium like that but if
we have a city county or animal
companions has an event in which
we are doing health care spaying
neutering vaccinations we can
only use one clinic we can use
one mobile clinic we cannot
bring these others together so
that was the first imperative
for working on this problem but
as we did our research we became
more and more aware of that the
shortage of veterinarians nation
wanted was causing additional
problems and the non compete
clause in particular was causing
additional problems just to give
you a few statistics here the
the veterinary
stats on a scale of one hundred
and this is a need based K. data
coming from the veterinary care
accessibility project in
association with the AVMA the
centers for disease control
prevention and the census.
We right across New Mexico
twenty three.
Twenty one of our counties are
in the bottom twenty fifth
percentile in hearing Dona Ana
County we rate almost twelve out
of one hundred so it's pretty
dire so what happens when we
have such a shortage it means
the clinics themselves have
shorter hours they cannot.
I'm provide emergency service
hours they can barely find for
the patients that they have
right now we have about one
veterinarian to one thousand
pets.
So we've been working to recruit
veterinarians to New Mexico to
be able to extend the hours of
these clinics but also
provincially to build an
emergency hospital here for
southern New Mexico and I know
Santa Fe is working hard trying
to figure this out to in a
conversation.
The other thing that the non
compete clause does that makes
this dire situation worse this
if a veterinarian has to sign a
non compete clause and becomes
and happy in that clinic.
Basically they end up going to
another state.
We cannot lose any more
veterinarians I had to
veterinarians took me to lunch
to talk about this to talk about
law case they have brought and
it is very very difficult to
recruit in this situation and to
keep all our vets here with us
now we're working with
university but schools now we're
paying the fee to prove to
provide job fair information an
externship information on behalf
of our veterinarians because
it's that important that we
support our veterinary staff
that we get more veterinarians
here that we find.
You may be aware that there is
actually a nationwide move to
get rid of these non compete
clauses the reason noncompete
clauses were made was really for
protecting reserves in business
and science development it was
not about health care other for
humans for animals and the FTC
right now is
working on a rural and all non
compete clauses so we would be
in keeping with what is the
movie across this nation to add
or veterinary health care
professionals to
Removing non compete clauses.
You heard Representative Ferrary
say how much the how many of us
love our animals and I just was
the single our bill and I was
like yes keep them here
I also want to emphasize that
this is not just about.
Well to do people who have
animals but we have animals and
every walk of life and we have
issues of poverty that mean that
some people cannot make that
drive to el Paso they just can't
and then the animals
unnecessarily done one thing we
learned a great deal about
during the pandemic is the
mental health associated with an
animal in one's life.
This dire situation with our
lack of veterinary care with
noncompete clauses that drive
the trinitarians away and allow
them just allow them to work in
consortium together.
It affects not only our pets it
affects our human population.
And I feel a right.
Imperative to support our
veterinary professionals to
support our communities and to
care for these animals that in
our lives do so much for us as
well so thank you for allowing
me to present today I have tried
to keep it short and clear and
I'm happy to take any questions.
Of thank you of.
would you like to read that are
Representative I think her words
are very eloquent thank you okay
thank you how many people in the
audience are supporting this
bill.
How many people are against this
bill.
saying no no media remote sites
entertainment questions from the
committee and representatives.
Madam chair thank you very much
Representative Ferrary thank you
for being here today yeah of.
Madam chair and representative
did you go and visit with the
veterinarians before you did
bring this bill to be presented
before committee
yes Madam chair in
Representative Ezzell we had
I've been with the coalition for
pets and people for many years
in Los crucis and we had
veterinarians attended and spoke
about this and madam chair
Representative Ferrary due to
visit with the.
Yes Representative.
due to.
Visit with Mr Duran and and he
is executive director of the
board of veterinary medicine did
you face him as well.
Madam chair representative now
okay.
Madam chair representative I
understand the need for this we
have to get more rural
veterinarians in our state.
For small and large animals and
we need to keep them in our
state.
One thing I do see that are
might want to point out to you
in the regular bill as a stated
right now under starting on page
one line twenty.
Twenty three excuse me is to
start with health care
practitioner means gives all the
listing.
And it's going to certified
registered nurse on the next
page certified nurse
practitioners certified nurse
midwives.
And then you have added a
veterinarian and I would like to
see with that.
Certified veterinarian
technician that would be the
only change that I would make
madam chair and that would fall
in line with everything else
started list.
And madam chair I don't know if
we can do that here is a
committee just like that it's
not a technical change or
anything else is just adding
that next step as as as far as
the other.
Listings that are up up up.
Would you be open to something
like
the.
Madam chair I think don would
like to respond to that.
Is that yes yes yes I'm actually
two points the this thank you
very much Representative you
brought up to great points I
just want to let the committee
know that I spoke before the
veterinary board The New Mexico
veterinary board
but it was before of.
Chair Duran came on but we've
emailed since then I also spoke
at length with their lobbyists
last night so so I just want you
know that yes I'm working with
the veterinary board the second
thing is how I would love for us
to be able to add that line
here's an issue you might you're
just come back to next year to
tackle this one in New Mexico
right now we register
technicians but they are not
They don't have to be certified
and what we the next thing that
we would like to tackle is
working with our community
colleges to set up veterinary
technician programs that would
get them certified but at this
point that could be a problem to
add that line because there are
number of veterinary clinics and
practices that do not have
certified technicians they have
registered technicians so I just
wanted to make you aware of that
otherwise I would be so happy to
see that added thank you.
Madam chair and representative
in your expert witness
Actually I don't see how a
veterinary technician can become
a registered veterinary
technician without going to one
of our major veterinary maybe
I'm wrong.
Dr Hanisch might be able to
answer that the use of all the
audience I don't know if you
don't might the committee
doesn't mind I'd like to call on
doctor finish if you could could
you answer that of the question
for the committee.
Chair members of the committee
examined try I was the chair of
that in the record seven years
so what this might be a we do
have registered licensed
technicians New Mexico date the
take a test it is measured by
the board of veterinary medicine
and and a annual dues it so they
fall under the auspices of the
board of that anything that is
we do have programs in the state
right now that that that that
the support for training C. N.
M. an Albuquerque has one of the
San Juan has won also and then
there are programs that are
distance learning programs that
are available they have to sit
for a national award in the
state.
Thank you for that so we do have
certified okay and madam chair
if I may don't ask questions
does the board of veterinary
medicine a recognize or
acknowledge out of state
certification and registrations
of these tax Madam chair.
That is I would have to go back
and look at the to my knowledge
right now we do not have
reciprocity for other states and
madam chair Rep Representative
and Dr Hanisch.
There's a problem there isn't
there.
Yes or.
Leading
leading the.
This is a this is a topic that
is being debated that is being
discussed other other
professions have reciprocity
there's there's other issues
there I can speak from a
personal level sure yes.
Yes Representative the the the
whole.
Senator association the the
personally I I think that we
should be able to ask Miss
process.
And madam chair representative
and Dr Hanisch I think
reciprocity is a great thing to
have other states do have
reciprocity clause in place as
far as technicians or
veterinarians being able to do
various jobs throughout there's
a program that
This is Texas a and M. west
that's in canyon Texas and there
is reciprocity for those that
are been certified in Texas to
be able to travel out of state
and I think it's time that New
Mexico get on board.
I really do so if a regulation
licensing is listening I hope
that they take.
Here this and I hope that the
veterinary board will decide
because described the need as
far as.
What we are seeing in our
particular and most even though
I live in a very rural areas.
We are seeing more.
Focus turning to the small
animals instead of the larger.
And we do have problems with
callous with forces with goes
with sheep at the list goes on
and on.
And I understand that
The shortages going to continue
unless we just have the lady and
so were they too can have
certified registered here.
And to me that's very poor madam
chair thank you very much
Representative.
Madam chair representative we
will check on whether or not of
their
our non compete agreements for
the technicians and look at you
know seeing about adding that.
Can.
I would like to just clarify
something here I think there was
a friendly amendment to to add
another category as yes ma'am in
I wrote it all in there together
and I apologize just repeat that
little and then is going to
happen.
Could I ask a question before
she she actually does that we
want to get that language right
right.
Of I recognize that
Representative you are not yes I
guess you can ask Miss Iglesias
so sorry but I still love what
is happening here and I want to
make sure we have the language
right as you did in that first
bill
so I would like to ask
drive him Mr
since I've been working with the
veterinary board and this became
a real issue can we make sure
that we use the right language
as to whether it's certified or
licensed
and I am aware of the three
programs that we do have here
for certification.
But I'm also aware that not all
of our technicians or service I
just wanna make sure we get the
right language so we can do the
best job of.
Thank you flexible thank answer
that thank you madam chair
committee.
There you go there's a lot of
discussion on how the term
technician could be used in New
Mexico's decided a technician
should only be used for those
who have gone to a formal
programs passed has passed the
national has and the state yes
and and we are referred and as a
license veterinary technician
license veterinarians veterinary
technicians technicians going
that will the technicians who
have non compete agreement
doesn't happen but I I don't
know the do so.
Thank you so I'm gonna leave it
up to Representative the sale
and to and Ferrari really I
should I don't know if you want
to just leave this and take it
to them this is your first
committee so if you wanted to
amend that make sure we get
everything right that I think we
can that would be my suggestion
Madam chair representative of
the cell I want to make sure
that they are being asked to
sign a non compete clause
because it might not be
necessary and if they are having
to do that then we in the next
committee can make that
amendment for another number
nine and
licensed technician and madam
chair are near you to.
Pardon me I didn't mean to
interrupt madam chair and
representative for our I think
it would be if we are going to
be looking into this over the
terminology that Dr hand is
brought forward the licensed
veterinary technician I think it
would be in our best interest
before we do try to correct that
you do check with the board of
veterinary medicine over the
specific language and run this
through Legislative Council to
make sure that's what we need to
go that might be to think look
this thank you very much madam
chair thank you Representative
Ezzell.
India any other questions other
members of the committee excuse
me representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair as I'm
reading through the fiscal
impact for there's a freeze
Representative non compete.
I
no definition of.
Exactly does that mean.
Of I want to mention because
apparently that's a really
strong ratings because of the
last sentence of FIR says.
Eight.
Contract contains a non compete
falls they are limited to for
three months practice for the
questions based on that no
compete clause.
The legislation to practice and
leave Mexico.
At the moment.
Also as we were in for and yet
we have no definition anyway.
Madam chair representative
Allison
I don't have non compete.
but it is understood for the
other
You know
Licensees.
Thank you.
Okay thank you a non compete
provision is an agreement in an
agreement which provision
restricts the right of health
care practitioner provide
clinical health care services in
this state and Shelby
unenforceable upon the
termination of this agreement.
Sure that.
It just of basically means that
they cannot provide health care
services.
In this in the state I guess
From where they have they can
come you know the noncompete
clause within that area Madam
chair representative I think it
would help if it was inserted
some residents.
Of what exactly and non compete
clauses is.
and I just heard you say it
affects all health care
practitioners it doesn't apply
just to that it's.
Correct it the exceptions are
listed here with like a Dennis
osteopathic physician.
Thank.
And we're to static
veterinarians and possibly
technicians.
I see no other questions I have
a few questions that this is
just general a general question
is just because I know and I.
You know when I when I read a
lot of these bills it is
referred to health care
practitioners you know and and.
And we have you know we have.
Others chapter other chapters in
the law that you first of that
year and I was just wondering
why this didn't come under
chapter.
What.
I wondered why we called it yeah
like chapter seventy seven acres
to animals and livestock and
chapter we have another chapter
that refers to that and so I was
wondering why this didn't come
under.
You know those chapters thank
you chapter that I was just
curious and in a lot of the
legislation that we were going
to consider today we've rolled
one of the bills that this is
all under health care
practitioner and I'll get it if
an animal gets a disease that
can be passed to humans as well
it's but we do have chapters in
law that referred that narrates
and and I was sort of letting
you put it under there.
A madam chair and committee.
Because this has the provision
for non compete it was of the
clears to put this in this
section.
On that.
Of.
The chair will entertain
questions.
Madam yes we do passed second
okay we have the a motion by
Representative Nibert do passes
second by Representative Zamora
the clerk to take root.
More from yes.
Representative gates yes
Representative Ezzell is.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Allison yes.
Yes you have a two thousand.
Thanks committee for any
appreciate.
And I got word from the under
an Romero that.
