Members roll call is closed. We
have a quorum.
in
Gentle lady from Santa Fe with
the invocation.
Good morning members. Please
rise.
Dear Lord, help us to live this
day quietly, easily to lean upon
your great great strength,
trustfully restfully to wait for
the unfolding of your will
patiently, serenely.
To meet others peacefully,
joyously, and to face tomorrow
confidently, courageously. Amen.
The gentleman from Captain Gro
Andy Dole with the pledge to the
Mexico flag.
Good morning members.
Good morning. Good morning
members.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Seeing no objections, so
ordered.
Members' announcements, uh.
We
Generally from Bernal Leo, uh,
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you members, um, I have an
incredible honor today to uh
welcome our guests from um.
Somewhere, oh, Sanral New
Mexico.
Community College, um,
And before I, I introduce our
attendees today, uh, they had
asked me to ask a couple
questions and so I wanted to
share the questions first and
the first question is, who here
has graduated from TBI or CNM.
Anybody?
All right.
Congratulations. All right.
Uh, who here has taken classes
at TIR CNM.
Lots of us, OK.
Um, now, I added a couple of
questions just to to give some
extra input into the for the
president and the board who here
has had trouble finding a
parking space at TBI or CNN.
Um
And then my last question, who
here loves that CNN brought us
lunch today.
All right.
So I was chosen for this, for
this honor to uh introduce the
folks from CNM because I taught
at CNM for a number of years,
used to teach business law and
uh other business classes. First
there's a part-time instructor
and then, um, they finally broke
down and hired me as a full-time
instructor and it was one of the
great, great experiences of my
life, uh, and I personally think
that community colleges and
Particularly CNM do an
incredible job for the people of
our state, um, and I'm, I'm sure
that's true the community
colleges throughout the state,
uh, it's just a great
organization and then so I would
like to introduce now.
The
President of CNN Tracy Hartzler.
And, and, uh, Doctor Harsler has
the additional, uh,
Attribute, and I think it's an
important one and she is my
constituent.
Yeah
Um, uh, CNM governing board vice
chair Annette Chavez de la Cruz.
CNM governing board secretary
Virginia Trujillo.
CNM board member Nancy Baca.
CNN board member James Chavez.
And CNM board member Marla
Schultz.
All right.
Um, and they do an amazing job
of making uh something in the
range of 20,000 students a year
now, um, and incredible range of
programs and I'm trying to
think, I think we have at least
5 campuses, um, so, um, it is
really an honor to have them
here and thanking them for all
their incredible work on behalf
of New Mexico.
Thank you. Welcome to the house.
The gentleman from Verillio
represented de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want
to join the gentle lady from
Berna Leo and welcoming CNN to
to their house to our house.
Uh
I will echo the sentiments from
the gentle lady of how amazing
CNN is in their ability to serve
our
Students of all ages, of all
ages, and I'm a proud adjunct
faculty uh instructor at CNM as
well. Some of the best times I
ever had.
And I also, gentle lady body
have a favorite board member.
She told me to say that or she
would hit me.
OK, just kidding, Mr. Speaker,
uh, what I really wanted to see
more than anything today.
Was that
They have a mascot and the
mascot is world famous, known
throughout the entire globe.
And it is the sun cats.
So a round of applause for CNN
and the Sun Cat.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen. The gentle
lady from Bernalilo representing
her.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to
absolutely applaud CNM for the
great work that they have done
over the past 3 years in
sponsoring women in the trades
to get more women involved in
the trades professions. So we
want to thank the President
Hartzler and her entire board
for doing that and, and Mr.
Speaker, I just, and members, I
want everyone to know that on
March twenty-ninth from 1
o'clock to 4 o'clock at CNM the
next woman in the trades.
conference will be going on and
thank you very.
Thank you. The gentle lady from
Bernalio Representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it's
very good to be back. I
appreciate all the well wishes
while I was out the last couple
of days, but I'm especially
pleased to be able to be here to
share.
To raise in honor of CNM and
when I first went in, it was
TBI.
And so it changed names as uh I
was graduating in 2003.
There is no way that I could not
have succeeded.
Unless I didn't want to and that
is what I love and I say most
about CNN, the support systems
are there the structure is such
that our students, the students
that come, have the experience
at CNM do successfully go on,
um, to UNM where I went and
graduated as well, so and I'm
also very happy and honored to
say that the tradition in our
family is continuing. Not only
do I have friends
and relatives who have gone
before me, I now have a
daughter-in-law who is in your
colon in the culinary arts
program and I'm wondering if she
had anything to do with this
today. I will have to thank her
and then our granddaughter, her
daughter is now entered her
first year last fall.
At CNN and I'm seeing such
wonderful uh experiences from
everybody, uh, who's who's, uh,
had the privilege of of being
accepted at uh CNM so thank you
so much. I honor you all and I'm
just so thrilled to be a part of
the, the alumni from uh CNM and
TBI. Thank you.
Thank you. The gentle lady from
Berneo Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. uh, Speaker.
I have a whole another thank you
for President Hartzler and
everybody at CNM, uh, Senator
Harold Pope representative
Charlotte Little and myself have
just gotten offices at CNM West,
our, our districts, uh, adjoin
each other, and I think it's
really typical and reflective of
C's outreach to the community
that they found a way that we
could rent space and the
students will benefit.
our communities will benefit and
it really
Makes our civic experience alive
for everybody. So thank you CNM
for making that happen.
Thank you. The gentle lady. Let
me see if I can get this right.
Bernard Leo Sibola McKinley, San
Juan, uh Socorro and Valencia
Representative Abita.
Thank you, Speaker. I'd like to
say welcome to all of you from
Central New Mexico Community
College. I'm a proud alum of
that institution and that's
where I studied hospitality and
tourism because I am definitely
New Mexico true, and I loved
promoting the state of New
Mexico and that was a great
first start. It also opened the
door for me to the college
internship program at Walt
Disney World, which was very
exciting and I was working with
Charlotte Little at the time and
here we are 20 plus years later.
on the floor and I just look
forward to supporting you all
and continuing to recruit
students from my home community
and uh in my spaces to start at
CNM because it was a fantastic
place to start and it bridged me
over to UNM perfectly. Thank you
and welcome.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Uh, next we have the gentleman
from Curry devaca of Guadalupe
Roosevelt and San Miguel
representative Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise
today to wish a happy birthday
to my wife, Mr. Speaker.
She's, uh, as many of you know
here in the chambers and in the
Capitol, she works very hard to
support everybody and, and keep
everybody fed and
And uh she's back in Clovis
today celebrating her birthday
with her elderly mother, her
grandkids, and her daughters.
And I want to wish her a very
happy birthday. Happy birthday,
Miss Debbie. Happy birthday,
gentlemen, gentlemen to sing.
Happy birthday to you.
The gentle lady from Bernali,
representative and I am.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I would also like to
welcome the folks, um, from CNN
this morning. uh, Mr. Speaker, I
have the unique privilege of
having them in my district as
well.
Um, CNN is very much in the
heart of my district and um one
of the more interesting things
and uh more meaningful things
that happened right before, um,
I came here to the session is I
met with many of them and one of
the things that they prioritize
was not necessarily their
students only because of the
classes they were taking, but
Mr. Speaker, one of the more
meaningful things that I found
was that CNN was thinking about
the ways in which students live
their lives.
students have transportation to
school when they get to school,
do they have child care when
they get to school? What does a
whole life look like for a
student and not just the classes
that they take. And so, Mr.
Speaker, I am so glad to have
CNM in the house this morning.
Thank you so much for what you
do, um, both to the president,
to the board, um, and to my own
constituent as well, board
member BACA, um, thank you so
much for educating me on
everything that's going on
there. I'm so appreciative of
your work. Thank you.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
too want to take this
opportunity to welcome, uh, CNN
to the house this morning, um,
when I was, uh, council
president in Albuquerque. I met
uh President Tracy Hartzler. We
had lunch together and she had
just taken over that role and I
had just taken over the role of
city council president and so we
had a lot to talk about. She
told me about her time, that the
time that she spent in
Washington DC and and some of
the strength.
that she brought, and she surely
did bring those drinks to CNM
also wanna welcome Virginia
Trujillo, who is my former
neighbor, um, in the North
Valley and just I love and adore
her and also in that uh de la
Cruz, uh, board member who, uh,
I've known for many years and uh
Nancy, all of you gentlemen, um,
thank you all for being here.
The, the education that you
provide to our citizens of New
Mexico is just.
Stella, uh, especially working
with our unions and doing the
workforce training, and I just
want to thank you also for this
wonderful stew, which I just
really enjoyed this morning.
Thank you so much for being
here.
Thank you. The gentle lady from
Bernal Leo Representative
Thompson.
You, Mr. Speaker. So I too
wanted to welcome um CNM. I'm,
I, I still call it TBI but and
and especially Nancy Baca who
worked on my campaigns and was
in one of my early photo shoots.
My sister Cathy actually
graduated from TBI at the time
in culinary arts and she went on
to teach culinary arts at Sippi
and they made some amazing using
um Navajo and Pueblo patterns,
cookies.
and cakes and things, it was
amazing. And then finally, Mr.
Speaker, if any committee is
looking for a place to hold an
interim meeting CNM treats you
like royalty, so I would advise
that you work with them and you
get good food and great places
and they're, they're wonderful.
Thank you.
Thank you. The
The gentle lady from Berna,
Representative Hochman.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. I too rise to thank and
say hello to CNN this morning,
um, everything that they do for
the state is fantastic, but I
want to highlight one specific
thing and that's everything that
they're doing through their
aviation maintenance technology
program. It is the only program
in the state where we are
teaching our young folks the
importance of aviation
maintenance technology and
aviation in general, um, we have
a dearth of pilots and aviation.
Maintenance technicians and CNM
is certainly doing their part to
help fill that need. Um, they
have been renowned throughout
the country for their program,
and I just wanted to rise and
also say, tell a little story
that it was in a board meeting a
couple of months ago, Mr.
Speaker, we're in one of the
board members said that.
His experience and he's a big,
big, big entrepreneur guy um who
started businesses all over the
world and, and he said that um
President Hertzler and CNM was
um the best educational facility
that he had dealt with with
workforce and recruitment, um,
in his entire career spanning
the globe, so big, big deal
there. CNM is um a shining star
in the state. Thank you for
being here.
The gentleman from Donana
represented Small. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want
to welcome the delegation from
TBI or rather CNM, uh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, my family, my mom
taught it uh TBI and a part-time
and then a full-time capacity
for a number of years leaving
the house in El Cerro mission,
uh, in teaching all over the
many different campuses, Mr. uh,
Speaker, this is, uh, an
institution for the state that
is doing tremendous good our
your, uh, community colleges and
the good that they do, which is
reflected all across the state.
I think the expansion of members
on both, uh, really from, uh,
all perspectives who have
invested more in workforce, uh,
appreciation for certificates to
get folks into the workforce and
uh preparing folks for really
well paying, rewarding careers
in the state of New Mexico and
at the same time, Mr. Speaker,
uh, my mom having taught adult
basic education, some of the.
core functions that we're also
now supporting in that TBI now
CNM has helped lead the way on,
uh, do you wanna say thank you,
welcome, and, uh, keep, uh,
taking on additional
responsibility to serve the
state even better. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Romero, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I also
just rise, wanted to tell a
personal story about TBI, um,
and thank the folks for
continuing this incredible
legacy. My dad was a first
generation college student, um,
didn't really know what he was
getting into going to college at
all, but TBI was such a great
landing place for him to really
get his legs and try to figure
out am I actually prepared for
college, um, and did all of his
basics in math and a bunch of
other sort of
Skill building things and ended
up um graduating as an engineer
from New Mexico State, and that
was just a huge boost, and he
was the first in our family to
to ever have that degree, which
of course is just so, so
important and of course I was
the first generation woman to
ever graduate from college, uh,
from our family and so it's just
such an incredible honor to, to
have you here today to share
these stories that transform
lives and families and really
make us all feel that we're all
part of the educational
community after um K through 12.
So I really appreciate
everything that you're doing to
bring folks into that fold.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I think you are the gentle lady
from Bernardo Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you members, uh, and everyone
who, um,
was, was
So wonderful in describing how
TBI and CNM has worked with our
communities and our families
throughout the time.
Um, I just represented Garrett
reminded me of of a new
relationship and she talked
about the West Side campus being
the site for the district, uh,
our new, uh, District aides, but
we're also doing that at the
Montoya campus and it may be uh
have it may be happening at
other campuses, but my district
legislative aid has been told he
gets to move in on April 1st,
uh, at the Montoya campus and we
had
He was greeted with such
cooperation and such help, um,
that it's a new relationship for
us with TI and I'm imagine that
in for those of us who live in
the Albuquerque area that uh
we're gonna see that
relationship grow and, and be
super for all of us. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, the gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
rise to uh um the first off, uh,
um, thank the Central New Mexico
Community College, as I, I knew
it when I lived on the west side
of Albuquerque, going to school
at Sippi, the relationship that
you guys had with all
institutions of higher learning
and Mr. Speaker, my escape from,
from where I was staying at was
your main library, your
Community library, you know,
that was opened up to the
community. It was a place I knew
I can go to for institutional
refuge to learn something
different and always knowing
that somebody was there to help
me and Mr. Speaker, that got me
motivated to take a class at at
at CNM and I took a political
science class, Mr. Speaker, and
Mr. Speaker, I want to
acknowledge my instructor at CNA
because
The instructors you guys have at
CNM are like no other. They're
people that are in the field,
people who are experts of what
they're doing, Mr. Speaker, my
political science instructor was
a former city of Albuquerque
councilor, counselor Ray
Gardino, and I'm glad to have
his, his mentorship and uh and
it's through, through that, um,
local government and what we are
here to do to, to uh represent
our community. I learned that
from
Councilor Ray Garduno and so I
wanna acknowledge that and I
also want to acknowledge the
student clubs you guys have many
student clubs, Mr. Speaker, on
campus that everybody feels
welcome to and one of those
student clubs I participated in
was a Native American student
club because there's a large
Native American population of
students there and we were
actually the first, uh, I, I,
well.
When when the main library got
built and there was a really
beautiful uh grass yard.
We, uh, ask for permission in
the CNM leadership, Mr. Speaker,
gave us permission to have a, a
in tribal powwow on the library
uh uh grounds. So Mr. Speaker,
I, I'm proud to say that we, we
blessed that new, new uh
building, the new library. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Another round of
applause, please. Thank you.
Welcome to, to the leadership
from CNN. Welcome.
Uh, the gentle lady from Bernard
Leo and son of all
Representative Cates.
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have
some great guests on the
rostrum. Could you introduce
them, please? lady, if you could
continue to introduce him,
please. Yes, of course, Mr.
Speaker, and thank you very
much. Please help me welcome,
um, we have a Shelly Man, uh,
Shelly is a longtime public
health leader who has led
coalitions of health
professionals and community
members to tackle major
preventable public health
threats through advocacy and
education she currently serves
as the executive
Director of Healthy Climate New
Mexico. Thank you very much for
coming, Shelly, and we have
Thank you. And we have Christine
Doblin, uh, who was born and
raised in El Paso while pursuing
a career as a medical doctor,
Christine became increasingly
aware of the tremendous
inequities rooted in systematic
environmental injustice and
pivoted to public health.
Christine is now an MPH
candidate at MMSU and she loves
the the shirt here and so and is
a full-time intern with healthy
climate.
Mexico. Thank you so much for
attending and uh please uh
welcome them, the Healthy
climate in New Mexico. Thank
you. Thank you, gentle lady.
Welcome to the house.
And I like, I, I appreciate the
representation from the Cuco.
Next, representative.
The gentleman from Sandoval,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, my
guests went to go hang out on
the Senate side, so.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Any other announcements?
OK, well, I, I do have an
announcement. I have some bad
news.
The basketball game for tonight
has been canceled.
Good thing is we get to keep the
the the the the trophies for
another year, right?
Yeah.
Uh, Representative Avita, would
you like to say anything? Oh,
no, she, she stepped out, but I,
I just want to, uh, to, to thank
everyone who was wanting to
participate. I appreciate it,
but even though this is uh I
guess a win by default we still
beat the Senate again, which is
always good. I'll always take
those.
And yes, absolutely, we'll have
that engraved on the trophy.
Thank you, thank you gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
in finance committee to him has
been referred House Bill 113 as
amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that I do not
pass, but that house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 113 do pass, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We are an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report for
House 113 as amended.
And, uh, with a favorable
committee report the House
Appropriations find a substitute
for house 113 as amended.
See no objection, it's so
ordered.
Are all those in favor?
I any opposed?
No, OK, seen and sorted.
The report a Can we report
adopted?
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred House Bill 192 has
had it under consideration and
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Nathan
small chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption.
We are an adoption of of a
favorable committee report on
hospital 192.
All those in favors please
signify by saying aye.
All those opposed?
Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House, Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 61 has had it
under consideration and reports
same with recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report for.
House commerce and economic
developments, uh, substitute for
House Bill 61.
All those in favor?
I
Signify by saying I.
All those opposed, nay.
The eyes have a committee
reported.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 120 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 120 do pass and he referred
to the appropriations and
Finance Committee respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We're an adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House Bill 120 as amended, but a
favorable committee report on
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 120 as
amended.
Uh, all those in favor,
signifying by saying I.
All those opposed?
Committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 132 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report for Hospital
132.
All, all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
All those opposed?
Can be report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 255 has had it under
consideration report with
recommendation that do not pass,
but the House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 255 do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We are on adoption of an
unpayable committee report on
House Bill 255, but a favorable
committee report on House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 255. All those in
favor say aye.
All those opposed?
Committee reporter doctor.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 352 has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
Respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 352, all those in
favor say aye.
All those opposed?
Can we report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 413 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler. Mr. Speaker, adoption.
We're an adoption of favorable
committee report on House Bill
413, all those in favor say aye.
All those opposed say nay.
Like
The ice of it we have we've.
The
committee report adopted.
a lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I move that we
go to that order of business
messages.
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 119
as amended. Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 235 as amended and request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Joint Memorial One
as amended Senate Joint Memorial
2 and request the concurrence of
the House respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan, Senate chief
clerk will be entered.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business, 3rd
reading of legislation.
Gentle lady from Los Alamos
Sandoval in Santa Fe.
Are you ready on item number 2?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm arranging
to have my experts brought in in
one minute, Mr. Speaker.
We will give you a minute,
gentle lady, thank you.
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
How's
Yeah.
House energy.
And Natural Resources Committee
substitute for House Bill 140.
On final passage has been taken
and is now subject to debate.
Amendment substitution, the
gentle lady to explain.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, body.
This bill is pretty
straightforward.
It is designed to address an
issue that has arisen primarily
in the eastern part of state but
has potential to expand well
beyond that and it relates to
the fact that there is PFOS in
that in.
Firefighting foam that has been
used.
Um, largely on Air Force bases,
airports, other sorts of places
that and it contains PFOS and
what happens, Mr. Speaker, is
that PFOS has been seeping into
the water table in these
communities.
And
It's particularly um harmful or
it has really been a prominent
problem in the eastern part of
the state and there have been
some horrific stories, very
painful stories to read about,
about the loss of cattle and
really some huge economic
impacts for the residents in
that community and our, um,
secretary of environment has
been working to obtain
settlement monies from the
Department of Defense in support
of our.
Residences and the Department of
Defense has been, I would say,
um, it would be kind to say, Mr.
Speaker, uncooperative and
unwilling to negotiate in good
faith and most recently, Mr.
Speaker, and body, they have
raised the issue that AED does
not have regulatory authority
over PFOS, and they've used that
as an uh I you might call it an
excuse, Mr. Speaker, not to
negotiate in good faith.
this particular point, um, until
now, uh, the department has, has
believes and has concluded that
they did have authority, but we
just want to clarify, Mr.
Speaker, so we have added, um, a
definition into the hazardous
waste Act.
That would um cover PFOS waste
and we worked very hard, Mr.
Speaker, to limit it to things
so that we would not, um, scoop
up other types of items that
might affect the oil and gas
industry or the cattle industry,
Mr. Speaker, and with that, I
stand for questions.
There is debate. The gentle lady
from Chavis Curry, Roosevelt,
Representative Reed.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady yield.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
happily yield. Thank you, um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
and as you stated, we've had a,
a major issue with this and in
my counties with PFOS and um I
also come from a agricultural
community with all the dairies
and um I have a, you know, had
some concerns and I'm, I'm happy
to see that you have worked with
the different agencies, um, and
getting their input in order to,
uh, make this, uh, bill.
something that um makes all my
constituents happy.
Um, I do have an amendment, Mr.
Speaker, but apparently we gave
you the 0.4 and there's a 0.5
coming, so I'm not sure how much
longer.
It's actually like 5 minutes
out, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Hmm.
But we could probably talk about
the bill a little bit if you
want to do that. I'm happy to do
that, um.
gentle lady.
Would you like to your your time
to another debater and then
we'll come back to you.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, that'd be
great.
The gentleman from Otero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with a kind gentle lady from
Sandoval, Santa Fe, and Los
Alamos, please yield. I think I
got those counties right,
finally. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from Otero, I'm so
lucky you only have one county
that I have to remember, but
yes, he did get it right, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Thank you so
much, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. I'm so glad I did. So I
guess I have a few questions to
start out with. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
looking on the amendments in
context, or I'm sorry, the
The committee substitute.
And so I'm on the.
433.2 version, is that what
you're looking at, Mr. Speaker,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that,
yes, that's what I have in front
of me.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And so I'm just
kind of wondering first of all,
we have, uh, I believe it's
hazardous waste constituent on
page 5, I think it's line.
21 through 25 and I'm just
wondering, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, does this
Mirror the EPA's definition.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
have been remiss. I need to
identify my experts so I have
Secretary Kenny here from the
NMED and we have Zachary Oga.
General counsel for the
department as well, so and.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it
does mirror the EPA definition,
but I'm gonna give you a spoiler
alert here, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I have a
suspicion that the amendment
that's going to be proposed may
change that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Oh, OK, Mr. Speaker Jimwitty, I
think we're reading into the
future here then. So good to
hear. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I guess.
If that will change, I would
hate to continue asking
questions on this one, but I do
think, at least with the current
definition, we're saying having
toxic.
Carcinogenic
mutagenic or teratogenic
effects.
Can you tell me a little bit
about what those may be and
And how they affect people
differently.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, I
will do my best.
Yes, I think I have some
information here that will help
us, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
OK, so in terms of cancer, Mr.
Speaker, PFOS has been linked to
increased risk of kidney and
testicular cancer, um, it has
also been shown to damage the
liver if the in thyroid disease
as well has increased when
exposed to PFOS and they're
apparently has been, it has been
also connected with fertility
issues and um pregnancy induced
hypertension.
And so.
POS, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, is
can be.
Very, um, problematic in terms
of health risks. I think that's
the bottom line, Mr. Speaker,
General. If, if exposed to
sufficient quantities and it
delivered in specific ways, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I, I guess
you kind of jump to my next
question, which was how many,
how much quantity would we need
for someone to
See some of these symptoms such
as a thyroid problem, pregnancy
problems, any kind of cancers.
Do we know if it's steady?
Um
You have to steadily be.
exposed to it or how does that
work?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I've been told that even a small
quantity of POS in something as
large as a swimming pool. So if
a thimble of POs into a large
swimming pool could prove to be
toxic, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, that,
that is quite concerning. And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I've heard and I don't have any
facts or anything right now
about this specifically, but a
lot of things that have been
wrapped in plastics and other
kinds of, of products that we
use daily, maybe even this
hopefully not this microphone
that I'm using, but I'm
wondering, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Would, would that contribute to
P PFAs.
Cans or any kinds of adverse
effects, daily use with wrappers
and things such as that. Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, just to be
clear.
that we're not talking about
products, although yes, there
have been, you know, studies
that have shown that PFOS in
certain products is problematic,
but that is not what this bill
involves, Mr. Speaker. This bill
involves waste, hazardous waste,
not stuff that's, um, contained
in products, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Yeah,
that, that does help me. So with
the waste, for example, let's
just use places in New Mexico
that could have waste like that,
maybe military installations.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I've heard some studies that
have been put out there, I think
with my area actually in
Holloman Air Force Base, there
was a recent study. I haven't
really gone deep into the.
The facts on that specific
study, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, can you tell me a little
bit about how this can affect
those airmen and the people in
the surrounding communities when
it comes to the POS
contamination that could be
there. Um, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, so we're focused
primarily on the firefighting
foam issue that's primarily what
we're talking about. So if an
airman is exposed to that either
directly or through ingesting
water because many
of them obviously live on the
Air Force base or in the
surrounding communities, that
could be an issue. It has been a
significant issue, Mr. Speaker,
as I've noted in, um, the Clovis
area, um, where the Air Force
Base is a, a, a prominent
fixture in the community and it
has um it has impacted the herds
there, as you know, and, and
others, and so we're very
concerned about that, um, also.
Fishing and hunting Mr. uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentleman also it could
affect.
Animals are ingesting the water
and other constituents and that
has a potential for harming the
individuals who are hunting
those, those animals and eating
the um.
The meat and so on, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
And then when it comes to the
actual corrective action that we
would be giving the.
Environment department
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what,
what would that look like? Would
it be anything that had to do
with emergency actions that they
could take and what, what would
this include when we're giving
more authority to our state
Environment department.
So, Mr. Speaker, we attempted to
frame a very narrow definition,
which will soon be even narrower
and um that definition will be
the springboard for new rules
that will be issued by the
Environmental Improvement Board,
uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So the
environmental improvement board
is that under the hospices of
the Environment Department, Mr.
Speaker, I understand it to be.
Um, Mr. Speaker, the EIB, um, is
a is responsible for adopting
hazardous waste regulations
through the rulemaking process.
It is not under the control or
direction of the department, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So is the board
I mean, is it in the executive
cabinet level, where, where does
it housed, I guess, is what my
question would be.
Mr. Speaker, it is not attached
to the executive. It's a
separate board. It only, it
meets um.
No more than monthly, generally,
um, and it is, is designed to
take up only these kinds of
issues in terms of rulemaking,
Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So I guess I could
infer from that that it's not
just advisory, they actually
have some kind of authority. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's
correct. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
the people on the board, are
they both uh both put on the
board from the governor and the
legislature or how, how do we
pick folks to be on that board.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, um,
7 members appointed by the
governor, there must be a
different political parties and
they are um
confirmed by the state senate.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And then do we know
currently how, if we have a
quorum, do you know how many
people we currently have on the
board that are not vacant
positions and how many are
vacant on that board?
Uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my, my
experts are checking.
OK, while we're checking, I'll
go to my next question if that's
OK. OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I'm gonna go on
page 10 of your bill on the
amendments in context or I'm
sorry, on the, on the uh
substitute. And so we take out
some language on page 10 from
line 15 to 21, so provided that
except as authorized by the
section 74-4-3.3.
it goes through that statute. It
says the board shall not
identify our list any solid
waste or combination of solid
waste is hazardous waste that's
not been listed. Mr. Speaker,
General lady, uh, why are we
stripping this portion now and
if we are stripping it, does it
go back into the, the section in
another, another section maybe.
Um, Mr. Speaker, no, but another
um.
Spoiler alert that is going to
be likely to be added back in,
Mr. Speaker, um, and gentleman,
and with regard to the vacancy
question that you had, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, there's
one vacancy currently, so that
means there are 6 members in
place currently, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's good to hear that
there's only one vacancy so they
can actually hold a meeting,
which is nice. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I also wanted to
just comment on that. I like
that it's a small size. I like
the 7 members because I know
boards can get kind of out of
hand if they're 10 to 15 to 20.
So I think that's probably a
good, good size for that board,
Mr. Speaker, generally, my next
question would be on going a
little further in your bill.
Where he actually made some
pretty big changes on here, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, when
we're talking about the, the
constituent, I know that we said
we were, we're gonna make some
Some tweaks to that potentially
in the future on the floor here,
but with that definition in any
way change what those kinds of
hazardous or toxic.
Toxic contaminations would be,
because I know we went through
them and I, they were really
hard for me to even say
mutagenic teratogenic. I mean,
are we adding anything or
subtracting from that in any way
with any potential versions that
could come in the future. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, um, uh,
again a spoiler alert that will
be changed and will be coming
out, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That is awesome.
I'm on the edge of my seat here,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so gentlemen, we all are very
impatiently waiting.
Thank you, and I guess we'll
have to see when that amendment
comes out, but I do have some
more questions, thank God,
because if we didn't, I don't
know what we would be doing
right now, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so.
Can you tell me a little bit
about how this could impact the
budget of this board or what the
environment department, how much
more would we need to go after
these federal actors to get them
to help alleviate these
concerns. Uh, Mr. Speaker, there
is no financial impact that's
anticipated by this change, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's good to
hear. I always like to hear
that. So we don't need to add
anything to the budget or
anything regarding that from
what what I hear. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
I believe in, I'm looking at the
FIR here on page 3.
And according to the FIR,
enemy dimensions that it has
already spent $12 million on
PFOS contamination studies, and
I'm wondering how does HB 140
ensure that such costs are
shifted to polluters rather than
the taxpayers.
And I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker,
that's page 2 of the FIR. Thank
you, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, for that
clarification, um, the benefit
of of this bill is that it will
allow the department to shift
the cost.
Of the costs that have been
identified to the actual
polluters, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then when it comes to the 12
million that we've already
spent, do we expect that to be?
In some way, shape or form paid
back to the state through
whatever we can get from the
federal government.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, we expect to get full cost
recovery and more, Mr. Speaker,
significantly more, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I'm seeing
here on the FIR we're talking
about in Texas, there was some
some kind of case.
That we already spent money on,
and it was DOD applicability for
PFOS regarding the Texas
Commission on Environmental
Quality.
And I'm just wondering, Mr.
Speaker, generally, how does New
Mexico fall in place in that
because I know that we already
spent some money, the 12
million, according to the FIR
and how does that work? Because
the state of Texas.
It might have been interstate.
It might have been both New
Mexico and Texas. So how does
that work when it comes to going
after these folks.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, with
respect to Texas they have a
statute currently in place that
is similar to what we are
proposing, not identical, but
similar, and as a consequence
they are not incurring the costs
that we are, that they, um,
snapped to the fact that
legislation such as this would
allow them to push against the
federal government and the
Department of uh Department of
Defense slipped there almost um.
To get to recover the monies and
the Department of Defense has
come to the table and because of
the the statute is in place in
Texas, Mr. Speaker.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I don't want to
get too in the weeds here, but
it's on the FIR. Do we know when
they, when they implemented that
statue in Texas is it recent? We
don't have to give a specific
date if it's not available.
Are you
Mr. Speaker, um, years ago, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that helps me on
that. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm also wondering when it
comes to the EPA's slow
rulemaking process, how does HB
140 allow the state to act more
quickly when addressing these
kinds of hazardous waste
contaminations. I just want to
make sure if they, if we do give
this authority that it can be
expedited quickly. Um, Mr.
Speaker, because we know that
the departments of defense will
come to the table if there's
such a
regulation in place as they have
in Texas and other states. I
believe they're more than 20
states that have a similar rule,
and it has proven to be very
beneficial to those states in
terms of dealing with the
federal government, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. And
then also when it comes to the,
the payment or the whatever we
get in recompense for what
they've done, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would this also
include healthcare costs for
people who have been
exposed.
Mm
Mr. Speaker, General, not
specifically under this
provision that we're talking
about this law, but I'm informed
by the secretary that they are
pursuing other avenues for those
kinds of redress, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then when it
comes to that, are we trying to
get that through the federal
government, through the
environment department or is
that with the health department
or the healthcare authority
department, how do we go after
that?
On the state level, that is.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is
through a lawsuit that was filed
by the Attorney General on
behalf of the citizens of the
New Mexico.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and is that joining
other states as well, or is it
just us?
Mr. Speaker, in this case, it's,
it's just New Mexico at this
point in time, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I appreciate that.
I hope other states may join
aboard our lawsuit unless it's
very specific to New Mexico
then, then in that case it's
very New Mexico based so then
Mr. Speaker, generally, I do see
on the AG's analysis, which I
looked at and I just wrote it
down on my notes here. It said
that there were some concerns
about the circular nature of
hazardous waste constituent
definitions.
And it, and I'm just wondering
how does HB 140 avoid the risk
of regulatory ambiguity. Um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
wonderful question, um,
fortunately, based on our
spoiler, that in that uh
language is going to be um
removed, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I am still on the edge
of my seat, and I believe I saw
some papers coming in, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen. Yes, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so I'm
just gonna pause here and maybe
I will.
Reserve the right to reclaim the
floor later if I need to, but I
will, uh, just stop questions
here because I believe maybe
there is some kind of Christmas
present for us early.
In the form of an amendment or a
substitution, so I will stop
there, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Thank you for the debate.
Thank you gentlemen. The, we'll
go back to the gentle lady from
Chavez Curry and Roosevelt
Representative Reed. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and gentle lady. I
have now, um, I think you have
the amendment, um, point
231494.5, House of Floriment
one.
Thank you gentle lady it is
being passed out as we speak.
And I've been notified that it
Has everyone received the
amendment?
OK
So, generally need to explain
the amendment.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
um, gentle lady, so house floor
amendment number one to house
energy, environment and natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 140, um, does
some things, um, the hazardous
waste constituent, page 5,
section L, the amendment to HB
140 removes the new definition
for hazardous waste constituent
or hazardous constituent in
terms throughout the bill.
Um, the EIB authority page 10
lines 15 through 21, the
committee substitu attempts to
give the environmental
improvement board, the ability
to regulate things as hazardous
wastes that have not been listed
by the federal EPA. The
amendment reinstates existing
statutory language that limits
EIBB's regulation of hazardous
waste generally to those wastes
identified by the EPA.
And then hazardous waste
definition page 4 through 53
changes are made to the
definition of hazardous waste.
The amendment list lists
discarded aqueous film film
forming foam, try to say that 10
times, containing intentionally
added a POS as a hazardous
waste. The amendment designates
as hazardous waste, those things
that are listed by the federal
EPA on July 1st, 2025 is
hazardous waste and allows the
EIB to regulate.
things that are currently listed
under EIB, uh,
is to delist them, um, and the
amendment exempts agricultural
waste from being listed as a
hazardous waste by EIB, which is
consistent with long standing
EPA rules, and then lastly,
under the rulemaking authority,
the final change made in the
amendment page 20 is authorizing
narrow rulemaking authority to
EIB related to Aqueous film
forming foam containing
intentionally added.
boss is a hazardous waste, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
John lady from Los Alamos
Sandoval and Santa Fe is a
friendly amendment.
I'm sure no one is surprised,
Mr. Speaker. It is a friendly
amendment.
Thank you and Mr. Speaker, I'd
just like to thank the secretary
and the gentle lady from really
working hard with the various
groups and stakeholders in this
and making this a bill that
protects agriculture and oil and
gas and the different entities
that had concerns about it. So
thank you both of you.
Thank you Is there any objection
to the adoption of the
amendment?
Seeing none, you have an amended
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Gentle lady still has the floor.
Seeing further debate
represented, uh, the gentle lady
from Bernardina and Torrance,
representative Lord. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Speaker. Will the gentle
lady from Los Alamos, a bunch of
cool counties, please yield your
time. Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady with from all those cool
counties I yielded.
I have to say, Mr. Spear and,
and John Lydia, I think we need
to see if this has been the
world's record for friendly
amendments this session because
I think we're on track for that,
which is good. That's great
because we should both sides
should have a voice, but now.
Then I have this in context. I
don't have to ask, uh,
Representative Reeve any
questions I can ask you some
questions so, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, when we talk
about, excuse me because I'm
going.
From the substitute now to uh
the amended changes, uh, we're
now adding PEAS in here and I'm
your representative does that.
For explanation because this is
a brand new amendment is this
restricting it just to PA or
with all the other changes, can
this board still make all the
regulations that it wants to
make based on anything that the
EPA uses and that's a twofold
question one, that, and 2 are
the only, is it still have that
same amendment in their words
just what the EPA has listed,
Mr. Speaker, generally, I hope
that makes sense.
OK. Mr. Speaker, um, gentle
lady, it applies only to.
Discarded
Foam, you know, the fire waste
foam and that you heard
described as this film stuff in
the amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, gentle lady, I know
Mr. Speaker Dell, so I, I was on
the, I've been on the interim
committee forever of hazardous
waste, so that, that PIA has
been brought up quite a bit, um,
so going back to the substitute
on page 5 line 21.
Is this still in there because I
haven't checked it where it says
hazardous waste.
Means the chemical substance has
been identified by the federal
EPA agency.
Um
So that is still in the bill, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker, um,
gentle lady, that's correct.
It's the discarded foams and
only EPA hazardous regulated
waste, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and Mr. Speaker, gently, I wanna
tell you how much I appreciate
from the original bill that went
to this because I read that and
I had some other people read it,
they go, wait a minute, that
could be anything. So now we're
narrowing it down at least to
the EPA. So Madam Chair and
Representatives I see on here
that the EP.
PA on January 3rd, 2025 added 9
additional PPAs that are now
toxic, so is it gonna be
everything that the EPA does,
including those 9, and are we
also going off with the
standards of what EPA says is
toxic.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is not a final rule.
Meaning it does not, it has not
taken the force of law until
it's finalized, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, so Mr. Speaker
and generally, how many
different levels right now
currently are there EPA and what
we have to come back and amend
this that they added more or
would it just be that the EPA
decided we're doing all these
other PIAs as well, Mr. Speaker
and John Ledy.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
We're limiting it to the foam,
but if EPA does finalize a rule
that adds additional um
constituents, um, we would, as a
matter of law have to follow
that as well, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
let me just ask you a very frank
question because we've had
issues with PEAS for some time.
What is the hold up with the
clean up or being more
aggressive with the PIAs that is
in our water and in the state of
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, at
least with respect to the the
most egregious that I'm aware of
that we are aware of at this
point in the eastern part of the
state. It has been the
Department of Defense who, as I
mentioned earlier, has been very
difficult to work with in terms
of accepting liability and
responsibility for the the foam
that they have left and they
have pointed now to this what
they regard as a gap in our law,
so and actually I'm told they
have also sued us as the
re s po n s ible party, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. OK, Mr.
Speaker John, let me absorb that
into my head for one second. So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you're saying that the the
The DOD side, part of, yeah, the
DOD they're saying that.
It's not their fault.
How long, Mrs. Selli have they,
have we been aware when did the
EPA make a claim to make an
official stand that PEIS is
dangerous and harmful for
people, um, Mr. Speaker, young
lady. Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm sorry I was talking to
the expert. What would you
repeat that? Sorry, I, I totally
understand that happens,
speaking gentle lady. When did
the EPA decide
That PI was something toxic and
dangerous and in certain levels
is bad for humans and cattle.
It's a when did they make that
decision, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, generally, I'm
informed that actually it's been
since the 90s that PAS has been
identified as as hazardous,
although frankly it's taken the
US EPA's quite a while to start
issuing rules and identify
levels of exposure as I
understand it, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
OK, Mr. Speaker, lady, so OK.
So they decided that and then.
OK, I'm still trying to wrap my
head around it because it's been
some time. I know that PIA is a
horrible thing. Mr. Speaker,
gently, is PIA still being used?
Is that foam still being used on
the planes or is there something
else that they have come up with
that also uh will work just as
well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
it's shocking as this may sound,
they are still using it, um, it
is supposed to be phase that's
supposed to be phased out, but
they are now seeking assistance
from Congress to allow it to
continue to be permissible use,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
That was my heavy sign must be
like because it's OK, I get it.
We have to have planes to fly
and we have to put stuff on
them. I mean, we learned PIs and
everything, right? It, it's in,
it's like everything, makeup,
it's in when you go to Subway,
sorry I don't wanna pick on
Subway, uh, if you go somewhere
and it's wrapped in a food box,
everything, even when you get
organic food at Whole Foods on
the box inside it has peas. This
is what I learned about PAS is
literally everywhere.
So Mr. Speaker Delaney, the, the
problem, and I'm just gonna make
a statement and ask a question.
The problem that becomes
How do we make sure that our
people that are flying the
planes have this product of some
sort other than PIAs when there
is no such thing.
And they're supposed to be
phasing it out, but at the same
time it's still going in and we
had to have our cattle killed in
Clovis, it's an interesting
catch 22, Mr. Speaker and De
lady that.
We have to put that on the
planes my understanding.
Mill ladies, so I, I, I guess
I'm very frustrated with this
because
That's a huge problem and it's
just the tip of the iceberg, um,
Mr. gentle lady, because
literally, it's in our female
hygiene products too that goes
directly into our body. I mean,
it's in our makeup it's
literally everything seems to be
very slow rolling on making any
kind of regulations on this, but
Mr. Speaker, gen lady, I want to
go back to that lawsuit, so we
did we sue the department of
defense to say clean it up and
then they countersued us to say
we have to claim.
it up or it's not explain that
to me, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the, um, DOD sued us
first, um, in, uh, alleging that
we did not have authority to
regulate them. So again, we're
circling back to why this bill
is important, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So, Mr. Speaker
Deli, so, OK, so there, there
leads to this, so we this
passes, then what? Because the
problem is, is like my
understanding with like lan.
Just take lannel. We don't have
regulations over them. We can do
oversight, but we can't regulate
what they can do. How would this
make it different that we could
force the DOD to now do
something if we really have no
regulations on on federal, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady. Um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
uh, a gentle correction here,
yes, the, uh, enemy does have
regulatory authority over large
aspects of the laboratory's
operations, Mr. Speaker,
generally.
in terms of environmental um
insult I guess you might say,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Right, Mr. Speaker, young lady,
I also understand because my
husband works in that field that
there are a bunch of departments
of it, you know, the NRC and
even DOT to move things around
and you have to have permission
them on permission permission so
if this passed.
If this were to pass what
authority does that give us on
all the different regulations
because now we're talking a
clean up and a specific way to
clean up and forcing the federal
government to do something is
this bill going to force the
federal government to clean up
the PIAS finally.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that is the expectation that
this will place us in a much
better position to force the
Department of Defense to come to
the table and do what's right,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
But Mr. Speaker, and young lady,
it, because
Because I learned about a lot
about the PI and because I, we,
we were in Clovis, you know, we
got to see all the cattle that
had to be killed. I get that
part.
But what I want to know is I
guess at the end of the day.
They can still do what they
want. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and generally? They
still, they could look at this
and go, we don't care, we're
still gonna do what we want,
right? Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Well, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, no, if we
believe in the rule of law and
we go through the appropriate
processes, Mr. Speaker, and
they're directed through a court
process. No, they can't do just
what they want, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Well, Mr. Speaker down lady, how
I'm just asking for
clarification. How does this
bill play into
The closing of the gap or
because we still have to go to
court and we still have to say
you have to do this. How does
this board who's looking at all
these PIA things, how does this
play into the mandate of them
cleaning up, Mr. Speaker, I
guess this is what I'm trying to
get to. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the Department of Defense
has been using as an excuse or a
shield or however you might want
to describe it. The fact that
we, in their mind, do not have
regulatory authority over this
toxic.
So by correcting that in our
state law and clearly
identifying the department of
the environment is having that
authority, we are in a stronger
position to force the department
through litigation to do what's
right, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and they have done so in other
states where these regulations
are in place, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, Mr. Speaker,
that, that I'll wait till
they're finished talking to you.
OK, so I, I was giving you a
pause to listen because I know
how frustrating it can be when
somebody's asking a question you
can't hear it and you're talking
to somebody else. So Mr.
Speaker, gen lady, the hope is
we pass this, which is about
that PIA foam that is being
used, uh, by the Department of
Defense to speed up the process
because they're in this supposed
phase out process and we're
hoping that this strengthens a
lawsuit that will make them come
and clean it up immediately.
it stop using or just clean up
what's already there, Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, um, we're
conflating a couple of concepts,
um, so PFOS is being phased out
and foam, that's a good thing,
but that still doesn't address
the waste that is currently in
place and what this bill is
designed to do is to give us
explicit authority over the
phone, which will strengthen our
ability to enforce against the
federal government, Mr. Speaker,
generally.
So I just speaking generally, I
just wanna make sure I
understood that, um.
So we could not stop them from
using it, but we could enforce
them for the cleanup. Is that
what I'm understanding from
this, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes.
Correct.
I heard that from our classroom,
Mrs young lady.
OK, because I, I'm trying to
really pinpoint because the bill
started in one direction,
changed into another direction,
and I want to make sure that I'm
completely understanding before
I take a vote on something that
may have something in there. So,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
when we go um onto the
amendment.
Um
Let me go over to page 2 line 4
we made some changes in here,
speaking generally, Hold on
while I go to page 4.
So we changed from understanding
some of the definitions of
hazardous waste, Mr. Speaker
Joli, I can you tell me what
those changes are just kind of
summarize this and what the
purposes of changing from what
it was to what it's about to be
now, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
And Mr. Speaker, generally, I'm
also trying to read it at the
same time.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
added clarity um by specifically
calling out the foam, the film
foam, film forming foam Phos.
And we specifically um.
Clearly excluded the
agricultural products which was
a waste, which was an issue
among some of the cattlemen and
the other agricultural folks
that are very prominent and
concerned in that part of the
country.
And thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I understand that
there was a lot of work done on
this amendment and I was just
wanted to make sure because I'm
one of those people that I want
to make absolutely positively
sure that I didn't miss
something in the bill, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when we go
on to, OK, so explain to me and
then on the second page of the
amendment on number 3 does not
include the following substances
drooling fluids fly, so uh.
Can you explain a little bit
about why that was amended and
what changes and what effects
that has on our state, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
paragraph 3 is existing law.
And Mr. Speaker Delady, we have
underneath there. Did anything
change with A, B, C, D, E, F, G.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
on these amendments. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the only
addition is H.
Um, as you'll see, solid waste
generated by the growing and
harvesting of agricultural
crops, etc. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
Johnny for explaining that. um,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um.
And I think Representative Blan
had asked this question, but he
didn't quite understand. We talk
about hazardous constituents,
um, and hazardous waste
constituents, and I didn't hear
it because I was up there
speaking with the speaker about
what was about to happen with
this amendment. Can you briefly
explain those definitions to me,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, generally, they were
amended out of the bill with the
adoption of the amendments, uh,
the first floor amendment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
there was something else, um,
When it comes to, when I was
looking down here about what the
board can and can't do on page
19 rules adopted at the board.
Pursuant to this section, was
there anything changed in here
because I know there's very
specific rules on overseeing the
tanks on the federal level and I
think it's called Lusk.
L U S K I think is what
oversight's at, Mr. Speaker,
generally, is this process using
federal guidelines on how we
deal with um used oil, the tanks
and the storage facilities, um,
Mr. Speaker Delaney.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
this bill has no bearing on that
topic area.
OK, Mr. Belli, the only reason I
ask because I saw that in there
and I was like, I hopefully that
has got some sort of regulations
where they're applying with
federal laws. So Mr. Speaker
Delaney, um,
I always get nervous because I
understand where this bill is
going.
I understand the process of what
it's trying to do. I understand
that and that we really have no
oversight on the phone while
they phase it out, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, I think
that's all the questions I have.
I do appreciate the changing in
the language to not affect our
farmers, and not affect our oil
and gas, Mr. Speaker Dell Lady,
I do have one question. I know
we tried to reach out to
stakeholders, um, did.
I, I, I think if I remember
correctly, because there was so
much we learned about the PAs
and where land is, I know down
the hill we have some
contaminants down there is a
sits down there in the canyons
in that area, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
have begun to CPFOS around the,
the two major laboratories, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but to our
knowledge at this point it does
not appear to be related to
firefighting foam, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, just
OK, didn't, doesn't did Lano
have any opinion on this because
now that becomes, I know we're
doing a lot of clean up because
Early in time with a lot of
stuff, we would just kick
barrels off the side of
mountains, and that's no joke
and Santa Susanna, where they
had the first new meltdown, they
were literally kicking chemicals
off the side of a mountain, and
now we've learned, right? We're
trying to go back and clean it
up, so does Lael have an opinion
about how they would be affected
and would there be a lawsuit
against Lano if we found PIAs at
the bottom in the canyon.
And do they have any, uh, did,
have they pitched in any
commentaries kind of a
stakeholder now in this about
the cleanup of PIAs, everything
around and below.
Um
Lannel, Mr. Speaker Dunlaney.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we have
not heard from Lane on this
particular bill and I have been
informed by the secretary and
it's been my observation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
Department of Energy and the lab
has been, um, working with the
department on various cleanup
issues and occasionally there's
disagreements as you would
expect, but, um, generally they
have a good working
relationship, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, on clean up issues.
speaking and gentle lady, I, I
know that um land has been.
Very active with the clean up.
They're doing a lot of cleanup
all over the place in that area.
So Mr. Speaker generally, I
think that's the only thing I
would have liked to have heard
is something how this will
affect lannel and, and I would
imagine that it would go like
this. We found PA it came from
what you guys have done before
and then we would go or there
would be a negotiation with them
to clean and if they didn't, Mr.
Speaker generally, then they
would, and worst case scenario,
they would be proceeding with a
lawsuit to make Lano clean it
up. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think generally that's a correct
statement, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Speaking generally, I'm thinking
trying to think of more
questions because I want,
because I know that when we had
that.
Mrs. Belly, the, the, the foam
was also a big problem in
Albuquerque.
Albuquerque underneath Kirkland
has a very big, a very large.
Oh
plume in there, so that would
also include the cleaning up.
In Albuquerque, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker Delaney?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we
have had issues around Kirtland
if that was the question, Mr.
Speaker, gently. Yeah, that was
I saw you were I was gonna, I
was trying to pause slowly while
I was asking you questions. So
Mr. Sinelly, so Kirkland and all
the bases.
They're all affected because
they're all by the Department of
Defense. So all of that cleanup
would be included. It's not just
because we keep talking about
Clovis, it's going to be Holman
and Kirkland and everybody who
has any PPA that they leaked
out, uh, into the community, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker
Delaney?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
the, the basis under the
Department of Defense have been
cleaning up.
A lot of their issues except for
PFOS because we believe they
don't think we have authority to
enforce, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady.
And then Mr. Speaker lady, so.
If it comes down, if we go back
to the lannel issue, would this
give us teeth because we keep
talking about the Department of
Defense. Is that gonna give us
teeth over, uh, lannel and all
their oversight and Department
of Manner area, is that gonna
give us any way to be able to
sue Lane too, Mr. Speaker, gen
lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
only if it is relating to the
foam issue. This bill is very
narrow, intended to address
foam. So if a foam issue came up
at one of the labs or
potentially elsewhere.
This would give some authority
to the department to work
through that issue, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mayor, thank you
for that clarification. And what
is the level of how do you
measure PAS? How do you measure
how much PIs is too much or is
it gonna be every single certain
strain of PIAs that is a foam
issue, Mr. Speaker, generally,
and how do we differentiate
between uh api from a cooking
pan versus a peas from a foam,
Mr. Speaker and lady.
OK. Mr. Speaker, um, first
analytical testing will identify
whether it's derived from the
foam that is the only issue in
this bill.
And it will, and then the
department will work with the
Department of Defense in this
case, let's, let's say as an
example for them to clean it up
up to background, Mr. Speaker,
general lady.
And Mr. Speaker Delaney, I
remember, and I don't remember
how it is, I keep on saying like
a micro, but I don't remember
how many units of that specific
PIS has to be in that soil to
push for a clean up, would it be
any amount or a certain amount?
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
a gentle lady, sorry, um, 4
parts per million is 1 trillion.
Oh my goodness, 4 parts per
trillion, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady is the standard.
OK, Mr. Speaker Deli, so I
understand, so it's 4 parts per
trillion.
They have to that would trigger
that they need to do a clean up,
but if it's 3 parts per million
that would not.
Trigger a clean up. I'm just
trying to understand if it's all
or nothing. We're speaking to
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, 3
parts per trillion. That's with
like 3 trill, the T, it would
not, would not trigger a cleanup
enforcement action, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
And that's because Mr. Speaker
generally that
Is that because the level of
harm to people or what what is
that 3 parts per trillion based
on Mr. Speaker Delaney.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the,
um, that floor of 4 per trillion
is um based on drinking water
standards generally.
OK, Mr. Speaker, and Delaney, so
probably the last of my
questions I have, if you have
something that is.
Is
Is there going to be, how often
are we gonna check? So we have
an area that's at 3.
But something could leak into it
later making 4. Are we gonna be
constantly checking into those
areas, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, there is ongoing water
monitoring and they would be
continually testing to see when
and if that threshold were met,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, do we have standards that
were currently using because my
understanding for cleanuppis is
very technical. Do we already
have standards in place and what
we would do and do we, do we
have a way to tell DOD to how to
clean it up or is DOD gonna
decide how they're gonna clean
it up, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, DOD actually has standards
for cleanup and the department
concurs with those standards. So
that will be the basis through
which once this bill passes,
we'll have the authority, we'll
be able to force them to clean
up to the standards they
themselves have identified, Mr.
Speaker, gentle and lady. OK,
Mrs. Bajel, I think that's all
the questions I had because
it's, it's.
It's been an issue that's going
on for quite some time with the
PIAS and the water and the peas
in our districts and not getting
cleaned up, um.
I just hope that this bill does
what it's supposed to do. I
worry about this being locked up
for another 10 years, you know,
in a lawsuit and nothing ever
being done, so, uh, with that,
I'm finished. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady from La Salmo
Shield. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
from San Juan, yes, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, I do appreciate
that this bill has gotten more
focused.
Um, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I, I do believe we're
gonna have to.
We're gonna need
A lot further discussion on
PFOS, uh, going forward, uh,
hopefully, uh, I think it's
gonna take a national, um,
Discussion, um, but just, just
briefly for the body, I, I
remember when this bill was
going through committee.
And um
The
The products
That are in
That that have PFOS is pretty
extensive.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I know this is not in the
bill currently, but I've just,
uh, just wanting to talk about
how just briefly how this is a
this is a big issue and I'm glad
we're focusing on this issue to
deal with our particular big
Problem in New Mexico, so I, I'm
not speaking against the bill.
I'm just wanting to talk to the,
to the body a little bit about.
How big of an issue this is, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I hope, I hope that I, I think
I'm the last one on the board.
I'm not gonna take a lot of
time, but I, I would like to
just have a little bit further
discussion on this. So, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, I, I believe the issue.
That we're going to have to deal
with going forward, um, our, our
Products, and I don't know how
we can do this as a state, so I
do think this has to be a
national discussion very much
the way, uh, uh, lead in paint
had to be dealt with on a
national issue and a national
level, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Um, it, it is my understanding.
That PFOS is in.
Daily products that get washed
into our, in our drains.
And back into our water supply,
um, Mr. Speaker, generally, it
seems like, like, uh.
Makeup, I think, was the biggest
one,
and so Mr. Speaker and general,
I think one of the big issues
that we're having is even in our
water treatment facilities is
the ability to be able to get.
for us
Out of our water supply.
And so, uh, Miss Speaker and
generally, I believe that's why
we're having some of the issues
that we're having at a national
level defining this as a
hazardous waste.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
During that discussion, I'm sure
you recall.
those products, so besides
makeup.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um, what other products?
Uh, are, are daily use that
people may be putting direct in
direct contact with their skin.
Uh, or
Orally, uh, taking what Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
just a brief, I, I'm not looking
for an extensive discussion, but
maybe you could talk to the
folks about that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
uh, not to be difficult, but
this bill does not relate to any
of that in um just relates to
foam, um, I'm not well versed in
the issues of what products or
have this sort of thing within
them and um not to be
disrespectful, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen from San Juan.
That's fine, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so I, I'll talk
about it just a little bit then.
So Miss Speaker and gentle lady,
there, there are all kinds of
products that are being put
right back into our water
supply.
That are, are an issue, uh, and
at issue with PFOS, so if you
could, you mentioned something
earlier and I did not catch the
amount, but.
I, I heard you say something
about a certain amount of, of
PFOS in a swimming pool.
What was that percent again?
Well, the example that I use,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, was like
a symbol of POS in a swimming
pool, could be hazardous to the
health to one's health if
exposed, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, just to get
back to, to, to the point I was
gonna make and this will be it,
and I'll get off and let it go
to a vote, but Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I believe.
That uh
The reason that this has not
already been deemed a hazardous
waste at the national level.
And that we're having to come up
with a
A different
Criteria for us to regulate at
New Mexico.
is because it's in so many
products and at at this point
there's not an alternative.
And so Mr. Speaker and general
lady, I, I do believe this is a
big issue that needs to be dealt
with in New Mexico.
And the federal government.
Realizes that this is an issue.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I believe that's why we're
having to come up with the new
definition and um
Mr. Speaker, I, I, I believe,
um.
That
That that definition is, is uh
hazardous waste constituent or a
hazardous constituent.
And then if I'm looking at the
bill or the, uh, the, the.
Uh, substitute
That what we're doing with this
is we're saying that a hazardous
waste constituent or a hazardous
constituent.
If you drop down to the bottom
of that is to be to meet the
requirements under the hazardous
waste Act.
So, uh, Miss Speaker and
generally, I understand why
we're doing this.
I believe it needs to happen.
But Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I just wanna, I, I just wanted
to, to, to say this bill doesn't
fix our problem.
Uh, with our drinking water.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
until we
Or until the federal government
or someone deals with the fact
that PFOS cannot be in our daily
products for everything from
Scotch guard.
Uh, plastics.
Uh petroleum jelly.
Uh, things that are, are placed
directly on the skin.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this, this does not fix the
whole problem. This bill, and I,
and I, and
I agree with what we're trying
to do here fixes.
A big issue that we're dealing
with right now, but
For us every day, for those of
us who are not near any of the
military bases for those of us
not near an airport where a lot
of this, uh, the, uh, um, fire.
Uh
Extinguishing foam
is being used
We are poisoning ourselves just
a little bit every day.
With the products that we're
using at home and I, and I, I
would think that this might be
something for us.
As a state, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady for us to have a a.
Big ad campaign to our to the
public.
Encouraging them to look at the
products they're using.
Um, because as in particular
when I, when I think of makeup,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is applied.
And then washed into the drain.
And ends up in our, in our
drinking water, so Mr. speaker,
generally, my concern is if, if
what you're, your example is
correct, a thimble of PFOS in a
swimming pool is hazardous, um,
we need, we need to look at this
going forward. So I appreciate
you indulging me, um, I, I
wasn't speaking at all against
the bill. I just wanted to make
sure that the body understand
this takes care of one
particular issue, but going
forward, this is going to be a
much, much bigger issue for us
to address in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
See no further debate, the
gentle lady close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
move that house energy
environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill 140 as amended do
now pass.
We're on final passage of House.
Of the house energy, natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 140.
As amended
You know, the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Mr. Speaker, my button did not
work.
Because
Yes, reopen the vote, please.
OK
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 63 in thefirmative, 0 in the
negative, house energy, natural
resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 140 as amended,
has duly passed this house.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo,
are you ready on item?
Uh, 36.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House bill.
289 as amended on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 289 as amended.
Expands the state's economic
support for development of the
state's geothermal resources.
with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand
for questions.
There is the debate the
gentleman from Sandovan and
Santa Fe, Representative
McQueen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, does a
gentle lady yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, generally, um,
Uh, I'm pleased to hear of your
bill, uh, what type of entities
are eligible for these grants?
Mr. Speaker, if we can hold 1
2nd, we're trying to get
arranged here, uh, with the
experts.
And my seating.
OK, Mr. Speaker, I'm ready, and
I do need to introduce the two
experts that are here with me
and that is Mr. Tom Solomon,
who's a with the geothermal
working group. He's the chair
and he's also retired electrical
engineer and then I also have
with me here director Rebecca
Paster who's the director of
energy conservation and
management division of the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department.
And I will, Mr. Speaker, ask the
kind gentleman to repeat your
question again sorry.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we're,
we're amending a section of law
that's that's already in law
that is a grant program for
political subdivisions.
Um
And we're adding other entities
and Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm curious what other entities
are eligible for grants under
this program.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, thank you for
the question and um others in
this case could be anyone that
is eligible under the um rules
and guidelines.
Its application process, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, General Lee, so
we're talking about, um, well,
we are talking about entities,
so we're talking about uh
for-profit companies and
nonprofit companies.
Mr. Speaker, yes, it could be
any of the above.
Or all of the above and Mr.
Speaker, under the anti-Donation
clause, can we give grants?
To nonprofit companies and
for-profit companies.
Mr. Speaker, as I understand.
The Constitutional clause
related to anti-donation.
And we, uh, by the way, have
received uh a legal, um.
Opinion, uh, I read the
Constitution to read as it
states nothing in this section
prohibits the state from
expending state funds or
resources for the purpose of
providing essential services
primarily for residential
purposes if the assistance is
granted pursuant to general
implementing legislation and it
goes on.
As used in this subsection
essential services means
infrastructure that allows
Internet, energy, water, waste
water or other similar services
as provided by law and then this
particular section has been
amended several times, so Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen as I read
it, it does.
Mr. Speaker, generally, is there
anything in the bill that limits
ties this power this geothermal
power generation to residential
service.
So Mr. Speaker, and, and, um,
gentlemen.
The procurement law code has to
be followed to the max, which is
the constitutional requirements
so um this will be followed and
applied accordingly by the
department.
So Mr. Speaker, General Lee, um,
we, we talked about this in
house Energy, uh, I think the
bill's not drafted properly. I
don't think we can give grants
to other entities, um, the
reading of the relatively new
exception to the anti-donation
clause, um, you know, it was
intended to provide services,
you know, the, the example is
the Navajo Nation where they
don't have water and don't have
electricity, um, it wasn't
intended to apply to big energy
projects like this, and I'm
really worried that if we just
focus
on the word energy, um, we've
created a massive
Loophole in the anti-donation
clause and I'm worried about how
that would be exploited.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when we pass this exception, I
talked to the sponsor of the
legislation.
And it was her expectation that
we would be cautious as we used
it in, in passing enabling
legislation and I believe this
is enabling legislation, uh, and
I believe it goes too far. So
Mr. Speaker, general lady, uh,
as I've said before, uh, if, if
the language wasn't.
Addressed, uh, I would post it
on the floor and it hasn't been
addressed. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
There is further debate. The
gentle lady from Bernard Leo and
Torrance, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, you gave
me a moment to run around the
corner there very quickly.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and the gentle
lady from, is it just Bernaleo
County, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that's correct, Bern, OK,
thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
gentle lady, so if I understand
this correctly,
And I have a few questions I was
running around, um.
This is to give
$10 million in grants to
subsidize private industry, is
that what I'm understanding, Mr.
Speaker Delaney?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, $10
million is what has been
appropriated part of the request
of 20 million and it is not to
give $10 million to those
eligible it is to grant up to
$250,000 per uh application if
they're approved.
So Mr. Speaker, young lady, my
understanding with geothermal is
that for it to be used in our
state, it has to be subsidized.
It's not gonna fund itself the
way it is. Is that my
understanding, Mr. Speaker, and
young lady.
Mr. Speaker and uh gentle lady,
what we're purporting to do what
we'd like to do is.
Contribute to furthering the
research and study and in order
to do that in the area of
geothermal we've got to continue
kick starting the industry and
in order to do that, uh, we have
set up this type of mechanism to
do that, Mr. Speaker and general
lady. So Mr. Speaker generally,
I think geothermal has been
around for quite some time, like
maybe 50 years, uh, can you tell
me about the technology or what
kind of new technologies that
they
would be using to make sure that
we could even use geothermal
efficiently, Mr. Speaker Jelani.
Mr. Speaker and uh general lay,
thank you for that question. It
has been and as you know, uh, we
have an abundance of um heat in
our state and uh so most
geothermal plants you are
actually right have been
operating around the world
primarily as what we refer to as
hydrothermal plants and that
means that they're located.
Rarely
But naturally occurring hot
water aquifers such as hot
springs and um New Mexico has
one of the.
Hypothermal plant operating
today which is known as the
lightning dock plant and it's
located in Hidalgo County.
Mr. Speaker, De lady, I was just
asking to ask you about the
lightning dock where I didn't
hear where is that located, Mr.
Speaker John Lenn?
Mr. Speaker General Lady, it is
approximately 20 miles south of
Lordsburg in Hidalgo County and
I would point, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and a gentle lady and my
colleagues I did hand out a
flyer.
And it has a map at the bottom.
And um if you go to the far left
bottom corner you will see
Hidalgo and so Lordsburg is.
It located
In that area and that's where
the lightning dock is. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies. So
Um, when I look through here
because you are making an
amendment on here.
So Mr. Springdale, so the House
passed a version of this. I
wanna ask specifically on HB2
that contains $10 million
special appropriation and
geothermal projects.
In New Mexico, can you explain
to me what that $10 million in
the budget is going forward for
geothermal projects, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, as I
mentioned, we want to enhance
promote, and kick start in some
cases, um, the furthering of
research study, and development.
Of geothermal projects in the
state as we, as you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady may know you can
research and study, but until
you actually get into the
development of these projects,
um, the development of these
projects will then open up other
areas of uh furthering study or
research but in order to get to
that point we've got to be able
to um provide.
Whatever we can provide in this
case grants up to $250,000 in
order to be able to assist the
um furthering of these of the
research study and the projects,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what do you anticipate that that
grant of $250,000. What that
will do is a kickstart because
it seems like a very small
amount, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady when
we talk about kickstarting an
industry or or in any area we
begin with we usually have uh a
development plan in this case
the development plan will
include mapping of the area.
Of the particular areas as we
have to be able to identify the
um.
Hotspots or hot areas and then
it's also to determine uh what
we need what our workforce needs
will be, so those are two basic
um.
Provisions or eligibility
requirements that will be going
towards these projects.
So Mr. Speaker and young lady
and maybe your expert know, um,
my understanding was those areas
have been mapped out for like 25
years, Mr. Speaker and Delaney.
So
Mr. Speaker and um.
Gentle lady, uh.
This is what's being called as
the new, I mean the next
generation geothermal, so you
are correct, it has been around,
but this particular technology
continues to grow.
As we continue to study and as
we continue to examine all of
the previous um projects around
the world, so what we're trying
to do is promote, uh, for
example, instead of trying to
access the energy potential of
hot dry rock which is what uh is
most abundant in New Mexico
these technologies because they
continue to develop, uh, will be
further, uh.
Studying and applied.
And Mr. Speaker, John lady, so
if we use more geothermal, how
do we end up taxing that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? Um.
Mr. Speaker and um gentle lady.
Taxes are applied just like you
would apply to any other
business, uh.
Venture or plan or development
it's the same taxing so Mr.
Speaker, young lady, so I guess
who owns.
The area if there's geothermal
that's going to be used, who
owns that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
So
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's the exact same ownership
minimal mineral rights as any
other uh in the industry
including oil and gas.
Mr. Speaker generally, so if
it's on state land, who gets
paid?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
of course the state.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, I don't think this question
was asked yet. Can you define
who would be eligible.
For these grants, Mr. Delany.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh,
gentle lady, it will be.
Entities other entities other
than municipalities, um, tribal
lands, tribal entities, uh, and
it will follow the same process
that we follow with the
procurement code as allowed
constitutionally.
Mr.
Mr. Speaker John lady, so it's
no longer uh political
subdivisions university, it's
gonna be other entities and
who's going to decide that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Your, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, you're correct, it is
those other entities and who
will be responsible is who I
identified in my opening and
that is that it will be under
the um jurisdiction of the uh.
What is the
The secretary of of the uh New
Mexico.
Minerals, energy minerals and
natural resources department. I
always get fumbled with that.
Thank you, Mr. Springdale. I
know there's, we don't just
dealt with PPI, so I totally
understand that. So Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies, so now the
decision is to the secretary of
New Mexico Minerals just that
one person or is there a board
or how is that being decided,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, as
you know, every department has
different, I mean every um
major.
Division department have
different entities that are
responsible in this case it will
be under as I mentioned, um, the
director of energy conservation
and management division who has
a full staff.
Mr. Generally, I still, OK, I'm
gonna stop here because I know
there's other people have
questions, but, uh, I have a lot
of concerns about this bill and
I, I, I think there it should
have been some changes made to
it before it got to the floor,
but that's all the questions I
have, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Otero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
with the kind gentle lady from
Bernna Leo, please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I you kindly to the
kind gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So I'm just gonna start on
the actual bill and then I have
other questions after that, but
on the bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we're talking about the
geothermal projects Development
fund and
I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, it
says it's created in the state
treasury. So does the state
treasurer oversee that or does
some someone else oversee that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I,
I'm sure that that we all, I
hope we all understand that the
state treasury is where we hold
all our deposits, all our funds.
And again I will state that who
will oversee um the geothermal
continue to oversee the
geothermal processes is uh it's
located under the director of
the energy conservation and
management division of ERAD.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So we said energy
conservation division. I've, I
missed a few words there. So,
Mr. Speaker, General Liddy, I
see that because it says in the
treasury, right? So that's where
the funds will be. And Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, these
funds will not be overseen by
like the SIC to be invested
while they're waiting to be
dispersed or anything, they're
just gonna be sitting there
maybe getting some interest or
how does that work regarding
this specific fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
will not be under SIC will not
be.
In those type of processes it
will be administered by the um
energy conservation and
Management Division of ERAD.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So that's the
division and then Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I'm gonna look, I'm on the
amendments in context, so I
apologize, I don't have a line
number, but it's on the 2nd
paragraph says money in the
geothermal projects Development
fund may be used to make grants
of up to 250,000. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering what guarantees does
the state get to make sure that
these projects are successful.
Um, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen.
Uh
It is as any other project
that's overseen or managed, um,
the eligibility requirements
must be met the conditions of
the project requirements have to
be met all of that, uh, will be
incorporated in each of the uh
projects as um they are um
accepted and they will be
managed and overseeen by this
division.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General Lee,
and so we're, we're saying it
will be managed in a similar way
to other, other projects. Could
you give me an example of other
projects that are already being
overseen by the department or
the division when it comes to
this and how those are working
out.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, if you give me
just a second, I'm getting that
list.
Of course.
Yes, one of the areas is the
community economic efficiency
development and then we have the
uh various grants there are
various grants that are being
overseen currently.
And those are in the amount of
10 million as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then how does
this differ from something that
is overseen by New Mexico
finance Authority because I know
that they oversee some projects.
How are the parameters and the
division different from any
parameters that are overseen
from similar funds in the
finance authority.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, these
are not um loans or grants that
are managed or administered
under NMFA.
These are because they fall
under the energy, minerals and
natural resources department in
each division has a certain
responsibility that's how they
differ and in this particular
case, most of our, if not all of
our relevant um.
Wind energy, I mean, uh,
geothermal, uh, and other solar
or are managed in the same way.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then on this,
on the second page it says money
and the geothermal projects
Development Fund may be used to
provide grants for financing and
geothermal development project
approved by the Secretary of
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, does the division
oversee the approval of these
projects or is it the secretary
themselves because it does say
approved by the secretary.
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen,
of course the division operates
very similar to all the other
divisions within a broader um
department and in this case all
of the applications, all of the
eligibility, the selections, all
of that will be done by the
actual division that I
mentioned, um, which is the
energy conservation and
management division and of
course like every other process
they must be recommended to the
secretary and the secretary.
is the ultimate decision maker.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
in
In a hypothetical, if there was
a project that met all the
requirements, but they, the
secretary just did not approve
of it personally or, or in any
other reason, they could indeed
nix that project from getting
this grant. Is that my
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I'd like to clarify, I hope
that decisions are not being
made.
Personally, um, and the state is
obligated to follow the law and
in this case the procurement
code which is constitutional
must be followed so if there is
a a problem or or any of the
issues that you identified, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, they
would have to follow the
secretary would have to follow
the letter of the law.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, when we're talking
about the procurement code.
This, this project that we're
talking about when it comes to
geothermal.
It's different than many other
kinds of energy, right? It's,
it's objectively a different
product than solar, wind, etc.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what specific parameters then
would have to be met by these
potential grantees of this new.
Emerging fund.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
let me just clarify it isn't
really different. It falls under
the natural resources, um,
portion of what we're what you
just identified solar geothermal
is is heat, um, natural heat.
And um.
To your second part of the
question in in starting that
way, I forgot what your second
part of the question was, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so I'm
just wondering how is it
different than those other
factors when it comes to a
potential grantee looking for a
grant because it is inherently a
different kind of product. It
may be renewable, but it's a
little different from solar
wind. So what kind of parameters
are we looking to set, maybe in
rulemaking or in, in statute
that are specific to geothermal.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, again
this is gonna be through a uh
application process with the
eligibility criteria clearly
outlined by the division
director's office and they would
have to follow the particular
elements in the uh grant
application. I'm not, I don't
think that we're in the in the
uh we're able to outline all of
those items that are particular
to these gran.
Uh, this will be part of the
process once we uh uh offer uh
and and pass this uh piece of
legislation then those will roll
out accordingly and it will
follow of course and you and
thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen for um stating
that that this is particular,
um, so all of those elements are
particular to this partic this
area of um natural resource
which is geothermal.
Thank you,
There's a request for the
gentleman to remove your coats,
please proceed.
My apologies. Please proceed.
No, you're fine, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Uh, so, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so I asked that
question because I know every
year Rita, uh, the renewable
energy transmission Alliance or
act or something, Rita is what
it's called RETA. They have a,
and we're in that same committee
in NMFA, so they have some.
Information for us every year
about the wind and solar
projects and then the potential
in each county, for example. And
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when I see the, the flyer that
you passed out when it comes to
these geothermal projects, I see
some red areas in Santa Fe and
Sandoval, Los Alamos, Socorro,
Otero, Donana Sierra, Lunar
counties. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is there going to be any
kind of, any kind of
Consideration in the process to
evenly spread out these
potential resources to ensure
that there is production
wherever possible.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
the hope is that the more we get
the word out that these projects
um and these grant applications
will be made available, the more
outreach there is, um, obviously
whenever there is an area as we
noted on this map that quite
possibly could be um a a great
area to research to study and to
conduct a project then the hope
is that the application process
will uh be reflect.
ive of those particular areas
that you enumerated.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I do
appreciate you for bringing us
this.
It's kind of a visual. I'm more
of a visual learner myself, but
I do think it's important to see
where that's concentrated and it
looks like there is a lot more
potential up in the north
central corridor area, actually
probably down the Rio Grande
Valley. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm also wondering when it
comes to this.
The, the fund in the current
bill, I I'm looking at
amendments in context has been
stripped of the appropriation.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm wondering is that in the
budget and do we actually have
those funds right now as we've
passed HB 2.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for the question. Yes, those
funds, the reason that uh
preparation was amended out is
because those funds are
available if you have your uh
appropriation bill available
they're located on page 199.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I would, I wish I brought
that to the floor today, but it
would have another 1.5 or 2
pounds, so you've got 10, OK,
it's, it's in there somewhere.
So I'll look, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to these funds, they're
non-reverting, I see. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, my
question is, how do we know that
those funds will not just
accumulate on top of each other
for years on end if we don't
have enough grantees to the
project, uh, the new project.
creating.
Mr. Speaker, um, and gentlemen,
thank you for that question. I'm
actually actually very excited
because we will, I believe this
is one of those areas that is
developing um rapidly and the
research and the study
requirements and in fact um we
have a univer uh a university
that is located in Socorro, of
course that is undergoing um the
expanding their own department
and.
offering, uh, uh.
Programs for students and
otherwise so it's a field that
is growing rapidly this
technology is growing rapidly
and because it is one of the
cleanest renewable if well all
of them are clean but accessible
and because we have an abundance
of that in our state, I.
Sincerely doubt that uh we will
not be able to expend uh in this
project area and I, I believe
now already there are
explorations for the potential
of of uh these projects and
that's why I'm very excited to
get this bill out and passed so
that we can get moving in this
area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so I
I do think that it's good to be
optimistic, but my concern is,
I'm looking at this little
The map and from my
understanding, the northern
potential of geothermals
dominated by the bias super
volcano and it's mostly a
protected natural areas. So how
will production even be legal
there, Mister Speaker, gentle
lady.
That's my concern on on spending
these funds. How will that
happen if we kind of don't
really have much potential in
that specific area.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and so um
the Valles Caldera of course is
protected as you know, so we're
not gonna be exploring in that
area, but I was just told and I
didn't know this myself, but if
you look at that map, um, the
red areas are great, but all the
orange areas are probably uh
even greater and so, uh, the
anticipation is that these are
areas that will be uh
predominantly where the projects
will be located and uh.
They, you know, these are all
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, these
are all individuals that have uh
expansive knowledge in this
field and so I'm sure there's
selection will be uh
knowledgeable of where not to go
and then where to go, uh, based
on the abundance.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and I
do.
I hope that's the case. I hope
that the orange is the case, but
on the map, you, you've
provided, it says potential
power generation. So I do want
to make sure that there would
actually be some kind of
generation power, whereas
These red areas is definite
power generation. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
just hate to spend expend these
funds on something that was not
as strong when it comes to the
amount of energy produced. So
could you just address that for
me?
Mr. Speaker and and gentlemen.
You know this area is so um I've
been learning and learning and
learning. I'm already a, a
geology fan so anything that has
to do in that area is um it
sparks a lot of interest. What
I've learned is that.
And this is why this map is is
great right now we have the
lightning dock that I mentioned
south of uh Lordsburg in Hidalgo
County and if you notice it's in
that orange massive area, the
massive area is um quite notable
and the reason they're located
there is because of that massive
area of availability.
And um.
So
There will be, I, I would
imagine since our state is um
very conscious of protecting um
our lands and our water and our
air, um, that the scientists and
those all involved in this
field, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
are cognizant of uh where.
The areas are that lend
themselves to the greater
development and the.
We will be, I believe, uh,
developing in those areas that
are red and orange as well.
There's nothing to prohibit
either one what we wanna do is
encourage.
The development of projects in
in as many areas as possible and
that's the intent of this bill,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I also see
on the map when it comes to the,
there's green areas. It says low
temp industrial heating cooling,
geothermal heating and cooling.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
would that extend also to the
southeastern corner of the state
where we have a few counties
like Quay, Curry, Roosevelt,
Chavez, Lee Eddie, even a little
part of Otero where there's
green. Could you expand on that
for me, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. Mr. Speaker and uh
gentlemen.
the entire state.
I, uh.
What we believe.
Uh, abundant and so we will
encourage and those areas are
definitely in the project uh
area in the whole idea behind
Mr. Speaker this particular um
grant application process is to
encourage uh the exploration
study and research in all of the
areas of the state, so no one
area will be excluded however,
some areas lend themselves to be
more readily, uh, readily
explorable.
and uh Project Ready than others
but not to the exclusion of
those other states, I mean, uh,
areas.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Do we know what
percentage then of the state is
available for geothermal because
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I know
in our state we have a lot of
protected wilderness and will
production be possible in those
regions.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, um, and, and
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
are correct we uh we are aware.
And this is exactly why we need
to have um these projects get
underway.
So that we can get a better idea
and continue furthering um the
the uh identification.
Of these areas.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, and
then I know we both sit on the
Indian Affairs Committee and so
my next question is,
If we tap into a hot water
aquifer that's partially
underlying tribal land.
Where we need tribal input and
how will that work coordinating
with the department and getting
these grants to certain projects
that may potentially over.
Underlying actually tribal land
on the outskirts.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
this is exactly why I get
excited because this is a whole
new area of technology and this
new area of technology that I
identified earlier is called the
Next Generation Geothermal which
actually um tries to access the
energy potential of hot dry
rock, hot dry rock and what that
means is that um when we go into
and explore that particular area
we avoid having.
to disrupt um any other types of
um protections or areas uh or
lands unnecessarily this gives
this these projects will help us
and identifying those dry rock
areas and avoid uh potentially
in intruding on anything that
we're not supposed to be
intruding on. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I think
that's great, but
Can you, I, I don't see in the
bill where it says next gen
geothermal per se, and maybe I'm
missing it. Would you be able to
show me, because I wanna make
sure that it's not just
geothermal generally, but this
next gen, so it can be super
hyper targeted to each project.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen as you
know, and we've been um.
Passing the pieces of
legislation, uh, we don't go
into a whole lot of detail but
that's the purpose on page 2.
Um, under, um.
Letter B
Uh, it
Delineates that money in the
geothermal projects development
fund.
May be used to make grants of up
to $250,000 for the purposes of
studying the costs and benefits
of a proposed geothermal
development project as approved
by the Secretary of Energy and
and on so the whole purpose of
these particular projects and
the grants going to these
projects is to be able to study.
Not just the cost but the
benefits so that we can be
prepared as a state to continue
to support the uh area of clean
energy.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then this, I
see that when it comes to the
purpose of studying the costs,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
are, are there currently people
studying this potential energy
resource in the state without
these kinds of grants like this
250,000 for just research.
Mr. Speaker, and uh gentlemen,
as I mentioned in the purpose of
the bill, the whole idea is to
expand the state's economic
support for development of the
state's geothermal resources so
the whole idea here is to
continue to expand in these uh
in this area to look at the
economic and viability economic
viability, um, uh, and.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen again
I go back to the broader
benefits, um, as outlined in the
bill that's exactly what the
purpose is.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because it's my
understanding, cause a little
while ago we talked about hot
dry rock being good, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, according
to studies I've read in places,
it's happened, there is a higher
potential for earthquakes. Are
we going to take that into
consideration and what risks to
those populations does that
have, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, may I request
to sit down?
See no judgment ordered.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh.
I understand your question and
although um we see.
This activity as being uh having
a it's a rare occurrence with
small impacts however, the
Department of Energy, um, has
set up particular protocols that
call for the safety as we
continue to explore and it's
applying to the um.
I'm not sure what the EGS means
but oh.
Uh, the very system we're
studying the enhanced geothermal
uh system technology which
includes the screening
communication, uh, monitoring
and it monitors uh conducts risk
management, so all that is being
will all be taken into um
consideration obviously when we
are um exploring geothermal
because of the nature of the
science.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady because that is one
concern that I did get from
someone who said that that that
was a huge potential impact to
the state with those
earthquakes, and so I understand
that high potential areas are
also more vulnerable to
earthquakes like Socorro,
Albuquerque, San Fe, and those
are really highly populated
areas. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady in this piece of
legislation, is there anything
that will help alleviate those
kinds of safety concerns for
those high population areas
where if there was an
earthquake, there could be a, a
vast loss of life.
Mr. um Speaker and gentlemen,
this is precisely why we need to
uh have this piece of
legislation because this is part
of the research and the study we
are going to apply uh all safety
measures we will help mitigate
uh by monitoring and establish a
risk management that all is part
of what is hap what naturally
happens, Mr. Speaker, when this
type of projects get underway,
the especially.
Uh, based on what you just
described.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So I'm, I'm
wondering then,
if we're communicating risks.
Can the public
Be in the input process when it
comes to the granting of these
monies if they object. So will
there be public input periods
and how will the secretary look
into those.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for the question. The public
always has um the opportunity
and access to providing public
comment especially in areas that
we are exploring that are
considered in our in my opinion
not new but considered.
In general, um, terms, um, part
of the exploration, the
research, the study and um all
proper outreach, uh, all proper
notifications that are
associated with soliciting or
asking for these kinds of
projects and grants will be
included. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I do
understand that because when it
comes to rulemaking, there's a
lot of rules that get made, a
lot of very
Dense legal terms that are
thrown around. And so Mr.
Speaker, General lady, my
concern is to make sure that my
constituents have as much access
as possible to those rulemaking
meetings and if their voice will
even make a difference is my
concern. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, do we have a commitment at
least from the, the thought
process behind this to have as
many people involved from
communities, especially those
higher population communities
like in my community, we have
30,000 people may not seem like
a lot.
But if there's an earthquake, I
wouldn't want my population,
which has a lot of retirees, a
lot of older people to be
affected. Like right now we
have, we have a sonic booms a
lot at the base, and we're used
to that, but we're not used to
earthquakes. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, how will that be
integrated in this process and,
and how can you ensure that
there's as much public input as
humanly possible before these
projects are indeed given these
$250,000 appropriations. Mr.
Speaker, and gentlemen, as with
all assurances.
The public and the public safety
is first and foremost, and the
public understanding of how our
processes in terms of government
operate in terms of what will
happen in their particular
communities our public.
And the public's interest is
always, uh, first and foremost,
and I might note, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, just as a side
that you might be interested in
our children in grade school
right now are studying, uh.
All of these elements and in
fact again I go back to New
Mexico, uh, tech.
Um, all of this area is of
extreme interest to our young up
and coming scientists and so um
this is another way in which the
public will continue our
children will be educating us in
this field. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and you're correct
on that. I, the other day in
government committee we had some
young kids who taught us a lot
about the environment and about
how to protect nat natural
resources and animals and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
The reason I, I bring this up a
lot and I try, I'm trying to
bring this point home a little
bit is according to what I'm
looking at, all the maps of the
state, a majority of that land
that's not in these red areas is
federal land or is marked off as
public land in some.
former fashion, so the real
potential that we actually do
have is in these urban areas.
And so Mr. Speaker, General Lee.
We
I just want to make sure that
we're consulting with these
urban areas because it looks
like they will be the major
power source of this geothermal
and they could have large
impacts on a large amount of
people. Speaker and gentlemen, I
was um in conferring, could you?
Repeat your question. Sure, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so the the
production potential is a
majority.
house or it's inside really
urban areas, because that's
where it it appears to be. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle Liddy, I
just want to make sure that we
have assurances to these people
in urban areas that there will
be some kind of consideration
for their safety because that's
where a majority of this
production will happen due to
federal land and state land that
is already blocked off that we
cannot have any kind of
exploration on that.
For geothermal. So I'm wondering
what assurances can we give
people in urban areas so that
they can indeed be safe.
Um, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I, I kind of disagree
because if you look at the
science of geothermal the
science associated and the
technology I I.
I doubt that major urban areas
will be the areas of exploration
because uh we're looking at more
of the open accessible uh areas,
um, that.
In order to study.
And so, um.
I also will note that in some of
the areas that you identified
that are I think you uh
mentioned urban areas but you
also talked about military bases
everyone that has stepped up to
support.
Um, the furthering of the study
and research of geothermal have
articulated interest in the
exploration of geothermal
because of all the multiple
benefits that we know right now
but also the benefits that we do
not know and these include our
military bases and I might note
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
one of the points on your um
handout that I gave you, you
will note that um our very own
Department of Energy.
currently in office, Chris
Wright supports the development
of geothermal and he actually
issued an order that prioritized
geothermal as one of his top 4,
prioritizations as the new um
cabinet secretary for the
Department of Energy so if you
have the Mr. Speaker of national
federal department already
embracing uh as one of their top
priorities, uh, the exploration
and.
prioritizing geothermal then
rest assured that all those
areas, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen
that you identified absolutely
will be under this and all
safety protections as I've
mentioned, uh, in mitigations
will be taken into
consideration.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I too agree. I, I
do support Secretary Wright, and
I actually met him before he was
secretary a year ago at a
conference and I had no idea I
would be standing next to the
new Secretary of Energy, uh, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
it comes to the Department of
Defense,
I, is it, did I hear the, the
military bases support this,
including Holloman, which is
right outside my district, and
do we have like a statement from
them on that. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, that actually is,
is uh a very good question and
they are extremely interested
because uh from a military
standpoint securing the
electricity sources inside.
the area of their facilities is
of extreme importance because of
the protection and the need to
protect our national security.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I would, I just
asked that because I would like
to know when it comes to my, my
base that's right in my
district, I want to make sure,
Mr. Speaker, that if there were
any kind of events such as
earthquakes that could
potentially harm the missions at
Holloman and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that's why I wonder
what, what the Department of
Defense and specifically Holeman
Air Force Base has said about
this or Kirtland or Cannon
because I want to know
specifically what their approach
is when it comes to these
potentially
stating
Adverse effects that could
potentially come with increased
exploration of geothermal.
Mr. Speaker and uh gentlemen I'm
told that not only um are they
interested and not only are
there, are they also um based on
a national security interest
they um have they Department of
Defense issued a request for
proposals and in fact just last
week, uh, approved 11 um
developers to begin.
In their exploration and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, as you
all know I'm the daughter of a
of a military Department of
Defense intelligence and having
secure.
Ingress and egress to a military
installation especially located
in an urban area is of utmost
concern and if you reverse that,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
whenever there is a civil uh
need to rely on our department
of defense facilities or
otherwise located in our
communities, the Department of
Defense is called upon, um, to
provide.
type of security so it there's a
a definite partnership and
interaction uh between our
state, local, and federal
governments when it comes to
defense.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I, I don't disagree
with that. And like you, my, my
granddad was in the Air Force.
My other granddad was in the
army and the navy. He started
one of the first uh state
National Guard units in New
Mexico and, and he actually
volunteered for uh Korea instead
of being drafted. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I totally
agree with you when it comes to
the national security aspects of
it, but in my understanding, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and
especially with uh Secretary
Chris Wright, one of his.
Top priorities was not
necessarily geothermal first, it
was fossil fuels and nuclear.
Advanced nuclear, then
geothermal and hydropower. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, why
didn't we also include in this
legislation nuclear energy,
since that is one of the only
ways that New Mexico can indeed
get to a net zero by a specific
date such as 2035 or 2050.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
this is the geothermal bill.
It doesn't have anything to do
with any other kind of energy
we're speaking about.
One of the most uh abundant.
And clean sources of energy and
that is geothermal and that's
all we're talking about in this
bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess then maybe next session we
can start a nuclear power bill.
You never know, but Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'll, I'll continue
here because I, I find this bill
very important, and I find it to
be an important conversation at
least to have about the bill.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when we're talking about.
Potentially these areas where
we're going to be exploring, not
necessarily being in urban areas
as I, as I understand it from
your standpoint, are we going to
focus then on lower potential
areas that may be more rural.
Mr. Mr. Speaker and gentleman,
um, this is precisely why we
need to have more research, more
study, more projects out in the
field so that we can um further.
Identify where the where all of
the hot rock is located and
where it is most uh feasible and
viable and um I would say I
would add cost effective to be
able to um go in.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I do think that's
important. The cost
effectiveness, getting the bang
for our buck when it comes to
production and potential areas
around the state, so I just
wanna make sure that if we are
going to expand from those areas
that are really high
concentrations to lower
concentration areas that it's a
more efficient use of those
funds rather than somewhere we
absolutely know that there is
potential.
So I guess if you'd like to
comment on that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you very much and that's why we
kept I keep coming back to
Lightning doc because it has
been in operation for over 10
years and it is providing us
with a lot of information that
we have brought us to this
point, but in order to further
develop in the area of
geothermal, uh, we need this
particular um bill and grants
and projects to get underway,
uh, so that we can continue to
identify.
um spots in the state of New
Mexico.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then for people
or entities bidding for
exploration funding.
Will the
I'm just gonna call it EMNRD.
Automatically give them permits
for drilling, or will they have
to apply for each of those
boreholes as usual.
Mr. Speaker and um gentlemen, we
first have to get the
applications in.
And that's one set of processes
that are set up because it will
be by application and
eligibility.
And then once those projects are
in as you know, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, there are other
process which you just
identified which is the
permitting processes and that's
a that's a separate step.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
was, so then will they have to
fund an environmental study for
new drilling exploration
projects within this first step
of the 250,000. Would that be
what it's used for?
So Mr. Speaker and and
gentlemen, that's, that's an
important question and it all
depends on where the project is
going to be located there it
depends on what lands, who owns
those lands. It depends what
what um needs to be mitigated
and addressed and so that it
will be handled based on those
particular projects and where
they're located.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So then regarding
the actual process then I'm
gonna be on page 3 of your bill,
and it's on the amendments in
context starting on F, I think
it's subsection F, and so it
says geothermal development
projects approved for the grant
by the Secretary of Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
under this section shall not be
exempt from required permits or
permissions under New Mexico or
United States law. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what
current perm permitting
processes are there in
on the federal and the state
level to ensure that there's
safety in these projects.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that.
Question
Uh, is really loaded.
In the response because there
are so numerous.
Uh, projects, processes, uh, and
they are so great that it's too
difficult to start enumerating
unless we're here until um the
end of session.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm not asking you to recite
the, the, the federal statutes
which could probably take until
the end of session, which
actually might be a good use of
time, Mr. Speaker, but I would,
Mr. Speaker, just like to know
kind of at least what the
process in a general, very
generalized specific.
We
Would be like federally what
kind of permits would you have
to get? Would they be at the
Department of Energy? Would they
be at the, any other kind of
department and then on the state
level, I'm sure we probably know
a little more about the state
level, what other permits are
required when it comes to
exploration of these geothermal
projects currently in the city
of New Mexico alongside these
new grants that we're also going
to be giving out.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as
you know we can't speak to the
federal requirements or to the
federal uh processes are
permitting, at least I cannot
speak to that at this point, um,
and if you give me just a moment
I will be um checking into our
um state.
And probably just outline um the
few that we're able to identify.
Yeah.
So.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
glad that you related to the
various committees that we sit
on because Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, as you know, and
there has been discussed with
us, um, we have water permits we
have environment permits we have
surface permits, we have
electricity permits, we have
building requirement permits and
the list just keeps going on, so
all that applies.
Uh, everything that applies.
Will be applied once the
applications are approved and
have then moved on to that
process, then all of those state
permitting processes will kick
in and the projects will have to
follow uh all those permitting
and other processes. OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I, I do think that that's.
I think some of those
regulations are probably very
good and then some probably are
a little burdensome. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when it
comes to this 250,000, will it
go to helping with some of those
permits and trying to get
approvals because I know it can
be expensive and it can be time
consuming. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, could you speak to
that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
having been a project developer
myself when I submit an
application.
And I follow the eligibility
requirements part of what I have
to account for whether it's in
my planning process or my budget
process is being cognizant of
what the next steps are for me
is project developer to follow
and so however way these funds
are used in the development of
these projects which is how
they're identified, I believe
they will be followed.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. And then when it
comes to the landowners who may,
may have land where a project
is, uh, and people who don't own
their mineral rights, can they
be compelled to allow drilling
on their land if a high
potential area is proven to be
there.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I again, and
gentlemen, there's you raise
questions that have a lot of
different determinants and so it
kind of just deter deter depends
on whether who the landowner is
whether it's tribal, whether it
just depends, um, and I'm we're
not in the position to make
that.
To make that, to give you an
answer at this point because uh
it depends on the project. It
depends on who owns the land. It
depends on who's doing the
development project and, and,
and the particular requirements
or guidelines that apply to
those projects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. OK, so I guess it, so
eminent domain taking.
This land for potential
extraction or potential use for
geothermal could be on the
table, because it depends. I'm
wondering how that would work.
No, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, imminent domain
cannot be applied.
OK, thank you for the
clarification, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then.
I'm wondering regarding the
actual geothermal itself, so.
Does geothermal rock count as a
mineral and how is, how are we
defining that?
Mr. Speaker and um gentlemen
that's what makes this so um
interesting.
Because, um.
We have to
Who the the question is, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, who
owns the Heat?
And in this case the answer is
the energy conservation
management division of ERAD has
full jurisdiction over all the
regulations and production of
geothermal resources and they
are able to allocate to their
leaseholders and um so that's
partly an answer to your first
question.
And
And heat, um, according to Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, the legal
parameters and definitions heat
is generally considered a
mineral.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I think that's
probably like the new headline
for tomorrow's paper. Who owns
the Heat? I usually think in
headlines, so, you know, that's
just from my line of work, but
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
I'm also wondering, are there
areas that have been excluded
from drilling for oil and
natural gas, there are still
eligible for geothermal
production.
So places that have been
excluded from oil and natural
gas, could they be potential
places for geothermal
production.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
thank you for the question, but
we don't have that answer.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and then I'm just
gonna continue onward to the
Attorney General's FIR on your
bill. And so Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I saw a couple of concerns
that the Department of Justice
had regarding it, and one of
them was concerns about the
anti-donation clause of the
Constitution.
And I'm, I'm kind of wondering
how does HB 289 and ensure
adequate consideration is
received from private entities
to avoid those constitutional
challenges.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as I
mentioned earlier when I
answered on um this similar
question, um, the attorneys for.
The Emirate department, um, have
evaluated this bill as they as
they normally do and relevant in
association with the
anti-donation clause in mind and
they indicated that this
particular statute could be
executed and um we could fund
fully under the Constitution and
so Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as
I mentioned earlier also I read
sections of the Constitution in
which by which uh we believe.
Um
We are not in contradiction too.
OK, Mr. Speaker General, and
I'm, I'm trying to figure that
out because earlier we asked who
owns the heat and according to
the answer I got was M nerd. So
what about the private property
owners who own a hot spring or
small personal geothermal
heating unit for their home. I'm
just wondering how that.
How we balance those two
interests.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
guess you would envision, um, if
you were the landowner, you
owned the heat.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that helps clarify that for me.
And then, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I also see on the Attorney
General's
FIR I'm wondering how would HB
289's funding model compared to
other states that provide public
grants to private renewable
energy developers and how is
ours similar to those?
if at all, if it's even, there's
even other states that do this.
I
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
told that Colorado and
California have similar um
projects, um, and we're not
aware of how ours are modeled
by.
You know, modeled by by them or
or how they reflect on ours.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I will.
Look at that after we're done
with this debate here. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm also
wondering where is, is there a
definition of project in here
because I do have some
questions, Mr. Speaker, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady about a
private individual who would
like to apply for this grant to
set up their own geothermal on
their land for personal use, so.
I'm just wondering how that
works regarding those entities.
How is that defined?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
once we pass this bill and it
moves forward, um, that will be
part of the entire process, uh,
our, uh, request for proposals
and everything else, all those,
uh, specifics that you're
referring to will be addressed
in that process.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
when it comes to, I, I'm, I'm
still trying to figure out who
specifically is owning this this
heat.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what
What heat and what energy would
be owned by M nerd versus what
would be owned by a private
individual, and where is that
delineating line.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen again
who owns the heat is the
landowner and it basically
follows the same um legal uh pri
priorities and definitions and
so on all the parameters, uh,
legal parameters.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So if a private
property owner owns it. Can they
charge a royalty to a producer
who develops the resources on
their land.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes.
OK, and would that situation
still be eligible for these
grants enumerated in your bill.
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I go
back to it depends on whether
the project.
Meets the criteria and the
eligibility and that follows the
entire application process.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, OK, I'm, I'm kind
of starting to track here and uh
I'm sorry for
All the, the
Questions, but I do find it to
be important to at least put
these down. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we talked a little
bit about the anti-donation
clause, and then when we're
talking about energy markets,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do we
expect this to have any kind of
strain on the current energy
grid in the state, since I know
we are currently having problems
with capacity.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
actually it's gonna uh uh the
anticipation is gonna have the
opposite effect.
So it will not stress our grid,
yeah.
And in fact we're gonna provide
more access and uh broaden the
availability.
Of the grid capacity.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just wondering how that
works then. How, how are we
going to be strengthening the
grid since we're having more
power generation, and it would
have to go through those same.
Grid power lines. I'm just
wondering how that works. How,
how is it benefiting it instead
of hindering it since we're
adding more energy current
through those, those grids, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
beauty in all of this is because
the projects can be placed, um
where there is a uh capacity on
the grid.
And um that's what makes this so
exciting.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I guess I'll have to do some
more research about, about that
portion, but I also, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady wanted to
know because.
Since the application process
has not been created already. We
don't really know what
parameters we're going to be
measuring to ensure that there
will not be strain on the grid,
that there will not be
earthquakes that happen in urban
areas like Santa Fe, Albuquerque
Cruises and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I just, I, I kind
of want a little more and maybe
that's asking too much when it
comes to the the actual bill,
but when it comes to rulemaking,
I do want to understand what
parameters we're looking for
when it comes to safety when
we're coming, we're coming to
talk about private.
We held interests and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
guess, could you just tell me a
little bit more about maybe
you're just intent of these
rulemaking processes to ensure
the safety of New Mexicans when
it comes to these kinds of, of
uh eligibility criteria.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'll
take you back to what you, uh,
were concerned about in terms of
having uh participation I would
encourage that your communities
and those that you have
influence over participate in
the rulemaking process, uh, it
will be during that time that uh
everyone um.
In the areas uh or not in the
areas have the opportunity to
offer their comments, their
concerns, their suggestions,
their input that would be the
great place to do and that
actually is part of the
rulemaking process.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then I'm sure it would also
take into consideration, I hope,
the amount of water being used
because I know that geothermal
takes water and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Do geothermal production plants
typically use cooling ponds, and
can you tell me a little more
about that and what water needs
would be per project on an
average basis according to other
projects that we've seen in the
past, such as the lightning,
lightning dock that you
mentioned.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
From what we understand, the
beauty in this new area as this
technology is evolving is that
it actually uses very little.
Uh, water, and that is part of
what we will be continuing to
study and explore but part of
the interest right now in
pursuing geothermal is precisely
for the reasons that I just
stayed in that is that it is
does not place a burden on our
water.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So could you, maybe your
experts know this. What, so
previous generation capacity
requirements for water, what is
the reduction from traditional
geothermal to these new
innovations. What is the
reduction percentage of water
usage.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
is exactly what we need to find
out and that's why this um
particular piece of legislation
will open the door for us to
continue to uh look at how the
evolution of those geothermal
processes have been and how they
impact our current and then how
these new generation
technologies are actually gonna
reduce maybe major impacts that
others have had but lessons.
um
Negative impacts and increase
the positive impacts.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
from Bernna Leo, I'm wondering,
so does your bill have a
requirement that once we give
these grants to these entities,
and they start looking at their
projects that they must share
their findings in terms of
savings of water to the state of
New Mexico and where is that
enumerated in your bill because
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would hate to fund something and
then later on, not be able to
access the data that we already
put out in $250,000 increments
per project.
Because I'd rather have
standardized information that we
can intake into M nerd so they
can know how much are we saving
on water and if it is it is not
saving water, can we stop the
program so that we do not
continue to lose water potential
because I know New Mexico is a
dry state, you know, in my
district we're very dry. We need
the water, so I'm wondering, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if you
could address that for me and
how is that going to be
addressed in the rulemaking or
in the bill itself. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, it will be
addressed.
And the rulemaking process this
is exactly why we have
rulemaking processes and the
data um that is generated
through these projects will be
absolutely shared because we all
have a common interest in
accessing uh natural resources
that have a high positive
potential and our beneficial to
our communities and in fact
will.
Assist us in transitioning into
a cleaner energy world and
that's the objective. So the
more data we have and that we
can extrapolate and through our
studies through these projects
the better and we will share
those widely.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I sure hope so because I don't
want to just give out these
funds and then not get anything
back data wise. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, we said that this
could use very little water with
the new production. So will the
state engineer have to approve
water usage? Who approves the
water usage when it comes to
projects such as this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you're you're going into the
weeds of um some of the areas
that.
Precisely this piece of
legislation will allow us to
look into because again it goes
to it depends on the degrees of
heat. It depends on the depth
there are many factors that
influence the answer to your
questions and this is the beauty
in passing this piece of
legislation so that we can then
provide the answers. OK, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I know
that in this body, we a lot of
the times I've heard we like.
Data-driven data-driven
legislation, we like
evidence-based approaches. And
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when I'm looking at the bill and
a lot of the answers I'm hearing
are, oh, it'll happen in
rulemaking that does give me
some pause, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because I do want to make
sure, number one, we have safety
and also I'm wondering about who
approves the water if we don't
have the water capacity. Also,
what about recycling this water
and back into the plant, does
that cause any kind of harm to
the energy generation.
How many entities are we going
to be giving this out to and how
many of these will be reporting
back to us and so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I guess my question
was to just get a little more
clarity on maybe your
Maybe the intent of your
legislation. So we're looking at
rulemaking from a lens of
clarity, and so, Mister Speaker,
gentle lady, I just want to make
sure that we're both on the same
page when it comes to this with
the water usage. So,
I, I guess I would just ask
again, who would be currently or
in the future overseeing the
water usage of these plants and
who are they accountable to.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um.
If you will note in the piece of
legislation all this is current
already but um it again who will
be overseeing depends on the
nature of the project and one of
the things Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that I would like to
stress is that just.
The field of research.
Ensures
Or is the field of data.
It is, I mean, that's all
research and study is about
collecting.
Compiling
Analyzing evaluating.
And then applying.
The data, so everything that you
just identified everything that
we wish to do as uh and we have
continued, we'll continue to do
because this is already current
processes these are already
current um geothermals already
in the field of current research
and study will be collecting
data as you mentioned.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. OK, well, I guess
I.
I agree, but I also do want to
make sure that we're also
utilizing national,
international data as well
because New Mexico is great when
it comes to our potential, but I
also want to make sure that we
have safety concerns addressed.
We also have local industries
around hot springs and places
like Truther Consequences and
Demming reserve and Hemes and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
there is a risk that production
in these areas will disrupt the
local resorts and local
populations. I want to also
account for those. And so, Mr.
Speaker.
Lady, I'll continue to listen to
the debate and I appreciate your
answers, but I do, I would like
to have a little more concrete
information when it comes to
development of geothermal
because it is indeed an
interesting topic, but I do want
to make sure that we are keeping
in mind the water. We're keeping
in mind the safety of
populations against earthquakes
which are specifically happening
across the world, and I do want
to make sure that this will not
exacerbate those current
geological effects to the, the
populations across our state,
so.
I do have some concerns, but I,
I will leave it there and I
appreciate the, the healthy
debate, but Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'll continue to listen
before I make a decision on your
bill, and I really appreciate
your candor and uh the answers
to my questions and thank you to
your two experts.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from South
Representative Lujan.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, is general lady
from Berlioield.
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentle lady. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
and thank you for this piece of
legislation that we have before
us. I think this is one of the
most um
Important
Pieces of our energy portfolio
that we have in front of us. I
feel like this is uh this is a
bill that we we have um our
information of uh the type of
bill that we've been working on
for a couple of years, is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Speaker and gentle lady, you and
I and others have been for a few
years, but I also understand
that this has been um ongoing um
thanks to the efforts of various
senators and uh uh our
predecessors.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what makes geothermal
energy, a unique and valuable
resource here in New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
geothermal and.
Heat related um.
Geothermal and electricity that
can be generated from geothermal
is abundant in our state. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Generally,
and, and how will this bill, um,
and the funding in this bill
essentially encourage
investment, um.
Projects in New Mexico and what
economic benefits do you
anticipate for our state.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
whole idea behind opening up um
these grants is to encourage the
development of geothermal around
the state where viable and um
the entire bill is concentrated
on the benefits which will open
up to what I've been
identifying, Mr. Speaker, as the
next gen geothermal electricity,
um, which and then and also uh
we'll be exploring.
Um, if.
Geothermal electric power is
dispatchable and to what degree
it's dispatchable and we know
that it is, but it will continue
in that area and then the final
or not final but one of the
other benefits is that um we
believe geothermal could provide
up to 10% of New Mexico's
electricity, uh, or as much as
1000 to 3000 megawatts of
electricity which is uh part of
what we're going to be um um
encouraging in.
these projects.
Thank you, thank you, Joe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
This is not a geothermal is not
the only solution as we are
looking for clean energy,
renewable energies and in our
state.
It's part of a portfolio, is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, of course it is
thank you thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I think that this
is, this is, um, this is
responsible, um, legislation, I
think that this is opening the
doors for us to really further
our, our portfolios I'm
mentioning for a, a cleaner, um,
energy portfolio for New Mexico
and I know that there have been
some concerns and we're having
discussion about um how these
funds will be dispersed.
and I'm referring directly to um
Page 2, when we're looking at
I think this is it.
The other entity, other entities
that participate in a
competitive bidding process
conducted in accordance with the
procurement code. So Mr. uh,
general, uh.
Speaker, gentle lady, when
we're, when we
Um
Spend our state dollars are
public dollars and we, we spend
them through the procurement
code and through
Those lines of um the legal
system.
That this was very specifically
noted in this piece of
legislation so that we wouldn't
be um disrupting any of our laws
regarding that. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, you
are correct.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I wanna be, I wanna be
very careful about that because
I want to give assurances to all
of our um all of our members
today that this is this is we're
doing this in a very just and
and we're following our
procurement code. We follow our
legalities around how we are
going to distribute public funds
and I just wanna say thank you
for doing that and being very
careful about how we're gonna do
that.
And I think for geothermal
development in our developments
in our state this is um this is
a starting amount is that is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
The $10 million Mr. Speaker,
generally.
Mr. Speaker and um gentle lady,
the, the request was for 20 what
we have in the budget is $10
million and it is expected to
enhance and continue um as we
have, um, as you well know, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, you and
I and others helped pass um this
original funding um mechanism
last session I believe it was so
this is the continuation and the
expansion thereof.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
And
What is the what is the opinion
from our um
From uh
Or other um agencies or state
agencies, particularly Ener.
Mr. Speaker, General Le.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
can you be a little when you
mean, uh, what do you mean by
opinion? I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker,
generally, their supportiveness
and how the the the they were
gonna help us get these grants
out, Mr. Speaker, generally. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yes, of
course this is under the
jurisdiction of the secretary.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I'd just
like to note that during our
hearings in um HAFC are are
secretary, I think she's, I
think she's going to be our
official secretary today, Mr.
Speaker General lady, and
I'd like to thank her publicly
for her work and her, her, um,
I work in making sure that this
was something that she uh wanted
to have funded through her
budget, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is that correct? Speaker
and gentle lady, yes, everyone
is very enthused with how this
is unfolding and and the outlook
and and it will be under her
jurisdiction. That's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Can you, can you give us,
uh, a little bit of, um, you
know, the benefits, the, the
future benefits as, as we move
forward with this, um, with
these projects, Mr. Speaker.
do.
Mr. uh, uh, speaker and gentle
lady there are multiple
benefits, of course, um, the
expiration of the projects will
create jobs.
Um, hopefully, um, career
related um.
Positions, jobs that not only
will participate in the initial
stages of the project
development but will continue
and hopefully we can get into
professions such as uh
engineering and other
professions, um, also, uh, from
what we've known throughout the
years that geothermal has been
um globally as well as
accessible as well as other
areas it is a very inexpensive
source of generating
electricity, which is one of the
best benefits that.
We can see. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I that's,
that's what makes it so
important for us to expand the
the the technological advantages
of, of this um industry, um.
What are we doing in the states
as far as when when you
mentioned the workforce and
jobs, how are, how are we
creating those opportunities for
our state, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. um Speaker and general lady,
this is precisely why the fund
can be very helpful or will be
very helpful, uh, passing this
legislation and continuing to
fund in this area is that that
the objective is that.
Once we continue the
exploration, the projects
evolve, um, it is anticipated in
our expectation is that it will
be a very strong economic driver
in that it will provide
accessible affordable sources of
electricity that are natural to
our state natural and abundant.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Can you also, uh, remind
us what, what are the um
Benefits in energy costs within
the horizontal drilling, um,
technologies, Mister Speaker,
generally.
Um, Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady, this is part of what we're
going to be finding out because
we could drop, I mean drill
direct we could drill.
Horizontally, um, there are
multiple ways in which the
scientists, um, the engineers,
uh all that participate in the
development team, the project
development team will be
equipped to explore and study
and research and then determine
uh what would be the best way.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and in the in speaking
economically, um, what are the,
the energy cost benefits with
geothermal as opposed to maybe
natural gas.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady when
I understand, and I will
continue researching myself is
that it is very competitive with
natural gas and stable prices,
Mr. Speaker it's my
understanding that it it it can
outcompete those, those prices
and costs and be even more
beneficial. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker Speaker or Madam
Speaker.
Gently.
Thank you, Madam Speaker and uh
gentle lady uh potentially
that's correct.
Thank you, Mr. uh, um, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady.
What, what is there a storage
component to geothermal?
Energy, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mrs. um
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, um,
there is the capacity to provide
storage or steel thermal, Madam
Speaker, gently, and how is
that, uh, beneficial component
for as we're looking at
renewable or clean energy
strategies for our state.
Mr. Madam Speaker.
Um, Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, it will act as a beautiful
backup.
Um, and in terms of our um
energy.
And Monsieur, Madam Speaker,
generally, so are you saying
that the geothermal energy is
just it's a it's like a full
circle of all beneficial types
of, you know, components that we
need as we are moving towards a
cleaner energy sources. Madam
Speaker, generally, Madam
Speaker and gentle lady, that's
precisely what we're saying and
that's what makes geothermal
heat, um, as one of the cleanest
and best sources of generating
and transmitting electricity.
Thank you, thank you for that
answer, uh, Madam Speaker
General later. I, I think that
this is just, you know, one of
the, the, the, the.
Best investments that we can be
making.
As we're looking for energy uh
clean energy sources for our
state is there opportunity or
possible opportunity in the
future for this energy to be.
You know, used, uh, or there an
economic benefit to it rather
for us to uh distribute to maybe
other states or have a potential
of of an economic component in
that matter.
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I, I, I believe
someone said that we have the
potential of being number one in
the potential to be able to um I
don't know what the word is
scientific export share I was
gonna say share because I like
the word share, madam speaker,
and, and, uh, um, gentle lady
because I believe our resources
should be shared abundantly and
but yes there is that potential.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Speaker General Lee, and what
makes New Mexico the, the
fundamental best uh source for
this type of energy, Madam
Speaker.
Um
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we're getting into um what I
like what we refer to as the Rio
Grande Rift.
Um, and again I throw that out
because um hopefully you our
children your daughters, my
grandchildren will continue to
study this, um, but we also have
not just the Rio Grande that
what's referred to as the Rio
Grande Rift, but we also have
the workforce.
Um, we have the vendor vendors
that are already ready to step
up we have um actually all of
the developers and developer
components for projects ready
and willing to undertake these
projects so that if we can go
from being number 6 is a
potential to a number one that
would be our goal because we
would be recognized globally as
being number one source of this
energy.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I can't
wait till that happens and it's
through these types of
investments that we are going to
be able to, to get to that
point. I, I wholeheartedly
believe and I, I believe that as
we um as we have our revenue
growth that we've been that
we've seen in the stabilization
of that revenue growth that this
is the, you know, this is, this
is how we, um,
We make the better, uh, better
choices and energy sources for
our state and it's really good
to um take us into the future,
Madam Speaker, gentle lady, but
haven't we already been using
this resource or this source of
energy?
Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady.
We've been using what?
Scientifically and
technologically is referred to
as the first source of this
energy this is precisely why,
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
we need to have this, uh, pass
this legislation so that we can
then
explore further the new
technologies because geothermal
is one of those fields that um.
Invites us to explore these new
I sound like Star Trek, Madam
Madam Speaker and gentle lady
but explore these new
technologies for our future
because that's exactly uh what
we'd like to do in order to uh
have our environment, uh, clean
air, clean water, clean lands
ready for our children and their
children. Thank you.
Speaker, gentle lady, and um I
don't know that this uh question
has been asked or answered, but
does the new uh DOE Secretary
Chris Wright support geothermal.
Energy
Madam Chair. Madam Speaker.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
um, yes, that he's actually
listed the new Department of
Energy Secretary Chris Wright
has listed uh geothermal is one
of the 4 items of his priorities
they go fossil fuels advanced
nuclear, geothermal and
hydropower so we're already
advancing with the DOE support
nationally.
Madam Speaker, generally, thank
you. I, I, I, I had heard that
and I wanted to verify that
because I think um we, we had.
The secretary here in New Mexico
a couple of weeks ago and he had
visited um some of, you know,
our national labs and he was
talking about our energy
portfolio and those sorts of
things and I, and I just wanted
to verify that so, you know,
even on the national level we
are um geothermal is, is noted
in in there there should be some
investments, I hope from the
national um uh funding side of
this have we, do we have any.
anything in place as of now, um,
as we're looking at federal
funding to uh match grants or
anything like that that would
help, um.
Um, leverage these dollars that
we're we're looking to invest
in.
Madam Speaker.
from the
Miss um Madam Speaker and gentle
lady, yes, and there is the
potential that for every $1.
That
We invest that New Mexico
invests we could potentially
leverage $100 so that is a huge
um return on investment and just
I mean potentially return on
investment obviously but um
that's a huge match and um
that's what we aim to um to
gain.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, you
know, that's incredible.
And when we're looking for, you
know, a secure energy future,
and we know that, you know,
under this new administration
that this is this is on their
list of, you know, on their good
list, so to speak, that that's
incredible for us I think in
that that really provides us the
opportunity to grow and expand,
and I hope in the future that
we're going to see even more
dollars go towards this
endeavor, um.
Madam Speaker, General Lady, you
had mentioned that um.
I think we were looking for more
funding, but what we have right
now
We're gonna have if in I mean
currently in the budget right
now we have a secured $10
million so with a 100, 1001
match, that's, that's
exceptional. I mean, I don't
think that that can be argued in
any other way. I think that this
is, we're really putting our
best foot forward as a state and
really putting the those
investment dollars forward as we
are looking for those, uh, a, a
clean energy future for New
Mexico. Would you agree?
And in a chair.
Uh
Madam Speaker and gentle lady, I
absolutely do agree. I think we,
the potential is we can't even
describe the potential.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you so much. I really
wanna commend you on your work
on this. You really have have
moved this um.
The, the potential of what we
can do forward for our states
and um I'm, I'm happy that I
could be a part of that. I'm
happy and you know, I get to um
Get to see and we get to see how
this is gonna grow for our state
and you know getting this
legislation through is, is uh.
An extremely important.
Um, piece of legislation and I
encourage all of us in this
entire body to support this
legislation wholeheartedly um
for for the reasons that we've
been discussing and, and for
many more, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Speaker, excuse me, um.
General lady, uh, again this is,
this is going to take us into
the future in a way that that we
we are um
We're gonna benefit from and um
wholeheartedly I ask you again,
Mary to vote for and support
this piece of legislation. Thank
you, madam Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady.
Thank you Madam Speaker and
thank you gently.
There's further debate, the
gentleman from Colfax, Curry
Harding, Quay, San Miguel,
Miguel, and Union Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
There's a gentle lady yield?
Madam Speaker, gentlemen, I
yield.
Thank you, gentle lady. Thank
you, Madam Speaker.
Uh
My young life till I was about
14, I grew up at TC, New Mexico.
Now TC used to be called Hot
Springs.
That's where the warm spring
Apaches came to take a bath.
And uh, so right there, the hot
water just bubbles up out of the
ground and they put it off into
bathhouses and things, so.
I guess the geological heat must
be pretty close to the surface
there.
A little further south, uh.
There used to be, and I, I
assume there might still be some
greenhouses that raised
beautiful roses down in southern
New Mexico.
Uh, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
do you know, or Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that was quick.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, do
you know if that's true or those
greenhouses still in operation
down in southern New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and um gentlemen
thank you for that question, um,
yes, um.
I'm aware of the geothermal well
that is used to heat the um.
I guess you would say Mason
Farms greenhouse complex and
Radium Springs.
And actually what's exciting Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, is that
the owner has indicated that it
has saved 93%. He has saved 93%
of his heating bill, um, on his
farms in these greenhouse
complex and then the other
exciting thing, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, is that these
farms employ 150 to 200 200
people.
And the 3rd most exciting thing,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen is
that the geothermal energy um
can also be used for commercial
and industrial cooling so it's
open and available for.
Owners that are successful and
experiencing what I just
described Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen the opportunity and
that's what we're we we'd like
to encourage.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
I wanted to put in a
bathhouse
Or a greenhouse.
Would I be available for this
funding? Would I be eligible for
this funding not available?
Would I be eligible for this
funding?
Mm
Um, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen,
the answer is potentially yes I
mean potentially there's a
potential for um the the um
project development process and
the application process and what
we've described as those others
in the bill, so yes.
So Mr. Speaker, General A, just
so that I'm clear, is this
funding available to pursue that
project to to initiate that
project or is it only available
to study the kinds of projects
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, to
answer your question, it can do
all of the above. So Mr.
Speaker, lady, we just talked
about there's some very shallow
geothermal available, and I know
some of that geothermal is quite
a bit deeper.
And I know they drill a lot of
CO2 wells around in my area.
And it's pretty expensive to get
down there at 2, they, I think
most of our wells are about 2500
ft deep.
And I don't think you could
drill one for 250,000, uh, is,
is this, uh,
How does, what's an average cost
of a geothermal well to, I know
they vary, but just wild
ballpark the thing what's.
What's the
Expected costs and and how would
this help?
Uh, defer that cost.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
told that the drilling costs
associated is similar to the
cost um currently by.
Per, uh, yes, uh, the oil of gas
is.
And that and that's completing
the well, that's not just
drilling it, but that's
completion also. Is that, is
that similar?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
sorry I had trouble hearing, so
we're closing one of the doors.
Can you repeat, please?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I have
trouble hearing whether the
doors open or not
Mr. Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
have a solution for you see me
afterwards.
Well, that wouldn't be any fun.
I got to ask you some questions
now, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
Oh, that made me lose my, my
train of thought. The, uh,
The cost of drilling, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is
approximately the same, is the
cost of for completion of the
well approximately the same.
It is the process somewhat
similar.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm told that it probably is
less expensive because we're not
extracting uh oil and gas and
we're not using the
sophisticated systems that are
used to extract.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I heard you a while ago say that
the water you used was minimal,
and I assume it's, you have to
use water. I mean, you got to
use water, you pump it down
there, get it hot, comes back
up, you spin the turbine, pop it
back down there, get it hot. Is
that true in, in the reuse most
of the water and what is the
approximate loss. Do you have
some idea? Do you lose 30% of
the water, 50%, 10%, is it a
closed system?
I'll just trying to understand
it. Mr. Speaker and.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's the beauty is in
geothermal is that uh we can
recirculate the water, that's
number one and number 2, I have
no idea what this means, but
this the expert says we will use
a closed loop I'm sure all of
you who are familiar will
understand that process, a
closed loop process and but the
most important point, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, is that
we're recirculating the water.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
do don't want to closed loop
processes, or at least I assume
that I know what a closed loop
process is. I think I probably
do.
Um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, what
is the projected lifespan of one
of these projects. We drill it,
we clo we install that closed
loop system, uh, depending on
how clean the water is, depends
on how long our pipes last, uh,
do we inject probably something
in there to keep it from
oxidizing, uh, what's the
approximate lifespan of a
project.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for the question. We, we
hope that, um, we will find out
more, but right now the life
cycle is 20 to 50 years.
That's great. You know, and, and
one of the things that we look
at in our area, whenever
anything comes in, be it
geothermal, be it oil and gas,
be it, uh, whatever is how many
jobs does that create? how much
money is left in our community.
Uh, uh, we have a lot of CO2.
They come in, drill, there's,
there's drillers, there's, uh,
people working around people
putting in compression plants
and pipelines and then boom,
there's nobody.
And it just comes up out of the
ground and leaves.
Uh
What, what, uh, what, what is
left in our community if you
came in and installed a
geothermal.
Uh, plant is there something
that
Stays there. Is it is their
jobs? Are there, uh, taxes or,
uh, I guess another question I'm
gonna ask you in a minute about
severance.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you again for that question, um,
again it gets very exciting
because of the potential, but it
would be similar to operating a
power plant, so the number of
jobs would be associated to
operating uh a power plant and
those are ongoing around the
clock.
Uh, positions so uh all of that
would be part of our our
objective in these projects to
look at how.
Much we and how many uh.
Individuals can we employ and
then.
Take it from there, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, 20 jobs maybe.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
mentioned a minute ago the Mason
Farms greenhouse complex just
that's just a greenhouse complex
and they employ 150 to 200.
Can you imagine a power plant?
Um, I would say potentially it
could start.
Maybe 20 to 50 and but it has
the potential of growing but it
depends again on.
The project itself.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that is, that's pretty exciting
to me.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
What about the cost of
electrons. I mean, I, I'm on
the, uh,
Our local Southwestern.
Uh, cooperative electric board
and we have contracts to buy
electric electricity uh from
Tri-State out of Colorado. Now
we, we have some wind projects
that are coming in and so we're
always talking about the cost of
electrons.
Uh, I, I know that, uh.
Wind and solar used to be far
more expensive and now they've
gotten where they're cheaper. I,
I'm, I'm not sure what they cost
if you take out the subsidy.
Uh, I've heard different
numbers.
Thrown around. Can you tell me a
little bit about the cost of
electrons with one of these
projects after you drill it,
after it's in place, and when
it's set in there producing
electrons, what is the cost?
Um,
Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, thank you
for the question. It's similar.
I'm told that it's similar to
that of natural gas which is at
$80 a megawatt of power and so
um but it was geothermal, it is
a much more stable pricing.
So it's a little more expensive
than win, but cleaner than.
Some of the other uh types of
energy.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
will note that yes but it is we
operate in terms of geothermal
24/7 because of the nature of
the ele electricity and the.
Now I like that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
many current projects.
Do we have an existence in New
Mexico, and secondly in the
United States.
puts us in the top
instance.
Mr. Speaker and um gentlemen
right now in New Mexico we have
one operating plant which is
what I've been referring to is
the lightning dock.
And that potentially puts us on
top of the list of of the nation
and other about a dozen other
entities in the nation, but you
see we're already at the very
top with that one lightning dock
that has been in operation, so,
uh, we're part of that dozen or
more in the nation.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
sorry if I missed that part. I
mean, stepped out or something.
I didn't, I heard a little bit
about Lightning dot, but I
didn't understand that it was in
New Mexico. I am, uh,
Surprised the Yellowstone and
some of those places that are
very volcanicly active, uh,
probably didn't aren't pursuing
this. Maybe they are, maybe
they're like where we're at,
just studying it and trying to,
trying to do something. There
are several other pretty
hotspots in the, in the nation,
so.
I'm surprised that some of them
haven't went for it.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
missed your question.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
didn't ask for a night. I just,
I was, I just, uh, kind of
philosophized about the, the
existence of uh geothermal up in
the Yellowstone, uh, National
Park area in, uh, I know you
can't, you wouldn't do that in
a, you wouldn't have the
opportunity to drill in the
national park, but I do know
there's a lot of volcanic,
there's geysers up there shoot
hot water up in the air, so
there must be some heat down
there on the ground, right?
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for answering my
questions. Thank you for having
a conversation about this and
helping me to understand it a
little better. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen.
There is further debate the
general from the, uh,
Representative Senna Cortez.
you so much, Mister Speaker.
Does the gentle lady from
Bernalilo yield.
Mr. Speaker, I do yield to the
gentle lady. This is our first
conversation. Yes, ma'am, it is
Mister Speaker and gentle lady,
I apologize if any of the
questions are repetitive. I know
we've gotten in the weeds a
little bit, so let's get back up
to that high view with some of
my questions. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, why not provide low
interest loans instead of grants
on the taxpayer's behalf.
Mr. Speaker and um gentle lady,
I understand that.
Um, the process will include a
combination of both.
Couldn't could include a
combination of both.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So if eligible
entities now include for-profit
and nonprofit businesses. How
could it competitive bidding
process be established to ensure
that there's fair competition.
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, as
with all uh request for proposal
processes, um, the assurances
and insurances are written into.
the
Application
Process the eligibility
requirements, um, the review
process, the evaluation, the
selection, all of that is
written into uh these pro this
process.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady does this
geothermal process utilize
fracking.
um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what I like to say and how I
digested this whole issue of
fracking because I had to be
comfortable with it in order to
be able to embrace um this field
of science is that.
When you drill,
You rack.
That's breaking down the rock.
But we don't use chemicals.
In the process of having to do
that, no chemicals are
necessarily exchanged from when
In the process of having to do
that, no chemicals are
necessarily exchanged from what
I understand, and again I'm not
the scientist but I had to
understand enough so drilling is
a form of uh fracking.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady is
POs found in fracking.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I think that's a whole different
conversation but in this process
it does not. OK, I was just
concerned about that, and I
believe I have one more
question, Mr. Speaker, and, and
gentle lady, um, lessons from
other states. I know that
California's geothermal
incentives led to cost overruns
in publicly funded projects. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
does HB 289 prevent similar
budget mismanagement.
Mr. Speaker and, and gentle
lady, um, one of the things that
I love about.
public
Administration I'm a former
public administrator is that we
in government have.
So many mechanisms in place to
ensure.
That the public's interest, the
public's money.
The public is protected and
insured against.
Any type of potential
mismanagement and that's the
beauty of being responsible.
To our public whom you refer to
a while ago as our taxpayers it
is incumbent upon us, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, to
represent that 100% and provide
that assurance.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, you've done a fabulous job
answering all the questions from
a 9 million ft view all the way
down into the weeds. So that
concludes my questions. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you. There's further
debate. The representatives
from, from, uh, San Juan,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the,
uh, general lady from Bernard
Leo yelled.
Mr. Speaker, I am very excited
to yield to um a wonderful
gentleman, uh, my colleague.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I've
been, uh, learning a lot through
the committee's hearing, uh,
your team gave the presentation
and um just wanted to again, uh,
Mr. Speaker, go back and, and,
and just um get this big picture
of this.
Really big, uh, legislation that
that's uh I, I know it's been
cycled around each session and,
and I, I also wanna appreciate
your continued efforts on
bringing this back.
To the body, but, um, Mr.
Speaker, my, my question is, uh,
on this whole process of, of, of
the application of this
geothermal technology, um,
would, would you say, um, this
technology has been around how
long has this technology been
around, Mr. Speaker, general
lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen you
will appreciate this because our
ancestors it probably dates back
as to the age of our ancestors,
but.
The technology over 100 years.
Thank you, um, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because, uh, that
that's also something that I
was, I was gonna get to, um, Mr.
Speaker, General lady was, um,
you know, we, we, we, we have
these locations as a place of
high reverence. We, we, uh,
these were places of, uh, where
we had ceremony and uh places of
healing and, and uh now it's
more about places of relaxation.
Would you agree? General Le?
I was just thinking.
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen,
yes, and that is um that is one
of the things that we can be
prideful in, in the fact that
we'd like to share.
Um, what we believe are uh part
of our ancestral um belief
systems and traditions.
Thank you, uh, uh, Mr. Speaker,
general lady, and um, you know,
my, my first uh introduction of
these of of hot rocks was
actually through ceremony, uh,
participating in our sweat lodge
ceremony that many uh many uh
indigenous people from North
America, not just Native
America, but North America they
practice these uh uh they they
uh.
rehealing of of their bodies
through, through.
the uh sweat lodge and uh and
my, my father, my late father,
uh, uh, you know, took, took my
brother and me to these uh sweat
lodge ceremonies in and I'm I'm
so blessed to, to have that, uh,
uh, upbringing in uh in uh so I
I just want to, uh, again this
this legislation means so much
because there's, there's so much
to it than just the technology
or, you know, uh, lowering the
cost of energy.
Um, Mr. Speaker, a general lady,
um, going back to to this
application, uh, and Mr.
Speaker, young lady, uh, with,
with the first process being
when hot water rises up a well.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, from
what I understand, it's not
necessarily rising, but we go
down and um generate.
When we drill down.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General lady. I'm just gonna go
through my notes right here of
what I understand this uh
generation of electricity
incorporates, Mr. Speaker,
Jolady, uh, incorporates, um,
you know, hot water, uh, of, of,
of every well being, being where
a where the hot water rises to
the hot water turns into steam,
Mr. Speaker General Lady after
it turns into steam, the steam
turns a
The turbine to make electricity,
uh, after they make electricity,
the steam is cooled back down
into water, then water is, as
once the water is cool, uh,
general lady, Mr. Speaker, the
water is pumped back into the
ground in what we're calling a
closed loop system. Do I have
this correct, Mr. Speaker,
General lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm
so proud you absolutely have it
correct. You should have been
the scientist responding to
these questions because you got
it right on.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and um, you know, this,
this is like, I, I feel like,
like, you know, we, uh, hearing
some of the concerns about the
technology, um, you know, and,
and
And uh Mr. Speaker, young lady,
there's areas where this is
already in full production such
as the country of Iceland. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
General lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Iceland and right here in New
Mexico, Lightning Dock.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
lady, um, and actually in
Iceland is where I first learned
about this because my, my uncle
uh my uncle was actually, he
served in the navy in
at a military base in Iceland,
and he talked a lot about their
geothermal, uh, technology that
was, uh, in, in Iceland and, and
I was looking it up and I said
actually they're pushing for
almost all of their electricity
almost comes from uh geothermal,
is that correct, Madam Speaker,
uh, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and, and uh
gentlemen, yes, and that
exemplifies.
Um
Why it's so important for New
Mexico to lead.
In this
Field so that we can then not
only be the equal to Iceland,
um, but we can lead the way in
so many different arenas and I,
Mr. Speaker, and, and.
Gentlemen, I do wanna also
stress that.
As you were raised?
Um, I was raised and I remember
the hot rocks being put into a
closed.
Uh, an enclosure when I suffered
from asthma.
And the steam generated opened
naturally opened my lungs so
this is a tremendous this bill
can can totally support um what
we have known as our ancestral
traditions and practices, but
what we now know is our tribal
energy sovereignty and in the
world of that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
general lady, um, and, and I
think there's, there's so much
um prolific and uh economic and
just just so much opportunity
here in in our great state of of
New Mexico to be able to um to
utilize uh this technology and
Mr. Speaker general lady is uh
actually a chapter house meeting
I attended to, and I, I
appreciate the, the graphic,
the, the, the, the information.
on the page I was given to us,
but um there was um a chapter
meeting I attended to in
Tohatchie, where there is a hot
springs there in the community
wants to uh take advantage of
this opportunity would would
this legislation help, uh, the
local government in Tohatchie to
pursue this.
Uh, thank you Mr. Speaker
General.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
absolutely this is exactly what
we aim to do but the beauty.
Is that in community such as
Tohachi.
Um
You can combine.
Community solar.
With um geothermal.
And I'm not quite sure about
wind, but I am almost positive
that wind is also an energy uh
element that can be combined so
can you imagine these small
communities, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, being able to
incorporate all of these natural
renewable clean energy sources.
And at the same time.
Create economic opportunities
for their communities this is
goes beyond our imagination.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I, I, I appreciate that, Mr.
Speaker, general lady, and um I
also want to like.
And let the body know that we're
not alone in this effort to
pursue legislation on this. In
fact, Mr. Speaker General lady,
uh, I believe there's a, uh,
federal.
there's a Senate bill being
introduced right now called the
Steam Act.
Uh, it's called the streamlining
thermal energy through advanced
mechanism and it's being
sponsored by Senator Catherine
Cortez Maesto and Sandra Lisa
Murkowski. This is a bipartisan
legislation at the
Federal level that's happening
at the same time, we're doing
this legislation and I
understand that there's also a
companion bill in the United
States Congress or House of
Representatives to also do this
exact same thing to make
permitting and bringing uh this
technology into communities that
have not yet received. Are, are
you aware of this, uh,
congressional push that's
happening at the federal level,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for that, um.
Throughout the years there have
been efforts.
Uh, I think we're now
experiencing with Department of
Energy secretary who has
highlighted this as a priority.
I believe the conversations have
led to what you just described.
Thank you for letting us all for
briefing us and bringing us up
to date on what the two pieces
of legislation are because um
they are being tracked uh around
the state uh all around the
United States because other
states are.
ent hu s ia s t ically and and
pursuing what we're pursuing in
this state so um I'm really
happy to hear that and thank you
for sharing that information.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I, I, I,
I apologize but what what I was
trying to get to is that this
effort is a bipartisan effort at
the federal level, it's a
bipartisan effort in the United
States Congress and, and, you
know, it, and I know there's
been um uh folks from, from each
side that have had interest in
this. Would you agree Mr.
Speaker, and yes, absolutely,
because all of us are concerned
about our.
every single representative
whether we're in representing
districts in the state or
whether we're representing
districts at the federal level
we all have communities, um,
that are in need communities
that need to be uplifted
economically communities that
need to be introduced to the
world of renewable energy as
accessible and as opportunities
and so.
It cross partisan lines all of
us have an interest because
every single one of our
communities have diverse, uh,
needs and diverse populations
and these type of bills can
actually.
Um, empower and elevate and
provide the best opportunities
for a clean future for our
communities.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and uh that uh I
don't wanna take up too much
time because this is such a
important legislation that um
Mr. Speaker, General lady, I
would ask my uh colleagues to
support House Bill 289, which
will spur innovation and lower
energy costs for all New
Mexicans. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
the gentleman. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I've applied for this
grant, but so let's just just
say I've done this. I've applied
for this grant. I won the
$250,000. I have a spot on state
land that is perfect for what I
want to do, so I, I apply for
that grant. I get it and I begin
to work immediately. Can you
tell me how much I'm gonna have
to pay for that hot water that I
am now going to be leasing from
the state.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and um
gentlemen for that scenario, um,
actually you're not leasing the
water.
Um, in this project you will
have to seek.
Permitting you you you're gonna
go through the permitting
process and whatever that.
Permitting process is and the
cost related, that's what will
be encumbered by you, um,
however, the water itself is not
there's not a cost to the water
itself it it.
But again it's one of those
questions that these projects
and the rule making and all of
this process will unveil for us
but right now, um, from what we
understand, um, it's all
associated with the permitting
processes.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, but if I'm an oil and gas,
for example, before I drill that
well on state lands, I know
exactly what I'm gonna pay, um,
per barrel for uh CFU, um,
whatever that cost is, I know,
so you're telling me then that I
could go out and get this grant,
and then I could use the state
which is everybody's water. I
could use it for free for the
next 20 years as I generate
electricity.
Using it
Mr. Speaker, and um.
And gentlemen again it's one of
those questions where it
depends.
It depends on what the water is
going to be used for it depends
on how deep you have to go in
and where the water is
accessible it depends on um a
number of factors.
And then we also it also depends
on what existing lines and all
of the above entail so it's very
difficult to say which is why um
these projects uh are so
important to get underway.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but that doesn't
answer the question. I'm going
to be using a hot water that
belongs to the citizens of the
state of New Mexico and I'm not
gonna have to pay for it while I
generate electricity and make
money off of that.
Mr. Mr. Speaker and, and um.
And gentlemen, I'm told that.
These processes are subject to
the same.
Laws that apply to um oil and
gas, um, but again.
These are processes that um will
be further either solidified,
um, monitor changed whatever has
to happen but for right now they
will be subject to the same laws
that pertain to oil and gas.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So, um, I'm gonna be
paying the same uh tax that an
oil producer pays right now for
the, for the use of that water.
the water.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen again
it's one of those situations if
you're using the water for the
same purposes most likely.
But again it's based on all of
those factors that I just
enumerated that will impact the
answer to your question.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, but that's my
point.
You haven't told me what it's
going to cost me.
And, and that's what I would
like to know what the citizens
of this state are going to be
getting for their allowing
somebody to use this and make
money.
Mr. Speaker and and um
gentlemen.
We do not know.
And cannot answer your question.
It is the the various agencies
in our state.
That impact the answer to that
question, for example, the state
land office, they have their,
uh, processes and costs
associated and I'm not sure who
the others are that will be
involved the application process
will reveal.
The details and um benefits and
costs and everything associated
but right now I don't have an
answer for you because it
depends. Thank you Mr. Speaker
and gentle ladies. So it
depends.
Um, let me, let me go down that
rabbit hole for a minute, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, it
depends, would it depend on
whether or not I was using that
to sell electricity? Would it
depend on that if I was using it
for uh cooling houses in my
subdivision. I'm, I'm just
trying to figure out are the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico going to ever realize an
excise tax or a benefit from
allowing these companies to use
this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
when we pass this piece of
legislation.
We will begin the rulemaking
process and in the rule making
process all of these questions
that you've raised all of the
factors that are utilized to
come to arrive at the answers
that you've raised should be
part of that whole rule making
and as I mentioned to um Mr.
Speaker, previous, uh,
colleague, um, that's when it's
important for your communities
you and others that you believe
should be.
involved um should all and the
public is invited to these rule
making processes that's where
the input would be given but we
cannot at this moment give you a
specific cost what I've said,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, is
that in every one of our efforts
across agency and across public
the first and primary
responsibility we have is to
protect our public's interest
so.
It is incumbent on the public as
well to assist us in that
protection by participating in
these processes such as rule
making.
think, Mister Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um,
and other states done this, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, yes,
we have, um, project A project
or projects underway in the
state of Utah.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, so, um, is it on state
land?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, all I
know is that it is located in
western Utah.
And the name of the of the um.
Project is called it's referred
to as fervo and they are in um
phase one of their operations,
um.
Going into 2026 with the full
400 megawatt output expected in
2028. That's all I can give you
in terms of what our um research
has uh.
Relate to us.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I, I guess my point is.
Um, we're, we're, you're asking
us to pass a bill that I don't
know and this body doesn't know
if there's going to be what type
of benefit that we are going to
to.
What excise tax, what whatever
tax it is or if there is even a
tax that we're going to benefit
from and that's the question and
in my mind, um, what is that?
And so I'd prefer not to pass
this bill until we actually know
what the benefit is to the state
of New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Seeing no further debate,
General lady close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
I now um.
Move
House Bill 289 as amended do now
pass.
We're on the final passage of
House Bill 289 as amended. The
vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 35 in the positive.
23 in the negative.
House Bill 289 as amended has
passed this House.
Gentlemen from Colfax Mora Rio
Riva, San Miguel, and Taos, are
you ready on item number 36, Mr.
Speaker, will you get me to that
point?
Let the record reflect
That all action necessary for
placing House bill.
289 as amended, no, that's not
it. 323 house built 323.
On final passes has been taken
and not, and it's now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, my
co-sponsor, uh, Representative
Pettigre passed a bill about 2
years ago that had a consequence
that he he didn't intend so what
this bill does is uh.
It takes us back, uh, the crops
in the past did not need a PE
stamp for the day to day work
they do.
And this bill is going to take
us back there and I now stand
for questions.
gentleman was, was there an
amendment on this bill?
Mm
Mr. Speaker.
My, my, my apologies, gentlemen,
uh, the gentleman, uh.
From Sunderal
Mr. Speaker, will the kind
gentleman from Ri Riba and the
other counties yielded, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, there was
quite a bit of discussion in
House Judiciary.
Um, and we came up with
language.
To fix the issues that came up
in judiciary and at this time
I'd like to.
Move the amendment.
Gentlemen, do you have that 202
number, please? The number is
231657.4.
Thank you. Does everyone have a
copy of the amendment?
Oh, it's been passed out. OK.
the
It is online. Thank you.
It seems like everybody has the
amendment. The gentleman from
Sandoval to explain the
amendment.
Mr. Speaker, this is, uh,
corrective language.
Uh, in the amendment that fixes
the issues that were brought up
in uh.
House Judiciary
Um, changes, uh,
In the title
Creating an exemption from the
engineering and surveying
Practice Act.
For rural electric distribution
cooperatives.
And the, the big part of the
amendment is on page 2.
Lane 25, it closes the quotation
mark.
And after line 25 it inserts the
following language.
A rural electric distribution
cooperative shall be exempt from
the provisions of the
engineering surveying Practice
Act.
Provided that the cooperative
services are not offered to the
public.
And are performed only within
the legal boundaries of the
property that the cooperative
owns, leases, has an assessment
or right of way on or lawfully
operates.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment?
I'm sorry, is this a friendly
amendment, Mr. Speaker, yes,
this is friendly.
Is there any objection to the to
adopting the amendment.
No, OK, see you then we have a,
we have an amended bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Joema still has the floor.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I now stand for
questions. Uh, if there's any
other questions?
further debate the gentleman to
close. Mr. Speaker, I move that
House Bill 323 as amended do not
pass.
We are on final passage of House
Bill 323 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
by a vote of 61 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
House Bill 323 as amitted has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo, are
you ready on item number 29?
Yes, I am. Can you take me to
that point, Mr. Speaker. Let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
365 on final passage has been
taken and is now subject to
debate. Amendment or
substitution, then the lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 365 provides staffing for
the public education commission
in the form of the state charter
schools office, uh, it moves
staff from the PED charter
school division into the state
charter schools office.
Excuse me, I gotta catch my
breath.
Um
The office is funded as a, as
all charter school authorizers
are funded by the 2% withholding
assessment to all charter
schools, and this would happen
effectively July 1st, 2026, and
with that I stand for questions.
There is debate. The gentle lady
from Santa Fe, Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
gentle lady from Borglio, uh,
Guild, uh, Mr. Speaker, I yield
to the gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
You took a few questions, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um.
As I'm reading uh even more
carefully through this piece of
legislation and as you know, I
did not, uh, vote for this, uh,
piece of legislation in our.
Uh, how's government committee,
uh, just due to my, my, my
issues with having, you know,
separate entities governing.
Public
Schools, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, so one of my questions
is if this is um inacted.
Um, would this encourage more
charter schools to be chartered,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, this
has no impact on more schools
being chartered or not being
chartered.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
Lady. This is, uh, so this is
just an alignment bill that
would move staff from PED over
to the PEC, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady exactly.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
many staff
would be FTEs would be moved,
Mr. Speaker, General lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
there's 15 currently servicing
the state char the charter
schools and PED and they would
move under an executive director
in the state charter office.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, so we, so those 15
FTEs that would be uh would you
call it a transfer or would you
call this, I mean, can you
describe that that um shift in
um FTEs, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Yes, Mr. Speaker and kind
lady, it would, they would be
transferred um.
As per what the
Legislation proposes. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker generally is the PEC
a state agency, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, it is. It's an elected body
of 10 commissioners representing
every part of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Generally, and it's my
understanding that they are
still there's still oversight
from PED over the PEC. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker and general
lady all schools are public
schools, charter schools are
public schools. They all have to
conform to the policies and
statutes under PED. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, generally can you
explain to me why the PEC
exists?
Mr. Speaker, and kind lady, it,
it goes back to 2003, the
original charter, when we did
away with the state board of
education, the PEC took on the
responsibilities of chartering
charter schools. Mr. Speaker
General Lady, how many charter
public charter schools are there
in our state?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady,
there's 60 chartered by the PEC
and there are 26 by local
districts. Speaker generally,
how many total public schools
are there in the state, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I do not
know.
Mr. Stricker Jenna, can you give
me an estimation?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady
probably between 800 and 900.
It's not part of this bill.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker generally
understood, but there, what is
part of this bill is the
oversight of those 60 charter
school, public charter schools
that exist, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, it's
a matter of transferring the
stuff so they're directly under
the board of commissioners.
I just figured and I understand
that, but we're gonna take 15
FTEs from PED.
And transfer them over to the
PEC for
60
Oversight of about 60 charters,
public charter schools, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaking kind lady, they'll
be continuing the same work they
currently do, but it will be
under the state charter office
instead of the charter school
division of the PED.
Mr. Speaker General later, um,
Yes, that's that's how I, I read
your, your legislation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. What I'm
trying to understand is why that
is necessary, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, it
aligns the charter school
purposes, uh, without.
Uh
Disagreements between having two
heads, a PD.
Division and the PEC division it
it just aligns the purpose of
those charter schools more
effectively, Mr. Speaker General
later, uh, but there's still
under the oversight of the PED,
is that correct, Mr. Speaker,
General lady?
Mr. Speaker, and kind lady, all
schools, and I don't even want
to say and charter schools all
public schools are under the
oversight of PED and accountable
to all the policies and statutes
therein.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. General
so again.
With all due respect, why do we
need uh 15 FTEs transferred from
the PED to the PEC when they're
only when they are
Responsible, if you will, for.
A small population or small
percent of all of our public
schools in our state, Mr.
Speaker.
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, um,
The charter school officers and
staff oversee the specific
contracting, uh, unique to the
charter school contracts which
vary in price size purpose,
everything.
Mr. Speaker, General lady,
that's, that's uh can you give
me what?
15 FTEs, what is that in
relationship to the budget of
the PED right now, Mr. Speaker,
General lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, I do
not know that answer.
Mr. Speaker, General lady, just
Did, um,
this uh PED have any um
Do they
Support this piece of
legislation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, and
kindly, can you repeat that?
Yes, ma'am, Mr. Speaker,
generally, does the PED support
this piece of legislation?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady
following the government
committee meeting PEC PED Public
charter schools of New Mexico
and myself met and added some
tweaks which we feel uh PD was
comfortable and continuing the
mission of PEC and reducing
funding expectations of the PED
in relationship to the PEC.
Mr. Speaker, General Lead, is
that reflected in an amendment
in this piece of legislation,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, I've
heard word that someone has
reposed an amendment.
Mr. Speaker, generally, that
that's not my amendment Mr.
Speaker generally.
But thank you for letting me
know, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I'll be interested in, in
seeing that amendment, um, I'm
see what those tweaks are, uh, I
would have liked to know, um,
but I still, um, have a concern
about um me being 15 FTEs from
the PED directly into the PEC,
um, I think that affects the
PED, uh, budget, uh, and I would
hope as we are going through.
budget meetings throughout the
interim that this is going to be
reflected and that the PED
recognizes and understands that
they're gonna, that this is
going to affect their budget,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and kind lady, the
legislation includes uh.
What do you call it? MOUs
between PD and PC that were
developed, so part of that 2%
would fund any universal
functions of the PED that
directly tie in to the oversight
of charter schools. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Generally, I
appreciate that you've done that
work and that you're, that
that's gonna be reflected in,
in, um, what we're going to hear
today and I'd also like to say,
um, I still have concerns about
there being two different
Divisions I guess of.
Of um pieces of
Of what I think is uh um
duplication, if you will at at
best of what I can explain
today, uh, to be to be kind, Mr.
Speaker General later, because I
don't.
I know how the PEC was developed
and how why it was developed and
in its existence, but I don't
understand why it's still exists
today under the the historical
um evolution of why we even set
this up. It was to find best
practices, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady of those chartered public
chartered schools so that we
could have better models for our
entire public school system uh
which point.
we, we stand today this there's
still a separation and I just
hope that at some point we can
have more alignment so that we
are not going through these
types of pieces of, uh, pieces
of legislation, Mr. Speaker
General, later we we are
separating things out and you
know, apples, oranges, but
everybody's everybody's still in
the same uh basket, if you will.
It's, it's not, uh, for me it's
not best practices for our state
and for our budget, Mr. Speaker
General.
a lady, especially when we just
have a portion, a small percent
of our schools that are um
That that that have and I'm not
gonna say benefits or nonpa
benefits because there's
parodies on both sides. I would,
I would, I would argue, Mr.
Speaker, General, I'd like to
see better alignment. I
understand that that's what
you're trying to do with this
piece of legislation, however,
it's still divided. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from Valencia,
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentle lady from Borneo, do
you yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the kind
gentleman from Valencia County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind gentle lady.
Uh, I did hear this fear bill in
education and uh.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you tell me briefly about the 2%
monies?
Yes, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen per state law 2% of
the state equalization guarantee
monies that go to each charter
school are automatically turned
over to their authorizer, so the
60 state chartered schools turn
their 22% over currently to the
PED and the, let's see.
And I think it's 26 district
chartered charter schools or
whatever the correct number is,
I have to check their money goes
to their authorizing district
and that's supposed to be used
by the authorizer to support and
carry out the contractual
agreements, etc. of the charter
schools they oversee.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Is the 2%
taken from the regular, uh,
school districts or public
schools, Mr. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen, no.
So Mr. Speaker, so based upon
the, the conversation early,
earlier, um.
The, the 2% moneys are taken
from charter schools.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it
is my understanding that those
funds are what has funded the
positions in PED is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady? Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
you are exactly correct, and
it's 43 schools are authorized
by different school districts.
So Mister Speaker, gentle lady,
just to, to bring this to light
is so that the money is taken
from the charter schools, and
yet the charter schools do not
have authority or are part of
the hiring process so the money
has been taken.
From the charter schools and has
been used to fund positions at
PED. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that is
correct, and we are the only
state where the state chartering
authority does not hire their
own staff.
And, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, this also goes where,
where the PEC is located. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, from my
understanding that it is located
at PED, um, which may not be the
most ideal location for this
commission. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Speaker,
that is correct.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
the other part is about
oversight. I know there was some
concern about that, but my
understanding, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is that PED will
still have the same oversight
and responsibilities to support
these charter schools that were
addressed in this, in your
legislation. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Speaker, kind gentlemen, that is
correct.
with that, Mr. Speaker,
generally, I do have an
amendment.
Gentlemen, will you kindly bring
the amendment. Oh, we already
have the amendment and it's
already passed out. Look at
that. Good things happen to them
when I'm not here. Uh, can you
read the number on the bottom
just to make sure I have the
right one.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
number is 0.231548.1.
Right been passed out,
gentlemen, to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. My my
amendment uh just is uh to
address a certain area as far as
to to clean up some of the
language and to bring clarity to
this bill. So bullet 11 page 4
line 6 after the period, strike
the remainder of the line and
strike through line 7 through
the period on page 9, line 24,
remove the brackets of the line
through all and strike the
remainder of the line.
And on line 25 strike chartered.
And ladies is a friendly
amendment.
Mr.
Speaker and kind gentleman,
having studied it and
recognizing that it stems from
our post-government committee
meeting. This is a very friendly
amendment. A friendly amendment,
right. Is there a debate on the
amendment or is there an
objection to adopting the
amendment?
See none you have an amended
bill. Gentlemen from Valencia,
back to you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you kind gentle lady, um.
I think this really does help to
clarify and and does bring some
kind of equity to this and so
with this amendment and with the
purpose of this bill, I am proud
to support your bill and I I.
I basically asked the, the, the
body to do the same. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. There is the debate from
Colfax, Curry, Harding, Quay,
San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, I also heard this
bill in in education and I voted
for it and I just wanted to make
one point, uh, the difference
between the PED and the PEC is
one of them elected.
Mr. Speaker, kind gentlemen,
yes, the PEC is elected the PED
leadership is appointed and then
hired by those appointees.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I
prefer elected, and I will vote
for your bill. Thank you.
Seeing no further debate and
later to close.
Mr. Chair, I now move a due pass
for House Bill 365 is amended.
We're on final passage of House
Bill 365 as amended. The vote is
now open.
What it's about to close?
The boy's not closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative house with 365 as
amended has duly passed his
house.
Gentle lady from Bern Lee
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
are you ready on item 14?
Speaker, will you get me to that
point that all action necessary
for placing House Bill 84 as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution, the general lady
to explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. House Bill 84 as
amended protects employees from
coercion and retaliation
regarding participation and
employer mandated or endorsed
political and religious
activities this bill.
provides remedies for violations
of the act by employers. It is
important to note what this bill
does and does not do. This bill
does not prevent any employer
from speaking to employees, this
bill does prevent an employer
from retaliating against an
employee who exercises their
right not to listen to political
speech at work.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions and I would
also like to introduce my expert
witness, Steven Curtis. He is a
labor lawyer, um, and again with
that I stand for questions.
There is the gentle lady from
Berlio and Torrens,
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Sorry
about that. I was looking over
the bill and I saw somebody went
I thought Representative Dow
went before me, but I will go
ahead and ask a few questions.
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I want to ask some questions
about me grab my glasses so I
can see.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, uh, I
just have a few questions on
this with this employee free
speech.
Um
Can I ask you a question? Does
that, what would happen if there
was a so called meeting in an
office or building and let's say
a group of people were bashing a
certain president and they felt
uncomfortable. Does that give
them the right to go ahead and
file a lawsuit that they uh have
been feeling that they've been
violating.
Violated.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it gives them the right to leave
the meeting if they didn't want
to be there. It also gives them
the right to file a lawsuit if
they were retaliated against for
leaving the meeting.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what do you mean by retaliated?
Can you explain to me in
definition what an example of
retaliation would mean in the
workplace, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it is defined in subsection D,
and I can go ahead and read that
subsection D on page 2, line 10,
retaliatory action means taking
any discriminatory or adverse
employment action against an
employee in the terms and
conditions of employment,
including discharge of
employment, discipline,
suspension, demotion,
withholding promotion, punitive
scheduling, or a reduction of
hours.
Mr. Speaker, and, and gentle
lady, what happens
If I because I know there's
union meetings that happen and
sometimes union people, there's
an important meeting where they
need to talk about stuff and
let's say that union leaned
towards one side versus the
other, and if somebody start
talking about politics in any
way or form they could go ahead
and and do in a retaliate
because if they felt they were
being judged and they couldn't
go to the meeting and they
couldn't make a vote on an
important union issue and they
had to leave. Could they then
sue because in a way they're
being retaliated against because
they didn't want to stay there
for the discussion.
Mr. Speaker and General Lani.
Only if the employer retaliates
against them for leaving the
meeting.
Mr. Speaker Representative.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um,
And I think I forgot, Mr.
Speaker, young lady, I forgot to
ask you you your time. We yield
all your time. I think I totally
blew over that, sorry, because
Mr.
Speaker, Representative, yes.
OK, just wanna make sure. Uh, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so I guess.
What happens because I'm, I'm
specifically sticking with union
questions we have a person and
let's say the union is one
political party mostly or they
push the political agenda and
that person can't attend that
meeting because of the agenda.
What that mean because they
couldn't attend the union
meetings that they're a member
of that that would be a form of
retaliation, Mr. Speaker,
generally, just by not being
able to go because of the
discussions about politics.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
no, it only applies to
employers.
So Mr. Speaker De Lady, if
there, if part of you're being
an employee at a place and you
need to participate in a union
meeting because you're part of
the union and they can't because
of political discussion, they
have no recourse then to say,
hey, I'm being retaliated
against because I'm not in a
certain party, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, even though union
dues are mandatory, they're part
of the union, Mr. Speaker
Delaney. So I think uh I'm gonna
interject real quick here
because as I'm reading the bill,
this applies only to the
employer, um, and I think that.
that's been stated twice now, so
I'll say it the 3rd time it
applies to the employer, that's
the purpose of the bill. Thank
you. OK, so Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies, so, OK, so then
if somebody I just wanna
clarify, so somebody is mandated
to be in the union, the union
fiends are taken, they can't
attend a meeting that would not
apply to them.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
can you tell me
If
There was a meeting taking place
uh in the lunchroom and somebody
walked by and they overheard
some sort of language. They felt
uncomfortable, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so there's no, as
long as there's no retaliation,
um, they could that person
couldn't claim, well, I felt
very uncomfortable and I feel
retaliated. I mean, I feel like
I was being picked on because
they were talking about me
because I'm, I don't like the
current president, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, representative,
that would be a not, not be a
violation because they were not
compelled to attend the meeting.
So Mr. Speaker, De lady, if, if
there was, so let's say there
was a meeting and um.
They go into that meeting and
there's discussions about a
certain president, how they feel
about it, it's a mandated
meeting, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and they feel like they're
being assaulted because they're
they're making snide comments,
Mr. Speaker, is that applicable
under your bill?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I'm
sorry, but I'm gonna have to ask
you to repeat your question, um,
and if you will give me just a
few minutes before you do that.
OK, Mr. Speaker Representative,
we're ready.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker, as I
said earlier, I know how hard it
can be when somebody asks a
question and you're trying to
talk to your expert at the same
time. It's, it's a lot of
overlap.
So what I'm trying to get to is
somebody goes to a meeting,
they're having a meeting, let's
say some people are joking
around, they're talking about
they don't like a president,
they do like the present, the
other person's left out and
they're kind of ribbing them
about something. Could that be
seen as retaliation, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative not
as defined in the act.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so if I just wanna make
sure I'm perfectly understanding
there's a meeting it's mandated
everybody's saying, oh, I hate
this president or whatever,
whatever scenario you want to
put, and they're kind of ribbing
the person who's the one person
who does like that certain
president or doesn't like that
president, so that would not be
counted as retaliation by them
kind of harassing them or hazing
them in that meeting, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's not the employer.
Mr. Spe young lady, if there's a
meeting that the employer
mandates and they're at that
meeting and the employer has a
certain political belief and
there's a person in there who
has the opposite political
belief. Explain to me how that
would work out is, is that not
retaliation if they're giving
that person a hard time, Mr.
Speaker Delaney.
Madam Chair Representative, the
only thing they uh bill does is
prohibits retaliation if the
employee exercises their right
to leave the meeting.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but it didn't quite answer my
question.
Because my, my concern is with
this, when we start talking
about free speech and
retaliation, etc. um, there's a
lot of discussions that happen
where a certain employer may
feel a certain way in a
political term that seems almost
like we're edging on if that
person
Feels left out even that could
be retaliation, Mr. Speaker
generally. So explain to me
exactly if you own a business,
you feel a political way,
everybody's talking about a
certain political person.
Explain to me an example of what
retaliation would look like, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Um, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, again
retaliation is on page 2,
section D, line 10. There's um
that paragraph contains what
retaliation means.
So figure gentle lady, it means
taking discriminatory adverse
employment acts against the
employee in the terms of
conditions of employment,
including discharge that's when
suspension withholding
promotion. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, how would somebody
show that they were at a place
of employment that leans one way
or the other, and how would they
prove that they did not get a
promotion or that they got
demoted because of their
posing political belief, how
would they show that that was
retaliation like they didn't
agree with their boss and their
political beliefs, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
uh, Mr. Speaker, uh,
representative.
And retaliation.
The bill doesn't do anything
about um disagreeing with your
boss.
It only uh uh Mr. Speaker, Madam
Chair, the bill only um
prohibits retaliation if you,
uh, as an employee, uh, refused
to attend a meeting.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
So you refuse to attend a
meeting based on political
beliefs, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and there's a retaliation
from that and then how do you
prove that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? How do you prove
that in court of law?
You
Mr. Speaker, Representative.
If you have any direct evidence.
Circumstantial evidence.
Or you could show that the
timing was suspicious.
Mr. Speaker and or the
discipline was pre pretextual.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you explain pretextual?
The reason, Mr. Speaker, um,
Representative, the reason given
for the action.
Taken against the employee is is
not um the correct action or the
correct reason.
So Mr. Speaker, generally, so it
could be based on just suspicion
as you said earlier, Mr.
Speaker, gen lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, but you have to prove it in
a court of law.
And Mr. Speaker, Dan Lady when
that happens, um, the person
That is doing the lawsuit, they
get a lawyer in hopes that they
win and the lawyer gets their
cut, but that employer would
also have to hire a lawyer to
defend themselves on said
suspicions that correct, Mr.
Speaker Gility?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, this is why I'm voting no
for this bill, uh, because
there's a sus suspicion and then
two people have to lawyer up and
I don't think this is good for
business when we want to
encourage businesses to come
here so that I'm done with my
questions, Mr. Speaker and John
Laney.
There is for the debate, young
lady from Burton Leo
representative Ononornu.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
general lady yield, Mr. Speaker,
I, I, I do yield to the
representative.
Thank you. um, so I am very
excited about this bill. I have
taken some time to read it, but
I don't have it directly in
front of me, so I was hoping you
could expand on why it's
important, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, that employers
have the option to opt out of
political speeches in the
workplace.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
thank you for that question, um,
because the workplaces,
workplace environment should be
free from coercion, allowing
employees to focus on their job
duties without fear of
retaliation.
Political beliefs are deeply
personal.
An employee should not be forced
to listen to or engage in
political discussions that don't
relate to their work.
Employees usually go to work to
do their work, protecting this
right ensures a fair and
inclusive workplace.
prevents discrimination or
hostility and upholds the
principle that political
participation should always be
voluntary.
that? Thank you, thank you for
that answer, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, and that that
makes sense to me. Can you tell
me why?
being forced to attend a meeting
like that. Why?
Why would those discussions like
matter in terms of workplace.
Fairness, excuse me.
Chair Representative because um
What we want to do is make sure
that employees don't feel
pressured into attending any
political discussions that they
don't necessarily agree with,
um, as a condition of their
employment, um, employees should
be free to make their own
decisions employees should be um
be able to do that with any kind
of fear or retaliation.
Um, and by preventing mandatory
political discussions at work
this bill creates a more
respectful and inclusive and
inclusive workplace. The
protection reinforces the this
protection reinforces the
principle that political
participation should be
voluntary at all times and not
dictated by any employer.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
Representative so if we're
giving.
An employee a chance to choose
whether or not they want to go
to a meeting where political
issues or political people are
being discussed, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, does that.
Does that prevent an employer
then from sharing any political
information with their
employees?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
prevents the employer from
mandating the employee, um,
attend that um meeting where
that political discussion is
going to be had.
OK, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
but then are they allowed is
that employer allowed to
disseminate any political
information in other mediums
apart from a meeting.
Mr. Speaker, Generalleti, yes,
they are allowed to disseminate
political information, but
again, they cannot retaliate
against the employee if the
employee chooses not to um
participate in that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
Representative. So if there was
a meeting about a political
issue, the employee is not
required to attend the meeting,
but then if their employer
wanted to pass out flyers about
like with bullet points about
what was covered in the meeting,
the employer is still allowed to
do that, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, is that correct,
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
OK, thank you for that. So
lastly, like I said, I don't
have a copy of the bill with me,
which is quite unusual because I
usually have my laptop handy so
I can't see it for myself. Can
you outline, I know that there
is a section, um, in the bill
that outlines exceptions to
this, uh, new policy so can you
maybe outline what those are for
me and and tell me what those
are. Um, sure, Mr. Speaker,
Representatives, so there are 7
exceptions that allow for
communication without coercion
and I'll go down.
and read those and what they
are, uh, one communications
require um by law,
communications required about uh
work duties, communications that
uh are part of coursework or
academic programs at public,
private, post-secondary
educational institutions
religious corporations
communicating about religious
matters, casual conversations.
Requirements limited to
management or supervisors and
finally communications from
political or nonprofit
organizations conveying the
employer's political views or
purposes.
And then I also want to add, uh,
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that these exceptions ensure
that employees are not
unnecessarily restricted from
relevant communications, but
they protect them from being
coerced into political
discussions.
Well, thank you very much for
that, Mr. Speaker,
Representative. So it sounds
like the language of the bill is
actually pretty specific in what
we are saying can't be mandated
by an employer, what types of
meetings, what types of
discussions, so things like
casual chats by the water
cooler, those are still
perfectly um allowed. So thank
you for outlining that for me,
Mister Speaker Representative,
and I look forward to supporting
the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
Representative. There's further
debate. The lady from Catherine
Sierracoro Valencia,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Berlio
yield.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
yield. Thank you so much. I, uh,
I think my, one of my questions
was answered, but I just want to
make sure our churches and
nonprofits exempt.
Mr. Speaker, Representative of
the answer to that question is
yes, and you can find it on, on
page 4.
Um, section 4 line 6.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, kind
lady. I, uh, wanted to, um,
Ask a little bit about.
If a company was having a
meeting.
Um, I'm just gonna use a
scenario of, uh, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, when the, uh, I'll
just say the Affordable Care Act
was passed, and you're having a
company meeting to let your
employees know the changes that
are coming, uh, because of the
act being passed at the federal
level, is that considered, um,
A violation.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
the answer is no, it's not
included in the definition of
political matters and again
that's on.
Page 2, section C line 4.
So Mr. Speaker, kind lady, why
would it not be a political
matter when it is political that
the reason that it happened and
you talk about that, that it's,
you know, they passed this at
the federal level. This is an
issue. This is why the things
are happening. I just want to
make sure we're, we're, we're
covered in the parameters.
Because Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
the, it's very broad.
In saying political matters
means matters relating to
elections for political office,
political parties, attempts to
influence legislation, rule or
regulation change proposals or
the decision to join or support
political party and, and so on.
for
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
um, that.
That's the you asked me a whole
bunch of questions in that, so
it's kind of hard to
Um, answer them all at once. So
on page 3, employers are
required by law to communicate
um those kinds of changes um to
them.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's necessary also for them to
perform their job duties to know
that information, to have that
information.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I
think it's a little bit
confusing when it's on page 2,
line 4 where it says political
matters means matters relating
to.
And then
This is rule or regulation
change proposals and so.
We're talking we're talking
political, so, uh, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady, I, I just think that
it, it muddies the water just a
little bit and so it's a little
bit confusing. The other part of
it is, um, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
if I can answer that question
because it sounds like you're
gonna go to a different
question.
Sure. So the question that you
asked, um
The, the only, the only time
that it's uh prohibited and
again we're looking at page 2,
Section C is when there's an
attempt to get the employees to
influence legislation, um, rule
or regulation change proposals.
That's a little bit different
than having a conversation, Mr.
Speaker Representative about
what the actual rule change is.
OK, uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
kind lady. I, I, I think it's,
uh, the muddy, the water is
still muddy. The other question
I have, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
so if I'm trying to encourage uh
employees.
To get out to vote.
Well, Mr. Speaker,
Representative I could start
again. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
If I'm trying to um encourage uh
our employees to get out to vote
and I send out a please get out
to vote. Here's a list of the
candidates.
Is that a violation?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, um,
the only way that that's a
violation if someone is, if
someone refuses to read that
email and you as the employer,
uh, choose to retaliate against
them.
OK, so thank you Mr. Speaker,
kind lady. So if I happen to put
all the Republican candidates at
the top, are they going to take
that negatively, um, instead of
all the Democrat candidates at
the top, can they find a reason?
Is what I'm asking to sue the
company, saying, I took this as
negative influence, uh, are you
trying to influence me in some
way.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
the only thing that this bill
does is if you take action, if
the employee refuses to attend
the meeting or listen to
political matters.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, the, the water is still
muddy as far as I'm concerned.
Thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Dona and I
Otero Silva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, does
a gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mr. Speaker, I do yield,
um, to the representative.
Thank you. Um, I'm wondering,
um, I have a couple of
questions, but wanted to
understand, can you describe the
power dynamic between an
employer and an employee that
might find themselves in this
situation, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
uh, definitely in this kind of a
situation in an employment
situation.
Um, the power dynamic that
exists is that the employer has
the power to um discipline an
employee, um, demote them,
threaten them with job loss, all
those kinds of things. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and what kind of work
environment might that create
for an employee, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that would create a hostile work
environment in which it makes it
difficult for an employee.
To do their work in the matter
that they um believe is is the
best manner possible.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and have you ever
experienced, um, yourself been
required to attend one of these
meetings or like what are called
captive audience meetings, um,
before in your experience or
have you come into contact with
someone who has, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
actually I have um I think that
many in this body know that I am
um a union organizer and there
was a situation probably.
23, maybe 4 years ago where I
was called to by employees to
come help them organize their
workplace, Mr. Speaker
representative and as soon as
the employer found out that the
employees were organizing, they
hired a uh consulting and
anti-union consulting firm from
Florida, um, that firm proceeded
to come in and schedule meetings
with the employees, Mr. Speaker,
Representative.
in which the employees were led
to believe that they had to
stay, how to listen, uh, and
many of the employees, uh, let
me know, Mr. Speaker,
Representative.
It
That they were not interested in
participating in those meetings,
um, but felt that they could not
leave because the employer led
them to believe that they would
be, uh, disciplined if they did.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, I appreciate that, um,
testimony, um, because I too
have been required to attend um
meetings like that and as a
young worker,
Um, not knowing like, hey, this
is a really good paying job, but
all of a sudden I'm required to
come into this meeting and
there's people here I've never
met before, um, telling me
certain things and then from
that point on, wondering what
might I say or do that might,
um, that doesn't pertain to my
everyday work that might
determine uh the outcome of my
employment with my employer is a
really scary, um, experience
and, um,
And so thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I appreciate that,
um, again, that testimony. Do
you know how many employers
conduct these sorts of meetings,
um, or things that this piece of
legislation is trying to um to
ensure that employers refrain
from practicing, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I don't have an
exact number, um, I do know that
um this does happen.
There are many times that we
don't know about it because
employers are afraid to report
it. um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I am aware of a
situation where doctors were um
organizing at a local hospital
and that hospital did the same
exact thing, representative, I
mean, Mr. Speaker representative
they forced them to sit in what
are called captive audience
meetings against their will.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I've heard from, um, like
the National Law Center and
others that it could be upwards
of 89% of employers conduct
captive audience meetings uh in
the United States and so, um,
and so before the NLRB um bans
that practice and so I'm really
excited that New Mexico is
helping protect uh workers, um,
people who have less power in
the workplace and I'm wondering
how does this bill support and
reinforce New Mexico's.
existing public policy regarding
employees' rights to freedom and
political expression, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
I think that this bill
reinforces New Mexico's
commitment to protect workers'
rights in the workplace, um, the
other thing that I will also
wanted to say about this is that
um you know, you mentioned the
NLRB decision and I think it it
um strengthens that, um, other
states have also um uh pass
legislation like this, but
again, um, this bill would keep
New Mexico.
at the forefront of protecting
workers' rights, which is what
we want to be doing.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and I'm
all I'm also wondering so part
of my um history has also been
like helping raise the minimum
wage and, and, uh, Southern New
Mexico and ensuring that uh
employees' rights are protected
and enhanced in the state and um
part of the challenge is not
just passing good policy but
making sure people know about
that policy and um can arm
themselves with um that.
of their expanded rights and so
how does this bill ensure that
employees are aware of their
rights under the Employee Free
Speech Act, um, and, uh, what
resources might be available to
them if they believe their
rights have been violated, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, this
bill ensures that employees are
informed of their rights, um, by
providing clear legal remedies
in cases of violations and also
employees will be made.
aware that they can seek
damages, reinstatement, lost
wages attorney fees if their
rights are violated, um, and
resources like the New Mexico
Department of Workforce
Solutions and other agencies
will be available to help
employees navigate through this
process if they think their
rights have been violated.
Excellent thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, yeah, I think
that's really important just as
when employees find themselves
um in the space where they think
their wages might be um are
might be getting garnished or
they might not be receiving all
their tips, um, or they're not
able to take their, their lunch
breaks, um, this sort of law
helps protect workers, um, from
those making the minimum wage,
um, all the way to those on, um,
in the
are, um, factories and, um, and
larger businesses and so um I am
really proud to be a sponsor of
this bill, and uh I'm glad that
you brought this forward, uh,
representative, and, uh, so with
that speaker, um, I
wholeheartedly support House
Bill 84. Thank you, Speaker
gentle lady.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from Donana Sierra
Socorro Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, religion
lady from Bernalillo, please
yield, Mr. Speaker, I, uh, do
yield to the representative.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, I, I, this
didn't go through my committee,
and so I'm
Very foggy on what is, I, when
you read it in plain language,
it's complicated for me to
understand. So I'm just gonna
Start asking questions. Um, so,
House Bill 84 defines political
matters broadly, including
It attempts to influence
legislation and rules or
regulation change proposals. The
wording of the bill, it's, it's
ambiguous, so
It seems to me that it could
interpret even routine
compliance discussions. Can Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, can you
explain to me what is meant by
political matters.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
think we've already answered
this a couple of times, but
we'll
Do it one more time and hope
that um we've answered it uh
thoroughly.
The um the bill speaks to um an
employer's attempt to get
employees or to coerce employees
into influencing legislation
rules or.
Regulation change proposals. It
does not include uh meetings
whereby the employee, the
employer, Mr. Speaker,
Representative is communicating
rules that have already been
established or put into law.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
sorry. Can you just
Explain to me how I'm supposed
to know that and read that in
this law.
In this proposed act.
Mr. Speaker, I, I, I.
Representative, again, if you're
attempting to get the employees
to influence a certain
particular type of legislation.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
word legislation is not in this
bill.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's in the bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
tell me the page and number,
please. Page 2, section C line
6.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, it
says rule or regulation change.
Most employers have rules and
regulations. They have policies
and procedures. How do I know
this is related to legislation
do you mean state or federal
legislation over the other.
Please hold on one second. I'm
reading page to line 4.
Starts with section C, political
matters means matters relating
to elections for political
office, political parties,
attempts to influence
legislation, rule, or
regulation.
So I'm looking at page 2 line 6.
House Bill 84.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the
word after the word influence
legislation, there is a comma.
Then it says rule or regulation
change proposals.
How is that?
Is that the local, the, the, the
businesses rules and
regulations? Is it the
stakeholders' rules and
regulations? Is it state rules
and regulations? Is it federal
rules and regulations?
There's a comma after the word
legislation.
Fair enough, fair enough. Um, I
interjected because what I heard
was that the word legislation
was not in here and it is here.
So understood, uh, your question
is fair, um, we'll go back to
the gentle lady to answer the
question.
Speaker, Representative, it
includes state and federal
legislation.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, OK,
I will accept that for line 5
attempts to influence
legislation. Now on line 6 after
the comma, rule and regulation
change proposals. How am I to
How is an employee who doesn't
want to go to meeting regarding
the agency or organization or
the, the corporations rule or
regulation changes that are
going to be proposed.
How do I, how does that employee
differentiate that between
State and federal legislation
when there's a comma there.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
you've got to read the whole
sentence. Basically, it's
attempts to influence
legislation, comma, rule or
regulation change proposals.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
hear, I hear what you are
saying. I think this is
ambiguous and could lead to
misrepresentation. The
definition of political matters.
Um, it, it certainly seems, um,
when you're trying to, it just
seems, it seems very broad.
Um, so when you're, when you're
trying to do a training, you're
trained to do a legal
obligation, and it's regarding
state and federal labor laws.
Let's say it's in regard to a
federal change that's happening
right now, that is being
proposed and executive order
that is being proposed, um,
workforce cuts that are being
proposed a congressional bill
that may, may impact employment.
They cannot be compelled to
attend that meeting to find out
their job or to be suggested
that they advocate for their
job, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that is incorrect.
Mr. Stir and Mr. Speaker
representative, it again, um, it
is only when you're attempting
to do all of those things when
you're attempting to influence
legislation.
Rule or regulation change
proposals when you're attempting
to do that, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, it's, if it's
already happened after the fact,
then you can explain those
changes to the employees, two
different situations, Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies, so if
I'm at an NRCS office, and I
hear that farmer, farm services
are going to be cut, and people
may be furloughed, and there's
an action that's about to take
place that would jeopardize
their job. I can say, hey, if
you
want to know about the action
that's going to take place that
could jeopardize your job and
you would like to attend this
meeting, then, um, go ahead and
attend the meeting. If you don't
want to know about the actions
that may jeopardize your job,
then, then don't attend the
meeting. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, that is
correct. OK, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, if this person is
an hourly employee, and we are
going to take Monday to go over
the process of
Coming furloughs, the appeal
process, and they're an hourly
employee, and we're, we're
conducting no more business. The
office is not going to be open
to the public, and that person
is an hourly employee. Would it
be considered retaliatory if
those were the hours that they
missed because they chose not to
come to the meeting.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, we
don't think so.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I,
that we don't think so. You,
this is your bill. I need a yes
or a no.
No, Mr. Speaker, Representative.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And
if at that meeting, we had some
swag, we had a meal, um, I don't
know, we had a drawing or
something like that. It was no
one was compelled, but there
was, there was a benefit first,
you're saying the hourly wage is
fine. They can be without those
hours. So they're going to get 8
hours less than their peers, but
they also didn't get the meal
and they didn't get their name
in the drawing for the flat
screen or whatever compelled
them to come but was not
required, as I've seen
organizing groups.
before.
Is there retaliation for that.
Mr. Speaker,
representative, no. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, are
you, is your expert witness
referencing another section of
law that explains what's
retaliatory or discriminatory as
he.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's the same definition that we
went over in Section D which
describes retaliatory action.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, in
section D,
The, the section that says
nothing in the employee free
speech shallow, you're talking
page 3, section D, uh, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, we're
talking about section, I mean,
uh, page 2.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
means taking any discriminatory
or adverse employee action
against employee in the terms
and conditions of employment.
suspension to motion withholding
promotion, punitive scheduling,
a reduction of hours. If the
employee felt that having their
hours reduced by 8 hours because
they didn't want to come to the
The day of training that was
related to pending
The employee doesn't get to say
I lost 8 hours of work. I don't
want to lose, I don't want to
come, but I don't want to lose 8
hours of work.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if,
if it's a meeting outside of
their work hours and their not
compelled to go then.
It
There's no violation, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, this is
inside of the aid of the
traditional 40 hour work week.
They've closed business, they're
not serving the public.
They're not, they're not a
server in a restaurant. They,
they do paperwork and that day,
this is what the work is
dedicated to, and they don't
want to go.
Mr. Speaker, representative,
it's not retaliation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. I'm just looking at
page 2, line 14 that says
punitive scheduling a reduction
of hours.
It.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, representative,
um, it was the employees not
choice not to go, uh, to attend
that meeting, therefore it's not
retaliation in terms of the
reduction in hours. Thank you,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. And, and so
they can voluntarily choose not
to participate and they, it's
their hourly. Now, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the same question
for someone who's salaried.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
if they're salaried, it doesn't
affect their pay if they don't
go.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Um, so,
In the
The, the National Labor Relation
Act, it already prohibits
employers coercion and workplace
speech. So what does this do
additionally that that didn't
get the job done in the bill
that so many folks have
referenced.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
um, again that's contained in
section page 2 section C,
political matters, influencing
legislation, uh, political
parties, elections for political
office, um, those kinds of
things, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, so the bill, the National
Labor Relations Act fell short
of what the state of New Mexico
wants to do.
Mr. Speaker, represent
representative the um National
Labor Relations Act is specific
to um forcing employees to
listen to anti-union or to
participate in uh meetings
regarding umfluencing their
decision whether to join or not
join a union. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, then why is this
bill needed?
Mr. Speaker, representative, um.
This bill is needed, uh, again,
looking at page 2, section C to
prohibit employers from forcing
people to listen to the speech,
um, or attend meetings about the
um items that are described in
section C. Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, we're going to go
beyond, um, discouraging them
for being involved in union and
instead we're going to add, um,
anything related to political
office, political parties.
attempts to influence
legislation, any rules or
regulation change proposals, uh,
we need to trust you, the
language doesn't say it, but
trust you that it's related to
legislation specifically and a
decision to join and support a
political party or political
organization, civic
organization.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, um, Representative,
it's in addition to what the
NLRA, um, has already, um.
Included in their, in their
decision.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady. So what
was the specific um civic
organization that was, you know,
from your personal experiences,
what, what kinds of civic
organizations where people
persuaded or coerced to listen
to or be part of.
Mr. Speaker, Representative in,
in the example that I gave my
own personal example, um, it was
not a civic organization.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, but
what are some examples of the
civic organizations.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, examples
representative examples would be
like um forcing them to forcing
them to join the municipal
league or um you know, any other
kind of uh civic organization
that they may not want to
participate in.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
didn't realize that municipal
League is a civic organization,
is it?
Mr. Speaker, representative,
that's an example of an
organization that the employer
may be forcing the employees to
to join.
Mr.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Um
New Mexico Infant Mental Health
Association.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, representative,
they can't force them to uh
attend a meeting where they are
being forced to join.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
and how about, um, the community
organization.
Mr. Speaker, representative,
same thing.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is the
early childhood coalition, a
community or an example of the
community organization.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
could be.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, so, so let's
just, I'm gonna use the example
of a home visitor.
In the scope of work.
The contracts that are provided
by the state of New Mexico in a
condition of being a home
visitor, you must be pursuing an
infant mental health for level 4
endorsement, if you don't have
one, and not a lot of people
have them, and part of getting
that is being a member of the
New Mexico Infant Mental Health
Association.
Um, it's that they are the ones
that offer the trainings, the
trainings are paid for by the
state and the employees are
compelled to go as a scope of
their work. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, what about that? Uh, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, um,
that is covered on page 3. it's
one of the exceptions under
section D 2.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this is not part of their
post-secondary.
Um, this is, this is not part of
their education. This is part of
their, um, certification and
training. They're also full-time
college students in addition, if
they don't already have the
degree.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
um, you need to look at, um,
section 2.
D2
Well you're looking at, uh, Mr.
Speaker, Representative is
section D3 on page 3. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So if I am a, if part of
what we do is community
engagement. So, say, Rotary Club
or, um,
The Community Health Coalition
or, you know, such because part
of our work is marketing and
outreach. And so part of the
duty for marketing and our
outreach for the for-profit
hospital is to be a member of
Rotary and to attend those
meetings to do presentations and
to promote the organization and
we do this at civic
organizations, some of those are
closed, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that would be an exception as
well.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I saw
that your expert witness was
pointing at a certain page. Can
you?
Saint now, Mister Speaker,
Representative, same page, same
section.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
then the, the, the, the
definition of necessary. So
necessary for such for an
employee to perform their job
duties, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker Representative,
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and, and the word
necessary, could you describe
that? Is that a, is that a
separate legal term in a
separate section of law?
Uh uh Mr. Speaker,
Representative, no, it's just
necessary.
If it's necessary for them to
perform their job, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, what if I said, I
don't want to be part of a civic
organization. I don't want to go
to the community organization. I
don't want to go to those
places. I work for a
group that I believe I can do my
job duties through communication
by email, text, phone, and I
don't feel you should compel me
to go to any of these civic
groups, be part of these groups,
or go to them. I'll do my job
electronically. I like, I prefer
to text, I prefer email.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
if that is part of their job
duty, that situation that you
described then they must do
that. They can't opt out so Mr.
Speaker and gentle ladies, so
the job duties will determine
what necessary is.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
that somewhere else? Because, I
mean, I know I'm going a little
far here. I'm a CDL driver. I'm
licensed by the state. I'm
endorsed for the state, so I can
do my job. But if I'm compelled
to be part of an organization
where we learn about best
practices, because that's who's
teaching the best practices.
You're saying those are those
are exemptions, even though
technically I'm licensed, I'm
approved by the state obviously
I know how to drive. I have my
CDL, but best practices and job
duty and if they agree to a job.
duty that includes civic or
community engagement or
Business association engagement,
then it's OK if it's in the job
duty.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes. OK.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
your definition of necessary is
anything in the job description,
any job duty.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
Necessary. I mean, it's just a
simple.
Yes, I mean, it's.
That's what they need to do to
um
If that's what they need to do
to complete their job, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, yes, so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if my
employee, part of the necessary
and it's in their job
description is to attend the
local health council, and at the
local health council, there is
speech that they do not want to
be part of. They don't want to
hear it. They don't want to read
it, they don't want to touch it,
but it's not the health council.
And they don't like it, and they
don't want to be part of it
because at the health council
meeting,
They're talking about
legislation and they're talking
about political parties and
they're inviting candidates of
one persuasion or the other, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, do they
still have to go because it's in
their job duty.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
are you talking about an
employee an employer sponsored
meeting in the case that you're
um describing Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it's not an
employer sponsored because it's
part of another organization
that we've compelled them to
join as part of their job duty.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative
on page 2a1, I think that's what
the answer is contained, the
answer to your question is
contained there, so.
Um,
The employee, um, shall not be
threatened.
Um, for refusal to attend an
employer sponsored meeting with
the employer or the employee's
agent representative or
designate to communicate.
Political matters or and then it
goes on.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
understand that part, like as
the employer, I'm going to be
politically non I'm completely
non-political. I'm not
influencing anything, but part
of their job duty is to be a
member of the civic organization
and that civic organization,
because we have to come to the
table. It's part of our scope of
work with the state. It's
something that we're responsible
to do. It's a Behavioral Health
Coalition, it's a health
coalition. It's an early
childhood coalition and we're
compelled to do so as part of
our scope of work with the
state. At that meeting,
And I have personal experiences
with this.
There's certain persuasions, or
certain candidates, there's
certain bills, there's certain
legislation, there's certain
policies and practices, they're
here in the capital today.
You know, even today, pushing
certain bills, certain budgets
and stuff, and I'm compelled
because it's part of my job,
it's necessary for me to be at
those meetings because it's part
of the scope of work and it's in
my job description. And I hear
things I don't like at those
meetings.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
because it's not an employer
sponsored meeting, it's not a
violation.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
then can we please go back to
the part where we say we can't
compel them.
To be part of the civic
organizations and these
community organizations.
It's a political matter. So I'm,
I don't, I'm not, I'm not the
president of American Legion.
But if my behavioral health
program, my for-profit
behavioral health program is
serving veterans and it's a job
condition to be part of these
civic organizations and
community organizations that are
veteran focused.
It's my job to attend. It's not
employee, it's not I can't, I,
I, how does the employer take
responsibility and over and be
responsible for a civic or
community organization.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they don't.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
feel like we're talking in
circles.
Do, can an employer compel an
employee as part of the
condition of their job to be a
member of a civic organization.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's if it's necessary to
perform their job duties, yes.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what I'm hearing you say is that
as long as I create every job
description to include
As understanding their job, the
culture of our, our workplace,
who we serve and why we serve
them that I can write into that
being part of a civic group or a
community group or a poli or a
I can write that in and then
they are compelled to do so as a
necessary part of their job.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so the definition necessary is
left to the employer.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I don't read it that way. OK, so
Mr. Speaker and General Laney.
There is an issue
With the National Labor
Relations Act, it feels sort of
what you need. So we are adding
far beyond many additional
restrictions far beyond the
federal law.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
This creates a new cause of
action for employers. Is that
case? Is that true? A new cause
of action for employees,
allowing them to sue their
employer for alleged violations.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, yes
it does. So Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, if my employee
Who is extremely conservative.
No, it's, yeah,
extremely liberal. They're
anti-war.
Um, but they're very concerned
about those veterans who come
back with PTSD. I have a
contract with the state. They
must be members of any, any
veterans organization,
behavioral health, they have to
be any behavioral health
coalition, they're members. So
they are compelled to attend and
it is necessary for the
performance of their duties. Now
they go, and every time they go,
people are talking about
political things. Um, at that
meeting, every time there are
they talk about the elections
that are coming up for political
office.
There are political parties that
are there attempting to
influence legislation. They even
talk about rules and regulations
and policy changes related to
veterans, and they even
compelled them to join these
different organizations, civic
organizations, community
organizations, etc.
That employee has no recourse
for feeling like they have been
forced or coerced to pretend
something they don't want to do.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, the
only bill, the only, um,
Thing that this covers, the only
thing that this bill covers is
Page 2.
Section 1, line 21 is the
section that speaks to attending
an employer sponsored meeting.
That's what this bill covers.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
does this bill cover political
matters?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
let me add a little bit, um, uh,
to clarify that at a employer
sponsored meeting.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
If this employee comes back and
says,
I realize I signed up for this.
I don't like it. Every meeting I
go to, all they do is talk about
political matters, and you've
compelled me to go as the
employer. And I say, I, I, it's
the job description you signed
up for it, but if you would like
to do a different job, we can
talk about a different job. The
pay scale may not be the same.
The hours may not be the same,
but we have this liaison.
We have this position, we have
that position. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would that be um
retaliation.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
would not be retaliation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
General Laney.
Um, so,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
If there was a retaliation, if
they did go to court because I
honestly don't read it the way
you read it. I think it's very
gray. I think necessary is gray.
I think retaliation is great.
I'm reading it a cut in pay, cut
in hours, cutting tidal, um, but
if they went to court, um, and
so the court's going to decide.
I, I think it's vague. Um, but
anyway, anybody can sue for
anything. Who, how, who's going
to represent the employee and
who's going to represent the
employer.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they are free to choose whoever
represents them.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, could you repeat that? Mr.
Speaker, Representative, they
are free to choose their
representative.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, is
there a representative that
could represent the employee and
pay for those fees for them. Is
that a program that we have
available for those employees?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
don't know.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, is
there a program that would pay
for employers to, to, to help
the employers out, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I don't know.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, so,
If
If an employee does not want to
attend um
OK, what is, why, what's the
difference between coercion and
routine communication.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
when you coercion is I don't
have the dictionary in front of
me, but, uh, coercion is when
you force somebody to do
something against their will.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
routine communication, uh,
communication that you might
have with your employees
throughout the day about uh work
matters, uh, things like that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, gentle lady. Um, have you
considered, you know, when this
has happened in other places,
what type of relationship
changes have there been between
the employer and the employee.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, can
you be a little bit more clear
in terms of when this has
happened?
Well, I, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I don't, I don't know of
an example of where it's
happened.
So I'm in, in the example that
you had given earlier, did it
build trust between the employer
and employee, like, are, are you
seeing this is something when
you have an additional liability
and you have an exposure when
something defined as necessary
or coercive is not defined in
your bill. And I ask if there's
a different section of law and
you're telling me no.
An employer, would they
Do you think that the that this
builds the relationship between
the employer and employee trust
or that it almost is like a
given that we're not trusting
employers and employees to have
positive relationships amongst
each other, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, are you talking
about the personal example that
I gave when I was organizing.
Uh, that, uh, you answered yes,
um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they did not build trust, uh,
between the employees and the
employer because employees were
forced to listen to a subject
that they did not want to listen
to.
Yet they were forced to do that.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
so I, I, I probably as an
employer have, have had people
in meetings that
I, I, I definitely attended as a
liaison, as a parent with an IEP
asking me to go and attend with
them as a parent advocate. I've
been in those situations. And
sometimes it felt like the folks
who are building the, the plan,
we're being clear and we're, you
know, giving it because parents
are in charge of that IEP. But
to the parent, it felt like
coercion.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Do you think that it's possible,
so you said that the employees
weren't forced to go, they just
didn't know they were forced to
go. So if the employer is always
posting voluntary meeting,
voluntary meeting.
Then, then can it be perceived
as as coercion.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
if, if all things were equal and
one person received a promotion
and another person didn't, and
the only difference was one
attended the meeting and one did
not. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, with that, even though
it's a voluntary, could they say
they felt that it was coercion.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that would probably be a very
difficult case to prove in
court.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, but
they would have, they would have
grounds now to go ahead and take
that case to court.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, Representative,
potentially.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so I
I've never had, um, in my
context in small towns, I think,
I think our hospital has an HR
director. I do, yeah, they do.
They have multiple duties, but
one of them is they are, they
are like their degrees in HR.
But most small businesses don't
have an HR director. Most small
businesses do not have legal
teams to help them navigate
compliance. Um, so does this
create further uncertainty and
put a disproportionate burden on
small businesses.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
So how does a small business
that doesn't have an in-house
legal team, how do they navigate
the vague
These big speech
Restrictions that you're
describing here.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
think that um they should inform
themselves of this law and not
retaliate against employees for
attending um a meeting that
contained that was related to
political matters, elections,
political offices, etc. etc. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, when
you say the small business
should inform themselves of the
law. Are, are you, there's
nothing in your bill that helps
a business.
when this change has been made.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
this is like any other law
that's passed in this
legislature.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I've seen laws in this
legislature that had outreach
and and did inform people of
things. So how would a small
business, um, with just a few
employees that's not engaged in
the legislative process, where
would they go? How will they
know about this law?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's um the same as any other
law, you know, many of us try to
uh keep updated in terms of laws
that are passed during this
legislative session. Many small
businesses belong to
affiliations or organizations,
and I would think that those
organizations um would inform
them that this law has been
passed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Um, I just, I,
you know,
There's, it, it just feels like
it's a gotcha to the employer
and like the employer is doing
something to dis the employee.
It just, it, it feels like that
we don't trust that there's open
communication between employees
and employers. I mean, and
that's, that's essential for
building trust. It's, it's
essential in the workplace. It,
it
You, I'd feel like I was on
eggshells to not know what
people's perception of necessary
is to not feel, to not know
where they stood on these
things, it would, it would be
hard to engage with your
workforce, especially, I mean,
if you're a for-profit and
you're dealing with behavioral
health, for example. I mean, the
target's always changing on what
you're doing, how you're
serving, how you're complying,
and I mean, you, you want to
talk about these things,
especially when it's like, I
don't know, your behavioral
health provider and standard,
you know, best practices are
changing, are going to change.
And if it's not a formal
meeting,
Is
Can they be if you're, if it's
not a formal meeting, but you're
sitting there saying, oh,
there's this bill, they're going
to cut behavior. I have been
here when we've, when we've cut
funding, when we swept funds,
and, um, you know, the
As long as it's not a formal
meeting, and as long as there's
not a communication that people
will attend, then this bill does
not apply?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
OK.
So
On the definitions of employer.
Or a person acting in the
interest of an employer in
relation to the employee. Um,
why are we saying
It just, it just seems like it's
just so vague. I, I really don't
even
Mr. Speaker, I, I can't fix the
bill. I, I can't fix the bill.
I'm just, thank you. I'm just
gonna have to stand in
opposition to the bill. Thank
you.
There's to be gentle lady from
Ber Lee representative Gurola.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, will
that gentle lady from Bernalillo
Yal Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
representative.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
We, you have mentioned already
about how this bill helps
support that work environment
and uh protect the employees'
rights. Could you tell us how
does this bill protects
employees' autonomy in their
workplace.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
can you repeat the last part of
your question? I didn't, um,
hear it all the way over here.
How does this bill protect
employees uh autonomy.
Employee autonomy.
Yes, Mr. Speaker.
OK, uh, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, um, it gives
them the freedom not to listen
to um political speech, um, or.
um
Political matters where uh the
employers may be trying to
influence them to vote for a
particular candidate, for a
particular party, um, where a
situation where they don't want
to sit and listen in a captive
audience meeting where they're
um being forced to listen to uh
anti-union rhetoric, those kinds
of things.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, how
does this bill also address that
uh and I know you also mentioned
it already if you have any
examples or any other um ideas
to understand this bill better.
How this bill addresses um power
imbalances and promotes fair
labor practices, Mr.
Speakerpresentative, um, again,
going back to um, you know, the
example where, or the question
that was asked in terms of what
the relationship is.
Between a um employer and an
employee and employer definitely
has more power in that kind of
situation, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, because they
have the power to um discipline
to threaten an employee with
their job, uh, to reduce hours,
um, and so in those kinds of
situations, this bill would
allow the employee to opt out of
those kinds of meetings without
fear of retaliation, whereas
right now an employee is made to
sit and listen.
to, uh, again, political speech,
um, and they may be retaliated
against and they have no
recourse without this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it seems um for me
very natural practices and to
create a better work place, um,
would you say that this bill has
work environment.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
I do think that this bill will
improve the work environment,
um, this bill has been um uh
passed in other states, um,
where they are also attempting
to protect worker rights.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, would you be able to
expand on that which other
similar legislation in other
states, um, have passed or what
we have learned from those
legislations, Mr. Speaker. Sure.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
there are 12 states that have
passed this kind of legislation,
um, and I'll go ahead and read
them, um, Alaska, California,
Connecticut, Hawaii, Illinois,
New York.
Minnesota, Oregon, Vermont,
Maine, and Washington, um, and
also, uh, some of the lessons
learned, um, again speaks to um
being able to balance worker
rights in those work
environments.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, we hear throughout the
debate that uh there is fear
about businesses being affected
for a bill like this, why do you
say to businesses that may be
concerned about the bill's
impact on their ability to
communicate with employees, uh,
Mr. Speaker representative, this
bill does not impact the
employers or even small
businesses, ability to
communicate with their employees
about um work.
Place issues, um, job-related
manners, the work that needs to
be done, how the work needs to
be done. So it does not
interfere with their ability to
uh communicate with their
employees and the employee's
ability to do their work.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um.
Have workers in New Mexico
experience this captive
meetings?
Uh, yes, um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, they have the
two examples that I have, um,
when I was, uh, organizing at a
hospital and then the other
example was um when I spoke, Mr.
Speaker, Representative with an
organizer who was helping
doctors organize at another
hospital, so those are the two
most recent incidents, Mr.
Speaker, Representative that I
know of, um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, there was
another
situation
probably a few years farther
back again at another hospital
we're organizing was taking
place and the employer attempted
to have captive audience
meetings forcing employees to um
sit and listen to anti-union
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker,
Representative.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and without this bill what
protections do they and I know
it was, it has been kind of
address but without this bill
which protections do the
employees have right now, Mr.
Speaker, employees would have no
protections at all.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and are they any
exceptions when employers can
require attendance at meetings
to discuss political matters.
Um, Mr. Speaker, there are
exemptions that are included in
the bill and so those some of
those exceptions are
communications that are required
by law. Again, communications
required about work duties, um,
communications that are part of
coursework or academic programs
that public and private
universities, um.
Casual conversations like at the
water fountain, um, and then
communications from political or
nonprofit organizations for
conveying the employer's
political views or or purposes.
Those are a few of the
exceptions that are in this
bill.
Uh thank you, Mr. uh Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and where
or how employers and employees.
Can get information about their
rights and responsibilities
under this bill.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um,
Representative, um, you know,
one of the things that I didn't
mention earlier, um, with the
other representative, um, but
resources like the the New
Mexico Department of Workforce
Solutions, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, would be a
resource, um, for, um,
employees, um, advising them in
terms of, um, you know what, um,
legal recourse they might have
if they feel they were
retaliated against.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady I think um this bill for me
is best practices in the
workplace, um, I think it's
autonomy enhanced workplace, so
I'm very happy to support this
bill. Thank you Mr.
There's further debate, the
gentleman from Otero,
Representative Bloch.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with a
kind gentle lady from Bernalio,
please yield. Speaker, I yield
to the representative. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, and so I have some
questions based upon the
previous debate that I'd like
cleared up. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm gonna start on
page 2 of the amendments in
context. And according to that
under political matters.
We defined that it relates to
elections or for political
office, political parties, and
then when we talked about
legislation, we said state or
federal. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, would it apply to school
boards and to city commissions,
uh, city councils, county
commissions.
Mr. Speaker, uh, Representative,
yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, for that
clarification. And then, Mister
Speaker, gentle lady, I heard
also that we said that it would
be out of order for the
The employer to force them to
listen to, and I believe, and I
quote, pro or anti-union
rhetoric. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, would it then be
Also
Not allowed to.
Have pro-union rhetoric that
they would force down the
employer's throat.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
Good. I'm glad to hear that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady and then when it
comes to the definition of
employee.
It says an individual employed
by an employer for remuneration,
including an individual employed
on a part-time seasonal or
temporary basis, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would this also
include someone who is, who's a
contractor who's not really part
time, not really temporary, is
just kind of doing one task, for
example.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, so in no case when it comes
to me having a contractor who
let's just say does a graphic
for me and I asked them to make
a political graphic and they do
not want to do that. Would they
have to be required to do it
since they're not included in
this definition.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they're not an employee, so
they're not covered under this
bill.
OK, thank you so much for the
clarification, Mister Speaker
and gentle lady, and then when
I'm, I'm reading this, it.
From what I, what I've heard
from the discussion prior.
Would it be out of order for the
employee to find a loophole from
this by adding to the
individual's job description
before this passes into law that
they must.
And they're required to attend
political events meetings, etc.
if it's added in their job
description prior to this
enactment of the bill.
Mr. Speaker, with this uh bill
prohibits is the employer
forcing an employee to attend an
employee sponsored meeting for
some of the reasons that we have
already mentioned. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
then.
So I'm just, I just want to be
clear, so if, if I
If I did indeed.
Put that in the job description
of the employee before this was
enacted.
I would be covered if I forced
them to attend a political event
or meeting that they did not
indeed want to attend. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
we're only talking about
employer sponsored meetings.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General later
an employer sponsored meeting
that's political.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
you can't require that.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for the clarification
on that one. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when we're talking
about political matters as your
bill says on page 2.
In the middle of the page, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, may this
relate to social issues that an
individual may have an opinion
about.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
only if it's an attempt to
influence legislation, rule, or
regulation.
Change proposals.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
this would not prohibit
mandatory diversity, equity and
inclusion trainings if they
contain political content and
they are sponsored by the
employee, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, can
you restate the question,
please? I would be happy to, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, would
this prohibit mandatory
diversity, equity and inclusion
trainings if they contain
political content and our
sponsored by the employee.
Um, it's Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I'll go back to
page 2, section C.
If it's an attempt to influence
legislation, rule or regulation
change proposals.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
if that did indeed, the DEI.
Content did indeed specify that
it wanted them to advocate for a
specific diversity, equity and
inclusion platform that was
disagreeable to the entity or to
the employee.
Would they be forced to sit in
that.
Meeting that was planned by the
employer, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they should not be forced in
that case. Good. OK, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that's
good to hear. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I also am wondering
when it comes to religious
matters, should they be
explicitly defined in the bill
given that religious speech is
exempted in section 3.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
the religious entity isn't
covered at all, so it doesn't
need to be defined.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then.
Continuing on your bill, does
your bill prohibit
Or, or what I guess what legal
standard will determine the
difference between casual
discussion and coercion. Do we
have definitions for those?
Because someone could
potentially say that it was
coercive if it was like at the
water cooler having
conversation. How do we
delineate between the two.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if
they make them stand at the
water cooler and.
Um, make them listen to that
conversation.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so they would not be
required. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, Representative not
be required to do what?
They would, Mr. Speaker, General
lady, they would not be required
by, let's just say an employer
was standing next to the water
cooler, speaking to an employee,
and they brought up.
Election-based issues or
something that was political,
the employee did not want to
have that conversation, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, would
that employee be covered if they
decided to leave that.
Situation and not listen to it.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that helped me on
that. So then, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, what about um
companies that would be impacted
by legislation, who let
employees take time off for the
purposes of campaigning against
or for a proposal which would
harm or help that business.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that's not covered. Speaker,
gentle lady, but let's just say
I was an employee who disagreed
with the entity's stance on the
platform that we're trying to
campaign for or against. And
then Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would rather work in that office
on that day instead of taking
the time off, would I be allowed
to do that since I am a person
who does not want to be included
in that political speech.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so what I'm hearing is, even if
it was a, a company that had 500
employees there was a huge
warehouse, for example, they
must open that warehouse only
for me if I was the only person
who did not want to take the day
off to go campaign for or
against a specific issue, is
that correct?
It's up to the employer to close
the business whenever they want
and I would assume that they do
that on a regular basis.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but this is not a regular basis.
We're talking about. This is
about a political campaign that
could help or hurt the business,
so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
again, if I did not agree with
the stance that the employer
took in that campaign.
And I, every employee was given
the day off to campaign for or
against this issue.
And I didn't agree with that
position, and I'd rather stay at
the office and work with the
employer be required to keep
the, the workplace open for me
since I am the only person who's
objecting to this.
T
Mr. Speaker,
on a i up the employer whether
or not to open or close the
business.
And uh Mr. Speaker,
Representative, and again this
bill speaks to employer
sponsored meetings.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but in my scenario, it's a, it's
a campaign rally that's from the
employer to defeat or to support
a ballot initiative and a and a
political campaign. So it would
indeed be political speech from
the employer, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, if they did close
the business and I wanted to
work, I would be forced to not
work and just not go to the the
rally or what, what would happen
in that case, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker,
Representative, yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, so.
Then I'm wondering how does HB
84 differentiate between
protected speech and workplace
harassment, particularly in
hostile work environments.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, can
you be a little bit more
specific in your question.
That's a little difficult to.
Understand, of course, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so let's
just say
We're at the water cooler and
I'm with a couple individuals
who are employees and they
repeatedly keep talking to me
about political speech that I
don't want, and it's reached a
level of harassment where I feel
like it is constant and it's not
stopping, and it's something
that I am uncomfortable with,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, would
this bill be in tandem in any
way, shape, or form with current
harassment laws regarding that.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
this is a separate piece of
legislation that has nothing to
do with this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, well,
since it's because it's, it's
based upon political speech.
I would be inclined to actually
disagree with you and say that
it is regarding this bill
because it could rise to a level
of harassment. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
What I mean, is there anything
in the bill whatsoever when it
does protect an employee from
having to listen to speech and
its repeated, and it's something
that is uncomfortable, how would
they have a cause of action in
any way, shape or form under
your new language in your bill.
Mr. Speaker, this bill only
covers employer sponsored
meetings.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but then if there was a, what if
there was an ad hoc meeting next
to the water cooler, would that
be something that could be
included and it wasn't specified
as a meeting, it was just a, a
team building exercise, for
example.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
No, as in Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, it would not be covered or
it would be covered in your
bill?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
would not be covered. OK thank
you Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
and then Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, could HB 84 discourage
private employers from
discussing company policies that
could involve legislation or
regulatory matters.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
no, as long as attendance is
voluntary.
OK, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady from Bernna
Leo. So then what about.
The company sponsored political
action committee that encourages
employees to engage in political
activities. How would that fit
into this piece of legislation,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, if
there, if it's an employer
sponsored meeting and they um
telling the employees that they
need to contribute to the
employer's PAC.
That would be an example that
would be a violation.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So then I guess my
next question is how do we prove
that? Because when I see here in
your bill, it says retaliatory
action.
It says demotion withholding a
promotion punitive scheduling or
reduction of hours, so Mister
Speaker, gentle lady, how would
that fit into this when it comes
to, let's just say withholding a
promotion. What if I'm a
hardcore conservative Democrat
versus a hardcore conservative
or a liberal Democrat.
Right? And there's two different
entities who have different
political beliefs and I feel,
let's just say that I am being
discriminated against based upon
that, although I don't really
have proof when it comes to
withholding a promotion. How do
I prove that? What is the
standard of proof when it comes
to that.
Mr. Speaker, representation um
representative, um, you would
have to show that it was in
retaliation for you refusing to
attend a meeting. All right, Mr.
Speaker, General Way, and how do
I prove retaliation?
Mr. Speaker, direct and
Circumstantial evidence along
with.
The timing of the action.
And whether it can be shown to
be pretextual.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so direct and
circumstantial evidence, could
you give me an example of what
that could look like and it's
any scenario that you may have,
so I have a better understanding
from my constituents.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
you, uh, refused to attend the
meeting. Two days later, your
work hours, um, are cut and the
reason.
And the reason given um it's
easy to show that it's
incorrect.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
what if, what if this happened?
I would, I didn't, I refuse to
go to a meeting that I thought
was horrible and against my
values, and then
The next day, my hours got cut.
How do I prove correlation
between the two. What if, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, there was
another reason given like let's
just say economic.
Economic things happened and we
lost some shares and we can't
afford you anymore. How do we
prove that? Do we have to
subpoena the entity's financial
records to prove that is what
I'm kind of trying to figure
out.
Mr. Speaker, it's the same thing
that uh the same answer that I
gave a pre uh previously, uh,
and that applies to all
employment cases.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
when it, OK, all employment
cases, so if I did feel like
the.
The day after a meeting that I
Despised politically.
I got my hours cut the next day.
If I sued, I would have to
prove.
If it was financial burden or
something that was given by the
employee, employer, I would have
to prove that. And so would that
require discovery of financial
records, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Or could it rather?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it could require discovery.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Then when it comes
to
Other laws that we've seen
across different states. I know
we mentioned and I, I tried to
jot these down as quickly as I
could, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
we said Alaska, California,
Illinois, New York, Maine,
Washington, New York. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, is this
based upon any of those states,
this verbiage in the bill.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh,
Representativeative, it's
similar. I don't have the other
bills in front of me to um do a
comparison.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I ask that because I
just want to know when it comes
to litigation, what other states
have faced litigation and how
those have forced the statutes
to change based upon that. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, maybe
your expert knows this.
Is this something that you
believe to be able to stand in
court.
And is legal based upon other
states legal precedents and best
practices, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, it's been challenged twice
in Oregon and both of those
cases were dismissed.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
thank you for that. And then in
any other state, was it, was it
challenged? I know Oregon you
said too. What about New York,
Alaska, Maine, for example.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, um, I don't
know.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I would just be
interested in finding that
because I just don't want to
bring the state into any kind of
litigation. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'll continue on
this and I might go back to this
actually because I saw the AG's
analysis and I want to get to
that as well as AOCs, but before
I do that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
I do want to understand when it
comes to other kinds of
political speech that I could
find political, so I'll give you
an example, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So how would this bill
ensure that public health
campaigns such as let's just say
a COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
Not be inadvertently considered
political matters.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
I don't from what you just
stated, see how it would be
considered political.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So let's just say I
was totally anti
COVID vaccine
And I refused to get it and I
didn't want it, and I thought it
was political if I refuse to go
to your informational meeting
about health care, and they talk
about the COVID jab or the COVID
inoculation or whatever you
wanna call it. If I refuse to do
that, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
would I be, could I be held?
In retaliation if I was fired
following refusal to go to that
meeting.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
then I would be protected under
that because I saw it as
political. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm wondering who
defines what political is? Is it
the employee or the employer?
because Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, certain individuals may
have different beliefs upon what
is political, what is not.
Mm
Mr. Speaker, um, representative,
it's defined in the bill page 2,
section C, and we've read that.
A few times already.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
I really appreciate that. I'm on
the bill right now and on C, I
don't see anything regarding
health care. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, could you
specifically point me to where
it talks about healthcare.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
doesn't talk about health care.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so then how would the COVID-19
vaccination and my opposition to
it seeing it as political, be
included in this if we just
established it was, and now
we're saying the word health
care or even the, even any vague
phrases or or in or inferences
to healthcare are not included
in the bill.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, uh,
you're gonna need to repeat the
question, um.
So that we have some clarity in
terms of what you're asking. I
would be happy to, Mr. Speaker,
and gentle lady, so my question
is, we said that, and I believe
it was correct and please
correct me if I'm wrong. We said
that if I felt that a meeting
about the COVID-19 vaccination
was political, and I did not
want to attend that meeting and
I left.
I would be able to do that
because I saw it as political.
So Mr. Speaker, uh, general
lady, I'm wondering in your
definition on page 2 of
political matter, where does it
specify health-related matters
such as a COVID-19 inoculation.
So Mr. Speaker Representative
again your situation would not
be covered by the bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General lady,
because I believed earlier, you
stated that it would be covered
if I refused to go to the
meeting. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I would then be forced to
go to the meeting because I saw
it as political and it's not.
Defined in your bill. So I would
be forced to go and I could be
retaliated against for not
going, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Yeah, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I apologize. I
think we're getting a little
confused in terms of your
scenarios, so, um, the response
is.
The meeting is not an attempt to
influence um legislation if the
meeting is is an attempt to
influence legislation, rule, or
regulation change proposals,
then it would be covered. The
instance that you gave, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, is if
you went to a meeting to uh
learn about the COVID vaccine.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, OK, what if that meeting was
about enacting a policy on the
state level to require.
Vaccinations. Would that then be
covered?
Mr. Speaker, again, uh,
Representative, I'm sorry,
again, if it's an attempt to
influence uh legislation, rule
or regulation, um, change
proposal.
proposals.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady for that
clarification. So,
I believe we've established if
it's indeed trying to change a
proposal in any way that would
be, let's just say healthcare or
something else.
Would it also include
environmental policies affecting
businesses and advocating for
green initiatives or against
green initiatives if it does
indeed relate to, and I, I want
to make sure I got it right.
Legislation, rule, or regulation
change proposals and the
decision to join or support a
political party, etc.
Mr. Speaker, Representative
correct.
All right, thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, so
that that does clear it up a
little bit for me and then I
believe, so for example, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I used to work for a political
action committee and this
political action committee took
different stances on certain
political matters, so very
political and so Mr. Speaker,
General lady, what if I
disagreed with some kind of
political matter that the
political action committee was
doing and I told my employer
that I didn't want to do it and
I was fired.
How would that fall into this,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, Representative, um,
that's part of, uh, the
amendment that we included in
judiciary, I believe, um, and
I'll go ahead and read it, uh, a
political organization political
party organization caucus
organization or not for profit
organization with tax exempt
status pursuant to Section 501c4
501c5 or 501C6 of the Federal
Internal Revenue.
of 1986 as amended from
requiring staff or employees to
attend an employer sponsored
meeting will participate in any
communication with the employer
or the employer's agent
representative or designee for
the purpose of communicating the
employer's political tenants or
purpose.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So which one of
those would be included? Would
it be a political organization
because technically political
organization like a PAC is a
nonprofit. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would that be
political organization? Would it
be, uh, not for profit, where
does it fall in this definition
that you've added in House
Judiciary Committee, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative
political organization.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady. So then these are
exempt, so let's just say I, I
decided to go against the
political action committee's
stance on something, and I was
fired, that would be totally OK.
I would not have any grounds
whatsoever in this bill if it
was not relating to a meeting,
etc.
Speaker, that's correct. OK,
thank you. That helped me a
little bit on that. Thank you so
much, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, so also I had some
questions relating to
This bill, so I was wondering,
can the bill sponsor you clarify
whether this bill prohibits all
employer discussions about rules
or regulation changes, even if
the employer is some simply
explaining new compliance
requirements, for example,
rather than advocating for
change.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
does not prohibit that.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
I, I could as an employer say,
well, this is a regulation
change that's going to happen,
and I need you to, to go and
advocate for or against that.
That would not be covered, but
just informing somebody about,
about it would be covered. Is
that kind of where I'm
understanding your legislation.
Speaker, I think that's the
opposite of what the bill
covers.
OK, could you please, uh, tell
me more about that.
Mr. Speaker.
compel
Mr. Speaker, um, an employer can
compel an employee to attend a
meeting to explain regular
regulatory um.
Changes but not compel an
employee to attend a meeting to
influence again legislation rule
or regulation change proposals.
So
That's the difference, Mr.
Speaker, Representative. OK,
thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So then let's just
say I was an employer and some
new regulation was passed on the
state level, and I'm telling my
employers in this meeting or my
employees in this meeting, I'm
saying I hate this regulation,
it's stupid. I'm sure you agree
with me, and it's stupid and I
hate it and it's the worst, and
I really hope you agree with me.
You agree with me, correct? And
so, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in
that instance, it's kind of
coaxing a position out of the
person, would that be?
covered if the person said, I
don't agree with your stance,
and then they did have some
quote unquote retaliatory action
taken upon them.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, the
employee would be entitled to
leave the meeting at that point.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but since we
established in the bill, it's
only about advocating for the
passage or failure of a, of a
certain political
Uh, I guess exercise like uh
campaign or a rule being
approved or not. This is after
the fact. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, could you tell me a little
bit about how this enacts
something to protect after the
fact, not for passage or against
passage just, it was not
something that was supported by
the employer and the employee
doesn't have a stance on that.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, can
you repeat the question? Yeah,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, OK, so
I'm gonna go back to your bill,
and I'm just gonna read verbatim
what it says, so.
Attempts to influence
legislation, rule, or regulation
change proposals and the
decision to join or support
political party, etc. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if I as an
employee am coerced into saying
I support a piece of legislation
that is already passed, not one
that is in motion.
And I disagree and I get
retaliatory action upon me.
Would this cover me if I was
fired following refusal to agree
that I think that this is a bad
or good proposal.
Which already passed.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
just to clarify, this is about
legislation that has already
been passed, correct? Correct,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
um, this could be a situation
where the employer is having a
mandatory meeting to get the
employee to agree with him that
this legislation is uh not good
legislation and therefore, um,
is attempting to encourage that
employee to participate in
getting the legislation either
repealed or passed.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but my question was not about it
getting repealed or passed. It
was just, it's stupid. I think
it's dumb. I cannot stand the
bill that was passed by, let's
just say the New Mexico
legislature or the US Congress,
and I want the person to take a
position on the bill that was
already passed but not coercing
them in any way to
advocate for its revocation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
thanks for clarifying that and
that kind of in that situation
then this would not apply.
OK, perfect. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
I'm wondering also regarding
this bill.
Have we had any studies done in
the interim or prior and
previous legislative sessions
about similar legislation and
have evidence-based.
Data driven results about how
this could work in the state of
New Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, why
was it not vetted throughout the
interim?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
I don't know that I can answer
that question.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
guess my question then I would,
I would, I'll evolve my question
to say, why is it that we did
not try to get data about how
this could affect New Mexico
before it was proposed as
legislation.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
believe that that's the same as
any bill. We don't do.
Um, studies, um, before we pass
the multiple kinds of
legislation in many cases um
before we introduce legislation.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, well,
I guess I would agree and I
would disagree with you on that
because Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, a lot of the time we hear
that individual pieces of
legislation should have been
vetted throughout the interim,
and we hear that a lot in
committees, especially when it
comes to finances, when it comes
to healthcare, we always want to
be data-driven, and I think
that's actually something that
is a policy of the current
governor's administration, as
well as many legislators in the
body here, and I'm sure you'd
agree more data is better before
making policy. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering, is there any data
that you can show me about New
Mexico and how this bill could
be beneficial to us specifically
not relating to Alaska, not
relating to Maine, not relating
to New York, relating to New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
again, uh, we did not do any
kind of a study.
Um, but I have spoken with many
workers who have experienced
this in the workplace and they
believe that it would be
beneficial for New Mexico to
join the 12 other states that
have enacted this legislation um
to create protections for
workers.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. Since we did not
have a study about this and we
didn't vet this in the interim.
Can you tell me why we didn't
put some kind of sunset clause
on this to see it as kind of an
an emerging program before we go
full steam ahead and enshrine it
permanently into state law.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
there is no need to put a sun
sunset clause to protect
workers' rights.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
well, I don't actually believe
that that would be a correct
statement to say because we
don't know if it would protect
workers' rights because we don't
know how it would affect New
Mexico because we don't have
legislation or we don't have any
kind of statistics specific to
New Mexico. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the, the stance
that says this protects workers'
rights cannot be backed up in
fact, since in New Mexico, we
don't have any studies. So
again, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
is that a fact that it will
protect workers' rights, period,
due to
studies and data that we do
have.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's a fact based on the plain
meaning of the statute.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
well, I could say in a statute
that the sky is red.
And if it's in statute, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, then that
would be a fact, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so I don't know if
that that could
That could be debated and that's
a very philosophical question,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when it comes to the employer
and the employee that we're
talking about, I just want to
make fact-based decisions. So
can you also, Mr. Speaker, tell
me how this could impact
scientific institutions and
their ability to communicate on
policy-driven research.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
has no impact on their ability
to do that.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
well, I would like to see how
this actually can play out. And
so I think that could be
something beneficial. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, does this
have a fiscal impact?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, the
fiscal impact that I am looking
at says that it is indeterminate
but minimal.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that is important, so
that's based upon state, state
entities like departments, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, what
about, have we seen any data
from other states that it's been
that's impacted the actual
businesses themselves.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
the way I see it, and please
correct me if I'm in any way
straying from the bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we're
talking about litigation that
could ensue after this. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Could there be a fiscal impact
for these entities if they were
sued and they had to hire a
lawyer.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes. OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so then we're talking
the same language here. It will
have a physical impact because
of laws that could be broken and
then lawsuits that could be
filed. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Can you tell me a little more
about this statue because I, I
see when it comes to the AG's
opinion and the AOC.
We have a bunch of different
rulings and I'll just go through
them quickly, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. There was some
rulings. One of them was
Citizens United versus FEC.
Actually, my former boss
actually litigated that case and
that was interesting and then,
uh, I also see Amazon Services
LLC.
373 NLRB, I also see on the FIR.
A few other cases, Frisbee v.
Schultz. Can you tell me, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, have you
looked at the impact potentially
on constitutionality regarding
First Amendment free speech
rights. Representative, yes.
In
TV shows and frisbee, uh, the
shorts.
recognize
the right of an individual not
to listen to coerced speech,
coerced speech.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, OK, and then did, do we
know if that, that litigation,
where was that? What state was
that based upon?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
was a US Supreme Court.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
then currently, according to
legislation, or rather uh
case law this is currently the
law, is it not, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's currently constitutional
law that the state may pass a
law like this.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but it doesn't already protect
these employees.
Regarding this verbiage.
All across the country.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
except for the Amazon case
dealing with union organizing.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General lady,
could you go into that one for
me a little bit?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that is the case where.
The NRB uh made a determination
that captive audiences captive
audience meeting.
Regarding unionization.
Should be prohibited.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady that helps me regarding
that one.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Can you tell me, uh, regarding
the unions, does your expert,
who's your expert again? I, can
you just tell me a little bit
about him?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, his
name is Steven Curtis, and he is
with the law firm of
youths and Valdez.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. And does your, I'm
guessing it's this, this
attorney.
Litigates or does union cases in
some cases, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker Generali? Mr. Speaker,
Representative, yes. OK. Thank
you for that. And Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
I'm, I'm just trying to figure
out regarding this bill when it
comes to union activity does the
employer have to allow
Employees to take off union time
or time rather to form unions
and how is that protected or how
is that, how has that changed in
any way with this piece of
legislation.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
OK, Mr. Speaker, generally, so
it doesn't, doesn't touch it at
all. So let's just say if I was
an employer and it was on
company time that individuals
were trying to unionize that
would.
be allowed for me to tell them
not to do it, do it off of
company time, and I wouldn't in
any way, shape or form be
Be penalized in this piece of
legislation for that, Mr.
Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, it's not covered by this
legislation.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. And so I'm
just kind of reading these in
our NLRB.
Requirements and it says
employees, employers must
provide employees reasonable
advance notice of the meeting.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, does
your bill in any way say what
that is? Does it codify any
language that says reasonable.
Advance notice of meetings and
could you just point me to that
in your bill if it does, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, no, it
does not.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
why didn't we put the best
practice known from NLRB in the
legislation if we're trying to,
to be as.
All inclusive and accompanying
the federal statutes in other
states as possible.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
apologize. Can you repeat the
question please? that since it's
NLRB best practice.
And that was regarding the
advanced notice of the meeting
just to remind everyone,
because all we're doing is
protecting employees' rights not
to attend a um.
Uh, employer, uh, sponsored
meeting.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so then also their
requirements according to the
FIR, attendance must be
voluntary. Does that say that in
your bill specifically from that
best practice from NLRB.
Mr. Speaker, representative, it
makes it voluntary because the
employee.
may refuse to attend the
employer sponsored meeting.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and then also, does it have any
kind of requirements relating to
no attendance records being
kept.
According to the NLRB best
practices. Speaker
Representative, no.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, thank you for that answer.
Uh, next here, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I'm wondering when
it comes to this bill.
Why are nonprofits exempted from
this.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
because their work is the
political function.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but what if it's a C3
organization that is precluded
from, I'm sorry, C4 organization
that has some political
leanings, so I know I believe
according to the uh the IRS,
it's 51% of the entities.
Any, any of their actions have
to be non-political and then 49%
can be political, so Mr. Speaker
general lady, what about that
49% that is required by law not
to be political. Speaker,
Representative, can you clarify
which 501c you're speaking
about. Of course, Mr. Speaker,
Lady, I am not very familiar
with 501c56 or federal internal
revenue code of 1986, but I am
very aware since I have worked
for nonprofits before of a C4
organization according
to the IRS as long as half of
their political activity, which
is 49% is political.
The rest must also be not
political. The the 51%. So Mr.
Speaker general lady, why are we
exempting them if half over half
of their the entities.
Duties are indeed non-political.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
because part of their work is
political.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
hate to go in circles here, back
and forth, but since a majority
of the work is not political.
How can we delineate between the
two because if, if half my job
is non-political or over half,
and then some a small minority
of it is political. What if in
uh a piece of my job that I
don't believe to be political in
any way has political
encroachment. How am I not
protected under this statute
with this language. Speaker, um,
that's why they're exempted
because part of their work is
political.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but then I could be fired if
the, let's just say the entity
had some kind of political
meeting that was required that
didn't really have anything to
do with the mission of the
entity, and it was very
political based upon something
that was totally off off
regarding the actual mission of
the program, they would not
protect me in this case. Is that
kind of correct?
Uh,
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
because it has to be
communicating the employee's
political tenants or purpose.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
So then what happens if
someone's on their probationary
period.
Can they be fired if they are
fired.
I mean, can they be fired if
they refuse to attend a meeting
in a probationary period at
anywhere, nonprofit, for-profit,
anything that's included in your
bill, Mr. Speaker,
representative, even though a
employee may be probationary.
They cannot be fired for
refusing to attend a employer
mandated meeting.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that.
So I'm sorry, and can you tell
me if that's with the nonprofit
or for the business?
When it comes to the
probationary period. So I, I'm
guessing you could still fire
them if there was an, it was a
business that was not exempted.
Is that kind of correct? or am I
off base here?
Mr. Speaker, Representative if
they are a covered employer than
they are prohibited from firing
a employee.
refusing to attend the meeting.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then can you
tell me how this could affect
state programs such as
Departments like Department of
Education or the Department of
Finance and Administration or.
Environment, natural resources,
how would this affect state
agencies?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, can
you repeat the question again,
please? I'd be happy to. Mr.
Speaker, waiting, can you tell
me specifically regarding state
entities like the Department of
Finance and Administration, the
Department of Environment, the
children, youth and Family
department, how would this
affect that entity?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they are covered in the bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Can you tell me where?
Page 2, line 1.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, OK, so
under employee definition, is
that correct?
And Mr. Speaker, um, you'll have
to flip to page one, section B,
uh, under the employer
definition.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So it says state
or political subdivision of the
state or person acting in the
interest of the employer. So
could it, could, could this be
exempted if I was working for a
county or a city?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they are a political
subdivision.
Perfect. Thanks for the
clarification.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that helps me on that one
and then continuing on here, I
do have some kind of.
Concern when we're putting this
definition of.
Attempt to influence
legislation, rule or regulation
change proposals.
And the decision to join or
support a political party or
political organization. Mr.
Speaker, generally, I think we
went a little bit into this.
But I just want to understand.
To be very clear, if the entity
that I have to be a political or
have to join like a political
organization is inherent in my
current job description would I
still be allowed to.
Well I still be forced to be a
member of that organization if
it was inherently within my job
description in the current form
before the bill is passed.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and then
my other concern is, why does it
say labor organization.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
I'm forced to be part of a labor
organization, doesn't that go
against the spirit of the bill
previously because we said that
it would, you wouldn't be forced
to listen to for union speech
and so now I see in here it says
you have to be a member of a
labor organization if it's
inherent to your job. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, how does
that, how's that gonna work?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
doesn't impact that at all.
OK, mm.
That's hm.
Interesting. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so then going down
here on a retaliatory action.
It says taking discriminatory or
adverse employment action, can
you tell me how this intersects
in any way with the human rights
Act that the state has.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
it's, it's two different, um.
Pieces of legislation or law.
All right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, because I believe
In
Title
7 of the Civil Rights Act, it
addresses religious
discrimination in the workplace.
So when we're talking about
religious discrimination, which
is based in your bill, I
believe. How is that?
Working together.
Mr. Speaker, representation, uh,
representative, uh,
discrimination is not in the
bill.
Uh, religious discrimination.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so.
But it says retaliatory action
means taking any discriminatory
or adverse employment, so.
That does not include religious.
Mr. Speaker, represented
representative no um it
basically um this bill addresses
the um action taken against an
employee who refuses to attend
an employer sponsored meeting.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what if that
Refusal to attend was based on
religious grounds, though.
And I'd be happy to give an
example if you'd like.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
they may have a separate claim
under the Human Rights Act.
Perfect, and that's exactly what
I was going to ask you because I
talked about the Human Rights
Act when we previously said it
has nothing to do with that. So
now it does relating to
religion, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
it is a separate claim.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so what if that political
meeting I refused to go to was
based upon my, my refusal on
religious grounds.
And so let's just say it was a
meeting that was related to, I
don't know, health care, and
someone was trying to put an
abortion facility.
In, in the county that my
business was in and I, I
vehemently objected to the
employer trying to
Campaign for that.
And it was based on religious
grounds, not on political
grounds. So Mr. Speaker, General
lady, that's a political matter.
How would that intersect with
this legislation since we're
using the Human Rights Act, but
also this new piece of
legislation that talks about
political since it's both
political and religious, how
does that intersect?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
because that would be an
employer sponsored meeting.
To communicate political matters
which an employee is not
required to attend.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, could you go a
little bit into that for me? I
don't really understand. So how,
how is it not connected when it
comes to religion.
And politics, if those both are
the reason I am not supporting
the meeting.
How would I be able to have two
claims, one under each act, and
could you tell me how that works
with each
Mr Speaker Representative, we're
talking about this bill. We're
not talking about the Human
Rights Act, so um this bill
again speaks to the employee's
right to refuse to attend and an
employer sponsored meaning, uh,
to communicate political
matters.
It doesn't matter why they
refused, uh, Mr. Speaker
Representative, they have the
right to refuse.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So that's good to
hear. So I, in any way, if it
was political or religious, I
would indeed be able to say no,
I do not want to attend this
meeting because it goes against
my values. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
That's what I wanted to hear.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So now, I would actually
like to offer an amendment to
your bill to make it way better.
And so I do have an amendment
that I will be getting delivered
to the clerk momentarily, Mr.
Speaker, if I could.
I'm just gonna grab a copy so I
know what the, the number is.
We're all set, Mr. Speaker. Here
we go.
OK.
It's coming to you, Mr. Speaker,
right now.
What is the number on the bottom
left, gentlemen? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, the number on the
bottom is 0.231.
732.1. Alright, that passed out
and online and we'll get
rolling. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and would I please we have be
able to have a roll call vote.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
It looks like the amendment has
been passed out and it is
online, gentlemen, to explain
the amendment.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
So I'm just gonna give you a
quick explanation of the
amendment, and then we can go
into questions if you like. So
the proposed amendment redefines
the language in Section 3 by
specifying that employers cannot
compel employees to engage in
discussions about political
matters, unrelated to their
employment or job duties.
Additionally, the amendment
clarifies that employers may
still provide employees with
legally
required information and
communications necessary for
job-related duties.
The ladies is a friendly
amendment Mr. Speaker, it is not
a friendly amendment.
Right, is there to debate on the
amendment?
Gentlemen from Katherine Grant I
goerrazas.
Mr. Speaker, with the gentleman
from Otero, please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gladly
yield to my friend from all
those great counties.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I've
been listening to the debate.
It's, it's, we've been seem like
we're going in circles and
circles and circles and it's
very confusing.
Mr. Speaker.
And I, and I'm, and I'm
concerned.
As an employer, I'm gonna make a
few statements and then I'll ask
you questions.
I don't see you, Mister Speaker,
gentlemen, um, how.
Uh, you know, well, let me
rephrase this, how would this
change?
And help
With the confusion and NBA get
uh the the ambiguous nature of
the of the of the legislation
that we have before us.
Because I, I see Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, where both the
employee and the employer could
be very, very confused.
In that they start the employee
thinks he has certain rights.
The employer thinks he has
certain rights or maybe the lack
of certain rights.
And I can see how this could be,
could get you in in trouble real
quick as an employer.
And what worries me, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, is, you
know, and, and no one's really,
I don't know, I mean we've kind
of touched on it here and there
but.
Realistically,
You can be sued without you
don't have to show proof in the
beginning.
So what scares me about this
legislation is if you're sitting
there and you're an employee and
you feel that your rights.
have been
Uh, you've been discriminated
hours changed, you get laid off.
Whatever it is
Um, I can see how real easily.
Just even by the matter of
timing or chance.
You could end up in court as an
employer.
And so you know I've been, I've
been listening. I go, golly man,
there's a lot of things that
could happen here.
And so, uh, in, in part that I'm
worried about is because you are
stifled in the communication
between the employer and
employee, this is actually I
hate to say this, but, uh, as
respectfully as I can this
almost hinders the freedom of
speech.
And to me it's dangerous.
Because there are so many
things, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that can be seen as political.
And, and so I mean whether it's
a hat that you wear.
A T-shirt you wear?
A mask that's required for um or
or you're asking someone that's
that, uh, to do for safety
purposes.
A bumper sticker you show up to
the whatever that is.
You can get yourself real easy
in a in an argument or a
disagreement where you see one
thing is political.
Or another thing that's not.
Um, one of those being even
watching a football game and so
um.
What, what I'm worried about is
that breakdown in communication,
Mr. Speaker, that I'm, I think
you're trying to, I think you're
trying to define better.
Um, is something that that needs
to be done because.
As the employer, you yourself as
the employer may find yourself
thinking that hey.
If, what if I, what if this
employee doesn't show up to uh I
can't force the employee to show
up to maybe a meeting that's
environmental.
Or maybe it's in most
dangerously a safety meeting.
And so that how do you think
this would help you if you had
because of the because of it
being so confusing because this
is very confusing. I mean we've
been listening to to this
debate, Mr. Speaker, for.
2 hours, maybe longer.
And we, and we've seen the back
and forth and.
The sponsor has an attorney
sitting there and even the
attorney, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, was stifled and or
was paused in his answers. They
were still kind of gray. There
was a lot of gray, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, causing me to kinda
sit back and go, how can this,
how can we fix this to define
this better can you help me
explain that a little bit
better, Mr. Speaker?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady or gentlemen,
pardon me, I would be happy to.
So, I guess, first of all, when
it comes to the, the bill's
verbiage.
I have read this bill back and
forth about 20 times.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady or
gentlemen, pardon me, I.
I do not understand what some of
these definitions mean,
specifically relating to the
actual job description of the
individual. So when it comes to
that job description, we're just
trying to clean it up to say
this has to be in your job
description, and so that will
cover you, because we've already
heard and it's been established,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, from the
gentle lady from Bernalillo that
it would have to be in their job
description, and if it was, then
indeed it would not be out of
the realm of their job to say,
OK, well,
I, I have to be there
essentially because it's in my
job. So Mr. Speaker, gen
gentlemen, this just gives a
little clarity to these
employees to say, OK, here is a
little bit more stability in the
statute, less ambiguity, less
gray area because Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the last thing that
we would ever want to do would
be to be vague, and that's also
a reason why I asked the
question prior about getting
this thing vetted in the interim
and having a lot of eyeballs on
it and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when
it comes to the specific changes
in, in this amendment.
It's really clean up language,
honestly. It's just saying what
the jobs duties are so unrelated
to the employee's employment or
job duties. It also says
unrelated to the employee or
employee's job duties in
section.
Pardon me, lying
23 of page 2 and then line one
of page 3. So we're trying to be
as complete as possible and not
ambiguous so that employees and
employers both have.
Finality when it comes to the
reason why we're putting this
forward and who indeed is
included in the changes, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, and, and, and I don't know
if this is correct, but I want
to see if it addresses it.
Does this in any way your
amendment and and I'm gonna
explain why because your
amendment in any way because I,
I really just got on my desk and
I had another one I was looking
at and so now I've got to start
all over, so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, does it your uh
amendment in any way, shape or
form.
Um
Was it hold on, I lost my train
of thought here, and that
doesn't happen too often, Mr.
Speaker, but does it, does it
actually.
Define the employer.
Let me explain why because I was
worried about that, Mr. Speaker.
Because if you're an employer to
me.
Is anyone that employs another.
And so if I don't know if I'm a
homeowner and I decided to hire
a crew to come and clean my
yard, Mr. Speaker, and I, and I
get them in the yard and, and
then I say, you know what it's,
it's lunch time and I decided to
go over there and talk to them
and I don't know maybe I see
their bumper sticker and it
disagrees maybe with political
views that I have or whatever
and you start having a
discussion.
Or maybe in the middle of their
of their work uh in the middle
of their work you, you tell him
hey you, you wanna have a
discussion it's not a.
Horrible discussion. It's not a
disrespectful discussion, but
you're asking, you know, their
thoughts about that and they
walk off Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
and use a homeowner.
Tom, you know what? You, you get
this escalates because that's
just the sad thing about this,
Mr. Speaker.
There's a lot of things anymore.
Get escalated out of control
over tiny little things.
And then, but so we're gonna
assume that this escalates into
an argument.
Now they're upset with each
other and he tells them, you
know what, get out of here. Does
your amendment in any way, shape
or form because I know that that
was a worry that I had on, on
the original bill. Does it
address in any way, shape or
form any protections to home or
who he's not a like he he
doesn't have a company or she
doesn't have a company they're
just hiring somebody to clean up
the yard and work on on their
pool or uh clean work in the
garden. Does it in any way,
shape or form protect them from
that?
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. So I believe and
see.
The bill that I, I'm reading is
kind of confusing in the way
that it's written, so when it
comes to that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I believe the gentle
lady from Bernalio said it
doesn't apply to contractors, so
potentially when it comes to a
yard worker, it would not apply,
but if let's just say you had an
assistant who worked at your
house or someone who, who is a,
a general employee of you who
trimmed your, your hedges or uh
planted roses, for example, on
your.
property than it would apply,
and it also would be a little
more clear when it comes to
defining what that political
meeting could be, so you
couldn't have a bunch of people
in your yard that you were
paying full time or part-time
employees who you were forcing
them to have a meeting about
politics, but it wasn't in their
job description. Their job
description was to take care of
the lawn, to fix your er escape
if necessary or do any kind of
yard work, it would not pertain
to politics. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
That's kind of the reason of
this amendment. I think it's
very
Very
Unambiguous, I think it's not
gray area at all. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, when we're
making policy, I believe it's my
personal belief that we should
be as explicit as possible so
that we can get the results that
we require from the piece of
legislation's intent, and I
believe the intent is to indeed
protect employees, but we can't
protect them if we don't have
specific definitions in the bill
that show who is and who is not
required based upon their job
description, Mister Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I,
and I know you're trying to
answer my question again this
is, this is really, really
because it's so muddy.
It's causing everybody to get
confused and you know, uh, like
I said, you know, because we're,
we're hearing.
The back and forth and it just
seems like we're it's, it's so
unclear.
Then I can see how uh uh an
individual this is and I'm gonna
start with that an individual
get himself in trouble.
Over
Uh, hiring the gardener, but
they're paying them hourly
because I heard that that when
they, if they're paid a salary,
which I, I don't know how many
people can afford a salary for a
partner, but if you're paying
them hourly and stuff, how does
your amendment
Because through the clarity
protect them because.
To me, I think in the original
bill.
You're in trouble if you do
that. I mean, if if that
employee decides to say, you
know what?
If that employee decides, you
know what?
He discriminated me because he
didn't like my bumper sticker. I
was wearing my hat that he
didn't agree with.
And he told me he he started
talking to me about that. I
don't want you wearing that in
my yard and because my neighbors
and we don't believe in that
whatever it is and you run them
off.
How does this protect you from
ending up in court when all you
wanted to spend is 150 bucks to
clean your yard.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you for the
clarification. So, from what I'm
understanding, the employer and
your scenario fired somebody
because let's just say they had
a bumper sticker they didn't
like and they fired them based
upon that.
I believe, and, and is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
before I finish answering your
question. Well, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think what you,
what I'm trying to do is figure
out how this.
Clarity as having a meeting
protects you as a homeowner as
an employer because technically
you're an employer as soon as
you hire another.
And you exchange money for
services.
Goods or services you become an
employer.
And many people, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, don't necessarily uh
at their homes turn around and
start falling I-9s and turn
around and start, you know, to
go through their accountant to
hire someone they need their
yard clean they need their
garden tended to they need their
pool taken care of and they hire
someone on their own and they
decide to do this and this is
what scares me about this bill
is not just for businesses but
just the individual homeowner
and I'm wondering how that.
protects you and I'm wondering
if there's any protections.
Through your homeowners
insurance that would cover that
liability.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So,
I believe, and I was gonna
continue asking a question of
the general lady how this
affects your insurance. So for
that, I can't answer the
insurance portion, but I would
say, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I reread it, the statue or the,
the bill while you were talking
about the specific
Instance, and I actually didn't
see the word meeting.
In here. It says, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, political matters
means matters relating to
elections, political offices,
etc. So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I guess it could mean anything
relating to.
Politics
And it doesn't necessarily have
to be a meeting that was set by
the employer, according to what
I'm reading. So when we look at
the amendment, we look at how it
changes it. It specifies that
this goes into effect because it
was due to something unrelated
to the employee's employment or
job duties. So for example, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I didn't
have a Craigslist ad that said,
I need a Trump supporting
Gardiner who's super mega,
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
if that was in, in the job
description technically.
I guess it would be OK if they
were a someone who supported a
different candidate for
president like uh I don't know
who ran for president. I forget
who that was because they lost.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
Can you, uh, can you clarify a
little more about what that
would be.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
know here, here's what happens
is, is we find ourselves in in
inadvertently having discussions
that sometimes start excuse me,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we find
ourselves having discussions
that sometimes start out as.
Something this is what worries
me about political matters, OK?
And we start talking about
certain things.
And it can be safety.
It can be environment.
And it doesn't necessarily need
to need to be, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that you're
Uh
I don't know Wolf's, uh, a
liberal.
You could fall on the other side
and you're a conservative.
You don't believe in certain
environmental standards.
But it's part of your job and
maybe you know it falls in gray
area and this is what scares me
about this is because you're
talking and you're going back
and forth and what starts out as
an innocent conversation and
we've all had them before and
before you know it, Mr. Speaker,
it's a, it's an argument.
People leave this uh uh upset
with one another and I'm afraid
that if this isn't, this is why
I'm worried about, I mean, I'm
trying to understand your
amendment because I, I was
reading a different amendment.
So I wanna make sure that your
amendment works to help protect
that individual. We'll start
from there and then we'll work
into businesses and so forth,
but that that individual isn't
gonna find himself, he or she in
a problem.
Finding in in court over having
this.
You know what, get out of my,
get out of my yard, you know,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, because
we had this discussion and I
felt that you should have
recycled.
The, uh
Though I don't know the plastic
that that wraps around the
insulation that you're working
on and I fire you or whatever.
I'm just kind of throwing that
out there.
And
And I fire you.
I'm worried that this is going
to get the individual in trouble
I mean that literally that
little senora, the little jujita
just needs help.
That's what I'm worried about.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
because a business person, Mr.
Speaker, is gonna be if this
legislation goes through is
gonna be very, very careful.
They're gonna readjust all the,
all the requirements of your
employment.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
they're going to try and reduce
every bit of liability they can
because.
Well, I didn't hear discussed,
but I discussed this in
committee, Mr. Speaker.
Is that the.
The penalties for this.
I
is that you have to rehire that
person.
And pay the rest of that
contract so if you're in court,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for I
don't know.
A year?
Uh 2 years or whatever this
could cause you to have to pay
back wages.
And rehire that person.
And so I can see how an
employee, uh, excuse me, an
employer is going to.
Then have to feel that they have
to um protect themselves
expanding their expanding their
their the language in
employment.
Mr. Speaker
I'm worried about, but at the
same time I'm more worried.
About the the the individual.
Little lady
It just needs help.
Where the little old man and
they just need help because you
know if they're not feeling
good, they're elderly and they
just need help painting the
fence.
Like I said, all these different
things and they find themselves
in a in litigation over a $200
job $150 job and then they,
they, they were stifled with
this.
And they're not even sure and
and and you know I don't even
know the answer to that if
you're insurance would cover you
for that type of liability.
And so this is why I wanna make
sure that.
That your amendment
Is going to clarify it well
enough that it doesn't get that
unsuspecting.
person in a lot of trouble.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Will your amendment in any way,
shape, or form?
You think it would help retain
or.
Get more people hired. I mean,
as an with your language, do you
feel, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that your language is gonna
change the way hiring measures
are in the in the positive way
or the negative way.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I would
in no way offer an amendment
that would be negative to an
employer or an employee, but Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so for your
example, someone who's doing
yard work, they are a seasonal
employee, right? That's in the
bill. And so, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, if this individual
decided to.
Hire somebody who was an
employee to do yard work and in
their job description it said
please recycle, please do not
use pesticides, please.
Do very specific duties and it's
within the job description and
let's just say they, they defy
that job description they use
pesticides, they do not recycle
those, those pesticide bottles,
for example, or in any other
case regarding that.
Then they would be violating,
Mr. Speaker, this.
This stipulation in the bill,
which says it needs to be in the
job description. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it does indeed
protect not only the worker.
But it protects the employee. So
if they did have to fight this,
and it would be unfortunate
because that's what this bill
opens up unlimited litigation,
but it would have parameters
that would be easily definable.
So if it wasn't in the job
description, let's just say it's
a Craigslist ad or a Facebook ad
for a gardener or something like
that. It wasn't in the job
description, I would have no
cause to say, well, I got fired
because of this or that because
it was specifically based upon
the job description of that
specific role that was being
hired for me.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
problem that I have with the
employment part and this is what
I'm trying to clarify is.
Individuals and I'm not trying
to beat you up please don't take
that, Mr. Speaker that I'm, I'm
trying to make a point.
Little ladies or elderly people
or people that need maybe they
maybe they're of special needs.
They don't write up employment
contracts.
They don't have the time to do
that. They don't have Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, and,
and, and attorney riding up.
Protection when they hire
someone.
And the way this thing is
written, that's why I'm asking
if your amendment clarifies it
enough that it's gonna take care
of someone from getting in
trouble and that's my.
That's my biggest problem is my
mother, my grandma, she's 103,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
But she, she remembers things
pretty good, but she could get
herself in trouble with
something like this or my mother
could my father whatever your
aunt, your grandmother and, and
this is where where I'm worried
about, you know, I'm worried
about that this amendment is
going to protect that
individual.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you know
the penalties that I talked
about and this is where I'm
going with this can be loss of
wages.
And it can be loss of wages in.
In at at the workplace nobody
talked about that that I heard
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, but on
your amendment does it protect
you from the punitive damages
that on top of that.
That loss of wages, let's just
say, and you have to on top of
that first you get slammed Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen with the that
that you have to rehire that
person.
That that you have a
disagreement with second of all,
Mr. Speaker, you have to then
pay them all their back, back.
Well, you got to first go to
court, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Then after you go to court and
you hire your attorney and all
that, then you have to hire,
then you have to pay if you
lose, which this is so great
that I it's pretty easy to lose
I think Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Then you go through court, then
you have to pay for that then,
Mr. Speaker, then you have to
pay back the, the, the employee.
Then depending on what you did,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, then you
have punitive damage on top of
that, which I have no idea where
the limit of that is.
And so how does your amendment,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, protect
a business, an individual from
uh from and, and does this help
and well the nonprofits are
already exempt from what I
understand. So how does this
protect those people and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm gonna
throw a couple other questions
is what happens if you have a
taco stand and you only have one
employee.
Two employees
I mean, does, is there any
limits, Mr. Speaker, to an
employee because that's that was
my biggest problem. I don't even
see a limit. You have 5
employees, all employees. Why,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are.
are certain employees.
Protected from
From this, from, uh.
political matters and others are
not.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So I'm gonna, I'm
gonna try to address your first
question, and it was how does
this protect the workers? So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, first of
all, the bill does not protect
workers when it comes to the job
duties. So the duties is not
something that is included in
the bill currently and so this
would add some protections to
that. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when it comes to
those duties, right? So if, if a
little old lady or a little old
man hired somebody to, to work
on their yard, and they had a
contract with them. It could be
a verbal contract.
And so they could say, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, they could
say to that person, I need my
yard cleaned every, every other
Thursday until the end of the
season, and I want you to use no
pesticides. I want you to be
environmentally friendly. I want
you to do specific things. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, because they
had that contract with that
individual and they both agreed
they both signed the contract
technically by saying yes, I
agree that was the agreement. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when it
comes to that agreement, the
gentle lady, she said that there
are multiple circumstances.
required to prove something. So
they said that
There would have to be
circumstantial evidence.
There would have to be pretext.
And then there would have to be
proof of the timing of some
something like you fired
somebody in a timely manner. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when it
comes to the actual amendment,
the amendment clarifies
regarding those duties of the
job. If it wasn't the duties of
the job and
And it wasn't included in that.
It's not protected. And so this
just clarifies who is protected,
the people who did their job and
they were retaliated against
for, let's just say political
reasons, they were doing
everything within the job
description and let's just say
it was political based upon
environmental standards, they
defy those standards, then I
believe that there would be
cause within the legislation. If
they didn't, and they did
everything perfectly, then there
would not be that, that
clarification. Also, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you said
something about a taco stand
with one employee.
And I don't know any political
taco stands who have huddles
about President Trump or, or a
former vice president who I
forgot the name of. So Mr.
President or Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that's pretty much
what it is.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, first of
all, I may have used the word
employee instead of employer,
but back to Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, here's the thing, it
doesn't matter if you're, you
have uh this.
An employer, this is why I want
to clarify that an employer any
one person.
Any person
So if you're any person,
Doesn't matter if you're an
individual, it doesn't matter
about your age you employ this
person if you're in a taco
stand, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
and your taco stand you let John
Block.
Put his, his, his political um.
Uh, uh, paraphernalia, I'll call
it that. How do you like that
on, on your stand and, and you
start talking about it and you
fortunately, you know what, this
is my place I can do whatever I
want.
I don't want to go into these
little rabbit holes, but what
I'm worried about is how does
your deal with defining it
enough to protect.
An individual from getting sued
and, and, and again the
disparity that I have the
problem that I have is you're
gonna get employers that are
gonna hire attorneys you're
gonna get employers are gonna go
um they're gonna spend because
you're gonna have to.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I don't care what you're, I
don't care what business you're
in. Once this happens, you're,
you're gonna pay attention.
Especially when you hear that
one of your one of your buddies
that's a uh that's a, that is or
your fellow, you read in the
paper that are uh uh a
restaurant got in trouble.
For doing this or that, there's
timing issues, Mr. Speaker.
You saw what happens that you're
gonna cut hours and that
employee feels that they were
retaliated.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, just
because they felt the timing was
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
this happens all the time we go
to church, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, we hear sometimes the
priest or the pastor or whatever
and you think he's talking to
you, but he's just talking in
general, things just happen in
general, but you feel it's
yourself that you're talking to.
And this can happen on the jobs
on the job site this can happen
anywhere and so just because of
the way it's written, it's
dangerous.
Because there can be mis.
Conceptions of how the timing
was and you still end up in
court, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
You still end up in court. You
still go through all the things
that I just said and so I wanna
know how this clarifies a good
enough.
To protect me and my grandma and
everybody else in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So in my opinion,
this, this bill opens up a can
of worms, right?
And so, in my opinion, this
amendment helps alleviate the
blow of that can of worms
exploding open instead, it gives
a little bit of a parameter.
When it comes, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to the actual duties
of the employment. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I think you
had a bunch of scenarios in
there and I apologize if I
forgot. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think like the
church, if you have a nun who
works at the church and you have
a pastor who says something that
they disagree with, potentially
they could be included, but
they're not a C4, so they're,
they're a church and so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I don't, I
think that could be something.
Also, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
when it comes to like a taco
stand, if you
put my, my campaign
paraphernalia, the taco stand
from the owner and the employee
didn't like that. It's not in
their job description to support
political political candidates.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that person would be protected.
And so currently without all
these stipulations, Mister
Speaker, it doesn't add any
protections whatsoever in the
legislation. And so this
attempts to alleviate that
burden. It does not remove it,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and I
hope that's something that is
clarified in this. There is no
perfect amendment that can
delete.
Line 1, page one to the end of
the bill, unfortunately, maybe
there is, but, but this makes it
a little better to make it a
little less harsh on employers
so that they can have at least
some kind of
Of cushion as well as the
employee because it's based upon
the actual duties of the actual
job and not just upon vagaries
that we have no idea what they
are based upon current
legislation that is here in this
bill and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I hope that that
clarifies it a little bit for me
and for you, but
This is by no means meant to be
perfect. This is meant to be
comprehensive in the way that
it's based specifically upon the
employment duties such as a
gardener doing gardening, if
that's in the contract, it could
be verbal, it could be written
down. Also, it could be you're
selling tacos, you're not
supposed to be campaigning for,
for John Block while you're
selling tacos unless that's in
your job description. So, and I
would love that, Mr. Speaker, if
there's a lot of taco stands in
my district, go ahead. But Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that is what
this protects against so that
there is
any kind of vagueness when it
comes to the employment, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
going to support your amendment
because it gets us a little bit
closer.
gets us a little bit closer and
I know you're trying, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, please don't
take what I was saying as we
attacking your amendment because
I know that you're trying to
close the gap.
But the gap is wide.
And this is like putting a
toothpick to stop uh uh uh a
flood.
And so you know I'm gonna, I'm
gonna try I'm gonna support it,
Mr. Speaker, because I wanna, I
wanna help it get better, but.
Mr. Speaker
Gentlemen, I feel that we're
very, very far from being able
to um close that gap.
In order for me to support even
with your, your amendment, the
legislation.
I think it's dangerous.
I think, I think you're gonna
actually this is gonna have the
opposite effect, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, on, on, on
employment, I think Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, there's going to be
employers that say, you know
what? I've got, I have problems
with John and Mary and John and
Mary. I need to before this
legislation gets in in it
becomes law.
I need to, I need to get, get
rid of them for insubordination
they were, they were gone for,
you know, they were late for 10
minutes and I'm gonna start
writing people up in 3 strikes
are out before I get myself in a
situation where I'm arguing with
John uh using John for a reason,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for John
and with John and Mary and I
find myself not only having a a
a problem, you know, uh, with
the employee, but now I find
myself in another situation
where I, I, I'm in trouble.
And so, you know, I appreciate
it again thank you for hearing
me out I I know we, we, we went
in circles some, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, because.
I hear you make people go in
circles, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
but honestly I'm trying to
clarify this and it's just it's
a wide gap to fill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. There's further
debate on the amendment,
gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Montoya.
So thank you Mr. Speaker, does
the gentleman from Otero Yield,
thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
I gladly yield to my friend from
San Juan County.
I think Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I, I'm not sure
if you're aware, but uh.
I for 19 years, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, uh, I worked for
a union at a coal mine. People
know I worked at a coal mine.
But not everybody knows that I
was a union member, as a matter
of fact, I'm collecting
retirement for that today.
Uh, Miss Speaker and gentlemen,
I'm not sure if you knew this.
I, I've had the opportunity
throughout the years to to
mention this, but Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I, I, uh, for 5
years was a union steward.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, during that time.
I was, uh, I negotiated two
contracts.
Uh, on behalf of the union, a
very lucrative contracts, I
might say. I was actually pretty
good at it, uh, some might refer
to me as a recovering union
thug.
I
kind of take that pejorative in
the best way, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um.
I, I, I was listening to the
debate earlier in particular
several questions, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that were asked
in particular from uh the uh
Republican whip.
And several of those questions,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
We
Actually hard
To be that it was actually
difficult for uh the presenter
of the underlying bill to to
give a quick and decisive.
Uh, response that there was some
ambiguity there. So Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I'm actually
surprised that this was not a.
Friendly amendment and and and
I'm gonna go through that really
quick with you, Mr. Speaker,
and, and gentlemen.
Um
As a union steward,
I, I, I actually had a very,
very, very strong success rate
whenever I brought complaints
against the company, in part,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, was,
I knew the contract.
And the contract had very, very
specific delight dividing lines
that were clear.
The easiest way, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, to be able to.
Uh
When
With when the, when, when
actually you're, you're bringing
a presentation before the
company that that they get to
decide whether or not
You win or don't.
And that, that seems a lot of
times really uh tilted against
you if you're a union steward.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
had a tremendous and this I, I
will pat myself on the back for
this. I had a 90% plus success
rate in challenging uh the
company whenever they were
obvious violations, and Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, one of
the ways that I was able to have
that type of success rate was
because.
When I had members of union
members come to me and they were
angry in their minds it was some
sort of mistreatment, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I was
able to look.
In the contract, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and I was able to
point out
That whether the employee was
right or wrong, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and so.
What do they say good fences
make good neighbors, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen. And as I was
listening to the debate earlier,
there was a lot of
Discussion about what are the
clear dividing lines. So Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, as I was
reading your amendment.
What I saw was.
Your language just through very,
very strong dividing lines.
Made it very clear, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that
We wanted to with your amendment
prevent misinterpretation.
And, and, and what we really
don't want to do, we do not want
to punish good employee,
employers.
Uh, just because, uh, someone
were to get upset over something
like um
There could be compliance
issues, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen that.
Uh
That
Involve government.
And may involve right, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, during an
election year, something that
was on the ballot that was uh a
compliance issue and Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
I know because I was a union.
Representative
That I got complaints a lot of
times because the average
person who was coming to me
didn't understand the contract
the way I did.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
what I see with this is this
doesn't go to someone to help
interpret that. This takes it
right straight, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, to litigation.
And so, uh, if, if you, if you
could, maybe you could respond
to that in your amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
yes, uh, so this will be clear
clarifying language which will
indeed protect the employer and
the employee, so Mr. Speaker, if
I could make a point of order.
Stayed your point, Mr. Speaker,
this matter having been under
consideration for 3 hours, I
moved to close debate. It hasn't
been considered 3 hours. You've
got 1 minute left,
so I will continue to respond to
that I hit the 3 hour mark,
I'll, uh, I'll call on generally
from Santa Fe to close. OK, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so regarding
the duties of the employee,
we're protecting individuals who
are indeed.
Having these problems. So with
ambiguity, we're taking a little
bit of that out. The bill is
still, in my opinion,
unpassable, but with this
amendment it does indeed
alleviate some of that stress,
and it does continue to create
such things as protections for
employment based upon actual job
duties and not just any kind of
vague language regarding
political involvement.
Gent lady from Burnley of
Hogmanby Hill.
Mr. Speaker, this matter having
been under uh debate for 3
hours. I now move to close
debate. There's a motion to
close debate. All those in favor
by saying a.
' s name.
debate is now closed.
lady from Berlio.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
it's my understanding that
there, no, I'm sorry, apologies.
Resent Hockmany Hill.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I moved to
table House floor Amendment
number 1 to House Bill 84 is
amended. motion to table House
Flo number one to House Bill 84
as amended, a vote of yes. The
amendments tabled. The vote of
no, we're back on the amendment,
but without time to debate any
further, so with that, the vote
is not open.
What was not closed by vote of
40 in the affirmative, 24 in the
negative. House floor amendment
number 12 Houses 84 as amended
has been tabled.
Gent lady from Ber Leoside of
Chavez to close.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
and it's come to my attention,
Mr. Speaker, that some members
are concerned about um the
inclusion of of state or any
political subdivision of the
state and what I wanted to say
to the members, Mr. Speaker, is
that I am committed to
Amending this bill, should it go
over?
to the Senate to exclude the
state or any political
subdivision of the state.
Um, from the definition of an
employer.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I do
now move that House Bill 84 as
amended do now passage of 84 as
amended. The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 27 in
the negative. House Bill 84 as
amended, Azuli pass this House.
Gentlemen from Sandoval San
Martinez, I believe you are on
item 33.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
You get me to that point
reflect that action has served
for replacing House Labor
veterans Military Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 158 as a man did on final
passage has been taken. It is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution.gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, the New Mexicoba
impact fund which is designed to
support the readiness for
critical military installations
including Cannon Air Force Base
Homan and Kirtland Air Force
bases and White Sands missile
range. See, there is a gentleman
from Katherine Grantdal of
Terazas.
See no debate, gentlemen to
close. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move that
House Bill 158 do not pass.
We're on final passage of House
Labor Veterans Military Affairs
Committee substitute for A158 as
amended. The vote.
It's not open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's labor
veterans, Military Affairs
Committee substitute for House
158 as amended Haulli passed his
house.
Other gentlemen from Sandoval
Rosano Hernandez. Are you ready
on item 34. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
can you get me to that point
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill 233 as twice
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution, gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. House
Bill 233 ensures that private
insurance, uh, will cover
topical oxygen therapy used to
treat diabetic foot ulcers, and
with that, I stand for questions
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask
that House Bill 233 as twice
amended do now pass. We final
passage of 233 as twice amended.
The vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 1 in
the negative House Bill 233 is
twice amended as duly pass this
House.
Gentle lady from Roosevelt Curry
and Chavez, Representative Reeb,
are you ready on item 10? Yes,
Mr. Speaker, will you get me to
that point? Let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
101 on final passage has been
taken. It is not subject to
debate, amendment or
substitution generated to
explain the bill. House Bill
101, uh, makes an exemption to
unlawful possession of firearm
at a polling place for a
commission law enforcement
officer and with that I'll stand
for questions you know debate
genely to close.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I asked that
House Bill 101 do now pass. We
are on final passage of House
Bill 101, the vote is not open.
The votes are closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. House Bill 101 has
passed this house. She lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
gentlemen from Berley
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. House
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow morning in room 309 at
8:30. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
from Donana representative
Ferrari. Mr. Speaker, your um
CPAC, um.
Consumer and public affairs will
be meeting immediately after we
leave the floor.
gentle lady from Berlio. Mr.
Speaker, thanks. I missed this
last opportunity with the, uh,
earlier in the day, everybody
received some bags from those
poblanos, um, it's been a tough
evening go use this lavender
mist and take a bath and enjoy
yourselves. Thank you. Members
take note, gentlemen from
Sandoval, Ria Riba, and San
Juan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee will
tomorrow at 8:30 lady from Bern
Leo Thompson. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. How's Health and Human
Services Committee will meet at
8:30 tomorrow at 3:07 lady from
Achilles San Juan,
Representative Johnson. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee we'll meet tomorrow at
8:30 a.m., room 305. Bring your
own coffee and donuts.s take
special note, gentlemen from
Donana representative Lara.
Gentlemen from gentle lady from
Santa Fe, Romero, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I just want to
congratulate the New Mexico
House for being the reigning
champions of the basketball
game.
Next year is another year is
what I hear. Members take note,
we are reigning champions.
Tomorrow I will appoint a
committee of representative
Abeta, Representative Romero,
and Representative Vincent to go
to the Senate tomorrow and show
off our.
Do we earned trophies.
I'm serious, right at 10:30.
As soon as we start floor
session, gentlemen from Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Uh, House
Appropriation and Finance will
not be meeting tonight. We will
be meeting tomorrow though.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
gentle.
Seeing no further
announcementsenator from Santa
Fe to close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
Before I take that motion,
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, last
night my apartment was broken
into.
And somebody stole a dozen eggs
and left a pan with water on the
stove.
No
Police suspect it was some
poachers.
That's a good egg joke.
Mhm
The housingsta in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
