I'm at this point in time I
would like to introduce Karen
Kelly.
Come up and she's gonna be
taking us through the report
and then once we finish that we
have any questions will go to
the committee.
Waves.
Thank you.
The morning.
And committee members and thank
you again for the opportunity to
present the findings of the new
to report to release officially
yesterday and the secretary of
state in Albuquerque my name is
Carolyn Kelly I'm the director
of communications and research
for track and also the office.
On that this morning.
This report looks at restaurant
review of that recommendation of
New Mexicos.
Does that gestion and safety
economic development and
transportation funding for New
Mexico the more I get to the
findings of the report in the
first legislative initiatives
from Travis and.
As a national transportation
research nonprofit we're based
in Washington DC and we produce
code state specific reports like
this one as well as national
reports.
Issues the findings of our
reporters are often cited by the
major news organizations and
also used by legislative
yourselves when attorneys
transportation funding level by
the state or the national level
since Representative was founded
more than fifty years ago we
produce more than six hundred
reports in all fifty states so
with that let me turn to some of
the findings of the neural for
which is entitled New Mexico
transportation by the numbers
meeting states mistakes.
The release of the report is
ongoing nationwide public
education campaign and evaluates
as I said through the
recriminations traffic safety
national levels highly funding
and economic development both
statewide and also that region
data break down in the fourth
quarter Albuquerque's Santa Fe
and Los crucis as well.
The report emphasizes the need
for increased transportation
grant here in New Mexico and
includes a list also of nearly
six billion dollars in
transportation projects
throughout the state they
currently lack funding to move
forward New Mexico's
transportation network is
literally the backbone of the
state and each year it for is a
hundred twenty five billion
dollars worth of goods in and
out of the state and it allows
the state's one half million
licensed drivers to move about
as well as those passing
through.
After vehicle travel in New
Mexico dropped by more than
forty percent at the height of
the pandemic in April of twenty
twenty we've not seen that
travel in Mexico has returned
nearly two pre pandemic levels
in fact the last measurement it
was about two percent below pre
pandemic levels of vehicle
travel to find out perhaps has
been caught up and is even with
where it had been.
But because of a lack of
transportation funding the
state's drivers are now
contending with roads that are
increasingly deteriorated
congested and it lacks some of
the safety features that we like
to see
some of the most critical
sectors of New Mexicos economy
namely the energy extraction
agriculture and tourism areas
higher US transportation system
that is safe and smooth and
efficient and adequate and
sustainable source of
transportation funding is key to
keeping economy moving in the
right direction.
Recommendation efficiency and
safety of the same presentation
and Network affects quality of
life and economic growth and it
has a direct financial impact on
drivers here in the state in
fact in our report Mexico roads
that are deteriorating congested
lax and safety features cost
Xtrackers three billion dollars
a year that and that was
provided nine hundred dollars
per driver in Albuquerque area
these are costs including higher
yes operating costs as a result
of that in reference it includes
the cost of lost time and wasted
fuel as a result of traffic
congestion and also includes a
financial cost track crashes
some of which could have been
prevented well these costs are
already high even higher in
future unless the state can
provide additional funding to
improve road bridge conditions
ease congestion and enhance
safety in fact the New Mexico
DOT has provided us as we were
putting together for the report
with a list of five point seven
five billion dollars improvement
in construction projects
throughout the state they're
currently not able to move
forward because they lack the
funds so that additional
transportation investment these
projects centered on the drawing
board and you can find that list
and funding for these projects
and possibly downs are broken
down by each of the six state
highway districts.
There were also looks at payment
conditions in the state and
finds that throughout New Mexico
more than half of the fifty six
percent of major roads in the
state are for your condition.
Eleven percent are here
commission Andrew me thirty two
percent are good for this.
The conditions on major roads in
the state's urban areas are even
more deteriorated in fact in
Albuquerque and Los crucis
nearly two thirds of major roads
are at four condition and within
half of Santa fe's majority of
those are also in for media
production.
Based on trips copulations
driving on these deteriorated
roads cost Mexico drivers a
total of one point three billion
dollars each year as much as
nine hundred twenty eight
dollars for drivers.
These are costs that include
accelerated vehicle depreciation
as a result of that grows
increased tire wear and also
additional maintenance costs.
There were also lives at bridge
conditions statewide and find
that throughout New Mexico five
percent or just under two
hundred of the state.
R. D. in order for sexually
Division condition now it's
important to note that these
bridges are safe for travel and
they're maintained and monitored
on a regular basis by the
organizations that are
responsible for their upkeep but
many of them do needs repairs or
even replacing some cases most
bridges are designed to last
about fifty years for a major
overhaul or replacement although
it the advances in technology
today Representative now being
built to last for about seventy
five years but that fifty year
mark is important to note
because here in New Mexico
almost half of the state's
bridges were built before
nineteen sixty nine felonies
bridges are reaching or have
surpassed their intended design
life and really see significant
repairs or replacement in some
cases.
We're also documents increasing
level of congestion Mexico's
rose in recent decades the rate
of growth in population growth
has far outpaced the expansion
of the transportation network
and as I mentioned earlier after
vehicle travel dropped by forty
one percent at the start of the
pandemic it's now return to a
pre pandemic levels and in fact
that split the two drivers once
again being in fact in fact an
album Albuquerque area the
average driver loses forty six
hours each year that's more than
one for working as a result of
being stuck in traffic
congestion but that congestion
is more than just a headache and
a nuisance and hundreds from
getting to point eight point B.
just like deteriorated roads in
Rogers of money and time and
many of them can ill afford it
in fact the lost time and wasted
fuel due to traffic congestion
statewide cost Mexico drivers
not nine hundred million dollars
annually that's the in the form
of lost time and wasted fuel and
amounts to up to twelve hundred
dollars in some of the state's
urban areas.
The report also in at traffic
safety and traffic fatalities
in.
Funds of the state's track you
tell is the sixth highest in the
nation and the number of
fatalities rose significantly in
recent years even as we saw the
right vehicle travel drop.
More than two thousand people
lost their lives on the state's
roads of the last five years and
roughly twenty state counties
for bicyclists and pedestrians
estimates that traffic crashes
we're rotating features will
likely a contributing factor
cost is eight hundred twenty
four million dollars in the form
of lost work place and household
for it to do property damage
medical and legal costs
congestion cost services.
So the deficiencies that we know
in its report I do want to
emphasize that the deteriorating
appropriates and conditions in
the report are are not at all of
reflects the ability or the
capabilities of the
organizations that are
responsible for maintaining.
In fact the state DOT and local
municipalities are doing a
tremendous job with the funds
that they feel but the reality
is that the state faces a
significant and growing
transportation funding for all
and lastly Mexico can increase
transportation funding many of
these critically needed projects
will remain stranded on.
That federal infrastructure
investment and jobs act which
was signed by twenty one
legislative Mexico with about
three point two billion dollars
in additional federal
transportation funding from
twenty twenty to twenty twenty
six this edition federal
investment will be helpful but
the state will also need.
The funding needed to improve
Mexico's transportation network
New Mexico like other states
also these challenges to the
impact of increasing fuel
efficiency and adoption of
electric vehicles as all of the
it is the impact of inflation on
buying power factor revenue
generated by New Mexicos motor
fuel tax which is a critical
source of the state's education
funding is likely to a road as a
result of increased vehicle fuel
efficiency and increasing
adoption of electric vehicles
nationwide the average fuel
efficiency of US vehicles is
expected in the one percent by
twenty thirty L. increased fifty
one percent by twenty forty so
much of the revenue to the state
counts on now from the fuel tax
will start to be diminished as
well electric vehicles represent
five percent vehicle sales now
Nash nationwide if twenty twenty
three that's expected increased
to sixty percent of global sales
by twenty forty.
Inflation has also reduced the
buying power of the existing
transportation funding impacts
during the eighteen months from
January of twenty twenty one
through June of twenty twenty
two the federal highway
administration's national
highway construction cost index
went up by thirty seven percent
this is the index that tracks
the cost of labor and materials
needed for construction seven
dollars that they do have some
they're not stretching as far
investing in states reservation
system can have significant
economic impacts affect the
design and construction of needs
of transportation infrastructure
in New Mexico supports about
twenty six thousand jobs full
time jobs across all sectors in
states economy and in key
industries like tourism retail
sales and culture and
manufacturing nearly three
hundred fifty thousand full time
jobs in New Mexico are
completely on state
transportation network so
increasing investment in
Mexico's network of roads
bridges and transit is vital to
losing the economic health of
the state and the quality of
life of its residents in the
short term transportation
investment creates good jobs and
in the long term provides a
lasting assets that can be used
for generations to come.
It'll be critical to New Mexico
provides adequate transportation
funding for transportation or to
ensure that the state receives
residents and businesses of a
system of roads bridges and
state and smooth and efficient
so thank you very much for the
opportunity to serve the
findings of the report of
chairman and members and if you
have any questions at this time
to be happy to answer them.
Thank you so much.
I really start with any
questions from the committee I
think I saw vice chairman first
and Representative this.
Thank you madam chair thank the
presenters on page two.
Was the Mexico god right here if
you have.
Five hundred million dollars.
I.
In addition of a third may.
And then on top the first
paragraph on Dauphin FY forty.
Six lane design three eight
three hundred eighty million
that comes out to eight hundred
eighty million dollars do you
think the unitary shins that
there is an ongoing you'll.
Of making the fix they are we
from our.
All.
Hi Representative the members
the list of projects that's in
the report was provided as the
New Mexico DOT I know that
and since after here I think
they might be better it's people
that are close friends of the
information that they have
provided four point madam chair
and localized opted.
The secretary Schardin stated I.
Six three million dollars to
make it a six lane.
There's a billion dollars are
being spent on.
Sections of the actual
clarification Madam chair of
Westminster Garcia what.
Reporter or projects of
currently in the state of for
construction right now that
project that you're talking of
the study we started on is
getting out of this of course of
this year that's not reflected
in here you are correct thirty
three million dollars right now
about three billion is what we
have present early estimates put
projects is shown to production
projects that are designed
Williams construction works for
you is this of strangers stay
with this.
Should be done.
The low cost three billion to do
the whole thing we've been a
billion dollars in dollars I
need food section of it what
what is the purpose of a.
Of the manager of a Servicio
Six or under development and
falcons in state for quite
awhile those of identified to
address capacity issues in some
instances address phone bridges
that are deficient or transient
of students concerns whatever
projects that is so online forty
projects again under the size
within the fiscal constraint for
years and step so they've been
on they've been under
development for for some time
even prior to the start of the
related commercial at all.
No I do not understand.
On the system for years but
still was gonna make billion
dollar.
For but for a billion dollars to
do sections of the stuff in the.
And we need to do with the
federation with that being the
whole thing as a whole.
I don't know how.
Yes we said multibillion dollar
to six and interstate.
Read your claim of dog you can
see them at all this evaluation
chairs and we of crystal and for
the first one on.
The process is that.
Thank you madam chair R.
legislature Garcia.
But nature of the project
revolving right now on I. forty
point keep retain I forty it's
in taking up projects see come
out of that study we're gonna be
multiple years in the future
right so we still have to make
the nine forty so up it still
out there is one forty isn't the
tribe's long long long stretches
of of I. forty that are gonna
get updated with additional
capacity and again keep it over
to
to the staff that he's
considering incident part of the
state system
should be done thank you for
that all right well footer and
what that does is it is it is
concerned we are spending so
much money.
PC that and Idaho this is there
is there and we need to do
upgrades and preventive
maintenance to help people get
up on the Senator it just I saw
another Houston.
Would stand up to billion
dollars of this and been rebuilt
from renewable.
Thank you to the thank you
madam chair for surviving on the
data that we make with our
billion dollars instructors are
are they're not going to be
tough to be addressed with the
with the future projects other
than preventive maintenance and
things that actually will be as
possible and not impossible you
structures of the bill to
accommodate future third right
so they're not so they will be
in the will of the intent
transaction of this us the when
we get to the full of stress for
Maryland two two okay so they
are going to by the lease I
someone that's going to be
wasted if you will.
Thank you for.
The text of a half a dozen
editors thank you madam chair
good morning members good
morning everyone else in the
room first of all NMDOT has a
monumental perpetual task of
trying to not only maintain but
improve repair the.
See amazing of Montenegro's
bridges etcetera the trip
reporter I appreciate as well
because it brings to light some
of the things this year.
It's every year
on top of that madam chair.
You know we has representatives
have a unique perspective
because we are faced with our
communities and and we saw
people because we we we have to
talk and we run for office right
one of the things that I can
share is that.
Having formerly been account
commissioner now in this role.
Needs of community sometimes up
to.
So what was needed in the
community.
Back in two thousand nine is
different that twenty three
because recently as I was going
door to door about my community
the number one thing that people
wanted to see improved work
rules and particularly community
roads and and and that in and of
itself local municipalities is
is herculean herculean task as
well.
for driving the Santa Fe you
know just here on twenty five
the road is in need of repair
I know my committee would like
to have the roads but understand
Airbnb
tribal this horrible little road
and so it's it's just it's just
a big deal for the community
because we recognize that costs
when you hear that possible and
it hurts your front end of your
vehicle
it's space I appreciate what is
to be done and I hope that the
state.
Continues to fund Raul repair
bridge repair to levels that is
absolutely needed and lastly
madam chair.
I tell these two thousand and
five years this is just
unacceptable.
Just accept what we have to do
better for for literally
people's life thank you madam
chair thank you very much of
this to happen with our.
Representative Harper thank you
madam chair and I just want to
say thank you I very much look
forward to report every year.
And just the way all the state
is consolidated to one match
report and I really appreciate
you of the department working
with you into team to put this
together.
I just wanted to make one quick
comment and that is when I
started here about eleven years
ago
the number of bridges in the
state if I remember it properly
that were important for section
efficient commission was like
more than just.
And now it was on a state seeing
that we're now at five percent
that is wonderful and finally
Department concerted effort to
to make those approved I just
want to say thank you and thank
you all for the report you know
this does help shape.
Some of the things that we do
with this is a great example of
that so.
Thank you madam chair for for
requests for me much
Representative Lundstrom thank
you very much I wanted to just
remind the committee that the
transportation trust fund bill
that we all have signed on is
directly tied to the state of
which is directly tied to this
report the wouldn't you you
can't find a there are
compelling reasons that we have
the transportation trust fund
that what was presented today.
And this is just a point in time
this is the state right now.
That is going to look at
mentioned Representative
increases it's so much different
next year as things come off the
model is the new new projects
come on that.
There's so many of these have
been delayed because we haven't
had proper funding.
So I am strongly in support of
the trust fund
has certainly this is the year
for us to put money into it.
We have a tremendous amount
nonrecurring funding that go
into the corpus of the trust
fund that we could then use as a
supplement for funding
step projects I think the
purpose for the bill is to help
pay for state projects but we
desperately need that I think
this is a good report certainly
I'm I'm gonna read this on the
floor go through with a fine
tooth comb but I have no no
questions madam chair about the
projects that are listed here
certainly the one that's near
and dear to me is the I. forty
project I I live in Gallup and
we get up to seven thousand
trucks a day that are on that
road.
And you get one
crash it backs up for hours and
and I know DOT knows that I mean
I have literally hours to get
that that that fixed because the
frontage roads are undersized
for truck traffic and they don't
have the ability to handle much
pedestrian traffic.
I want to thank you for your
presentation today thank you
madam chair for housing on the
agenda thank you Representative
I have a couple questions
actually met first to
Representative Graham thank you
madam chair this Kelly thank you
for this report I think this is
the thirteenth one I've heard.
and it's always sobering madam
chair to see what and this is a
wonderful compilation of many.
Many subjects of overall guard
transportation our highways.
I'm just curious to know more
Germans Kelly are there any
states that getting a firm from
the trip folks for doing things.
Madam.
Chair representative The New
Mexico finds itself in a
position that many other states
are also in where the funding
needs of the system far outpace
what can be done and the need to
improve their transportation and
so certainly Mexico is not alone
in the challenges that they face
especially as it relates to how
the funding and the impact as I
noted above inflation of the
action of vehicles in the NFL
have on one of the main sources
of transportation revenue in the
state so as is and straight
across the board are struggling
to do this and so it's important
that statewide basis and and
federally that transportation is
funded adequately so that we can
have the of no that is.
In addition.
Thank you and madam chair this
Kelly.
So we're we're gonna be looking
at our general appropriations
act or budget bill this morning
in the house chambers
and I believe I heard you say
that you did a press conference
in Albuquerque yesterday and
chair it would be so nice if we
could see the trip report before
we we kind of think the budget
just because this is information
that are provided to have but
I'm sure thank you for what
you're showing us today please
keep up the good work thank you
madam chair.
Thank you very much
Representative anybody else.
Where I go okay thank you very
much this Kelly for the very
informative report I to leave
going through this with a fine
tooth comb on the floor I may
have some questions for you
later on so if you give me your
contact information I appreciate
it but Representative Brown RT
asks one of my questions which
is done in a.
The reports but not to answer
that one I'm going back to the
federal funding that's available
on P. talk a little bit more
about state matches that are
needed for that funding in the
in whether or not any
restrictions are found in our
for states to be able to utilize
it to full capacity then it is
as I mentioned that federal
guided by the IDA in two
thousand one will be very very
helpful to Mexico and all the
states in to further your
progress on on the community
education network but the
It will also be critical that
states have funding available to
provide for a match for those
funds and that they can also be
able to to use those of very
quickly so I think if if
there's.
Anything that the beauty
representative select added
terms of the formulas or have
funding is is channeled and use.
At the end of Madam chair thank
you.
We had just this morning.
Well as forty.
Instruction costs in two
thousand nineteen resisted the
number that we're using is
offered to thirty percent right
so good state formula funding in
say I need says we're going to
give you thirty percent more
every single year right
beginning in twenty twenty four
will construction and we're in a
position where we're seeing
perfect now we have the same
more funding technically
speaking twenty twenty three
that we did in two thousand
nineteen million in our capacity
so it's been some of our
struggles with the state any
small increases in formula
funding from U. S. U. T. is that
we're trying to catch up with
what the new normal is it that's
a thirty percent increase to
construction costs alternative
four years ago.
In my I have another question as
it relates to our nation and did
you fear automation into your
report we know that that's going
to become more of
An issue especially in larger
states like New Mexico with two
main intersecting
highways is that going to cause
more or less where our roads
what can we do to combat that as
we can anticipate increasing the
automation we see that Madam
chair and representative do not
look at appropriations the
context of of this report but I
think it's it's important notice
you sent any improvements to the
system keep economy and keep the
state's residents living on
system legislative session.
Anybody else.
Well thank you very much for
being here we sure do appreciate
you and all the work tremendous
work you put into this report
and look forward to having you
here to do it every year I'm
here Representative spend of
roughly an annual
in our compilation of this
report and I believe this is
probably the fifth or sixth
opportunity I've had to present
this to the to the committee.
Increasing your time this
morning and thank you again
Madam chair representative for
the chance to finance before
today the task was to ensure
that.
we are now going to go back to
fill set this point all of the
sponsors of H. B. one forty one.
There is also.
Okay
Representative Ortez sure there
you are.
He
is house bill two forty.
Thank you.
We have just.
Okay would you like me to be
happy to.
To to to to I'm not seeing the
amendment myself to the efforts
of the members.
It is yes okay you just a second
loss.
Because.
Okay go ahead without the two
two hundred please in order to
two five Madam two two five one
six five.
The amendment for the session
some of.
Okay one to tell us a little bit
about what this ammendment does
Representative the manager
committee we need
recommendations that you had in
the last committee of the
it changed.
On line one of the asserted
allow cessation of special
legislation certain conditions.
We changed from ten dollars to
five dollars that's the initial.
The
we also amended twenty dollars
to eighteen.
I did some changes towards the
added the language madam chair.
That is needed for these for
these bills to get.
One twenty three seventy six
year old compare the number of
special second Canadian
association registration issued
a written previous fiscal year
average.
Such issue maybe this twenty
five twenty six.
Yes.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment removes that we've set
the amendment has given.
Discussion.
Discussion on the amendment.
Please
thank you madam chair on so I'm
just wondering if anybody from
taxed Representative heard from
the motor vehicle programs here
translation.
Can we call somebody.
Not I could have the session
online offline madam chair
because I'm just wondering it
says that the department may.
And the license plates on just
wondering if they actually do.
These license plates have this
provision
and what their calculation
actually before.
Discussion imagine this is going
to be the amendment placed on
all these other bills today
so I just wanted to get that
straight.
To what their processes and if
they're actually doing away with
license plates.
What we're lucky Representative
that our in in house Mr
Representative Harper
he can answer questions all
right please.
So Madam chair representative
great question and.
The first time this languages
ever adopted actually on a
little bit I passed a couple
years ago.
The child cancer family support
by and what was that apartment
on this language I think it's
the the committee at that time
really believe that we have a
lot of places that were not
being used
there were several that only had
a couple hundred issues on the
books and so working with the
department we developed this
language that basically sets a
baseline and then does an
automatic appeal and so as the
childhood family
childhood cancer family support
provided the first one it's
baseline is essentially being
finished this year.
And so starting next year
they'll start looking at those
this really is a mechanism to
have any place that the Act
repealed.
but the department now if you
notice in the FY are for every
license plate bill proposes
adding this for peeler to it and
so.
I think it's best practice and
we'll we'll see in the next few
years however because that's
what.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative Harper I did have
one other question about license
plates are they need to order or
are the pre made for special
license plates.
Into the air yeah.
Answers to chair representative
at least in my experience date
pre make the first couple
hundred.
And actually for a special T.
was childhood cancer one they
will give the first hundred to
that the organization
organization Russian Raffles
often uses a fundraising tools
first hundred.
The wristwatch Department
wristwatch the issue once and as
the close to running out of
another batch.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much
representative madam chair on
his first point yes thank you
madam chair representative just
a confirming clarify I feel like
we had some conversation about
changing the referral and
sending all the eight states to
tax again to hear them I
imagine.
They'll trickle in but can we
confirm or clarify if that's
happening on each of those and
your conversations with
leadership madam chair
Representative thank you very
much and we can confirm that I
can look up on ledges where the
next.
Many will be that all we are our
first telling
Madam chair of the board looks
like your.
Preparation now
Representative thank you for
bringing up the issue I have to
leadership I don't know where
they're going with that issue so
perhaps we'll have another
conversation with them after
today so this year I know
something thank you madam chair
thank you for the reminder
Representative.
Okay were some individuals
anybody else have a question
just.
Okay in that case I'm sorry I
should have gone to the public
first on the amended bill this
by for this license with.
We have a document.
I think that we need to that's
right because you have this.
We now need to have a motion to
adopt the amendment madam chair
I maintain my motion to adopt
thank you Representative second
second by Harper in do you have
any opposition.
You now have a bill thank you
very much ready to go to the
public.
Is there anyone here in support
of this bill.
Anyone support this.
The body not opposition.
Okay great now we're going to
discussion questions of the
amended bill members.
Just.
Second.
Those.
Good
to have any opposition to the
minutes of.
Congratulations to the class.
And I will talk to the speakers.
Thank you.
We have.
He's also.
Representative Chandler so.
Good morning madam chair and.
I also have a set of that film
follows the line of reasoning
that.
Colleges presented.
Amending and some
Required phrases provisions I
guess.
Chair.
Yes that's the.
Right now I have also.
Richard sturgeon Richard is
president of the heinous riders.
In he came to me with his a
constituent of course with this
idea to create a license plate
that would fund motorcycle
safety awareness for the
supplements
Department transportation assets
programs and I have spoken with
you today and.
The support this as well so.
He noted that Mister chair if we
statement by.
Is appropriate.
This right off the to the two
numbers yes ma'am right just two
to five three zero three point.
And we're gonna deal with Ionis
for committees thank you US
recession sure.
These special.
Okay discussion is to.
I have one question chair and
looks like you follow the same
devices this is the last time in
the form of a committee
substitute as this was not just
a drafting decision or is there
any other logical up madam chair
that was feedback I believe we
got from your office and so we.
Your offices three suggestions.
That.
like every thank you so much
followed by.
I have any more discussion on
the amendment some of it
Sure.
Questions are just looking at.
We have the only amended bill we
just heard from hospitals to
forty there was some language
there I don't think I see in the
committee substitute.
And it was an amendment to the
bill Haidle.
adding the words allowing for
cessation of special license
plate insurance under certain
conditions I just
have that in there.
Happy to build forty I'm sorry
miss them.
So I have your process payment
here.
Thank you madam chair I see in
the last bill that we.
This committee that language is
not in the within the the title
either so.
As amended.
Okay thank you it together yes
if that is that would be our
preference manager if you can
just make that and then maybe we
can make it I members are okay
without okay hi.
If you if you needed again
Representative program here.
Chair representative some the
words added bill title in the
course of F. B. reflected in the
text of the substitute and says
allowing for cessation.
Of special license plate.
Issuance under certain
conditions thank you so much.
Strike making appropriation.
We have we have.
To use straight.
One thirteen.
It's.
We need a motion to accept the.
Chair of making motion and we
expect the addition the
amendment to committee
substitute for house bill two
eighty seven to include.
In the title.
The phrase allowing for
cessation a special license
license plate is under certain
conditions.
And striking second striking.
And striking.
Making an appropriation bills.
Thank you for that correction.
Copies of the second.
Mr chair just we would have to
have a language we saw it again
on house bill two forty as.
It was sections and talks about.
The way that that's false it.
The last amendments.
Your for the.
House bill two four we had
We added support do.
In the text of the bill.
Six.
Yes it is well.
The motion and the second we
have an opposition.
Right we have amended bill sure
Chandler and now we want to give
your expected chances I would
say we have the minutes of.
The amended committee
substitute.
And now you're just.
You can hear your rationale
Committee.
The chair representative.
The last two years I've
dedicated my life to motorcycle
Marcus I am the chairman
motorcycle safety committee in
Los Alamos and I distributed
weekly newsletter over five
hundred riders in three
different states.
In twenty eighteen Mexico became
the only state in America opting
signatures are sign populations
every county clerk may as
motorcycle awareness month.
All thirty three county silos
proclamations again in twenty
twenty one and twenty twenty
two.
I work with city councils mayors
town clerks John C. managers and
everyone there is yes that the
health.
So it's not surprising the
number told me.
They were eager to help because
their friends are for kids.
Of course wanted to create
something sustainable for New
Mexico's motorcycle community
something that not only raise
awareness for the countless
writers that I called family but
also something that actually
help the state's motorcycle
training department and.
The forwards.
Heard most often by vehicle
driver at the scene of an
accident involving a motorcycle.
Is simply I didn't see.
Wait we have look twice for
motorcycles is a very important
message.
The twenty twenty to New Mexico
saw increases motorcycle
registration for over sixty
seven thousand by.
Percent increase from the year
before.
More more New Mexicans
motorcycles way to commute back
and forth to work.
And we will see if we can reduce
the number of accidents.
These plates placed on vehicles
and motorcycles will not only be
a safety initiative for
motorcycle riding constituents
but for the entire state of New
Mexico.
There is another place like
They didn't see.
What's the big big issue good
you know this happens more.
People are not aware
you madam chair it is very
dangerous news that would be
able we can work on this people
around John the people by the.
Thank you for thank you Mr
chairman.
Okay Representative Pettigrew
was going to make a motion times
left with anybody else
Representative Harper chair of
do not pass house bill two
eighty seven.
To pass on house transportation
public works and capital
improvements on the substitute
for house bill two eighty seven
has.
The second.
Is there any opposition.
Now.
You have a committees.
We really appreciate it Mr
stern.
Appreciate your comments.
Yes Sir.
Representative Ezzell is here
house bill one twenty one.
Okay.
Madam chair thank you very much
for all of
me to community I was in the
middle of I feel whenever nine
o'clock time.
Several times for that madam
chair I am here today to recent.
He said to ask bill one one.
To continue with this is that if
we discuss give us just one
second it passed Representative
anytime you read out the two.
The right one.
Lotus herbals.
The to to make sure with the
reckless more two two four six
zero three.
Okay move the committee
substitute for discussion so
we're.
Thank you all right so we are
discussing the committee
substitute members.
Discussion to.
The committee.
To see.
We're getting really good at
this.
Have a motion to adopt.
The New Mexico.
That yeah I was noticing that.
Senator.
I understand this bill does not
make an appropriation from the
general fund start wonder if
because you are stating here
that so much is going towards
the initial.
Page one thirteen so much is
going to the.
Law enforcement fund.
That's why the state
appropriation I just don't know.
Representative I mean should we
see the can't call on the
drafters.
Yeah or
And I don't hold this up right
we tried to speak out to
challenge tax but
Maybe that's why it's there so
let's one time members of let's
start with the minimum I
Representative we need to strike
me thank you for your titles of
someone with.
Senator.
To move okay districts is rooted
out so striking.
Making and that's a line
fourteen paid one.
Ation let the team.
The body opposed.
Your your management on your
committees.
Thank you madam chair chair.
If I if I may madam chair
Concerned about the freezing in
the bill title with it's it's
actually quite a bit different
from the other standard using
let me just get to that
That.
So madam chair arms are also
began house bill's to forty of
Bill by Representative Ortez.
The bill titled
it in her committees of bureau
was modified to say allowing for
cessation of special license
applications under certain
conditions and the current bill
reads providing for cessation so
little bit of a different
that would be impermissible
there provided for cessation of
issuance base.
On.
So I I think maybe we ought to
go with them.
The other language so thank you
Representative around I I think
you're correct I think at this
moment time the committee needs
to make this on the exact
language that we receive going
forward.
in order for these types of
bills to proceed so
Let's make a second amendment
based upon that language he.
So madam chair of a change we're
providing to allow.
Remove the based based on new
information issuance and
renewals to issue so under
certain conditions.
Right this.
Session.
Madam chair.
I've heard two different things
I'm not too sure which.
Which working we're changing so
we are at the title of the state
providing for cessation
additions and based that's a
correction if which is a new
issue.
So whereby says to be in the
office so we're on line thirteen
Representative our changing
providing to allowing.
Providing to allow your reserves
right striking providing
changing to allowing good forces
station okay.
Of the hearing specialist.
Special conditions.
Of
Stewart.
Special.
Issuance under certain
conditions
so so going back to line
thirteen or gonna have allowing
searching to find into allowing
for cessation.
Of this is line fourteen special
license plate issuance.
Restrict these under certain
conditions and striking issuance
bass correct.
Serve our community back to me
to make sure we got this correct
I have allowing for cessation of
special places please issuance
under certain conditions
property measurements and.
So it.
We need lots of.
District all of this report I
thank all of the system ten
fifteen yeah.
If I might just one more times
allowing for cessation of
special license issuance and
production production.
Okay I'm sorry who need that
sentiment.
I will.
Any with any opposition to that
isn't.
Okay you now have an amended
committee substitute
Representative.
I'm gonna go to the public to
have anybody in favor of this
committee substitute.
Anybody in opposition to the
amended committee substitute.
We'll go to members members have
a question.
The motion.
Madam chair I move that house
bill one forty one do not pass
but that house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee
substitute.
Just the here in the mentioned
here in this committee amended
for house bill one forty one do
you have to pass.
Okay.
For a second.
Thank you very of those.
Congratulations madam have a
twice amended committees.
Madam chair members thank you
very much of the family thank
you very much.
Appreciate.
You're very welcome.
Special.
Also listed all of the losers I
need to check speaker's office.
Next we're going to
H. three sixty.
Representative.
The staff.
Chair and committee members
thank you for.
I think this is a.
Madam chairman of this but today
being access there you guys
rock.
It all together to.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair this is a license
plate.
Is official support for the
national FFA organization.
And
Chair of the probably the best
thing to do for you is.
Propose an amendment on the fly
we change the why thirteen.
To re.
We strike started fighting all
the way to appropriations.
To allowing for cessation.
Of special license plate issue
issuance under certain
conditions under certain
conditions.
Madam chair if it's the
committee is so inclined I would
move that we make that move.
The one second.
The.
I will.
Second.
Chair if there.
The numbers are a little bit
different this compares to some
of the other bills with respect
to.
Money is back and more goes
additionally New Mexico state
and.
These are
four H. programs I'm gonna stop
right there Representative let's
change with the amendment first
get that adopted and we'll go
back to the amended bill so we
have a second from
Representative Lundstrom is
anybody opposed to the amendment
no I don't think so okay now you
have an amended bill
Representative and you can
finish telling us about the
How the money works this one.
From the additional fee for the
fight support the national FFA
organization or and
This money will be filtered
through the New Mexico
department of agriculture to
fund statewide program to.
For active national.
Act.
Very good representative I am
Have you checked this specific
arrangement with TRD to make
sure that is and and allow
passed through these types of
registration fees.
No okay for them on this.
Chair I did not expect the
Business.
our lead sponsor sitting next to
us my understanding from what
I've read.
In the provide documentation
with this is all approved the.
Okay.
The.
And okay do we have anybody in
the public who is here to speak
on this bill Madam the back
thank you madam chairman and
committee members I'm here to
share with you about house bill
three sixty up hello my name is
Dorothy Hamel RD from here to
DFA chapter and I'm also the
district five as is the vice
president for New Mexico face
state seen others over fifty
three hundred plus members in
New Mexico for the purpose of it
is going over seven hundred
members this past year with
eighty five chapters in New
Mexico when we would you do all
right stuff for chapters three
point six million dollars from
New Mexico divers go straight
into the economy so I'd like you
to support this for the actual
education possible three sixties
of thank you madam chair thank
you very much anybody LCS.
I am not thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Michael are you looking
at the job fair I'm also part of
the New Mexico state.
Did a walk round these
bluejackets and partner
organization these are the most
recognized symbol in our state
organization these jackets and
this album is what we stand for
and as we come to you with this
bill the license plate is a lot
of recognition and we're very
proud to be here in Santa Fe
with each one of you trying to
get our bill passes regional
license plates sure project New
Mexico at the day as well as the
agriculture industry which we're
all super super product so thank
you guys so much for your time
hello this is the best.
Right anybody else.
Anybody in opposition to the
bill.
I see all these folks from FFA
and and only two of you are
brave enough to speak.
Okay Sir.
I'm here in the states advisor
stated.
Actually these are all our play
offs from New Mexico.
I collided Miller I am from the
Los crucis case after an
itemized I face the secretary
I'm pretty AUMENT on the visual
effects after in Los crucis and
I'm sorry New Mexico shivers
good morning my name is one of
the we're at the chapter and I'm
dishes this presidency.
Good morning I'm calling this is
Marie RT at the chapter I'm just
a very present save us.
Yes thank you very much.
This I see valuation the chapter
Los crucis that's certain issues
they I.
Thank you very much for being
here I was elected by.
Representative Pettigrew answers
license this bill has been
several years were very active
from.
C..
Thank you very much you can.
Okay I'll were on the committee
announced so
We have an amended bill do we
have any discussion on this
amended bill or not.
Madam chair Representative
Harper yeah so so I I think
everything in here is just fine
but just the a little bit of a
difference in a few structure
from the spill from the last
ones
I think it's I guess we're all
aware of looks like there's the
first year the fee is thirty
five dollars.
And then a ten of that goes to
the Department of twelve
practices that next on the next
committee.
But then every year after that
is twenty five dollars and
that's the twenty five dollar
fee that goes to the the.
Act department so they can help
support
these kind of programs.
Okay so that right and that is a
little different but.
Anybody off Representative
Brown.
Chair I just like to mention
these are very well spoken young
people and always impressed with
them good to have him here today
thank you.
Hi a motion.
Chair before we have a motion if
you if you allow me to speak to
system will have been doing on
the other bills thank you for
the in line nine page two from
Jan wealth.
That was rather to go to the
Department at the same time.
Need for the this is that so so
madam chair Act Preciado the
Representative want to do that
right now but then the
additional.
We have to change the twenty
five dollars to to make the mass
that operate so what do that
here just wait for the next.
Sure the twenty five was the.
I think I think Representative
that's a little bit more of a
substantive change nine
comfortable with doing on the
fly I so if you want to just do
it in the next committee which I
already have stock to the
speaker's office about anyway.
Let's just keep the language as
it is with that issue lacked.
Share that that's great we'll
have those conversations and.
This this this and we discuss it
here in the next.
Appropriations.
Discussion.
Thank you.
Representative Brown Madam chair
I move the castle hills three
sixty is.
The president and anybody
anybody opposition.
I think you have a bill
Representative the issue for you
all have given from with respect
to access today on your desks
and we hope to see you all
tonight at the US over thank you
very.
Thank you Representative.
License plate
that.
Okay house bill two eighty six
Representative Harper.
The manager and the district to
be here why hospital today I am
not a licensed.
So
this is my I'll call my frontier
bill for this session I try to
help you on your chest.
In July and August if you a
little bit of background on top
of this so.
Access international labs
in other words this.
We do a lot of fundamental
research and one of those areas
in which rural science.
The door.
And and there was a
fascinating breakthrough that
happened a few years ago.
And this involved in.
Until the transition property.
And the it's.
I'm sorry.
The the bottom line is.
there are these fifty medium
metal particles that were
invented.
In the field of these.
depending on the temperature C.
will either let he in for the
flight.
Which is fascinating rate which
changes problems what you're
what else thank you to what that
temperature is.
And so
companies actually spoke out of
the national labs because they
figure out all we can set this
up to transition temperature
around eighty degrees
Fahrenheit.
Thank you for these on windows.
Now the sun is.
The summer.
What the human out in winter
electors seats.
And W. just huge for you know
energy savings rate for all of
here calculation your last.
Internals creating more tricks.
perfectly with the pre folks
right.
So
the it's a great success story
is a little
on your desk from presenters
companies New Mexico based
company.
is for you all what this what
this bill does is.
Hello in New Mexico law with the
current federal law.
Continuing operations in your.
So federal lawsuits you content
up to thirty percent of the
white with disabilities we
seventy percent of the white has
to get through visible light
transmission realty is what
that's called New Mexico are
can only two first three or five
inches from the top of the page.
So.
Aussie there are a couple
reasons why I think this is a
great idea I have some friends
restored cars.
And the.
Right now legally.
There was Ruiloba with the only
has about eighty percent twenty
percent by production.
It's for all the resources and
destroyed also whether your dash
two to restore power
Also in the summer right hello
have you on your hand steering
wheel after two months of on
time most of your solar gain
this is windshield so yeah we
get to the sides and the back of
the Winchell's were faster if he
comes so that that helps to.
Then also hoping to actually a
small business next one of eight
technology is developed at one
of our national laboratories
so that was the product is ready
for going into cars we can do
our.
And then I got some just some
visuals here so I have an idea.
So
this is a ninety percent white
through.
So so we feel that the
put on which you'll have about
ten percent it's perfectly
transparent actually put a film
on my windshield to
technically construction.
And actually work really well
but it brings it down to ten
percent so this legally speaking
hours driving illegally without
additional.
we'll talk.
This is your this isn't spring
archive right so this is eighty
percent since eleven twenty
percent right through right this
is what you can do on your back
windows.
This is what you can do
whatever.
Front passenger side windows.
This is
Seventy percent so this is what
we wanted to on your front
windshield this.
Almost.
Not percent right.
So so that Madam chair
representative questions.
I do have state Representative
built with
Science projects through the
exhibits of the State Street
funds.
is there anybody in the audience
who supports this bill.
Anybody in opposition.
Right committee members I know
we have to have questions.
One question Representative
Lundstrom thank you very much
Representative what happens with
the vehicles are they
grandfathered in existing
vehicles that have a different
ten what you're talking about
what what what happens I guess
into this.
Yeah so it's a great question so
madam chair and she wants to
right now the current losses you
content that first three digits
only you can't to anything okay
and so if we pass this all the
current cars and that to to talk
they would still be legal.
We have to follow the federal
standard okay.
so we would be impacted in the
existing cars okay thank you.
Madam chair Representative.
Unlike the senators are curious
do you have Representative I R.
dynamic city today.
So madam chair and
representative Andrew I spoke
with them conversation.
Sadly if you read through their
their action in the middle of
their what was it
Yeah around the right just
Sir so we just have.
The huge development and now
they're going on three seven
million dollars Building piracy
on the fashion.
This so they are you're crazy
busy getting ready for that and
so the second I don't want to
not sure what can I write a
letter yes.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
Right this is so big hopefully
up on target the
how long before we get to this
point where we can places on our
home windows.
Shares of.
Right question so
my conversations with him are
that if their success with this
a round race this I was still
planned they've got the
technology throughout the
biggest on the ceiling on we can
always get something to work in
the lab on a small scale that
scaling up to that's were you
really have a hard time and if
they just figured that if god so
if they're successful people
that.
Invested in your two of the
hospital service in this.
Madam chair representative my
last comment would be that if
they need a trough disability
I'm happy to should.
This is all for a sec I have
dedicate that to the municipal
building.
Also.
The measure for just.
Thank you Representative this is
fascinating
I as a self prescribed car
person I learned very early on
from my dad the importance of
protecting your whether you
dashboard by utilizing tents
your windows that backed at that
time in New Mexico is very
illegal detention windows and
and then may not have received
some citations for illegal
hunting back in the day but.
This bill now and
that's all the comments I have a
motion.
I'm sorry Representative right
in state thank you just a couple
questions Representative Harper
so.
A credit card to and I love the
fact that this is a tech
transfer fee for that out of our
national labs really great
examples out of questions Madam
