Make sure that in the batteries
will not be disposed of in a
landfill or in other improper
ways and make sure that valuable
batteries and they are valuable
remain available for further
applications, remanufacture, um,
when they're ready to be
recycled.
The bill requires that they be
high quality recycling
technologies which will maximize
the critical mineral recovery
and minimize pollution. We don't
want any of these EV bat
batteries to slip through the
cracks and so we.
Um, there is a shelf life on
electric vehicles.
And those, those, um.
Vehicles will, you know, will
reach their end, and we want to
make sure that the batteries
that power them um have a second
life, I'm, I'm not calling, but
it is close to that in some
ways. Um, we want to make sure
that their second life um
provides um.
economic opportunities, these
batteries and reduce the
emissions, Mr. Chair.
There is a
We have that so
So I'm having our check, make
sure you see it who would have
come from? Do you know who the
rafter was?
Representative
Got it.
We didn't print it out.
And the timeline, but where we
fail is that we're.
So
I apologize, but we're gonna
have to.
OK, Mr. Chast, on Tuesday
morning
that
to someone else, uh, so that's,
but let me just.
Hold on that for a bit.
Or whenever you meet next, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. I apologize to the
whole committee. We did get it
on time, but it was our failure
to not get it noticed and
printed out.
So excited, Mr. Tur to talk
about zombie EV batteries.
You're gonna have to get excited
all over again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
certainly understand that that's
happened in my committee, but if
there's any way you can endeavor
to appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, really
quick, pardon me.
Representative
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, our analyst didn't
receive it, so I don't know why,
but if we could make sure that
we get a copy that would share
and.
Thank you, duly noted.
Thank you. OK, we'll, we'll roll
the bill.
Good morning. Do we have
Representative?
Es or Senator Pope here.
They are not here. We'll move on
to HB 145 additional highway
Project.
OK, does everybody have the
amended.
145. Do we have those? Pass
those out, please.
OK, I think everybody has the
amendments. Is that correct?
We're good?
Do we have a motion to or or
discussion of the amendment.
so
have a motion that we have a
second?
OK
There is no
Opposition, let's go ahead and
proceed.
Thank
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, thanks committee.
Happy to be back in front of you
again, this is House Bill 145,
um, and so the amendment, Mr.
Chairman, um, thanks to lots of
effort, uh, from several of you,
including you, Mr. Chair, and
others on the committee.
uh, were able to put on an
amendment.
To the pill, which basically
states that any of the money
that uh is allocated per this
bond or this bonding capacity
has to be allocated towards
projects that are, uh, noticed.
Vetted and prioritized through
the commission and that process
that.
to
um the way we identify uh
transportation needs throughout.
We're having a discussion on the
amendment.
No discussion
Mr. Chair
Moisture
at the moment.
We have a motion and we have a
second, any discussion on the
amendment?
We have an amended bill.
Please proceed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, um,
you know, we're back in front of
you again, this is, uh,
additional bonding capacity for
up to $1.5 billion in bonding
for the Department of
Transportation for road
infrastructure, transportation
infrastructure projects, um.
And we are, we stand ready for
questions to kind of take back
where we left off.
Thank you. Uh, you're done with
presentation, correct? Correct.
Just for the audience, please
introduce your expert. Oh, thank
you, uh, my expert is uh
department secretary Ricky
Serna, Department of
Transportation, and also, um,
Mr. Chairman, I think we skipped
public commentary the last time,
so just a friendly reminder, you
probably have to do that too.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
support of this bill? If you do,
please raise your hand.
And if you wish to speak, if you
would line up behind the uh
presenters.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Mike
Sandoval, registered lobbyist
for the Associate Contractors of
New Mexico, all the heavy
highway contractors. We support
this bill, but want to make two
important points. Um, first of
all, it's really important that
this bill is funded in some way,
we would have a lot of concerns
if this bill were to pass
without some additional funding
source, um, the department is
gonna be pretty much out of debt
in 2030 and without any new
funding source, a new
administration, we don't know
what they do and probably.
utilize this bill to put the
department back in debt without
any funding source, number 12,
we really feel like um we
understand the bonding process
is complicated. I've gone
through it a couple times when I
was secretary and best case
scenario, this money is out
there in a year, um, at the
earliest. And so we really need
to continue to support the
department with non-reoccurring
funds, particularly for
maintenance, since none of this
bonding money can go for
maintenance. We really like to
see that.
support from the legislature the
way they have been over the last
several years to continue that
with non-reoccurring funds as
well. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Committee
Jim Garcia, executive director
of Associated Contractors of New
Mexico representing the
contracting community. Uh, we,
we are in favor of this of this
amendment. We think this is a
great bill. I agree with what
Mr. Sandoval just said about
going up to the capacity and and
having a good road to pay it
back as well. So we're stand in
favor. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Rebecca Ru. I'm the
infrastructure advisor in the
office of the governor, and we
stand in strong support of this
bill and thank the sponsors and
Secretary Serna for their hard
work on this legislation, and we
see this as a real opportunity
for us building on incredible
effort and conversations that
been happening over the past few
years about how are we going to
address the needs to fund our
transportation projects in the
state. We think this is
responsible and the bill in
front of you.
balances transparency and
accountability, an important
criteria to make sure that these
um funds are used effectively
and responsibly by the State
Transportation commission. Thank
you so much for your time. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Marco Gonzalez and I'm
the registered lobbyist for
McKinley County. And so we thank
the sponsor and secretary for
coming together and bringing
this important piece of
legislation to the committee,
uh, we're a real community and
this important bill is going to
help rural community
infrastructure get.
And, so McKinley County stands
in support of the bill, and we
appreciate the sponsor for
bringing it forward. Thank you,
Mr.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee,
Franklin Garcia representing the
asphalt pavement association,
um, like the other speakers were
in favor of the increasing the
capacity to get roadworks, uh,
road projects done throughout
the state, um, and also looking
for the other revenue streams
that are out there to ensure
that the bonding of payment was
able to be made um without
taking bigger hits to the.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online that wishes to.
OK, do we have anybody in
opposition to the bill in the
audience, raise your hand if
you're in opposition.
Do we have anybody online that
is in opposition.
Now, Mister Chair.
Thank you, members.
Representative Lundstrom
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you presenters. I, I think
it's super important for the
public to understand.
Why this amendment was done in
in terms of age, your.
Your first um short amendment
where you're changing the title
which says identified in the
statewide transportation
improvement program, and what
I'm looking for, Mr. Chairman,
is, and we have the secretary
talk about what those guardrails
mean in inside of the step,
particularly as it pertains to
technical issues because I think
Mr. Chairman, it's important for
the public to know.
Uh
Legislators or a new governor,
whoever just can't rub their
hands together and say, oh,
great, now I'm gonna get a big
project, because I got.
The ability to to do that now.
But could you explain, um?
Mr. Secretary, why
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative for the question.
Um, as you mentioned, the, the
improvement plan, the program is
a six-year program that contains
all federally funded and
regionally significant projects.
And the requirement for the
Department of Transportation to
have uh a program.
Um, is codified in federal CFR
and so we essentially are
satisfying a federal requirement
as an agency supported by our
federal apportionment
apportionment funds.
The 1st 4 years of the stiff
essentially represent projects
that are fiscally constrained
and then the two outer years are
used for informational and
planning purposes, essentially
identifying projects that have
been deemed me just interrupt
for a second. Would you?
let the public know what the
skip is and if.
Yes.
So the sip stands for statewide
transportation improvement
program, and it's essentially
and it's available um
electronically on our website if
anyone's interested in seeing
it, right?
And it is essentially the plan
that identifies the projects
that are either fiscally
constrained or those that have
been identified
regionally significant projects
um for planning purposes. And
so,
It essentially ties to what's
called the states.
Long range plan and the
Department of Transportation has
one that extends through 2045.
And so the projects on that
plan, need to align with the
long range asset management plan
for the State Department of
Transportation.
And so it must assist with
meeting specific performance
measures, some of which again
are codified in CFR.
There are 3 performance measures
and 14 targets, including safety
system condition, system
reliability, and emission
reduction are those targets I uh
performance measures.
And so what we fundamentally do
to develop the tip.
is we work with our regional
NPOs, TLPAs, or local
governments, or RGPOs to
essentially ensure that when the
projects are in there, OK, they
represent the measures and the
targets and the goals of the
department's long-range plan.
And if there ever needs to be
changes that um must be
considered to place projects in
the stiff, move them up or move
the funding within the projects
that process starts with the
collaboration among the
districts, the regions, the
NPOs, the TLPAs.
And then it moves through the
secretary of the Department of
Transportation, but
fundamentally the Federal
Highway Administration and the
FTA are responsible for
approving all step adoptions and
amendments. And so
fundamentally, um,
To discuss why the amendment
creates some um logic in what
projects are ultimately going to
be identified for bond funds is.
It's a collaborative process
that starts with locals with
regional transportation
partners.
It includes the collaboration
and initial approval from the
Department of Transportation.
Um, pursuant to federal statute
and designated by the governor
and then moves through Federal
Highway Administration and FTA.
And so it becomes um a very
open, transparent and democratic
process, if you will, to get
projects on the step and moved
within the step.
And that's very good, um, Mr.
Chairman and what I'd like to
also ask Mr. Chairman when
because it sounds to me.
It's a technical assessment
before you can get approval.
Um, some of those things you had
provided to us, Mr. Chairman, in
an earlier discussion.
When you're looking at traffic
counts, you're looking at safety
measures and some of these other
things.
But do do the state technical
assessment components mirror
those of the Federal Highway
Administration, or do they have
a representative,
it's complete alignment, right?
So our plan is aimed at
achieving the federal targets
and measures, right? And so when
we develop a plan, we're working
towards achieving the federal
targets and measures that
support our sustained funding,
right? So there's alignment.
And so in the original
amendment.
Which I believe was adopted. No,
it wasn't adopted, but in the
original amendment language that
we were discussing kind of
articulated some of those
things. This rolls them up right
into the process, but it does
talk about the same measures I
discussed just a bit ago, which
include safety system, system
reliability and emission
reduction from those you you
derive crash data, volume,
traffic counts, pavement
condition, bridge conditions,
right? So Mr. Chairman, I'm
really happy to.
See this amendment.
What it does is it basically
provides the guidance based on a
technical approach.
Or how the funding would be
allocated and to what areas and
projects that would be allocated
to.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, can you just
again, Mr. Secretary, tell us
what that funding ceiling was
each year.
So, um
Mr. Chair Representative, um, I
actually, um, I don't know if
Miss Sher if you'll indulge me.
I, I, just to show you, I have a
little easel and a little
notepad, if I can pull that up
really quick, OK, I'm just that
kind of explainer, I guess.
Mr. Chairman, he's been dying to
use the easel since he got here
Here's a nasal.
I can't.
Members, it's about time we get
some entertainment. Yeah.
There's a
working with and they're in the
bill. Secretary, hold on a
second. If we could get the
sergeant at Arms to bring the
mic up.
And, and hold it for the
secretary, please.
Yeah
OK.
So there's um right now the
Department of Transportation are
beginning fiscal year, uh, the
next fiscal year in July when
this bill is acted will have
about $500 million.
In existing debt.
And this ties to that 2003
legislation we talked about the
last time. Secretary turn it
just a little bit some members
on this I can see it just a
little bit. Did you all see it
still, uh, representative
Lindstrom
500 million in existing debt,
the last of which, going back to
former Secretary Sandoval's
comments was authorized in 2021,
about 243 million.
And so we have existing debt
here.
There is in statue a ceiling I
before E except after C, right?
E I L I N G, OK, of um one.12
billion dollars, OK, which means
that at any time.
At any place in time, this is
the maximum amount of aggregate
debt that the agency can hold,
OK?
And through a technical group,
our advisor has indicated that
to pay this debt off if we were
topped out here.
Over 20 years, $18 million a
year.
When we saw that number, we
thought that's a heck of a
coincidence because as it turns
out, our annual debt to finish
paying this off.
is
$110 million.
We are paying this right now on
annual debt service, and we
expect to finish paying it off
in 2032, OK? So we, we already
know that for the next 7 years,
we already have money to pay
this debt. It's being paid right
now.
And so if the commission were to
get authority.
OK
For another $1.5 billion.
What would happen is we couldn't
exceed this limit at any single
time, but this is where we're at
now, which means that
immediately we could add another
600 million on top of this 500
million.
And it wouldn't do anything to
this debt service payment
because the total debt service
payment over 20 years is 108.
We're already paying 110 right
now.
And so, what we expect to do is
chip away at this little at a
time. So for example, in the
first year in 2026, we probably
would borrow somewhere about 190
million and in and in year two,
we would go in and borrow
another 200 million and we would
chip away at it to what we
estimate would be about an 8
year spending spree, if you
will.
And what we're doing is closely
calculating what the sum of this
new debt and this old debt is to
make sure it doesn't go above
this, all the wild chipping away
at the 1.5 little at a time.
And so what we're hopeful of
I
On top of getting this authority
is we want to get this money to
pay this new debt off.
And if we're able to get new
money to pay this debt off, the
money we're already spending
here.
Goes back into our operational
budget for other non-debt
purposes.
45 of this, 45 million of this
is coming out of the state road
fund.
And 65 million of this is coming
out of our federal funds.
So, if we get new money to pay
all of our debt off.
We get $45 million of state road
fund capacity, which we would
use to build up the agency and
65 million of federal capacity
which we would use for
construction.
And so not only do we now have
more money for bigger projects
sooner.
We have more money for immediate
projects as well. Every single
year.
And the concern that's been
expressed to us is, well, why
borrow? We have so much money.
Sure, if you want to give us
$1.5 billion in cash instead,
we'll take it.
But if we can't afford to do
that, you've got to keep in mind
that if we don't do $190 million
in projects and.
2026.
In a year, they're going to cost
200 million in 2 years, it's
going to be 220 million. ate
that to interest that you're
paying back, right? It's costing
us more every time we kick these
down the road, and in the
balance is roads that are not
good. So this is fundamentally
what we're trying to do is more
authority for the same annual
payment we're making right now.
Worst case scenario is we don't
get this new revenue and instead
of stopping these payments in
2032.
They would just continue until
we paid off the 1.5.
And so from an affordability
perspective.
did all things equal. The long
range concern which needs to be
fixed anyway, as you all saw
what's happening to the state
road fund in the next 30 years.
That needs to be fixed
regardless of what happens here.
So that kind of is the overview
of existing debt, current debt,
the difference between the
ceiling
and the authority.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
inside of this formula, Mr. uh.
secretary, are you gonna have an
inflation factor or some kind of
reserve account if these
projects are overrun.
Mr. Chair Representative, based
on the, the work that we've done
already, we can account for 1.2
billion of authority over the
next 8 years, which gives us 3
billion.
In cushion for project
inflation. OK, so you will have
that built in, OK, that's all I
had, Mr. Chairman.
Representatives, anybody else
wish to speak?
ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative and secretary, so
um I just wanna say I appreciate
this.
Well, it's a better bill because
of it. We were looking at an
earlier version of an amendment
which was much longer and I
don't think accomplished quite
what the new amendment. So thank
you for that.
Um, you know, I'm kind of
conservative, Mr. Chair, I
believe we don't borrow money
unless we really need to, but I
think this is a good investment.
I believe that we'll get work
done more quickly,
transportation district.
So, um, I will vote in favor of
the bill. I, I did sign on as a
co-sponsor.
Right
You know, and I remember Mr.
Chair being here a few years
ago, let's say how many.
But we had a lot of debt, and
that meant we didn't have money,
we were paying off debt, but not
getting road projects done.
And in this case,
I, I, I appreciate it very, very
good.
But it never feels good to me to
have that, but again, in this
case, I think we can justify it.
So thank you very much for this
seeing the fruits.
Mr. Chair.
Represent uh vice chair Lauder
and we would do pass as amended.
have a motion and a second
ranking member Brown.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Brego.
Yes.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Representative Hochman Beal, I'd
like to explain my vote.
Representative Jones.
Yes.
Representative Lindstrom,
Representative Romero, yes.
Ilata.
Yes.
Angela Cruz.
Yes
Oh, please.
Um, 110, um, do pass as amended.
Representative Whip Hochman v.
Hill to explain her vote.
Chairman. Thanks again to every
single member of this committee,
there was some good work that
was put into this amendment in
this bill, I agree with uh my
colleague Representative Brown,
I mean, I'm also a a co-sponsor
of the trust fund bill that we
keep bringing every year, be
wonderful, um, if we could, you
know, get our appropriators and
to agree with us that, you know,
major investments in
transportation infrastructure
are more, you know, bear fruits,
but until then.
This is the next best thing and
I think all of my colleagues.
Thank you and congratulations,
uh, I, I would just like to echo
and add that I believe that
creating this legacy fund is
critical.
And I hope that both sides of
the legislature, both houses of
the legislature, agree.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you Secretary.
We are
You
HB
To no, I'm sorry. Yes, HB 270
leader Armstrong.
Mr. Chairman
Just as we transition, if I may,
I appreciate secretary Cernas uh
differentiated instruction for
us. You can obviously tell that
he is a former teacher and it
made it all the math made it a
lot more clear. I was just
mentioning this secretary that
you can tell your teacher, um,
by your differentiated
instruction for.
Our committee, and I certainly
appreciated it. Thank you. I
could smell the marker from
here.
Representative Romero, it was
noticeable to the entire
membership.
Peter Armstrong, you ready?
Please proceed.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you, uh, for
hearing my bill. House Bill 270.
Um, in November of 2023, the
environment, uh, improvement
Board adopted the California
Advanced Clean Air Rules for New
Mexico, which became effective
in 2027.
Uh, which actually, um, uh, the
calendar year of 2026.
The California Advanced Clean
Air rules require 43% of all
vehicles available.
For sale in New Mexico to be
zero admission vehicles, and
this percentage increases 8%
each year until 2032.
Where the mandate would require
that 82% of all vehicles.
Available for sale, B 0
admission vehicles.
Since January 2022.
The market rate for zero
admission vehicles in New Mexico
has in increased less than 1%.
From 3.07% in January of 2022.
To 3.71 in December of 2024.
Yet somehow New Mexico is
supposed to increase this
percentage by over 1,000%.
In just over a year.
This is not possible.
In New Mexico or really anywhere
else in the nation.
In fact, California will not be
able to achieve these numbers as
they've been working on this for
about 15 years.
This bill is not to is not about
electric vehicles. In fact, you
will hear testimony from auto
dealers that they are very
supportive of electric vehicles.
As am I
And have invested hundreds.
And thousands of dollars.
In the EV infrastructure tools,
training.
Uh, training and to sell the
service and service EVs at their
dealerships. This bill is about
government mandates where the
government is trying to tell New
Mexicans what vehicles they
should be driving.
The California car rule.
In the
is an administrative rule
created by unelected.
board in California that was
adopted by an unelected New
Mexico.
Called the environment
improvement. The EIB considered
the adoption of the rule in 2023
during the hearing over 2400 New
Mexicans provided written
comment.
Uh, to the EIB for
consideration. Out of that 2400
written comments, 2,164 opposed
the rule while 248 in support of
the rule.
This equivalates equivalates to
89.7% of written comments
submitted by New Mexicans, being
opposed to this rule.
The New Mexico legislature has
not had any say.
In this overreaching rule.
Where they have, we have 112
legislators voted by the people
of the state of New Mexico.
California clean car rule will
limit the choices of vehicles
and ultimately raise the price
of vehicles throughout New
Mexico.
New Mexicans deserve the right
to purchase the vehicle of their
choice based on needs, budget,
and lifestyle.
The other point I'd like to
leave you with is that these
rules have been adopted the
rules that have been adopted do
not prohibit a New Mexican from
purchasing the vehicle of their
choice in other states and
registering them here in New
Mexico.
This will force New Mexicans to
travel hundreds of miles to
purchase their vehicle of their
choice out of state.
Meanwhile, it will be hurting
our New Mexico small businesses
that employ over 15,000 New
Mexicans.
Across New Mexico.
Joining me today, Mr. Speaker,
is Ken Ortiz, the executive
director of the Auto Dealers
Association.
I would just like to add that
um, I, I am a legislator of
fairness. I truly believe in
fairness.
Uh, I have my whole life.
Um, imposing government mandates
instead of letting the market
determine what vehicles are best
suited for New Mexico's, New
Mexicans is limiting choices and
increasing costs for New
Mexicans, especially in rural
New Mexico.
Uh, in New Mexicans and rural
and tribal areas of New Mexico
often drive hours to get to
their jobs.
Schools, medical appointments,
however, these areas are
noticeably lower rate of EV
charging stations and the areas
in New Mexico that do not have
electricity in their homes or
businesses.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um.
As well as the road fun that we
just heard about.
The EVs do not contribute.
To the road fund.
Whatsoever.
We heard just heard that the
road fund is going down, we've
all seen.
Um, charts on that.
And it's the gas tax is a lot of
that that that goes to the road
funds. So, um,
We heard testimony earlier on a
bill, um, earlier in the session
where people want choice.
They want to be able to make a
choice whether to drive an
electric school bus or buy an
electric school bus or the
people want choices as well and
our auto dealers are suffering.
Tremendously because of this
mandate.
And I, I'm all for electric,
whatever you want to do.
I will not, um.
Oppose that
But this is about choices for
New Mexicans, and, uh, with
that, I'd like to see if my
expert has anything to to add.
Morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I, I believe
that the sponsor covered the uh
the synopsis of the bill very
well. I just want to mention
that our association represents
120 franchise auto dealers in
New Mexico representing about
15,000 employees. So a couple of
highlights is number one is let
the market dictate. We don't
need mandates limiting choices
of, of vehicles for New
Mexicans, um, the comments
submitted to the EIB were about
90%.
of all New Mexican submitted
comments were opposed to the
rule, and it just doesn't work
for New Mexico.
Our dealers over the past 3
years have invested literally
millions of dollars at their
dealerships um with the
infrastructure for EV charging
stations, the specialized tools,
and the trainings, we are ready
to sell EVs to anybody who
wishes to purchase them. We just
don't need mandates limiting the
choices. What we've seen in some
other states of clean car states
that are ahead of us is some of
the manufacturers have stopped
stocking traditional vehicles
altogether.
So a customer in one of those
states basically has three
options. They can go down to the
dealership wanting to buy a
traditional vehicle, whether a
diesel pickup or a regular gas
vehicle, and they can either
special order it and wait 6
months.
They can opt for a slightly used
vehicle, and that's going to
increase use vehicles for all
New Mexicans because they're
going to be in such demand, or
they can simply leave out of
state and purchase that vehicle
title and register in New
Mexico. So buying the vehicle
out of state does nothing to
help emissions, number one, and
it just hurts businesses as well
as jobs out there. If the state
really was concerned about air
emission equality or or air air
quality.
I should say they should look at
the successful program
Bernalillo County has done and
maybe implement that in
metropolitan areas where they
have admissions testing program
to get the
Older, dirtier vehicles off the
road. So with that um central
questions, thank you.
Representative Harman Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, uh, Leader Armstrong
for bringing this bill, experts,
um.
So when I was the previous chair
of this committee, um, we were
doing a bunch of stuff with EVs.
The rule came out. I kind of
found myself in the unexpected
position of being in the
spotlight as EV Girl, uh, and we
did a lot of work.
I apologize, but we need public
input. Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
So, is there anybody in favor of
this bill? Raise your hand,
please, in the audience.
If you would wish to speak,
light up behind the presenters.
readiness chairman.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Howard
Hutchinson. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the coalition of
Arizona and Mexico counties.
When this rule was put forward.
It created essentially an
unfunded mandate.
On the counties
For the purchase and use of
these vehicles.
That is in direct and is
contrary to our constitution
that says that no rule.
Unless it's enacted by the
legislature.
Can be imposed on municipalities
and counties.
The end goal of clean car
standards is net zero.
Greenhouse gas emissions.
The key term is net.
Many think we will have zero
emissions as a result of going
to electric vehicles or other
clean fuels.
reality
is we will still have a mission
of greenhouse gasses.
Net Zero assumes we will secure
adequate uh.
But
In order to get in time. Thank
you, sir. Is that all the
audience comment?
We're not there yet. Uh, do we
have anybody online?
chair.
We have Travis.
Artillery
Good morning, Mr. Chair, and the
fellow representatives. My name
is Travis Tillery. I'm the
general manager of Tillery
Chevrolet here in Moriarty. I'd
like to start by saying we
support the sale of electric
vehicles, uh, at our dealership,
we've invested hundreds of
thousands of dollars in
electrical infrastructure to
prepare for EVs. It doesn't
matter to us if we sell an EV
gas or diesel. Uh, we just want
to sell a car or truck, we make
the same profit margin on each.
However, the clean of the
California Advanced Clean Car
rule is a great threat to our
way of life, and I urge you to
vote yes on House Bill 270.
Without this bill, we will be
forced to stock vehicles that
currently have very little
demand, and we will have very
little selection of vehicles for
New Mexicans to choose from.
Under the current rule for the
27 model year which begins in
2026. The manufacturers will be
forced to send new vehicles to
New Mexico in a ratio of 43% EB
and 57% non-EV.
Not only will not all
manufacturers even be able to
meet this demand, but currently
EV demand for consumers is only.
Carlos Santa.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Carlos Sontag,
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. We
strongly support this bill.
The state's current objectives
are not obtainable, and we're
risking a lot of jobs in the
industry. We just want to see
that people have a choice if
they wanna buy electric or the
standard.
vehicle that they can do that.
That's all that we're asking
that will preserve revenue
coming to the state. We can sell
more cars, we can keep more
people employed, so we encourage
you to support this bill. Thank
you.
Do we have anyone else that
Um,
McClston.
Good morning, chair.
And committee members, um, I do
stand in support of this bill. I
wanted to make sure that
everybody
I haven't heard it really stated
yet, but when I look at it from
our point of view is I'm a
general manager at Zys Fort in
Farmington, New Mexico. We sell,
um, approximately 100 gas
vehicles every one.
Electric vehicle and we like
selling electric vehicles, but
without the demand, we will not
survive this, this, uh, this
mandate because with
The the manufacturer being
forced to send us 43%.
Of our vehicles as electric
versus gasoline and without the
demand, I just won't have the
inventory that the customers
desire to purchase and they will
go out of state and buy.
So I strongly support this bill.
Thank you.
And
Mark Mark Poll.
Uh, good morning. Thank you, uh,
for asking. We, I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico Automotive Industry
Alliance. One of the things that
we, we are strongly in support
of this bill. And one of the
things we think is important to
understand is that there are not
technicians. There is not a
sufficient amount of
infrastructure either human
infrastructure, access to
charging, particularly in rural
counties. I drove from
Roswell to Santa Fe last week,
there is not a single charging
station between Roswell and
Santa Fe on 285.
Rural counties are gonna be
hugely impacted. We haven't even
figured out the tax
infrastructure for uh for these
vehicles because currently, uh,
electric vehicles pay nothing in
road tax. So we believe that
this is premature requirement
for a poor rural state. Thank
you.
Sue Barnes.
Yes, can you hear me?
Thank you. Uh, my name is Susan
Barnes. I'm a resident of Los
Alamos, New Mexico, and I'd like
to present a perspective as a
citizen and an EV owner. Um, I
have only heard a few of the
comments that have gone on. So,
um, I apologize if I
Uh, don't address all of the
things that I might, but, um, I
will say that my experience has
been, um, that when I wanted to
buy an EV, it was difficult to
do so because I did not have the
choice in the state in order to
uh purchase the type of vehicle
that I wanted to, um, since
owning an EV, I've had no
difficulty charging my electric
vehicle um around the state and
also in my community
we are hearing those in.
favor of the bill at this time.
Uh, so we will have to come back
to you.
I'm sorry, I apologize. I, I
didn't understand how this would
work, but I will wait
technicians, uh, do we have any
more in favor online?
No, Mister Chair.
OK, do we have anybody in
opposition in the audience.
If you wish to speak, please
line up behind the presenters.
OK. Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Camila Feibelman. I'm the
director of the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter here speaking
in opposition to the bill. In
reality, the mandate to
customers comes from the
dealers.
Auto dealers want you to buy
what they want you to buy, not
what you want to buy. Clean cars
rules simply give customers a
choice to purchase EVs.
Dozens and dozens of our members
spoke in person at the clean
cars hearings, saying they loved
their EVs, but so very often
have had to go out of state to
find one and or have been on
months-long waiting lists to
purchase in-state.
Our CR Club chair recently
attempted to purchase a Chevy
Bolt at a local dealership, and
the manager aggressively
discouraged her from doing that
purchase 2 weeks ago, I
attempted to buy an EV locally
in state and could only find the
most expensive vehicles, despite
there being affordable models on
the US market in different
states. This is about.
Thank you, um, committee chair
and committee members. My name
is Muriel Carpenter, and I want
to thank this legislature for
making it uh making me able as a
low income person in New Mexico
to buy an electric vehicle. I
got a 2 year old electric
vehicle from a small new
dealership that only had 2 cars
to choose from. I went over to
the Chevy dealer near me, and
they only had bolts and didn't
even know.
about some of the um the uh um
help that I could get from P&M
and getting my vehicle. So here
I was, I have solar on my roof,
leasing it, and does it feel
good to drive around this state,
making no poison from my car.
I really oppose oppose the bill.
We need more electric vehicles
here. I know all kinds of people
who want them. I'd love to bring
mine home and plug it into my
outside plug that I usually use
for my Christmas lights. It
almost cost me nothing. Thank
you so much.
Hi, I'm Terry Dunbar from
Albuquerque. I'm a retired
biologist.
An educator
I've been teaching about climate
change for over 20 years.
Uh, I oppose this bill because
we do need as many choices as
possible, and we need to move as
quickly as possible to a fossil
free future, and that's not just
for us but for our kids and
grandkids
vote against this belt.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Tammy Feeorn with
Western Resource Advocates, and
I think my colleagues have said
it all, but I will just quickly
say that, you know, we have to
have choices within this state
for saving money, and I have
saved a lot of money. I've been
driving an EV for almost 9 years
now, but I have to say, I had to
go out of state to get it
because it was impossible to
find them in our city, in our
state, and so I have been
benefiting from this that that
no other folks have the chance
to benefit from.
I have not been to a gas station
in 9 years. I have spent about
$6 a month to fuel my vehicle at
my house, plugged in into my
garage. I have spent about $20 a
year on maintenance and that was
replacing windshield wipers on
my vehicles. Those are the
savings that we're keeping
Mexicans from having, when we
don't have choice at the
dealerships. So for those
reasons and all the others
you've heard, I do ask you to
not support this bill today.
Thank you, do we have anyone in
opposition on online?
Stay, stay.
Hello?
Can you hear me? Go ahead.
OK. I, I oppose this bill, uh,
the clean Car Act only brings
choice. It does not mandate
anybody has to buy one car or
another, we'll all have choices,
but we do need to have more
choices. I live out in the four
corners of New Mexico and uh you
can barely see an EV out here.
They, they do exist, but it's a
few and far between, and I know
time I wanna go look our price
this sort of thing, uh, it's
just not in this area. We're
heavily oil and gas and it seems
like oil and gas has a, uh, uh
real desire to prevent this from
uh uh happening this Clin Carr
rule, but our state needs it. It
will benefit the people and not
just those that are making money
off oil and gas.
So please oppose this bill.
Thank you.
Joanna Struther.
Yes, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Joanna Struther. I'm the
senior director of advocacy for
the American Lung Association.
Um, air pollution from cars and
trucks is the 2nd largest source
of air pollution in New Mexico,
harming our health.
Transportation pollution is a
public health problem in New
Mexico, and a disproportionately
impacts our lower income
communities, communities of
color, children, elders, and
anyone with respiratory
conditions like asthma. Zero
emission cars and trucks are the
fastest way to curb the
transportation sector's toxic
air pollution and greenhouse gas
emissions. The American Lung
Association released a report
called er
in on healthy air which shows in
New Mexico, the benefits of
transitioning to zero emission
vehicles could generate over 3
billion in health benefits, um,
and this includes uh lives
saved, um, asthma attacks
avoided and lost work days
avoided. So, um, as we look at
ways to improve the health of
New Mexicans, I ask you to
oppose House Bill 270. Thank
you. Good morning.
This is Andrew Stone with the
New Mexico People's Energy
Cooperative.
I have been driving my EV for 13
years and had very little
expense in the way of
maintenance. I love it, and I
think that.
We need to follow what's
happening in China and India,
where no matter what your income
level is, there is a model
available for you.
Uh, thank you and please oppose
this bill.
Carrying
Yes, thank you. I don't have
anything prepared. I didn't even
know this would work, but I just
want to say as a low income New
Mexican living in Roswell, which
is also an oil belt.
I can't find anything. I mean, I
don't have the money to buy a
used gas vehicle, much less fine
a used EV and this bill would
make it much, much
More difficult.
Thank you.
So Barnes.
Yes, thank you. I apologize for
blurting in earlier. My name
again is Susan Barnes. I'm a
resident of Los Alamos, New
Mexico, and also an elected
member of our environmental
sustainability Board. I'm also
an EV owner. 2 years ago when I
purchased my EV, I had a hard
time finding one. I understand
that these conditions haven't
gotten appreciably better. Since
owning my EV, I've saved money.
I've saved, uh, it's a pleasure
to drive and I've had no
difficulty charging. I can also
speak to what our
is doing, we are interested in
lowering our carbon emissions,
the largest source of which is
transportation emissions, people
commuting to Los Alamos National
Laboratory. Um, we are
installing electric vehicle
charging stations here at the
county's own expense, and we
really would like it if people
had the opportunity to purchase
these cars, um, it's really all
about choice and I hope you will
oppose this bill so that people
have more choice to make
different
decisions about what they buy.
Thank you.
Michael Barrio.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Michael Barrio and I represent
Advanced Energy United. We are a
national trade association, um,
that represents the full suite
of advanced energy technologies,
um, uh, power producers and
consumers.
Um, we are opposed to this bill,
uh, this bill is simply about
taking choices away from
consumer consumers and limiting
the ability of the market to
meet demand, um, more clean car
options really means more
competition, more innovation,
and lower costs for consumers,
so.
We say let the market decide,
not restrictive policies that
put our state behind. Thank you.
Welcome to Zoom.
Glenn
Hi, uh, Glenn Weel, 3rd act, New
Mexico. I've been driving EVs
probably for about 10 years. Um,
I've found in the last two years
that the
The new charging infrastructure,
uh, that has been put up in New
Mexico, allows me to go
anywhere. I've driven to uh
Dallas, I've driven to Tucson,
um, and, uh, found I can charge
where I need to. Um,
I'm familiar with these rules. I
know that the uh auto industry
negotiated them with the state
of California, and therefore
it's what the auto industry
wants, um, because California is
has these rules earlier than we
do, uh, most of the EVs end up
getting shipped to California
and uh when I've shopped for EVs
on local lots, I've found that
they are not available to look
at and to buy, um, even today.
Um, so I believe this is, uh,
bringing more choice to people
who want.
To invest in a zero emission
vehicle and uh enjoy the lower
cost and lower maintenance and
um please uh vote no on this
bill. Thank you.
Bob Scott
Yes, thank you. I agree with
everything that has been said. I
just joined about 5 minutes ago.
My wife, uh, bought her first uh
EV, um, almost 3 years ago, I
bought mine last year. It used,
um, I appreciate the uh tax
credit on U EVs, and this is
choice. Um,
And we need to give consumers,
uh, purchasers of new cars and
used cars, the choice.
To choose an EV, um, it's one of
the few things that, uh, a
person or a family can do to
fight the climate crisis. Um, I
strongly encourage you to oppose
this bill. Thank you so much.
Mm
nothing more on Zoom.
Thank you, Representative
Hoffman of the Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um.
So to pick up where I left off,
I found myself as Eir.
And I did a lot of uh.
Extensive research rule, and um,
I contacted a number of
constituents all throughout the
state, um, to kind of just try
and see what the state of play
was.
Um, and I, you know, I was the
sponsor of the EV tax credit
last year, so I want to say I.
Wholeheartedly support the EV
transition. I hope and just
bought a plug-in hybrid. I'm
worried he might like it more
than me, but um.
It, it's
You know, I'm 100% for this
transition. When the rule was
being considered, um, I had
serious concerns though, Mr.
Chairman, um, that I conveyed in
that, um.
We simply did not have the
infrastructure throughout the
state to support a statewide
mandate such as this, so that's
actually why I started working
on infrastructure stuff, all of
you will get.
Um, and to ensure that the
mandate was workable because um
Mr. Chairman, I feel like.
If we put in an unworkable
mandate, we are not only working
against ourselves, we are
working against real solutions
to the climate crisis.
That's why we did the EV rebate,
um, so.
Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of
questions related to this bill
and related to to the status of
the California rule on which our
rule is based, so, um, Mr.
Chairman, Representative Leader
Armstrong.
What is the status of is the
California rule dependent upon
approval by the federal EPA.
Oh, thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
and, uh, uh, Madam Whip, um,
I it according to my expert
that's sitting right next to me
that I have not introduced yet,
who is um Mr. Carlos Garcia.
Um, it is
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and um
leader Armstrong has California.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam Whip,
yes. OK, Mr. Chairman and
Leader, when did that approval?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam Whip
right before Christmas.
OK. Mr. Chairman, Leader
Armstrong, would our rule be
dependent upon approval by the
EPA.
Uh, madam, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Whip, no, because.
Ah, Mr. Chairman, Leader
Armstrong, um, I.
That changes my opinion
somewhat. I, I have a couple
other questions. Does it relates
to inventory, so.
Um, we've heard from both sides,
either there's not enough
inventory, and I've heard from
the outdoor dealers that there's
too much inventory, so it's
gonna give your experts an
opportunity to kind of talk
about the state of status of
inventory.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Madam Whip and, uh, like I said,
this is Carlos Garcia and he's
happy to um to answer some of
those questions. Also, I just
want to bring back.
Some of the comments that this
is about choice.
This is really about choice for
New Mexicans and market driven
choice. And so uh with that, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Whip, uh,
Carlos Garcia.
Madam, Mr. Chairman and
committee members regarding the
inventory, it seems like, uh,
anytime there's
Public comment, we always find
the people that had to go out of
state to buy their car, yet the
availability of EVs is at an
all-time high and uh every
dealer that I know has spent uh
collectively we spent tens of
millions of dollars investing in
infrastructure, training and
equipment, and there are
Well north of 1000 EVs available
in New Mexico today, and you
know, the bottom line is
everyone wants to talk about.
About the market demand and the
choice when all
doing that.
Yeah
I apologize, that happens.
For God knows what reason.
Yeah.
So
Regarding inventory, uh,
traditionally manufacturers will
build and dealers will stock,
uh.
What is moving in the market and
the bottom line with all this is
same thing as I said in 2023 and
2024 were under 4% demand for
EVs in New Mexico. We're talking
about choice. The bottom line is
we want to talk about people
having free choice.
People aren't buying them. So
we're everybody has more EVs
than they can sell right now in
a relatively hot retail market.
So, you know, the market data
doesn't lie as the dealer said 3
years ago in this.
The demand has not moved at all.
REV incentive is a joke. $3500
does nothing to move the cars
and we're way behind in what we
were promised as New Mexicans
for charging infrastructure. So
all those things dictate uh
inventory, but as far as EVs go,
the manufacturers are pushing
them on us tremendously and I
know, uh, the example that keeps
being used is this Chevy Bolt
for the last 3 years that people
are being talked out of. We're
selling EVs in our dealerships,
our people are trained.
Our EV customers are happy,
they're state senators and state
representatives I've sold uh EVs
too and they're happy. My staff
is fully trained and engaged and
every dealer that I talked to, I
know is putting an extra effort
in because they know it's such
an important part of our future.
So
you know, inventory levels are
high, um, used car selection on
them.
is not as good as gas cars, but
if more people were buying new
cars, there would be more used
available and the bottom line is
when something is under 4% of
the market, the numbers just
aren't going to get to a point
where there's going to be a
large selection of used cars.
It's mathematically impossible,
and that's not just my opinion.
you still have the floor, but I
just want to remind everybody to
please turn off their right.
Thank you, leader, thank you,
expert, um.
So that goes back to um specific
conversations I had with people
throughout the state before
adoption of the rule and uh what
I heard was real worry that
especially places where folks,
you know, 90% of the vehicles
being purchased are heavy duty
trucks and above.
There is no option.
There's no like losing my voice,
um.
So
the lack of infrastructure in
our rural.
Areas of the state, um.
worried me.
And that's why I advocated
before adoption of the rule, Mr.
Chairman, for a tiered approach,
meaning we would have our Class
A counties have the mandate by
2027, or Class B counties there
later and everybody else after
that.
Um, which again, you know.
I feel like if we have bad
policy, Mr. Chairman, we are
working against ourselves again,
being someone who is.
ter r ified of the climate
crisis and working as hard as I
can to um bring down emissions,
so Mr. Chairman, uh, leader
Armstrong, what I'm trying to
say in a long-winded way is I
actually support your bill.
Um, because I feel like we can
do better, I think you need to
take a look at this rule and try
again.
So we can right size it so that
we don't create a situation
where we're just pushing people
to go buy the trucks they want,
especially in our rural areas in
Texas.
Or in Arizona, um, while we work
on getting the uh infrastructure
we needed and modernizing our
grid so that we can make sure
everybody who wants an electric
vehicle and get it at the time
they want it and that they can
charge it anywhere they want to.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative for the
bill. Um.
I, I really appreciate um the
thoughtfulness regarding the
bill.
And I actually see it as
something different. We voted to
make this commission.
And they're not, they're
appointed, they're not elected.
And they adopt.
In language.
On behalf of the legislators
that we'll just, we'll just
adopt the the California
Advanced Clean field rule, like
in language, it says California
adopt.
I mean, it's literally names
California Clean fuel rule.
In in our
I mean they mandated that on our
behalf. So my perspective, um,
Mr. Chair, Representative is
that I want to take back our
authority of what we were
elected to be here to do.
Um, and I, and, uh, it's our
duty to make these rules to that
to make the legislation and to
bed them and set the perimeters
around them. So I see that is
what you're trying to accomplish
here. Madam Chair, can you
focus? Oh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, um, Madam
Representative, um, I couldn't
have said it better, uh, we keep
giving authority away, um, and,
and once again, it's not that
we're against EVs.
Were against mandating to our
dealerships.
What kind of vehicles should be
on their lot when situation.
Um, and, and especially um in in
rural New Mexico, um, it should
be a mark across the state, but
rural New Mexico, this isn't
vehicle sold in New Mexico. So I
couldn't agree more and Mr.
Chair and Madam Representative,
I think.
Um, it goes a little bit further
than that.
We are elected every 2 years.
We're on the House side. We're
every 2 years. Our job is to
come here and be the voice of
our constituents.
We're looking at 100s of bills
where this commission is looking
at one thing.
And so I'm sitting here trying
to figure out how I go back to
my district and explain to a
major job, you know, an
employer.
Um, these local auto dealers
that are employing people, that
are sponsoring our, our, their
booster club members, they're
donating engaged in the
community, and how I go back and
justify that we put more and
more factors on them because
we're looking at all the bills,
some that passed through
committee last night.
Um, whether it's minimum wage,
whether it's more, um.
Requirements on employers for
compensation and benefits.
The loophole is probably the
most offensive thing to me.
That someone would say
We're here because we care about
the environment. We're here
because we want zero emissions,
but by the way, there's a
loophole. Just go out of state.
Just go out of state.
Almost every one of us is 2
hours from a state dealer,
someone out of state.
To the north
the east and the west.
And we can go buy this vehicle
we want out of state. This is
anti-business. It's
anti-economy. That's how I see
it, but that's less important
than us as this body taking back
the authority. Introduce a bill
that says New Mexico will adopt
clean fuel standards from
California.
Go adopt that. Then we made it,
then we did it statutorily. But
here, what happens if um.
Mr. Chair Representative, what
happens if you say we're going
to adopt the rules from.
2021, 2020, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Representative, it would start
all over again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um,
I also, um, serve on
appropriation.
On the declining revenue and
what that's gonna look like. And
I, I mean, hey, it's great the
road fund anymore.
And they're also not, they're
not contributing it goes to the
rule of funds, but I think 100
that funds all the other
programs, behavioral health,
schools, educate, you know,
whatever it is. But so there's.
And the idea of being zero
emission, that's also a farce.
Because if we have to replace
those roads, I believe people
know what our roads are made out
of, how it's produced and how
it's applied.
That does not have zero
emissions in that process at
all.
So, um, I don't know, Bill and
the opportunity that you gave me
to sign you.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we have Representative
Blunstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
also a co-sponsor on Chairman.
I have um not heard from one
person.
Out of all of my 9 Navajo
chapters are the city I
represent that opposed this
bill, um, primarily because we
don't have very many EVs out
there because there's no
charging station.
I come from an area of the state
where our folks are.
Not worried about charging
stations or worried.
So I think that and I did not
know Mr. Chairman that we had.
Suggested a tiered approach, you
know, I'm not trying to.
Stop anything that the
Metropolitan would like to see
in terms of reduction of carbon.
Uh, problems I'm not against
that, but I think that.
The rural areas and this bill
helps, uh, helps us.
And certainly
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Thank you to the sponsor for
this bill. I, I do believe, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative
that this does boil.
Um, I have actually, I actually
didn't like it. It was a
beautiful car.
But I didn't like it because I
like the sound and so maybe that
was just something and and Mr.
Chair, I, I know someone who was
ready to buy an EV. She works in
a
Science plays.
And so she was ready to go buy
one.
It's because the headrest was
not adjustable.
Everything else about the car
appealed to her.
But the headrest
was set and it couldn't be
changed, so she walked away.
So, Mister Chair, there are a
lot of reasons that people were.
session or a committee, I could
start at my home.
And made in an EV and maybe get
to.
And then I'd have to hoof it in
Santa.
It does
And Mr. Chair, I'm not inclined
to go buy any of you just to
have run around town type of
car.
That that's tying up.
Resources that are bad choice
for my family.
So
Mr. Chair and Representative
Metafor leader, I'm, I'm
representing my constituents
here.
And I am not finding that they
would approve of the status quo.
And what I'd like to do now.
Representative Armstrong is look
at the actual language of the
bill.
We're kind of talking in
generalities.
But I'm looking at page one and
it actually talks about.
How this applies.
And so it says,
And this is about the air
quality Control Act. It says I'm
a line 20.
That
And it's a little long, but bear
with me, please, a provision of
the air quality Control Act.
will not be interpreted to
provide a state agency.
The department, the
environmental improvement board,
a local board.
A local agency or a county or
municipality.
That has assumed jurisdiction
for local administration.
Of the air quality Control Act,
and then it goes on to say on
the next page.
It's not saying private
individuals may not buy and
correct me if I'm wrong, Mister
Chair, Representative, this is
not constraining.
A a private individual who
wishes to buy an EV. This is
telling government that it shall
be certain type of, is that
correct Mr. Chairman, um, uh,
rep uh league ranking member
Brown. That's exactly right.
This is not mandating that you
cannot buy one or that you shall
buy one. This is giving um.
Choices to New Mexicans.
On what they would chairman and
representative.
So this is just basically
saying, and and you know, we
know the federal mandate is
going to go away. We already
know that.
On EV's.
So we're heading into a
territory now where uh the
federal government is backing
off on this and and the panel.
I'm very sympathetic to the auto
dealers because they are being
forced to increase the number of
80s on the lot, but the demand
is not there for those to be
purchased.
And I think that puts them in a
very unfair and untenable.
It was correct, as was stated,
or can go.
A little distance here or there
to another state, get it there,
so.
We do that all the time.
When we go to purchase things,
if not cars, other items.
We go where um
And find them and it's so um.
I, I've heard Mr. Chair, um, EV
owners.
Love their cars, and, and I can
see why.
But they don't speak or
represent.
The 2.1 million people in
Mexico.
really do um.
And I will say finally, Mr.
Chair, that
You know, when you force people
into the EV market.
Because those are the cars that
are the dealers are told you
have to have on a lot.
All that does is create
resentment.
And when people get resentful,
it kind of shows in.
And um I don't want to get too
political here, Mr. Chair, but
people don't like being told.
What they have to do, that's
just human nature.
And we have certainly a system
of laws and rules.
But in this case, I think
there's gonna be an uprising if
we don't do something to free
people.
From Mr.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Um, thank you, uh, Madam Leader,
um, and your guests, your
witnesses.
Um, and I wanna thank our whip
also for her comments because.
You know, she's been around.
Since this started and and I
appreciated her candidness on
this, um, I had a couple of
questions, um.
Regarding
And I just want to preface that.
I kind of see both sides, and it
seems like I in almost every
bill, I'm kind of in the middle
because I'm always trying to
figure out what makes more sense
to New Mexicans and to my
constituents, um, I have a
couple of auto dealerships in my
district.
Uh, big ones.
And um
And so I'm, I'm trying to, you
know,
Figure out how, and I, I, I
understand the mandate that was
given, um, couple of years ago.
To, um, you know, reach this
goal in terms of emissions and,
and cleaner air and that sort of
thing, but I also understand
business, because I am in
business, um.
So Mister Chair, um, and, and
Madame Floor leader, um.
My question
In terms of the the individuals
that are with you today is a
little different than what's
been discussed here today,
because I also have two brothers
in the auto in the used
dealership business.
And
I don't gain anything from that
financially, but I've gone with
them to um auctions, and I've
gone with them to purchase
vehicles out of state.
Just because it was a nice
little trip for me, um, but I
saw kind of.
What they had to go through in
order to purchase vehicles to
bring back home to sell.
You know, on their lots.
Um, so this particular, um,
Legislation.
Affects both new and used
dealers. Is that correct? And
um.
So currently, the um
The new dealers are, are
probably transitioning as such
with the industry because I just
saw a commercial the other day
that said, hey, get a new
Toyota. It's an EV, you know,
and I was like, wow, maybe I
could buy a new Toyota, you
know, I mean, cuz it now it's an
EV.
Um
But
Auto dealers.
Who are in the used
And used dealer industry, um.
Many of their lots are full of.
Gasoline
gasoline vehicles because by
default, there's not enough EVs
on the market. Am I correct in
saying that? or madam, uh, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Representative,
I don't know that there's not
enough EVs on the market, except
in the used.
Area and that's what I'm
referring to, madam there's not
a lot in the used department.
Yeah, and, and I kind of see
that right now, um, but they do
have the option of buying EVs
and putting them on their lots.
There's nothing restricting
that. uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Madam Representative, there's
nothing restricting that.
And um, Madam Leader and you may
not have this um information in
front of you, but how many used
car dealers are in New Mexico.
Mr. Jar, Representative Brego,
there are
far more used car dealers in New
Mexico than there are franchise
new car dealers.
I believe that the numbers
somewhere around 1200 used car
operations and to answer your
question, uh,
Just, we're talking about EVs,
but when they're only 4% of the
new market, just like you could
pick any other vehicle that
represents 4% of the market,
that's demand driven. There's
Organically gonna be far fewer
used vehicles of that model
available because so few were
produced and bought and traded
back in the market. So it's more
a reflection of market demand
than anything. So if people were
buying a ton of EVs, then they
would be being traded far more
frequently like gas and diesel
cars are and it's just like
something else that's a small
portion of the market, say uh
3500 truck that represents 2%,
they're nearly impossible to
find.
Just because of, it's all
proportional to the amount of
new cars that are sold typically
and Mr. Chair, that you're
giving me a a number of maybe
12, 1200 used car dealers in New
Mexico, and then um how many new
car dealers do we have in New
Mexico?
Do we have any idea, um, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Representative,
120, 120.
OK, and I, and I'm going back to
the used car dealers, madam
chair and Madam Leader and Mr.
Chair and representatives. So on
average probably and I'm just
guessing this from thinking out
loud is that probably each of
those used car dealers has about
10 or 20 used car dealers or
maybe even more, uh, on their
lots, um, and I'm, I'm just
guessing from the rural areas
that I've seen, um, and there's
some really
mall used car dealers, but
there's, you know, to get the
business license and go through
the training and go through all
of the stuff you have to go
through and you have to mis
mister Chair and Madam Leader,
my understanding is that you
have to qualify every year, you
have to take tests, you have to
go to training. I mean, there's
a whole process involved in in
keeping your business license
for a used car dealer, um.
The next question I have, Mr.
Chair, is um and Madam leaders,
how many auctions do we have?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative one. My dad was
also a used car dealer. One big
one, madam, uh, in Albuquerque
off of Broadway, and it's a
pretty big. I've actually been
to that auction and actually
watched cars run through and um.
Actually looked at the cars on
the line, um.
Mr. Chair, um,
And and representatives and the
reason I bring this up is
because.
Um
You know,
There's a whole process
involved. There's a lot of cars
out there that are waiting to be
sold on used buy used car
dealers, also buy new car
dealers, they buy an inventory
and they keep those on the lots
and.
You know
The other piece of this, Mr.
Chair and Madam Leader is that
there are reservations that are
now in the EV business. Is that
not correct?
Mr. Chairman, Madam
Representative, yes.
And
Madam Leader and Mr. Chair.
Um
Approximately how many um
Reservations or pueblos or um
tribal um dealers are there?
Um, Mr. Chairman, for the that
would be in
Namber and in um.
Um
Is it Santa Anna
Santa Ana.
Yeah, so those, those EV
vehicles are available in New
Mexico as well.
And there's 2 of them.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Representative, and not only
specific to just electric only,
but they, this, the mandate that
was passed down is making every
car dealer franchise.
Have EVs on their lots. So
that's why we're bringing this
legislation forward. So the
So Madam Leader and Mr. Chair.
So this legislation really does
not remove um the ability for
A choice.
Correct, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Representative. They're, we are
about more choice.
Um, and we want people to have
choices, and we're really happy
for the people that testified
that are very happy with their
EVs, um, I'm very happy with my
vehicle. And so it is, it is
about.
Not mandating on these
dealerships to have a certain
amount when we do have uh
electric only available and they
also have them on their lot. um.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sorry about that, Mr. Chair,
and, um, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader and Mr. Chair, so
basically.
If this
Legislation were to go into
place and was adopted by the
legislature, um, individuals
would still have the choice to
buy EV vehicles or gasoline.
vehicles, um, in New Mexico. Mr.
Chairman, Madam Representative.
OK.
All right, Mr. Ty, well, thank
you for that and thank you,
Madam Leader, that, um, that
helps me make a a decision
regarding this legislation.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chairman
Members of the committee and uh.
Representative
Um
Mr. Chairman, I live on the
Navajo.
A nation
community of Shiprock.
Largest, largest community on
the nation.
uh, uh, you know, since, since
the, uh, implementation of
The, uh
Of the
Uh, advanced clean car standard.
Uh, November 2023.
I've, I've noticed a lot more.
Electric vehicles coming into
Or driving through.
The Navajo Nation.
And Mr. Chairman
my, my family, they, um,
They, they make their, their
They're um
There's an economy on the Navajo
Nation.
Around tourism.
Mr. Chairman, there's an economy
around the sales of our
Or
Native American arts and crafts.
And, uh, and Mr. Chairman, what
I've noticed is that, is that
as, as this new electric vehicle
transition is taking place
nationwide.
Including our neighbor to the
north and the state of Colorado,
which has more like.
To my understanding, Mr.
Chairman, um, um, madam, uh uh.
Uh, Representative, uh, there's.
Colorado has a has a
Does, does the state of Colorado
have a.
Better incentives for electric
vehicles in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, Mr.
Representative, it's the best in
the nation.
And ours is the worst.
Thank you for that, uh,
validation, um.
Um
Madam Representative, um,
because
in northwestern New Mexico, Mr.
Chairman, we have a lot of uh
Colorado residents.
Who work in New Mexico.
Whether it's teachers, whether
it's the hospital, you know,
they're, they, they, they drive
down.
And, and, and I talked.
to
Many of of of the uh
Of, of the, uh, whether it's a
school district or, or people at
the hospital and, and one thing
that they
They're frustrated with this is
the lack of infrastructure.
that we have, especially in
Northwest New Mexico.
And um
Mr. Chairman, while I was
listening to
To, um,
To this, um
to to
To everybody's perspective, I
was also uh reading up on uh
On a report that was given to
the LFC in on December 11, 2024.
This is a 23 page report, the
New Mexico Public light duty.
EV charging infrastructure.
And, and this, this report.
says that the AC2 rule is, is
only for new.
Cars
Not for used cars.
Is that, uh, is that true, uh,
um, presenters and madam.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr.
Representative, yes, it's only
on new vehicles, so it's only
for new car sales, um, what we
were talking about earlier is
the lack of the uh used car sale
availability, and we're saying
it's because the demand for new
electric is very low for less
than 4%. And that's why there's
not a lot of used electric
vehicles, but this mandate is
only for new, uh, new electric,
new car dealerships.
Thank you, uh, Madam
Representative, and Mr.
Chairman, um, in the report.
They talked about
Now we have 326 charging
stations well below.
The national average.
Um
And, and this report talks
about.
The National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure.
Also known as Navy.
Um, which is a 5 year plan.
And, and that
We had only receive, we received
a pledge of 48 million, but yet
the federal government has only
gave us 26.8 million.
Um, and
And, uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
Madam, um,
Representative
Um, would, would you say?
Um.
Should New Mexico be allocated.
It's, it's, it's full pledge or
should New Mexico.
Implement it's, it's
infrastructure and rural
communities would, would, would,
would you, would you
See
Um
More, um.
Interest in the electric vehicle
market.
Mr. Chairman, uh, I mean, it
would, that's just my opinion
is, and I don't know that that
counts for much, but, um, uh,
you know, I just signed a
letter, um, for the, the
district uh Coma where I, I
graduated from high school, uh,
in support of an a charging
station there. I am, I want the
infrastructure for charging
stations so that people can have
a choice whether they want to
drive electric hybrid, gas or
diesel or
Even gas propane, but
I, it's not, it's, that's the
federal government.
And uh we have someone else in
charge right now. I'm not sure
that we'll be getting the rest
of that money.
Uh, that is not up to me.
I'm focusing on this bill so
that we aren't mandating our
local um.
Uh, dealers to have something be
mandated to carry something on
their lot that they don't have a
large, it could increase if we
had those charging stations, the
demand could increase, which
good for everyone.
But it right there right now,
Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Representative, it's not there.
Thank you, madam, uh,
Representative Mr. Chairman.
I've only been on the job for a
month now.
Um, I, I'm learning a lot, uh,
Mister Chairman, and one thing I
didn't really understand or
realize until I, I, uh, sat on
on this committee is the
dependency that our, our, our,
um our transportation department
has on the field sales.
And I didn't realize that.
Um, and, and I'm, I'm really,
uh, Mr. Chairman, on, on, on the
House Appropriations Finance
Committee, I, I raised the
question, what can we do as an
appropriators to
2
Help our Department of
Transportation, and I'm, I'm
really glad that a lot of
people, including the chairman
of the House Appropriations
spoke up in support of of of
initiatives that are underway.
To, to help.
Anticipate the loss of
Revenue for our Department of
Transportation and, and so, Mr.
Chairman, I'm, I, I'm just
saying that there's, there's a
All the above approach.
And, and I agree with
Uh, Madam Representative, um.
about a tear approach.
I, I feel that is, is needed.
But I also feel again, Mr.
Chairman,
Um, a lot of the people that are
coming through.
My the the communities of my
district.
He
With, with the, with
infrastructure, you know, again
this.
There's, there's a, a, um
Reasoning around like economic
development and, and I, I, I
truly feel like
You know, since the
implementation of this new rule,
we've seen a lot more electric
vehicles, a lot more community
members are purchasing electric
vehicles.
And, and Mr. Chairman, uh, you
know, I, I, I, I am gonna
continue to put pressure on, on
getting more uh assistance for
our tribal governments, uh,
especially around the
infrastructure, uh, to create
A, a tribals specific charging
corridor plan into our state's
infrastructure strategy, and,
and Mr. Chairman, um,
I also sat down with the Pueblo
Santa Ana.
And
The, the, the councilman there,
he told me.
They
They depend. There there's a
significant revenue source of
electric vehicles that that it's
in the millions of dollars that
they receive each year.
And that they
Because of this, of this, um,
rule.
Rulemaking
Uh, you know, it, it, it's, it's
made a significant
Um, difference.
Uh, the, the other thing, Mr.
Chairman, I understand that
Navajo Nation.
Uh,
May have a position on this. I
have not received that.
position statement from the
Navajo Nation. But what I do
know, Mr. Chairman, is that the
Navajo Nation just installed its
first level 3 charger.
Mr. Chairman, uh, thank you very
much. Uh, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Armstrong. I just wanted to say
just mainly a statement about
choice that I'm certainly in
favor of choice like that in my,
my rural district, um.
To play this out, the body to
play that out in time shows that
those the two car dealerships
that I have in my district will
go out of business, which leads
to no choice.
And so I, you know, constantly
trying to remind um the entirety
of New Mexico, that rural, this
doesn't serve the rule doesn't
serve rural New Mexico. I'm very
much in favor of.
Looking at that again from the
very beginning, I knew it
wouldn't work for my Disney, um.
For um
Uh, car dealership to carry us,
there's no demand and expect
them to stay in the business,
so, so I appreciate this more
moderate approach. Chairman.
Thank you.
Chalata.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Leader, um, you know, I
my district
The majority of the minutes from
the state line, the Texas state
line.
Uh, I remember when this
rulemaking process was in place.
I got a lot of feedback.
From from my constituents and.
A lot of them said, you know,
we'll just goes that we want.
Um
Either that or what's happening
that I've noticed, Mr. Chair, is
that uh El Paso dealerships have
been moving into Las Cruces
market.
And so what's to stop them from
sending folks over to, oh well,
we have it in El Paso.
And, and so that, so I'm
thinking, you know, I, I'm
thinking that this rulemaking
process and and I I.
The weight was rolled out as I
completely agree, uh, assertions
that we should have been tiered.
Because what's, what's
I, I hate to say it or put it
this way.
But this rulemaking process.
Or uh for my neighbors to the
east and in El Paso, it became a
Texas economic development.
Yeah.
So we're, we're sending more
money into Texas.
And so I think the these
considerations and these and and
this consideration this bill
that you're, that you're talking
about.
I truly believe, well,
Give
New Mexicans that live in my
district.
The opportunity to spend their
money in to do that. And I, I, I
think what we're asking for what
you're asking for here.
Madam Les is reasonable.
I, I think, I think we should
really be working and you know,
I was, I was one of those.
Because I knew it was gonna be
very uh biofuels and and things
of that nature.
But I, I didn't realize or think
that it would affect.
The car dealers.
And the money our money and and
so I, I, I appreciate this bill
and I think this is something
that uh that is very.
Thank you. I have a couple of.
What um what other
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representatives. It's a great
question. So there's 17 states,
so the initial rule that the
government and the EPA said
rather than every state coming
up with their own set of rules,
we're gonna let California come
up with their rules and either
you follow California or you go
to the federal standard, so 17
states have adopted the
California EV rules that state
that um by 2032, it's 82% of all
new.
vehicles, um, supplied by the
manufacturer have to be EVs, 43%
in 2026, we're starting to get
2026 is in.
Next month, um, but, uh, of the
17 states, I believe, were the
lowest in Colorado is the
highest and Colorado is nowhere
near 43% that they'd need to be
in in 2026 and neither is
Colorado, which is actually
high. I'm sorry, neither is
California, which all this was
uh based off of.
But
Well
When the rule was put into
effect, all the states have sent
the manufacturers and put them
on notice, this letter of what
they've have to had to deliver
um starting in model year 2026.
So in New Mexico, we're already
seeing the effects of this, um,
where are you seeing less cars
that we would be getting as they
try to prepare for something
like this, even though it's
unachievable by anybody's
standards because New Mexico is
such a tiny market for new cars.
I think we sold 82,000 new cars
last year were such a blip.
On the radar that the
manufacturers are going to be
pushing inventory that our
dealers in New Mexicans should
be able to buy with their hard
earned money to other states. So
we're seeing Texas and Arizona
dealers setting records with
cars that should be coming into
our market. So every
manufacturer of these all 17
states have put the
manufacturers on.
That that their states are
Part and two of the two states
that initially signed on has
since reversed it, um, and any
state where it went.
The states that did it basically
did it the way New Mexico did
without having you all's
approval and running it through
the legisla lot of them were
done by executive order.
Thank you. I'm glad that you
brought that up because my ex,
can you help educate us a little
bit because as ever uh owned the
cars, so.
Let's talk a little bit about
inventory. How does it work?
You, you say, let me have 20.
Gasoline powered cars and 2.
Is so in a
What,
how does that work and how does
that affect how you do business
in terms of sales, does that
cost you money? Can you talk
about that?
Mr. Chair and representatives,
that's a great question and
really you need a PhD to explain
the entire system, but I'll do
my best to make it brief. So our
family's been in the
transportation business in New
Mexico for 91 years. We've been
franchised auto dealers since
1967, um, and basically every
manufacturer has a different
allocation system for how they
deliver cars Toyota, Honda.
Lexus, whatever, they all have a
different system for how they
manufacture and supply cars.
They're all different, but
generally, um, the manufacturers
a couple years, are, are,
they're already working on 2028
right now because the
forecasting is so huge. So
they'll forecast on demand from
things that they think are going
to be popular years ahead,
certain colors, certain
features. So the cars that we're
driving today in 2025, they
started working on him in 2021.
So every manufacturer
will allocate cars and roughly
They're based on what you sell
and what your share is of each
model in that market, so in New
Mexico, two wheel drive trucks
are impossible to sell, but in
Texas, four-wheel drive trucks
are very hard to sell. Um, so
they will regionalize what they
allocate to you, but generally
it's based on um what you're
selling and how fast you're
selling them. You'll hear the
term a lot, turn and earn, so
cars that you sell a lot of the
number one selling car in New
Mexico for 40 some years is the
Ford F-150.
You know, those come in and go
out very quickly. Honda Accord
is the best selling car. We've
been a Honda dealer for 50
years, um, those cars are, are
always in ready supply and
they're building more and more
of them. And when the
manufacturers bill us for the
car, we have to pay for them and
then we pay daily interest on
those cars until they sell,
which is typically how it goes.
So obviously if a car sits, you
know, a model that's tough to
sell, like when gas was super
expensive, it was very hard to
sell V8 cars. Our costs and
operating costs for renting our.
dealerships were very, very
expensive. That's why this is a
great question. Same thing with
EBs, um.
There are a lot more affordable
EVs on the market now, but uh
when it started and there's
still a lot of really expensive
ones, the carrying costs for EVs
are very, very high. So our
ability to make money when we
have cars that don't sell in a
higher, we call it a day supply.
You'll every single model of
every brand in every city and
state in America has all our
Honda dealership has a 21 day
supply of cars. That means there
aren't a whole lot of choices,
right? And a lot of that.
being felt because of this
mandate, you might go to another
market and there might be a 100
days so I think that answers
what you're asking. So when they
send you a car.
You don't have to pay for the
car.
You're, you're actually have to
pay for. Can you talk a little
bit about that?
Um, Mr. Chair and
representatives.
So the manufacturers will draft
on our.
Uh, bank accounts or our
lenders's account. We have to
pay for the car in full, even
before we get the car. So tip
every manufacturer is a little
bit different. So, uh, I'll just
say Honda, we pay for the car
about 5 days before we get it.
So we're already paying interest
on that car before it gets to
the lot. And so there's a daily
interest component and right now
interest rates are really high.
So dealer inventories are as low
as they could possibly be right
now because we're trying to save
money, but when interest rates
were at 0%, everybody had a ton
of cars because the carrying
costs were nothing. So right now
we're with EVs we're in a double
whammy because the interest
rates are so high for us to pay
to, to, it's sort of like a
mortgage on a house, right? We,
we have a tiny mortgage on every
single car and we're paying
interest on everyone until it
sells. So right now, the double
whammy of cars that aren't
selling.
you know, so take, we have a
every brand is going to have
cars that aren't super hot, so
there's cars that I have a ton
of that I'm paying a lot of
interest on them and I'm on my
folks every day to try to sell
them and make sure that we
aren't trying to order more of
those and sometimes the
manufacturers, they will just
send you what they have to build
in their plan, which happens
with the EDs a lot. So like with
Cadillac, I can't turn down an
EV. They will not let me, uh,
Honda, we have to take them all,
um, Subaru has backed up.
A little bit, you know, a lot of
manufacturers are backing off
now because they see that the
demand isn't there and there's
no way to hit the California
rules. So they're all bank and
they're all banking on the fact
that this is not gonna work and
that it's gonna fix itself. And
so all the manufacturers and
someone stated earlier that uh
one of the commenters that the
manufacturers negotiated this
with California. That's totally
untrue. The manufacturers are
not part of the negotiations in
California, they were not part
of the negotiations here. And if
they were,
43% in 2026 would not have been
the number. It would have been a
much more reasonable approach,
um.
Like Madam Whip had and in New
Mexico, we have a far worse
problem because of the, the
rural nature of our state. It's
a, it's a tale of two cities,
right? So Albuquerque, Santa Fe,
that's one thing. Yeah, you
know, the DOT fed us all a bunch
of bad information that they
were going to build all these
charging stations and the
governor said we were going to
get record breaking in Sans.
Well, we got the lowest
incentive in the US. We're so
far behind in all the promises
that were made were totally
untrue, but my real concern that
came out of
this. Obviously, I was educated
so much on the environmental
impact um from Miss Weibelman in
the Sierra Club, which has
changed a lot of my perspective
on it and, you know, wanting
clean air is not what this
particular piece is about, but
that 62% of New Mexicans are
Hispanics and Native Americans,
and they're our ability to as a
Hispanic to purchase these
vehicles and, and after going
out and seeing the reality of um
our, our tribal nations.
And President Boo Nyrin came and
to your point, you said you
hadn't seen it. There's a
lengthy letter that he wrote
vehemently opposed that he sent
to the governor in 2023 because
he said, look, my people can't
even get water, uh, and hey,
they're using hay and driving
trucks. So my very short answer
to the whole thing was until
there's an EV that can replace
an F-150 that people use, the
number one selling car in New
Mexico or an SUV for people to
take their kids around.
There's really nothing to talk
about the numbers just so
astronomical, so initially the
dealers wanted delayed
implementation. Let's come up
with our own plan at a
reasonable percentage, right?
We, you know,
Now, now I would look even would
not look good because we were
saying, OK, in 2022 we're at 4%.
Can we be at?
Yeah
Thank you. What is the will of
the committee, please?
leader orange, Leader Armstrong,
we have a motion to table.
We,
we have a motion
We, we have emotion
pass for Rebecca.
Uh, do I have a second? Do we
have a motion to pass from
Representative Doo and a second
from Representative Lundstrom.
Take roll, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Brown, yes.
Representative Doo.
Representative Fernandez? No.
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
Representative Jones, yes.
Representative Lundstrom,
Representative Romero.
No.
Vichelada.
Yes.
De la Cruz, yes.
What is it? 992 do pass. Thank
you.
Hm
Oh Bill.
Representative Cates, are you
ready?
On House Bill 30.
Thank you, Chairman we begin?
He's bigger.
I thank you, chair, and thank
you very much, committee members
and how we usually present
bills. I'm going to start with
my expert witness to witness the
statement. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for your time today.
My name is Clem Harris. I
represent nearly 600 members of
the Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen. Our
members are many of the, uh, men
and women that run freight and
passenger trains across New
Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to
start today's discussion by
explaining to the members of
this committee that we have
worked closely with leadership
and guidance have proven
invaluable in this process. Her
guidance included meeting with
the railroads in advance of
introducing legislation.
I also want to thank
Representative Cates for her
hard work in, in getting this
bill ready to go and her support
through this process.
There have been repeated
attempts to find middle ground
uh to address the situ situation
Representative Cates has made a
repeated push to find that
middle ground, as the demands of
railroad service change. The
railroads will transport their
employees utilizing a
third-party contractor to
provide this transportation.
The railroads have known that
there are many issues uh with
this form of transportation.
There have been many accidents,
injuries, and even deaths caused
by this mode of transportation.
This clearly demonstrates that
the issues with these contract
fan operators have been known
for for a long time.
As recent as 2 weeks ago, uh,
several BNSF employees were
injured and killed in this form
of transportation provided by
the company.
Our membership continues to
report poor driving habits,
fatigue issues with drivers, and
unsafe vehicles to their local
managers and, and it is rarely
addressed.
This form of transportation does
not fall under collective
bargaining is we do not
negotiate these contracts on
behalf of the railroad, nor is
labor invited to participate in
these negotiations rather than
reinvent the wheel we have
borrowed from existing
legislation in Minnesota where
both Union Pacific and BNSF
operate and transport. We've
also seen that BNSF is waived
underinsured and uninsured
motorist coverage in one of
their contracts is late as late
as November of last year in New
Mexico and all the surrounding
states.
The 3 major van companies are
all headquartered out of state
and currently register their
vehicles in other states that
have unknown inspection
requirements.
When these van companies cannot
provide transportation, railroad
employees get put in an Uber or
a Lyft or even local taxi
companies.
Uh, to go places that often
require a four-wheel drive
vehicle. Ubers and Lyfts and
taxis only require $250,000 of
liability insurance to the
railroad's concern of trains
being stopped while waiting on
crew transportation, they are
ultimately responsible for the
contracts that they signed to
move their employees and should
appropriately appropriately
negotiate uh the terms that are
needed to meet the demands of
their service, but that also
keep their employees safe.
I will close with the following.
There's a small business that
has sprung up around providing
additional insurance coverage to
our membership to writing
company provided transportation.
When I got on the rail runner
this morning to ride to Santa
Fe.
I, I didn't take out a separate
insurance policy to to cover uh
my transportation on that means
the conveyance. Why in the world
should our members have to
choose between this additional
insurance and taking a chance in
an unregulated mode of
transportation that's provided
by their employer.
You, Mr. Chair and thank you
members of the committee. So the
bill before you is a simple
safety bill, um, uh, so as you
know, the employers which are uh
mostly the three railroad
companies that pass through uh
our great state.
They are uh obligated as
employers to provide safe
transportation through a vehicle
that is either from one train or
the next train or from the end
of the stop of a train back to
uh vehicle. This is still during
work hours, and this is their
obligation to provide, um.
If they were in an accident,
this would be a workman's comp.
claim because they are under
their employers.
Uh, uh, of record. The bill
before you is, is quite, quite
frankly, despite the pages is a
simple safety uh bill requiring
that the vehicles are inspected
in basic safety requirements
that insurance is covered for
them as well as making sure that
the drivers are not intoxicated
and they have been trained and
trying. We have talked to the
different railroad companies, we
have heard.
Several different aspects. One
is we cannot provide this.
Because we don't have the
workforce.
And I do not believe that that's
a viable you're safe.
The fact that you have not taken
time to develop a workforce is
not a viable excuse to allow
your employer. I have also heard
that we're already doing it.
So I said that's great. Then why
would you own it?
Um, they, I have asked them, can
you show me where your safety
policies are and provide us how
you are auditing and um and uh
making sure that they are being
applied to with this third party
driver.
Um, we also, and they will admit
they also have 4th party drivers
because of the third party
driver company can't make it.
They're doing the 4th. How are
you the bill does not overreach
with business as it is
notrequiring the railroad
companies to bring
transportation into their
company which would be
acceptable because then there
would be able to control the
safety measures that are
required. This bill does not do
that. This bill is
asking for that to show and
maintain safety compliances for
providers. I would also like to
bring as I finish to the
committee's attention, this may
be one of the few bills shows.
No financial.
No financial, uh, uh, need, um,
from the state if this bill is
enacted, so this will only save
the state.
Uh, money as we could create and
maintain our safe roads. I thank
you, Mr. Chair, Stan for
questions.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience that is in favor of
this bill. If you wish to speak,
please line up behind the
presenters.
I'm Charlie Jeffcoat,
legislative representative for
the BLET 811 out of Clovis. I
represent approximately 600.
Men and women that do ride in
these taxis, and I've been
riding these taxis or vans or uh
28 years and um it's pretty
sketchy sometimes.
I don't see the problem with
having an extra layer of safety
or guardrails to uh make sure
ensure that my members get home
safely.
Do we have anybody online?
Yes sir one.
Dustin
Yes
I'm here.
Um, I'm here to speak on behalf
of HB 30, um, for
For a couple of reasons. Uh, the
main reason is the safety of the
employees that are transported
in these vehicles. Um, there's
been numerous um times
throughout my career, where
we've had near misses, uh, when
it comes to drivers, uh, driving
impaired when it comes to sleep.
Um, there's been other
Times where I've seen, um,
drivers possibly being impaired
under drugs and alcohol, um.
And I just think that this is a
good bill for New Mexico, not
only for the employees, but also
for the citizens, because this
deals with public safety when it
comes to our roads and highways,
and just ensures that there's
another added layer of safety,
as far as for the drivers who
are, you know, driving through
the state of New Mexico.
And that's all I have. Thank
you.
Joel Mueller.
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Joel Mueller with the
Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen. I am the
legislative uh chairman for the
state of Minnesota for our
organization.
And I'm just speaking today, uh,
before the committee to provide
some insight on how uh similar
law that uh
The state of New Mexico is
considering how uh we have a
very similar.
Existing statute in Minnesota.
And it has worked very well.
It's been past the Minnesota
legislature with bipartisan
support. It's been on in uh on
the books since 2014 and um
It ensures that railroad
employees are transported in a
safe manner across our state. We
have uh some very severe weather
conditions in Minnesota and also
have to go to remote places, and
it ensures that our members are
transported safely, uh, when
they get to uh being moved from
a train to a.
I do. Thank you.
Hm
Natalie Miller.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
representatives for allowing me
to speak today. I am the
Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen, National
Auxiliary Legislative
representative. I represent the
New Mexico families of the 600
BLET members and countless more
families from other unions and
crafts employed by the railroad
industry across New Mexico. We
thank the sponsors of this bill,
and we ask for this committee's
help to keep our railroad crews
and motorists in New Mexico
safe.
Companies must be accountable
for the safety of their
employees while they're at work.
Railroads have been allowed to
use third-party transportation
contractors with substandard
vehicles hiring and safety
practices without
accountability. Amending the
motor carrier Safety Act to
include requirements for the
safe transportation of railroad
crews is long overdue. This bill
will hold them accountable,
supporting this amendment will
tell the voters of New Mexico
that you are putting their
safety first. We hope that you
agree and that you support
house.
30. I thank you for your time
and your consideration today.
No one else on Zoom, Mister
Chairman.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in opposition?
And if you're in opposition and
wish to speak, please line up
behind the presenters.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, I
believe I have one minute. Is
that correct?
Uh, my name is JD Bullington.
I'm the registered lobbyist for
Union Pacific Railroad.
Uh, in New Mexico, I just want
to clarify one point we have had
meetings with the expert
witness. We met on two different
occasions, um, these meetings
were 3 hours apiece. It's not
that we refuse to discuss the
issues. We just think this is an
unworkable bill. This bill sort
of falls into two categories
overreach, overbroad, that's
flagged in the FIR by the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation. It's also got
provisions that are unnecessary,
that are already standard
emergency kits, seat belts.
The drivers are subject to
random drug and alcohol tests.
There's a provision in the bill
that says you can't drive a van.
Why? On page 15, line 22. It
says the van cannot operate if
the air conditioner or heater
isn't working, regardless of
ambient temperature, and that
would go into statute. That
would mean you can't operate the
van if it's 72 degrees outside,
you can't transport crew members
and the air conditioning doesn't
works of the Robert Romero,
registered. I would like to
thank the sponsor.
There's third party and safety
of
the, um, this bill, this bill
adds um a lot of things that
really aren't possible, you know
they're being done, this bill
will likely increase crew wait
times.
Add to block crossings and
actually have um
Contribute to supply chain
bottlenecks.
Anybody online to oppose.
No, Mister Chairman.
Uh, representative, uh, vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
For the presentation, so you
know, I, we've had discussions,
uh, on this bill and one of the
things that I brought up was.
Um
Why not?
Hold the third party
accountable.
Or they're either their actions
or their inactions or the things
that they're not able to comply
with.
As opposed to holding the
railroads accountable for that.
So I, I, the way I see this is,
you know, we, uh, we may be
pointing the finger finger at
the wrong.
person
Or the wrong entity because if
the third party provider is the
one that's negli, I would.
Filed a complaint with the third
party.
And then if they don't
do what they're supposed to do
to me.
Then I would complain to
The railroad.
To me, that's just the chain of
command. That's the process that
I personally would follow
because, you know, I, I, um.
I don't understand why we are
Directly holding the railroad
companies accountable for what
the third party people do.
And if, if, if that's the case
that we want to hold them
accountable, then we need to uh
work on or at least be part of
the conversation when the
railroads are working on
contracts with these third
parties.
And, you know, so I'm, I'm
thinking about these things and
I am trying to process what,
what, what, what, uh, what's
being proposed here. I
understand there are safety
issues, you know, based on the
conversations that I've had, but
one of the things, you know, I
received this handout here.
And you know, what are the
issues and one of the issues is
poor hygiene.
I didn't know what, you know, I
didn't know we should legislate
hygiene.
So there's, I have a lot of
questions and a lot of, you
know, I still have a lot of
questions about this. I
understand the intent.
But when I see, you know,
Things like this written and
given to me as official.
Evidence you could say on
people's hygiene.
Yeah, I really question.
You know, the, the, the, the
intent and what, you know, is
this really trying to address
the safety issues.
Or is this just a gotcha.
So
One other thing, Mr. Chair, that
I did, so I looked up.
railroad marketing
And so rail marketing so, uh,
you know, given the presentation
and the way it was presented to
me.
was, and this is the way I
understood it, I may be wrong.
But it's said that uh that
railroad employees are taking
out insurance specifically.
Because of the carriers.
But when I get on the website,
this railroad marketing company,
they offer all types of
insurance.
So it's, it's not only
insurance, you know, it's just
job insurance. It supplemental
insurance that they're offering.
So the way I see it is or the or
maybe uh if you can explain to
me, you know.
If people are are taking out
supplemental insurance.
Or
Accidents on the job.
You know, how would this apply
to the the the carriers and,
and, and, and how they
You
My, I'm sorry, I, I, I'm, I
apologize, Mr. Chair, I have a
lot of things going through my
mind. So my question is, is when
it comes to the insurance.
So obviously it's supplemental
insurance.
Uh
Are, are the employees, the
railroad employees specifically
taking out this insurance
specifically for the motor
carrier.
And not in general as as a
workplace injury type
as well. Um, I, I'd like to go
back to some of the statements,
but yes, we see that there are
many different types of
supplemental insurance. Um, the,
the.
That if they are in an
underinsured 3rd and 4th party
vehicle that this is a way to
get coverage, but let's go back
to your first question. I if you
hire a contractor.
And they hire a subcontractor
that
Breaks the pipes in your
Do you only go after the
subcontractor, your contract was
not with the subcontractor you
their obligation is with the
contractor. These of the
railroad companies and they are
still in their work hours during
this transportation in vans and
it is the employers duty to
transport. So if the van
crashes.
There will be and there's injury
involved, it follows under
already legally clearly shows it
is the employer's obligation to
uh provide safe transportation
and not the 3rd and 4th party.
Vehicle. Now whether or not a
lawsuit, you're absolutely
right, it's up to the attorneys
to figure that out, but the
obligation is with the employer,
um, and so that would be that as
for hygiene, honestly, when I
would do transportation
contracts with the Department of
Health providing third party
transportation for individuals
with disabilities, fire
extinguishers, AED seats, seat
belts, and hygiene were a part
of that.
When you are in unventilated car
being transported for a large
periods of time.
hygiene is part of the safety
requirements. It is not an
abnormal standard.
Uh, for any kind of third party
transportation. I bet if we
Googled Uber's transportation
hygiene in there as well. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. I really
appreciate that contractor, uh,
and so going back to the, uh, I,
I really hate to harp on this,
on this hygiene thing, but you
know it's.
Um
I, I'm assuming that the crews
when they're being picked up
aren't, you know, fresh either.
So, you know, it, it's, yeah,
so, you know, it's, it's, you
know, it's, it's a give and take
there, but you know I, I, you
know, I, I understand. I really
do. I honestly, I'm being
sincere. I do understand what
this is for and what you're
trying to accomplish.
But I, you know, I still have, I
still have questions about it,
you know, I, I, I'm, I, I'll,
I'll, I'll keep on reading. I'll
keep on doing what I need to do
to research this, but you know,
I, I, I just want you to know,
representative that, you know,
this is um I, I'm not trying to
be malicious or, or be mean,
mean spirited here, but I do
have uh a lot of.
Thank you. I don't see any other
members, so I have a, oh, I'm
sorry, ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate having had a
conversation with Mr. Harris
some weeks ago, I believe it
was.
I found that very um
Mr. Chairman, I, I have great
caution about.
This bill today because the bill
myself.
It looks like it's um.
Going to have a far greater
impact than just on Mr. Chero
I'll back that up.
Mr. Johnny Johnson, who's
The head of the New Mexico, Mr.
Johnson has been an expert to
this committee through your
value is input on things, and he
is concerned, is not ready, and
he suggests it really the next
session perhaps take action, but
he said.
He has a um I really think we
need to, and he said more
stakeholders need to talk about
this idea.
Um
Mr. Chairman, I, I'm getting the
impression here that.
That kind of the intent behind
this bill is to require these
Yeah
trucks carrying hazardous
passenger buses.
Uh, but typically, um.
Currently the these vans, so I
think there's a lot more to
discuss and figure out here
today, I won't be supporting the
bill, but may I respond?
Thank you, ranking member. Yes,
go ahead and respond.
So thank you very much, uh,
Representative and ranking
member, I would very much
appreciate that list of the
amendment I did try to sit down
with some of the train companies
to get an amendment because I
thought we could be able to, so
I've asked to see them, they
haven't provided them. I said,
then can you show me your audit
quality parties.
Accountable, like how, how often
do you look at you, you know, is
it, is it a requirement of
employment for the drivers. So
they haven't provided those yet,
but we, I did talk about
amending this bill to be able to
gather that and work it. I will
say that one of the
misinformation out there is that
this bill requires a CDL
license. It does not. There is
no registered.
Uh, type of a higher as a
commercial license and they are
performing a commercial. I mean,
we could say limousine license,
but that's there's not very many
of them here in our great state.
So it's a commercial, have the
drivers to have training.
Like the CDL if the if the
driver has done something in a
moving violation. We want to
make sure that they are not just
fired, but it is reported to the
CDL registration so that they
don't walk down the street and
get another driving job when
they have proven themselves, you
know, driving why briated or
something like that.
So that is what that they have
misconstrued it to be able to
present it that way and I just
want your chair so I, I think I
misspoke just license that they
have to abide, I think that's a
new one, but I do want to make
it.
Mr. Johnson would be here.
See
Thank you, Peter Armstrong. Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to make a
motion to table.
We have a motion table. Do we
have a
have
Representative Armstrong.
Presentative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative
No the table.
Representative
I can be
Representative Jones.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Romero.
Jalata.
Not him.
Uh, fair de la Cruz.
Esther table, I want to expect
my vote.
So
And we forget Representative
Doo?
Representative Dow
Yes to table.
OK, so representative.
A problem that I have is.
And by the way, members, we've
done this before.
Where we asked that there needs
to be more communication with
the stakeholders.
I think that's, that's in play
here as well.
So, we would, I would encourage
things that have merit. I had
some questions that I was gonna
ask that. That's.
Members, we have one more thing.
We have a presentation.
Uh, related to the New Mexico
Heritage Rail, it's a 15-minute
presentation. I think it'll be
well worth our time,
we are excused,
so.
Thank you.
Go ahead and begin.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
I represent, I'm a, my name is
Philip Jacobus. I represent the
New Mexico Heritage Rail, New
Mexico Heritage Rail that pulled
the 2 out of Coronado Park in
Albuquerque in 1999.
We have spent the last 2 rouble.
Um, it is the world's largest.
The world's largest operable
rigid framed locomotive.
Um, it dates from 1944.
Um
It was an operation with Santa
Fe Railroad until 1953.
Um, at which point Santa Fe
donated it to the city. It was
put in Coronado Park.
And with an old tent with a
caboose that was in.
Eventually, we bought it for $1
from the city of Albuquerque and
were promptly told, please
remove your asbestos asbestos,
uh.
encased locomotive out of our
Park and
So then we spent
The next 24 years, removing that
asbestos, renovating it,
restoring it.
It is fully operational.
It is registered and inspected
by the FRA annually.
We are working at the at this
which is basically a dead man
and we are working with NMD
limits.
So we have a 20 mile radius to
operate within.
Uh, NMDOT's trackage.
Um, along with this, we are
currently starting to work with
you all in obtaining capital
outlay and restoring portions,
uh, we have restored.
Uh,
You can see in my picture, we've
restored the input that lead
into the turntable, um, thanks
to $200,000 from the governor.
Um, we are working on a 475
capital $475,000 capital
outweigh.
allotment that will restore the
turntable at the rail yard.
Uh, currently we have two
requests in, one for more track
and uh the second to analyze
some of the smaller buildings.
To see what kind of found.
To do this, we have to to get in
the NSF rail yard, uh.
And BNSF has been also very
immutable to work with, worked
positively for a more
Formal
Um
Agreement with them and who
knows what that will lead to.
Where we see this in destination
if I I use for.
The city of Albuquerque, the
state of New Mexico. We did a
private photo shoot we brought
in.
in
fees that I will cut this short
or
ation
or any questions?
Ranking member Brown.
I'll be, I'll be quick. So is
the idea here that eventually
our agreement with EDOT
currently does not allow us to
carry passengers. Eventually, we
will have to have a discussion
with NMDOT about that because
that is gonna be over time, that
will have to be one of the ways
that we'll just mention Mr.
Chair, that
Some communities, I know this
would be something.
Right.
Um, that would be something we
would really like to do, um, we
would actually like to partner
with Santa Fe Southern.
Our Skyrail and bring passengers
from Albuquerque.
To Santa Fe
And then have them come in to
send from Lami to Santa Fe
because the city proper.
Um, so people can ride the
train, have dinner, spend the
evening, whatever, come back the
next I'll just say I'm really
impressed that you had a fears.
Help restore this
500 active volunteers.
Um, we've had 300, we've cal we
have kept track of um and it's.
My data is probably actually
incorrect. It's
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so,
And in, in my community, um.
And water flow, we, we used to
have a train.
Uh, steam engine train that used
to run.
from
Um, the communities of, of, of
the hawk of the outside of the
Navajo Nation, uh.
Uh through water flow and into
Farmington all the way up to
Durango.
Um
Then, you know, just like
everything else, uh, you know,
everything transitioned out of
that with the um with the
increase of, of, um, of the
transportation corridor of 550
and a 491.
Um
I, I see the um.
The economic boosts up in
Durango at there with their
railroad, uh, which is, um.
You know, uh
Every year students from.
From uh Central Consolidated
School District, uh, go up there
and, uh, and I, I, I grew up,
uh, going to the Toltec railroad
up in in Chama, um, and going
over uh the trauma pass and into
um into the small communities in
Colorado and Tonito and really
nice, um, you know, uh,
experience with these, uh, steam
engines, um, and I didn't know
about this.
Here in in in uh Santa Fe. I
always knew about it. I mean, I,
I, I knew about it from from
family.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, my, um, my
great
Great
Great grandfather, uh, migrated.
To New Mexico and worked on the
the Santa Fe Railroad, and so
this, this, this means a lot to
me, stories that my abuela.
Uh
Abuello has always talked about
my grandfather, Leandro
Hernandez, who, uh, and so it
means a lot to me what what you
guys are doing to continue the
heritage of, of, of this steam.
Um, engine and um
Not to just, uh, my question,
Mr. Chairman is.
For those that don't
Know how, how, how to work on
these, but want to volunteer and
help in some capacity. Is there
any opportunity like for myself
to maybe take time time on a
weekend to come and give you
guys an extra hand.
So
Yes, um, sorry, Mr.
Charesentatives, um, yes, there
is an opportunity. We are a
501c3, so we take members of
every walk of life, every.
Every
Area of expertise, whether
that's, hey, I'm a, I'm a welder
that can help you or I've never
turned a wrench or or swung a
hammer, but I would like to
help. So, on your, we also give
you another trifle pamphlet that
has our website on the back of
it and our address.
Um, you can fill out a
membership and become a forum
and become a member or you can
stop on by and we can.
We can walk you through the
process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, that
concludes my questions.
Thank you. So, uh, you're 501c3
and you're to try to move this
endeavor forward. That being
said, who is your fiscal agent
in in the event that some of our
members, Mr. Chairman, uh, we
work with the city of
Albuquerque. We've also worked
with uh Bernalillo County.
Uh, both as our
The middle ground conser uh Mr.
Cog, uh, the form have them be
our fiscal agent as well because
they hold for
for rail RX.
And Mr. Jacobus, uh, remind us
where the, the, the, the train,
I know it's bigger than just the
train your efforts, however,
that is, Mr. Chairman, that is
current, um, when we bought the
locomotive.
Part of the city will provide a
home in.
Proximity to uh.
The Alvarado station in
Albuquerque on city of only
piece of city on track that is
in that area is the south end of
the rail yard that the city
owns.
Hence the second reason that
they're also our fiscal.
We will have to.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation, members. I
remember when this train was
sitting in a park for years and
years, and it was a treat to go
to the park because everybody
made a hole through the fence
and we climb up all over that,
that, that engine. It's, it's a
beautiful piece of machine and,
you know, uh, I commend, I, we
all commend the work that's been
done by the volunteers and wish
you well and I will be trying to
participate to help.
Thank you very much.
Thank you members. We're
adjourning now.
