They would let they're going to
get copies of the information
thank you and then they might
ask the district engineers to
out to me with them later on
that's a might though so just be
aware of that
yes I think will just begin with
mr brash ready to go
I want you first yes.
And then we're gonna go to the
one bill we have for the day.
All right but i'm sure we'll get
started if you're ready we are
ready all right good morning
madam chair members of the
community committee when he was
rick pity on the executive
director for operations at an
empty ot and this morning we
have a couple of presentations
for you we are gonna present the
district three presentation also
district five over the last I
think month or so at least
through the holidays mister just
and gives in our former disagree
engineer has taken other job and
so we are actively trying to
fill the district three engineer
position and mister paul brasher
and the interim has
has gladly accepted the acting
district three engineer position
and is not currently the
district engineer of district
three and five until we can get
that position filled so madam
chair this morning we are going
to go ahead and start with
district three
we're going to go to this
presentations and I want to
start out by saying these
presentations we obviously we
have done for tears from the
interest and we also presented
these commission so there's a
lot of information here some
things on our staff and some of
our programs that maybe is a
little overkill but we're going
to go where these presentations
briefly and if you have any
questions we do we will surely
fill those when we're done and
mister you could just wait going
through everything it just focus
on anything new you got in tears
that would be great absolutely
all right almost turned over to
paul medicare
good morning madam chair my name
is paul pressure through the new
mexico department transportation
i'm the district five engineer
and I am.
Acting in the role of the
district three engineer
temporarily which you have in
front of you
entitled the district three
twenty twenty three update and
it was presented this is the
presentation it was
shown to the state trade place
permission in los lunas back in
november and so if you
on this their first page I
worked up this map here to give
you feel for how district three
is carved out of the state of
new mexico and how it combines
with the other districts there
are six highway districts and
every district is managed by a
district engineer out of offices
in santa fe las vegas roswell
damming in the grands milan so
this is the size of the district
this district happens to be what
you're saying is three thousand
one hundred and three square
miles and of course it has the
book of the population of the
state naturally and our
commissioner or a transportation
commissioner for district three
years miss he'll my china with
and of course as mister
mentioned a minute ago just for
girls and
recently resigned is not here
what you have to have good
people to manage the roads
throughout the state and we are
fortunate to have.
The executive staff are
consistent these individuals are
miss jill moser who is the
assistant discussion president
sport has since.
Resigned as well so that
position is vacant right now but
we have the very little as the
assistant discussion here for
maintenance I was a charist as
the assistant discussion
reconstruction during his
allisor business manager jane
goes as he has the executive
assist.
Company guy ego says the.
By way of update into what
district three has accomplished
or what we have going forward is
our budget responsibility
operating budget shown if course
is twenty point three million
dollars under construction right
now a fifty nine point three
million
we aside to eleven million
contrict maintenance feel
supplies at four and a half.
Millions striping signing at a
million and half and
right budget is almost three
hundred thousand dollars now in
it within this district here
this district is.
It is maintained out of five
maintenance patrols and they are
distributed geographically
throughout the district they're
five of them is one of burnio
wanted to hear us there are two
and albuquerque called north
urban and south urban and
there's a maintenance patrol and
beland and it is the patrols
that are how we mean it's
workers work out of under the
direction so supervisors under
the direction of
a remained supervisors under the
direction of the assistant
distinct engineer for
maintenance we have within this
district three
we have interstate twenty five.
Our priorities are the
interstates we have interstate
twenty five we have a little
over seventy nine miles a center
line miles a minute state twenty
five and about fifty two miles
of interstate forty for a total
a hundred and thirty one
satellite miles of interstate
and of course i'm sure you're
all aware that a significant
portion of th.
Interstate runs right through
albac.
So moving ahead to the next
slide here
there's the demonstration of
construction projects in twenty
twenty three and I won't
I won't give you a lot of detail
on these projects they are.
This should be the.
I'll make a clear with.
There are description of the
projects that we have in a
construction right here to give
the location and
the
dollar amounts associated with
those there is on the
there is a
a total of showing that fifty
nine point thr.
But you can see we have projects
on the mexican one or nine three
thirty seven I forty couple of
projects can i.
Very important projects and and
well in progress
when we go to the next sheet in
this slide it shows the projects
that are suspensive complete in
construction right now and and
you'll see that we have a number
of them that are in the final
stages of construction
subset complete means basically
that the project is to appointm.
Closed out there may be some
minor finishing details that are
yet to be added but fundamental
the project is open
in open to the public and these
are distributed pretty much
geographically throughout over
this thirty one hundred square
mile district here.
And you can see that we have
substantially completed about a
hundred and thirty.
That those projects so far now
that the next steep is a map
it's interesting photograph and
it shows graphically represents
the location of these projects.
If you can make that out that
that these are distributed
pretty well geographically
throughout the district then if
you move to the
my next slide which shows the
statewide transportation
improvement program this is
what's in the step this is what
is in consideration right now in
a mexican fourteen five thirty
six if you all are familiar with
the albuquerquery the seater
crester you may recall years ago
there was this grocery store
called the triangle very famous
call the triangle the road it
takes off goes up with the crest
that surfrost road.
Searching conference where we
launching the roundabout.
We've got a forty payment
preservation going on in uh
sedio.
Mexico five hundred we are real
browbridge replacement over the
rear grand and that bridges
about two miles western by
twenty five on real brother to
s.
We obviously have our flagship
project here it looks like which
is a twenty five.
Twenty five comman.
From each other and.
It is actually the
really driving this is probably
my gummy the.
The need for whitening and
rehabilitation of.
Well overdue.
The deficiencies in the width of
the bridge and it's transport to
carry capacity have.
Probably resulted in all the
skid mark.
Works on a twenty five in you do
I forty in his larger them a
gummer bridge while we're at it
we're going to get command you
but just you feel for the meg to
the problem here
the every state traffic I twenty
five through my gumry between my
government come achieve the
average daily traffic is over
two hundred and twenty thousand
vehicles a day.
So that's what we're dealing wi.
It's a phenomenal undertaking
here we got a bridge replacement
try to get rid of some of those
timber bridges and old timber
bridge and again donors here
this looks like.
It is past life it made a lot of
sense but it's time to go we
also have
the.
Constructive interchange at I
twenty.
Twenty five point.
Serves about ninety thousa.
The point i'm making here is
that these are these
interchange.
Projects are are
very extreme undertakings
particularly because
traffic
the traffic handling and the
maintenance of traffic during
construction is a difficult and
extr.
We are going to be asking the
patience of the public in
negotiate as in negotiating
through the works as we launch
those projects this the next
sheet i'll draw your attention
to.
Or distribute three general fund
appropriations here this is
under the laws of twenty twenty
three section nine and this is
the listing of of where the
where the money has gone you'll
see some are dealty projects on
our local leads.
You know such as the uh preserve
design and construction and then
my governing I tw.
The different method of project
delivery here the instead of the
conventional design and then bid
because.
That's where that is this is a
lot a ruster of the expenditures
of the general for a pre prior
general fund appropriations we
have also prior to that we have
several
general fund appropriations made
on the loss at twenty twenty two
t.
And these are the amounts of
money that we.
So forth and so these have
the money has always been put to
good use there's never enough.
And but we have made good use
all over the state with what
money we've had i'll draw your
attention to the
the next.
And these are this is the
listing of the money that has
gone to the various governmental
entities inside the district and
that money also is distributed.
She graphically a pretty evenly
throughout the state
unfortunately at the time ninety
five percent state the state
amount was only ten and a half
eleven almost eleven million
dollar feature in the page and
you go to the pf chat fish
project finance way twenty three
you'll see a little healthier
amount fifteen million dollars
bottom but that roster of
project shows you where
gives you feel for where that
money.
You will not also that the the
local government the entities
five percent is still sizeable
for the entities.
Program that's working out very
well
you never have enough.
Account well.
The we have the district three
local government road fund on my
next light here and
this is the seventy five percent
with the twenty five percent
local map we have the we have.
Or or through your program the
county or two program school bus
roots these are the.
Appropriations that are made to
each one of these categories
here.
Never enough but we.
Actually.
Let me
brag a little bit about the
district three of maintenance
activities
we get snow.
Twenty twenty two to twenty
twenty three this is a
duty is the one it does
something about whether
everybody talks about a deal to
does something about the weather
we're out there our guys are out
there.
Around the clock the night on
twelve hours shifts going out in
doing the best they possibly can
to keep the roads clear as they
share we have our priorities are
the interstate we do get the
state in the
in the national highways
and while while router but this
is this is what it takes you'll
notice that perfect the cost of
material costs look at what it
is is thirty eight thousand.
Thirty eight thousand passed
miles
what that tells you is that
thirty eight thousand miles and
it put put on that equipment and
and those trucks are it's not
far too empty on those there's a
lot of fuel lot of oil and lot
of.
Spinachers and human resources
here so we're actually very
proud.
And then before you head to the
we have contract maintenance now
the contract maintenance is
where we were higher contractors
taxi
actually w.
Now we do the district does some
some maintenance itself over the
chip ceiling for example part
whole patching fences and
repairing that sort of thing but
these are the the various
contract maintenance
expenditures that we've made.
Allotted and we put it here
again geographically pre evenly
distributed throughout the
district but where this is where
that.
This is where that money has
gone the next sheet shows
contract maintenance for twenty
twenty twenty three point twenty
four this is planned in in this
is what's planned and what is in
progress right now and so we
have.
You'll see the on the right side
of the column you see the
schedule for twenty twenty four
this is where we're go.
Forty three.
Planted in prices now we've had
district three is suffered some
emergencies here
in various locations in the
district here.
We've had some bridges then
bridgeney to be repaired quickly
we had a single appear in the
mexical six that had to be dealt
with it caused the collapse of
side box and my si.
And we had to get in their me.
Get this out of there to protect
the you know well for the public
sir priorities it makes you dear
to you this is truth for all the
districts are priorities are
safety economy multimodel
mobility
environmental protection and
cultural resources preservation
and so each one of these that is
emergency risks all of those
categories all those priorities
right here so we get in and get
after them
a very catastrophic failure was
that the failure of the
diversion channel
in albuquerque where flood
picked up actually picked up
some deteriorated ca.
The.
Lifted it raised the water
raised water levels to about the
about the elevation of the
bridges the bridge.
The.
But our guys got out there and
got after we worked up a
temporary fix for that but these
are the kinds of things that
that the district has been
working on the following sheets
show you photographs of those
emergency repairs in action
by.
We've got the we show.
The culver repair in los lunis
on new mexico six the next sheet
shows that I forty a channel.
The.
And just a massive reforms co.
A tough tough project to get in
to get.
And then.
That showed up on one and I
just.
Showed up just volunteered in
it's it's not a pothole to
single.
Restored properly we did at the
district constructive shopper
environmentalists and structures
crew.
Everything prior to that was
done outside or in a
partially in a
deal appetited building.
That was resolved by.
I was structures and equipment
get it out of the element so
that this that it can be stored
not weathered and.
Repaired.
Safe environment for for the
people
that are s.
And we could go through her
great people if you like but I
think we were surprised.
That sounds good thank you
mister let me draw your
attention to
the district five presentation
this was made before the the
transportation commission last
january.
Yeah I will step you through the
the same way without without a
lot of delay here and I
apologize I think I saw mister
taylor here.
I don't see her.
Actually I think we have a
couple of questions from
committee members on the
district three presentation
first and then we'll go to five
first we're gonna start with
that representative and actually
I don't know where bridge it is
but we still need to take role
but we'll do that when she
returns when we start with
editor.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you.
The.
Thank you so much
paul there's a couple pieces
that as we madam chairs we go
through this.
The.
When we talk about.
I prefer presentation.
The.
A snapshot we talk about.
Contract construction projects
right now.
Right
we go through and the next sheet
we talk about substantially
complete.
The.
This doesn't really describe to
me and what i'd like a madame
chairman.
To have described is.
With these substantially
completed projects.
What time trained is that go
from two thousand and eighteen.
And I say that because
there's been a lot of.
The performance of the.
Like to do is.
And so when we talk about
substantially complete projects
is there any and here th.
Medicare representative.
I literally representative I
don't think there's twenty
nineteen money in his project so
this is all made of chair and.
Um.
These are all twenty twenty
projects funded and new work
yeah I met i'm sure
representative I might have a
spoke there was there was likely
twenty nineteen money in the
design.
But like.
So madame chair and and
if I could rephrase that maybe
maybe there was twenty eighteen
or twenty.
Access doing some performances
doing some evaluations with.
Crossing ceration stuff like
that but that was all getting a.
So this madame chairs what I
guess what I want to do is just
talk about the fact that when we
get thirty million dollars
in am.
Road to northern five twenty
eight.
So we have thirty million dollar
construction project we're gonna
we're gonna have it work
substantially complete which to
me means all wayne miles are
open.
Maybe.
Maybe not all the signs
but we're substantially complete
people are using it in less than
four years.
Member.
And for people to start to
understand yes that's only one
point seven miles but i'm more
than willing to take any
committee member down there or
anybody from the public or from
from any of our different
committees and show them what
there's one point seven.
Every day.
And there sometimes.
And so and then we we go through
and then we
get to the next slide we talk
about substantially complete
projects then we get to.
Improvement projects with
respect to that madam chair
worders that money come from.
Yeah that i'm sure
representative if I could maybe
give it keep taught our chief
insurance he could probably
provide s.
Madame share representative so
specifically could you i'm sorry
I could just repeat your
question so we have one two
three four f.
Funding from the majority of
projects from we're talking
about improvement projects
what years are we talking about
what phase was.
Well
represent for instance the first
project frost road that was.
School twenty twenty four now
and then I forty nine mexico
five hundred real brothel that
is one of.
I will be ready by the calendar
year technically the funding is
out in the.
At this point
I twenty five commentary as was.
Or cause that project is gonna
work we're in preliminary war.
And thirty three timber bridge I
believe that one's already been
out then I twenty five gibson
work the very beginning stages
that.
After my governor so so must
recontinue with respect to that
madame chair
we're gonna leverage on a
project that we we've already
leveraged two years of funding
for a leverage.
And you're going to fight with
that.
Other district engineers.
The.
Okay
good luck with that I am tired
of the messages being set from
the people that don't.
What we have in place.
None of these questions are
designed to give anybody.
And and so I do have some
clarification
if you gotta give you guys an
adele if I take thirty eight
thousand madam chair thirty
eight thousand seven hundred and
one mile lane miles and I have
divided by a one month of snow
of ninety days.
That's four hundred and thirty
miles a day you guys do.
Got extraordinar.
Madam chair and
yes I know and you g.
People that are out on the road
to see that.
You know if if if you're like me
or like I really wish you goes
with ahead of me and said it may
be and I have but the other side
of that is is your out there and
you're doing the bus.
Once again i'm tired you guys
catch catching some of the the
grief that you're catching right
now.
Madame chair
when am all when when we have an
emergency.
And you went through a few of
them that you are had to deal
with.
Madam chair and representative
that comes from our mean and
budget so we will fund that to
the district mean it's budget
for example the mexico six was
three and a half million dollars
to get that back in operation
obviously the district does not
have three hundred million
dollars out of their maintenance
budget they get three million
dollars annually for their
entire budget to include bridge
mean that's a stripe being in
gardel and everything else so
it's very tough so that's when
the executive will step in and
we will since the district
secretary starter and I I think
we split the three and a half
million dollars between the two
of us and we assisted the
district with that type of
funding so yeah the districts
wouldn't survive on that budget
try to fix this me is many
emergencies they had the sure I
mean it was just one of those
years we had one after the other
so madame chairless pull up
point it we have a four four
that they cut your ma.
This would be a good time to
bring that up that we had to go
find.
And once again we're going to
try and underfund you again this
year
house will two yesterday.
So.
In twenty twenty three manager
you'll have ten million dollars
and
maintenance phones to
to do the work that you did or
you expenditures should say
twenty twenty three twenty
twenty four with your available
funds
how do you feel like you're
going to perform against how
well you did in twenty.
Madame chairman representative
that's a good question
giving our funding level right
now I think we're going to lease
be at this number if not a
little better I hope om we
should be able to we should be
able to have the district should
be able to have enough funding
in their maintenance program to
probably deliver through the
june thirty deadline and then at
which time we will load the new
budgets and we will hopefully
hopefully see some money in
there and will continue the
remainder of that program
but I think it's important to
know that we need to plan and we
need to program this project so
if we do have the money we have
the contractors lined up and we
have folks for you to go because
one thing we don't want to do is
waste the summer months are
construction season
thinking about products we
should have done
and madame chairman represent if
you know that i've been pushing
our contractors pretty darn hard
and and we talked about a
project I did on three this year
and i'm i'm probably pushing a
little too hard and that's
something I learned over the
year but one thing we're going
to do is preparing we'll be
ready for hopefully some funding
and we'll get our program out
thank you madame chair and thank
you for that the
you know you do represent a
pedigree we we have four five
other people on the list and I
promised where we started late
today because they promised we
wouldn't be lay on the floor so
because maybe ask your most
important questions left and
appreciate it i'm sure I
appreciate that when I looked at
the agenda yesterday we had one
bill we didn't have any
presentations.
And it's true but now we do have
two presentations that it's not
listening at listening with
route attention that that's not
my issue if we're gonna just the
schedule.
From from an overall standpoint
as long as i'm following a
discussion and i'm not rep.
I appreciate that very much
representative i'll i'm asking
for some awareness of time and
other colleagues that have
questions that need to be asked
as well thank you
thank you madam chair.
We built a new.
Madame chair representative came
from the maintenance budget
obviously and it took us two
years to get it up and.
Thank you representative
appreciate that next we have.
Thank you madame chair
so my question was answered
about.
A few years ago the gifts and in
our change proje.
But I also represent.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question so really
what has changed and i'm during
that time is
the timing of the real of a
comment you montgomery the
design build for that project is
really good
going to get underway troubles
in the ground around august of
this year that's gonna take
approximately three construction
seasons to complete and I I
really would hate to do to your
constituency's put another
design build out at the same
time and really disrupt it
twenty five I don't think i'm
that would be good but
real brother is just as big of a
of a need that bridges in in and
direct shape on you know it's
it's a need of replacement we
got we have that design just
about ninety percent it'll be
fully unpermitted and ready to
go by the end of the calendar
year so we're actively going
after some grant funding for
that and that project can go out
sooner than gibson can just
because of the disruption tie
twenty five we really don't want
to have those two giant projects
going on at the same time and it
would probably stress our
industry out a little bit with
two large design bills going out
at the same time
madame chair thank you for that
answer and I understand there's
a similar issu.
The on an ar.
Very.
In one moves forward rather than
the other day thank you.
The.
Thank you next we have
representative lunch.
Thank you madame chair and uh
german dis.
Across the united states and
very often our n DO t.
I have just one quick.
I know that.
There are many many compu.
Of course in our.
City in the state and eventually
will become the largest city in
the state because.
Second largest now.
The remission delegation has
been working for twelve.
Where it dead ends right now at
our cities.
And we want to now take it the
other half of the way through
rear and show entirely.
In order to say a look look
smith has been incredible to
work with his.
You know we've as a delegation
over with last twelve years have
got about twenty million
dollars.
Made major progress.
So my question is now that you
know we're were now to like the
last very few parcels between.
Which is southern boulevard.
But also
you know.
You know they're there is a
little bit of you know a desired
actually see some shovels you
know.
Next leg from.
So I guess my just manager and
john and my question is just
briefly and we can take more of
a soft line if needed but you
just exit me understand you know
what is perhaps the most
effective.
Right.
What what is the best way to
make progress.
Madame chair representative
harpered on you know that's a
great question I think from
your perspective starting
construction makes a lot of
sense however the right away
acquisition we are almost done
and the few people that are you
know
there's kind of people left in
limbo out there is sort of
speaking other some of their
neighbors have already been
relocated so i'm property has
been has been um transferred
over the dot and so I think for
them it makes lessons to
continue the right away process
because there's a lot of
questions in their head you know
if they have children you know
would you know it's just a it's
stressful for sure and I think
we want to make sure that we can
get that part of this part
that's the most stressful part
for for the public is right away
acquisition and specially
relocation so I think it makes
sense for us to just finish that
out and try to distress them as
much as possible and get this
over with okay so it's around
here thank you for that.
Take some pressure off the river
bridge.
Hopefully we can.
Thank you last week
representative delicates.
Thank you madame chair.
I'm i'm kind of curious
about.
Issues with it is it i'm not
sure if it's fun funded or fully
funded or not fully funded
is it going to be done in phases
and there's funding for part of
that there's a I think a dates
late slated for letting out the
bids on.
The.
Yeah madame chair representative
so that project is going to be
done in one face it's partially
funded as we have currently
right now at about fifty million
dollars give or take the total
project is closer to a hundred
so we're actively going after
the bridge improvement graph
funding through the bill were
hopeful that work will be
successful at that again that's
one of district that is district
these priority projects for
general funds this year that you
ought that we presented to you
also the plan is we can
hopefully get some funding this
year will be ready to go out to
bed this time next year thank
you and lastly madame chair and
I i've brought this issue before
and i'm curious because him in
parks a lot of the roads that
that are within my district
the state has an agreement or
license as.
For certain state roads like
real brave I think is one dash
chavis is letter and my concern
is that as a drive from albert
you to hear I note that the
state seems to do a pretty good
job of filling crats cracks.
So that they don't become bigger
and I don't see that in in the
local communities that it looks
like they don't do any mateness
whatsoever and then consequently
like it's led a boulevard
manager is a good example it it
was brand new in around two
thousand four two thousand five
with sidewalks and everything
else were done today it's a
completely disrepaired I know
that the state has stepped up to
provide a lot of funding for
rehabilitation of its letter
boulevard however it's in really
bad condition as.
Things that are done and i'm
part in my ignorance and not
knowing all the terminology
however
it's gotten to that condition
because it's not maintain in my
frustration is why do we allow
local government to maintain
state roads if they don't step
up and do it basically needed
which is maintenance thank you
madame chair if I could have a
answer to that
matter representative that's a
great question
we are always discussing various
rose with the local at the
locals obviously where there
ares are there's a we partner
with a lot of initiatives with
them
one of the things it's very
difficult for us to do a step
into a local government and tell
them how they're going to
conduct
you know road maintenance are
room construction
reconstructions a little
different because usually adopt
our specifications because they
don't have their own but mean
it's as one of those tricky ones
where you know the priorities of
the locals is very stressed and
we we've talked about some was
roads with I know you and I and
the least of condo conversation
with some of those roads and I
understand if we know of enough
about their budget and what they
have available to perform
maintenance but I i'm sure it's
just one of those budgetary
issues we'd love to step in i'd
love to step in and help on our
roads I just don't have the
money to help our roads and
their roads if you could
understand where i'm getting out
it just it's just one of those
decisions that we have to make
whether we help the local or we
move that money to another state
facility and usually the state
facility will trump it but i'm
churn representative thank you
madame charlie I just would like
a little pressure on locators
that brilliant counties are
great example they do have the
resources to.
Thank you manager i'm done.
Thank you very much
representative delicates I just
want to take a moment to echo
all the car the comments of my
colleagues I think you guys are
doing a fantastic job with all
the pressure that you have been
getting recently
mister rasher thank you for
stepping up.
To it at one district is enough
to seems
like a lot and i'm sure
secretary starter can tell here
sympathises with you because he
knows what it's like you do to
jobs at once as well but that's
going to end hour
our presentation on district
five i'm sorry to sick three we
are now going to go to our one
bill because we are supposed to
be on the floor in fifteen i'm
sorry thirteen minutes and so
before you do that we have to
take role really quickly so that
we can be a real committee and
vote on the bill absolutely
madam chair student we could
come back next week a present
district five if that's easier
for you I was that's was going
to be my next question thank you
very much mister we could do
that is these a this is
fascinating information this is
great for the committee to now
and you know we we need to do
this every year clearly got it
will do that thank you manager
committee asked my best her to
step up and chair while I
present he to thirty two.
Representative brown
representative daily cruise
representative harper
representative jones
representative
later
representatives
representative madrid
representative peter group
representative ramaro
represent mr v.
Madame chair.
We have a core.
About it when it were you get
ready.
Thank you very much mister chair
so committee we are here to
discuss house will two thirty
two
i'm going to read the talking
points on it and then I am going
to go on a hyperbolic rant about
the spell because I think it is
actually the most important bill
that we are hearing this session
so it's actually my honor to be
a part of it and to be
presenting it.
This will establish the new
infrastructure of division
within the department of finance
administration and incorporate
some existing functions of the
local government division into
the new division.
Sorry state revenues and an
increase in federal dollars a
creative a historic opportunity
and need to make meaningful
investments in our communities
the capitalizing on this
opportunity or require more than
appropriating money to projects
it will require an effort to
address long standing barriers
successive projects and those
barriers include peace mail
funding and effective
coordination and funding sources
and lack of capacity to manage
grants and projects I think we
all know about that.
The big picture gold the new
division is to proactively begin
to address these challenges and
in doing so to increase the
power of capital outlay dollars
to tangibly improve our
communities the new division
will be charged with providing
communities with more effective
support and fully funding and
completing projects.
Currently no state entity is
explicitly responsible for
coordinating available funding
sources for capital projects or
for insuring appropriations to
capital projects are not just
spent but that the projects are
completed.
The bill was developed assuming
a face process for building a
new division with an initial
focus on building its funding
navigation and cor.
Working in managing capital
projects which will provide a
foundation for much of this work
going forward.
Additional expansion of duties
and stopping could be determined
by the legislature in future
budget development.
The bill is developed in a
collaborative effort between dfa
and lfc during the interim and
it is endorsed by both the
committee and the agency.
And the amendment makes several
technical corrections to the
bill associated with the
functions of the local
government division that will
not move to the n.
At this point I want to
introduce a very important
person in my expert i'm sitting
to my right this is calicow's
well she is the capital outlay
queen
she knows I mean we all know her
obviously for obvious reasons
and she has been a very
important part in the
development of the spill and
call if you want to save a few
words.
Think you madam chair members of
the committee thanks for having
us this morning I think the
chairwoman pretty much covered
why were trying to do this we
have members of the f a here
today as well if you'd like to
hear from them
and any questions you like
answered
you know she spoke to her kind
of the phased approach to
developing this division which
is what this bill is designed to
start and I would say over time
what we're trying to do the kind
of bigger vision is to create
kind of
cradle to grave one stop shopped
in the state for helping to
develop projects and see.
And you know having a central
hub for providing that kind of
assistance and kind of strategy
deployment for the state as a
whole that we're lacking right
now and that we need and the
sort of assistance they would
provide would be option also it
would be there for communities
that want and need it not
something everyone has to use if
they do have that capacity with
at the local level and finally I
just want to say that this bill
does nothing to and fringe on
the appropriation process
so legislators would continue to
maintain their discretion to
deprive direct capital outlay in
your communities where you wish
it to go and essentially we're
trying to build a better back on
the support for ensuring those
dollars actually results in the
things you intend to get built
getting done in gener.
So young hb two thirty two
I think it's also important to
emphasize that again this is not
changed the discretionary
approach or ability the
legislators have to spend this
money in the in their
communities it's simply gives us
the support that we have always
needed to ensure not only that
these projects get fully funded
I think at this point we have
over four billion dollars
sitting in an account that is
connected to unfinished or you
know even
letted and finish projects and.
There is a better way to govern
this is not good government the
way we've been doing it and this
I believe is a very solid
solution that has been in the
works for many years with
several very bright people
behind it helping us to find a
solution that will work for all
of us on a bipartisan I would
even say non partisan basis and
are again it's a phase we can't
fix all of the problems all at
once but this is the beginning
this is the first space and
again I think it's incredibly
important.
And with that we will restrict
questions mister chairman thank
you matter before we go to the
committee is anybody that is a
favor of this bill.
If you want a stand up will give
you a minute or less to address
it in.
Well.
Thank you chairman and madame
share california to see.
I I just want to first say.
We
often.
Here we are the only state that
does co.
We hear that with a nega.
You know a bunch of legislators.
Sprinkle things in their
districts and and then because
You know as an engineer I try to
really understand the problem
well before designi.
Really think about what the
problem is.
To me the biggest problem is is
not the process of how we
allocate its how that money
actually gets out the door when
I talk with my my local school
dis.
They have a really hard time i'm
getting through that process and
or to say it's not
yet for his fault right
one of my best friends rank
leason was in the director of
the local government division at
DFA and they are just drowning
was there a normal work what
alone trying to manage all of
these questions that they get
from local government folks
trying to.
So I was incredible idea this is
when those ideas was like why.
Right to have a group of people
who it is just their specialty
to help get capital out out the
door and and how people get
their projects started so I I
love this.
This idea in.
And is this the silver boy know
we have a we need a multi
facility approach when you
change some other.
And terminal madame chair or
answered my first question which
was regarding the authority of
this group
right
it sounds like roy they they're
austority is limited to helping
and and with planning and
executing projects they're not
going to be and and perhaps they
have suggestions for new
projects but.
They're not gonna have authority
to appropriate money
sorry mr chair absolute of
herper now
yeah so so many i'm sure.
Thank you.
The.
I agree with rep.
Mr chair.
Share representative brown so
that reversing dates are
specified and the capital outlet
bills so they are in law this
would not change anything about
that so
you all would continue to sort
of make.
Within the capital out
and then the agencies are
essentially charged with
you know administering.
I just I called a rule of phone
because i'm not sure.
Yeah.
And so.
I'm mister representative brown
yes so I would say you know it
would
enhance the process of trying
to.
And providing support to
communities again that need and
want it
that perhaps have some capital
outlay dollars but need
additional funding from
somewhere else to actually read
full funding for their project
so you know this division would
be charged with helping them
identify and access those
sources or sort of sending them
to the right place so you know
one thing we hear often from
legislators is that the system
of financing options for these
projects is just to sprawling
and confusing
and so you know we're we're
trying to create one place that
you can always go for help and
figuring out how to navigate it
and then you know with them that
knowing that you are capital
outlay appropriations even as
large as they've grown in recent
years roman insufficient on
their own to fully fund projects
that we need kind of a more
effective system for being able
to leverage those dollars
against other.
I can actually speak and on that
point mister chair
part of the vision of this bill
in this new division and do a
goes towards a larger vision a
lot of you know that there's
been a lot of federal money
discussion I grant money
flooding out around ever since
the pandemic and and the
inflation reduction act in all
of that and so because there's a
plethora of federal grants out
there it takes a it takes.
People who know about those
grants to identify them no what
communities would qualify for
them help those communities
develop grant applications help
them identify if there is a
matching funding where that
matching funding can come from
and all of that
coordination could also
eventually become a part of this
office as well so it's not just
coordination of state capital
but eventually coordination of
all capital and I believe that
idea and itself could transform
the state.
Along those same wise mister
chair i.
Manager
question is that we've been a
concern to me i've been a
representative for years now was
wondered.
Where this money that's that by
billion dollars in their.
This will really help a lot of
people really well you know what
was happening with a capital
lounge that we put out now and
is not sufficient.
You know so you give it to them
and
to down the road they wind up
losing because they just don't
have enough money in on a dis.
Been lingering up there for
eight years you know is that a
realisation request since two
thousand and fifteen.
And I was an even in office and
I told my can help you but the
point is.
That there's a big problem out
there.
On unpeople who do get cap.
Anyway no more questions
committee to have emotion.
Mr chair there's there's
apparently i'm so sorry there's
an amendment that I was not
aware.
Think representative and also I
read as part of the talking
points the minimum make several
technical corrections to the
bill associated with functions
that local government division
that will not move to the new
infrastructure division in the
first place.
Yeah.
In the up in the objections to
the amendment review signal you
do have an amended bill them to
thirty two
thank you very much and i.
Stand for questions on the
amended bill of their irony left
otherwise.
The.
Thank you so much community
members.
Everybody really quickly you
will be receiving an email soon
about tonight's official
committee dinner please pay
attention I know there's been
three dinners but this is the
official one.
