Representative John.
Representative Lundstrom here
Representative Madrid.
Representative.
Representative Romero.
Garcia.
This is not here.
Okay
well let's start off with the
four thirty if you are shopping
around with this good morning
everybody my name is a.
On state route sixty three and
the here I have Matthew Gonzalez
is my expert witness.
And.
House bill four thirty the local
governments restricting local
governments authority to
regulate fuel retailers and
related transportation
infrastructure.
And with that.
This is the madam chair all of
is that the questions.
Okay thank you very much
Representative
we're gonna go first to the
audience is anybody who is here
in favor of hospital for thirty.
So.
Anyone on the internet.
Okay do you have anybody in
opposition the hostile for
thirty thank let's start there
Mr chair.
The chair members of the
committee jobs that.
Of the.
Description control
of this bill is already.
Local.
Is that Senator us this.
The.
This the local level respect.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members.
The account client advocates
conservation.
We are also an option.
Health.
Transportation whether he wanted
to be here not.
The session we have a lot of
action for the handle for I I
this bill.
For us to build out property
structure is to make sure that
are not left.
Session two.
Vehicles
this presents the possibility
that you do as well thank you
very much anybody else.
On the stand.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Alicia starting the
campaign director with public
power New Mexico a grassroots
statewide coalition working to
advance policies that empower
communities to be able to direct
clean energy futures and address
climate change we propose the
four thirty because it
undermines the ability of local
governments to advance policies
that address climate change it
also restricts your abilities to
fulfill their obligations to
protect our residents quarter
health safety and well being it
seems like it would restrict
their ability to implement
zoning laws restrict the
development of things like
refineries in their communities
it's also unclear to us how this
would affect state efforts to
advanced electric vehicles thank
you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Tammy people
Carmen Albuquerque city
councilor and I stand in
opposition to this bill this is
a preemption bill plain and
simple this is a bill to take
away the rights of local
government to set policies and
programs and incentives that
work for their people and so you
know this proposal in particular
is alarming because it seeks to
keep local governments from
planning for the future a future
that is definitely a elector and
so we we you know we would like
to have the flexibility to do
what we need to do for our
citizens in the future and this
bill would keep us from doing
that we ask you to please vote
no.
Thank you very much that are
funds on.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Tom Solomon I am the co
coordinator with the climate
focus group three fifteen New
Mexico and on behalf of our
seven thousand members we stand
in strong opposition to this
bill in particular the provision
that prevents municipalities and
counties and cetera from
requiring the build out of
electric vehicle charging
stations with electric vehicles
sales rising exponentially and
the fact they were up sixty five
percent of the United States and
twenty twenty two and states
passing requirements to phase
out the combustion sales
question vehicles in the future
including California
Massachusetts and Connecticut by
twenty thirty five there is a
clear need to build out electric
vehicle charging infrastructure
we must not hobble forward
looking cities and counties from
preparing their infrastructure
for the future of the future
with all electric
transportation.
And for that reason we stand in
strong opposition to this bill
thank you thank you.
Yes.
Okay this one we will go to
members.
Representative Cruz thank you
madam chair.
About three professionals madam
chair.
All Representative some more
white why is this needed.
madam chair and members of the
committee you know in here and
the testimony on on the internet
and and hearing people your is
in the room.
I want to make something clear
is this will not prevent this
does not stop.
Charging stations or anything
that what we're looking at is
existing gas stations and
stations truck stops.
That if if they were forced.
To put in a charging station and
it would cause a financial
difficulty for them they would
go under that's that's the side
we're looking and that's what
we're looking at so so we're
trying to keep the.
The the people.
That don't have the money and
and not just in business but the
people that don't have the
money.
To have to replace their vehicle
with an electric vehicle.
So so therefore we look at these
preemption bills.
And and and we think how can we
protect the people the poorest
of the poor that don't have the
money to afford.
To be to go from there gas car
that needs tires and is has a
hundred fifty thousand miles and
they don't have the budget.
To go electors and and go with
the flow of the transition so we
want to protect those people.
The the.
Struggle and have a hard time
which is the biggest part of the
population.
What we're looking for
perfection is what we're doing
if that answers your question
Representative I think it's it's
heading in that direction madam
chair so this bill doesn't
address whether a person has to
get electric vehicle or can keep
their their
The fossil fuel vehicle what it
really is doing is is trying to
not force existing gas stations
to install electric stations
four of our new stations.
madam chair representative it
doesn't prevent anybody from
doing anything with you stations
it doesn't prevent it doesn't
hamper the old station for
putting in a take charge station
at that one but it but if but it
doesn't allow.
The counties are the
municipalities to force them to
do.
Madam chair more of.
Why do you think you need the
state to weigh in on what's
typically a local jurisdictional
issues.
Matt madam chair and although I
serve with the sensor that Madam
chair representative who sent
for the question on I would say
that.
Houston Our Environment laughter
this.
Activism Mexico City.
Some places like California and
a lot of that is well
intentioned it's it's helping us
clean up the environment is
helping drive us towards a
cleaner future but sometimes
some of those proposals
convenience.
And I'll give you one.
There's there's a County
California this was a band the
construction of the gas stations
now that band of construction
gas station driving gas powered
vehicles not gonna be able to
fill up in that.
your people in New Mexico
roughly forty percent of New
Mexicans the federal.
Those people are thinking of
buying a car and times what
we're scared of them and I guess
the concern for me is I'm not
going to ban gas stations and
similar remember going to do
that I feel confident and even
my peers and other this counties
are going to do what it takes in
all cases we notice it takes one
row elected official this can
happen at the state level it can
happen local government of it
takes one person who doesn't
have the best intentions maybe
doesn't have a great idea and
they're going to start pushing
issue and counseling on just
need to vote to the whole
community support the two people
on council within the this is a
good idea and that's enough to
do radical change policy that
affects everyone the one thing I
would say at least in my
communities and I would say the
same for the state legislature I
know when it's out of a hundred
people I know who has a hard
time making bills every month
and who has a hard time paying
their electric bill making sure
that money for gas to get that
out of the work.
We are largely were people in my
area.
those same people struggle don't
come to my house they don't have
a voice in the Energy today
because they're so busy with
their nose to the grind it out
there to say Hey this is this is
going to and so I you know I'm
very soon with those people I
would say that those same people
will come to Santa Fe to testify
and say Hey this is going
because those people are so busy
just trying to make ends meet so
percent off on behalf of them
this piece of legislation
consumer protections we can go
out there to the gas station
companies and say a few support
this we did a lot to industry
eighty support this this is
purely and simply a consumer
protection piece of legislation
that ensures as we move towards
an energy transition but you'll
have local governments far
Charlie in actually lost they're
going to hurt the most
vulnerable since the ETA in the
state as are indicated that
we're going to go.
Renewable energy we don't want
someone to come in and disrupt
or derail that progress that
we're making and so this is
really a piece that keeps it the
the Q. six addictive all across
the state and for our most
vulnerable citizens when that
transition comes for them
they're able to do it and not
mandated reports to do so.
of representative Garcia is on
the way in on that question is
thank you madam chair you know I
read an article or a.
Stated that the state of
California and other bigger
cities.
Twenty thirty they will be that
is all yes yes both got water
heaters and gas firms.
And with this people New Mexico
just for the could not afford
twenty five thousand dollars to
convert from is that this is the
ability to see people.
We really need to look at those
issues.
Some of us are fortunate.
While you might the people are
not good fortune.
If there are questions will
reduce you and that that band in
my thinking Susan the state
number twenty thirty they will
be back in the.
The banning the use of those
guests to the banning the sale
of gas so that's what.
Madam chair of our
Representative Garcia I don't
see how in rural New Mexico you
can go to electric because you.
Propane gas and
For response to generator runs
under.
Well madam chair will not
question that that's a good
question because what we really
do.
The gentleman to do it.
A decision will determine what
yes but the mall it's not very
feasible and were afraid of.
Some big shot the person come in
the state of New Mexico on the
ballot for this is no well the
whole community here.
Basically and then you for for
the people of our guests.
For what will be for that
matter.
what are you you know I have a
lot of people in my district are
burning coal.
Because they don't have all the
money will be by the and they're
burning waffle which is back for
the the reason that so anyway I
just what I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much yes we have madam
chair Lundstrom thank you madam
chair I I am appreciate this
bill coming forward and
certainly understand it it it it
reminds me of our session a
couple days ago and it's a much
bigger discussion when you think
about technological advances
I often wonder of what cities
and counties are going to do
when you start looking at
artificial intelligence electric
cars Thomas if bulls when you
think about the infrastructure
today.
Cannot handle any of those new
initiatives I know that had a
lot of discussion at one time
with previous more in
Albuquerque that even the down
area when you think of that bus
system I believe it was up and
down central and the fact that
what that did to the businesses
because.
These are the cities are
designed a certain way and they
get their infrastructure in but
now we're talking about
changing to say elector vehicle
with charging stations and how
long does it take to charge a
vehicle which I'm I don't know
that that changes the whole
dynamic of development for all
cities in New Mexico all
counties in New Mexico at the
end of the day I don't think we
would have to begin to
understand what the
infrastructure cost is going to
be to local governments and
state of New Mexico when you
think about some of our state
roads madam chair Sir Rios as an
example in in in Santa Fe when
we start looking at
electric vehicles and changing
those fueling stations start
looking at economists vehicles
and you know the
delivery center now by robotics.
What does that mean for a city
and how they bonded changes do
those upgrades I think it's
gonna be billions of dollars to
do that.
it gets back to what we talked
about a few days ago with this
whole subdivision Act and how
the state of New Mexico has is
packed in place that helps
directed guide local governments
to funding in development I
think that we're gonna have to
look at that madam chair to get
around I mean it's a much bigger
much bigger discussion the
representatives are bringing to
us today but an important
discussion particularly for
rural New Mexico.
So it it's it's my hope madam
chair this bill does move on
because not only does this kid
committee need to talk about it
but I notice it's going to
governments next I think that is
a very appropriate committee
take care for this discussion
thank you madam chair the the
US.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
Just a thought
so I'll just say I don't think
it's a secret I I would have.
yes let us clarify four.
Going from zero to sixty one
point nine seconds in this
Lamborghini
is amazing because.
And and I really do think that
naturally over time as
technology improves you'll see
for electric vehicles.
a right now the chair of the tax
committee told me a story he got
himself a new electric vehicle
and I will see what it was.
I got it from.
It had a range of two hundred
and twenty five miles and he
thought he could use it to
commute between.
Bernalillo and Santa Fe.
Well
all these cold days here
recently when the snow was
coming down the almost cold
access batteries.
He was fully charge what is
house and starting to go up you
know what a hard hill starting
on the warnings that you're
going to lose your battery is
about to die and turn off your
cedar and if you know and he got
up to Santa Fe fairly million Ms
Oakes like in charge and and
make it back home.
He was like I don't have to know
how to spend less money on the
status of.
I don't need to deal with this
right now and actually returned
and the dealership to the back.
So I'm just saying I really
believe electric will become
the future we will need to make
but.
I'm I'm very concerned about
Forcing right now.
Folks to make these investments
when when things are even quite
right yet.
So I just wanted to share that
order madam chair I to support
that legislation is buzzing and
says you can't.
The drive structure and as
these.
Gas stations in rural New Mexico
start seeing a demand.
And when they say Hey I can make
this investment and I'll
actually have a return.
They will do it.
But I don't think it's our job
right now to mandate adoption
when things are still.
Needing to write it so thank you
madam chair thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew and
Representative around and and
Representative or six seconds.
Mention.
Thank.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair
representative for for the vote
The hearing test all the way
almost.
What is a good thing I
appreciate the bill listen to
the public comment and and I'm
concerned that.
We we hear chair.
A continual push.
On it you know well.
This.
We're.
We should have local governing
rights.
Madam chair representative have
heard just secession.
I started going through my head
on the number of bills and I.
It's north of twenty.
So far for state government is
pushing down.
To the federal up to this to the
local level.
There will.
And so the comments that you
know we should we should be able
to have.
The local decision making power
I completely agree but the state
continues to get involved in the
local decision making power of
we've done that on so many
different things
with the repression of protests.
You know and industries that are
trying their own people
We're pushing solar down we're
pushing it to the mortgage
company for that.
Share a no disrespect now we're
pushing like.
For less than one of our
population
we're we're pushing so many
different things down and and I
think madam chair representative
for your bill does is protect
the local municipality doesn't
require the use of.
It just says Hey you don't have
to do this.
And and I think that that's
important when we look at the
the our state constitution start
talking about our our our
personal rights bills.
And and municipal level to be
able to do
what is right for our
communities.
And and I agree with the witness
this is a consumer protection
this is a
this is not a mandate in any
form or fashion and I agree
Madam chair representative far
for work it's funny
Wind when the demand is there
file in a medically.
I have thought seriously about
given up money money money life
is a civil engineer and just
take a minute of ram.
A gas generator on in.
And charging stations on it just
driving around.
Charging a hundred Bucks to few
people that can figure out that
the battery was charged.
And and
I do feel that we're going to
continue it this way.
Madam chair and representative
as we continue through as we
continue to to.
Five four what Mexico could be
done from the extractions point
we we would be able the state
madam chair and representative
to extract five of the seven
main minerals.
But we refuse to do that.
And I'm not sure why we're
pushing on one side.
We're we're not helping our
economy on the other side so
madam chair representative I
appreciate the bill I appreciate
what you're trying to do for
spectrum this once again I want
to reiterate to everybody that's
listening that we are not this
bill does not require shipment
to do something it just keeps
government from requiring other
people business from doing
something and actually our role
in.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for thank Representative that is
on the ground.
Chair thank you good morning
Representative thank you for for
this bill.
I
I do support the bill I wish we
didn't need the bill however
Madam chair representative it
looks like there's a movement
afoot to force the energy
transition by basically what I
would call micromanaging but
local governments over
something that will affect truly
to New Mexico.
People from other areas so madam
chair I see
These these potential efforts by
local governments state to ban
the sale of gasoline or diesel
this would have a very negative
effect on commerce.
And in fact madam chair it would
disrupt people's ability to
travel because they would have
to be researching before they
leave their homes say they're
headed.
To some other city they would
have to research will can I get
it was safe will tell can I get
gas there if you look.
To do what I need to do in the
travel and the need to get home
and so the the implications of
this I think it's kind of scary.
And madam chair representative I
go back to my constituents and I
say Hey did you know there's
this efforts it's happening in
some other states and it could
happen here if we don't have of
consumer protection like this I
I think I could tell my
constituents are people who want
to take away your ability to
fuel your beautiful.
And I think that would get their
attention.
because madam chair that the
vehicle they owned and we know
from statistics madam chair and
representative that that the
number of electric vehicles in
New Mexico is actually very very
low has increased a little in
every little increase gets
counted as progress but in fact
it's still very very of small
segment of the
travel public or those who are
fearful so I I think madam chair
that the negative consequences
not having this bill would would
play out very soon perhaps and
and just madam chair the more
mention of a few people on a
governing board of local
government could change the face
of a town just by passing
something like this and I think
that's the taking.
Potentially and so madam chair
representative so I I understand
the bill does not say there
can't be electric stations
installed and that's fine as
long as it's been mentioned
there's a demand for it and then
yes it will happen.
So madam chair thank you so much
for a few minutes thank you very
much Representative next we have
Representative vice chair Garcia
Madam chair of the members of
this bill is Reacher you don't I
saw of testimony against this
the nursing that we want the
stations and so forth and this
bill does not do that we are not
required we're not trying to get
anybody doing the level of the
if you are approved gas station
or a charging station more often
than what we're trying to
prevent is from and taking them
destructors this.
The mayor said no two people in
the city council she's a whole
on that program thank.
Thank you Max we have
Representative life and thank
you for Morning madam chair
committee presenters.
I have done my best to listen
with an open mind public comment
to the committee.
Conversations so far.
And.
I've been a bit troubled by some
of the comments including those
that it would only take two
people elected to something
different.
Because frankly that's
democracy.
Whether we're looking at the
Supreme Court of the United
States or the presidential
elections or elections in my
small town missio twenty five
hundred people.
I'm here better worse when
someone is voted into office
they have rooms to make public
policy decisions we.
Created there thirty to do so at
the local level.
I remember I don't know if it
was this week or the week prior
probably when we're talking
about the subdivision
ordinances.
Talked about how local
governments are in fact come
from the body of the state we we
create a government together.
So.
Yes I think we often have a
contentious debates about
whether the state should be
making decisions or decisions
should be left in the hands of
local governments.
I try to whether we're talking
about a budget related to school
funding I continue to say out
loud that I trust our local
school districts in each of our
communities to know best what
those students and those working
families and those parents need
for their little ones I'm not a
hundred reasons are have I ever
been so expressed frustration
sometimes it decisions made by
our state appropriated as they
connected to extended school
years and other things that I
didn't I don't think we're doing
enough to test our local school
boards.
But at the same politics about
has power and so when I hear
some reasonable considerations
brought forward by you all and
and I agree that they're more
than reasonable.
I also think that if there was
somebody else sitting at that
table here saying that our the
conversion to different fuel
sources including those needed
by electric vehicles we hear the
same certainly how can you be
telling our local municipalities
like to do.
And so on this one I drawn and
and listening to the
conversations were having about
how fuel sources will work in
the future but for me it's
really spending much more as a
conversation about where we hold
state control and where we turn
to local municipalities to make
decisions.
I really appreciated chairman
serves comments about
hello this is what an element of
a much bigger conversation for
me and a someone brand new to
the transportation committee
I'm really feeling like we don't
know enough yes to figure out
how to create that right balance
of local control.
I will say out loud I
appreciated Representative
Harper is storytelling I also
have tried to figure out how my
family might use an electric
vehicle and I was raised in see
I live in India but most of our
life right our school our
extracurricular activities for
my kids all of that we just
drive down the road and into Los
crucis for
but routinely I'm here Senator
I'm driving to different parts
of our rural state so I knew
that for me I could not turn to
electric vehicles.
Even if that's something I might
be able to afford as invested in
Sunday because so far are
restrictions on and that brings
us to that question like what
comes first.
I also.
If I have to speculate today
would imagine that in our near
future the great majority is
very elector vehicles and we
have the onus is policymakers to
make sure New Mexicans are left
behind as the rest of the
country both there and we are
still trying to figure out how
to live their selves for me I
ended up buying a plug in
hybrid.
So that I could charge all night
overnight.
Have enough on my electric
engine and that battery to do my
morning drop offs get my kids to
school do all that I happen to
work remotely I come in.
It's hard to get all day and
have enough battery storage to
to do that cycle The pick ups in
the soccer practices must
practice but if I do anything
out of the ordinary we have a
dentist appointment off highway
seventy if we're I need to get
to a possible which is our big
city I'm using my just ended so
for me I was able to stretch and
four that that hired option but
also knew that there was a lot
of progress made it helps that I
absolutely testament be useful
or beneficial to my family I
have not worked remotely and be
able to do a drop off from home
titled a pick up and do that
again Adams that we happen to be
a small town right next door to
one of New Mexicos biggest
cities.
but for me it was also trying to
better understand like what are
the options for he's going to be
what's going to happen
you know all for me there is a
gas station down the road by the
time I get to crucis I passed by
Ortiz and if I need gas in
office my girls like girls who
definitely will we get but when
I'm having some.
I have.
A few miles on the road where
that that elector charge helps
out Hey this is the and then I'm
getting absolutely up and and
all the way home.
So again I really appreciate
this consideration
I don't think I I would not be
ready to support this bill fifty
it's the house floor.
and for me question is how does
this fit in to the changing.
Economies and future is and
existence of how we move
ourselves around a gigantic.
But mostly I am not ready to
with the certainty weigh in
about where that controls.
might maybe offer is that just
like I would be ready to support
this on a prohibition on the
local governments I would also
if you're if somebody else on
the other side of the table is
here saved money I would not be
supporting that either.
Because I'm still right now
there New Mexico that.
so it looks like my colleagues
here at the end of this
conversation it should and must
continue Government House
support that but I would not be
ready to send this sport and
again if it relates back to that
time line around when and how we
decide whether this is a local
control or statewide issue but
thank you offer starting and be
part of this really.
Thank you thank.
Thank you very much
Representative as we have
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you all for bringing this
forward and and like
Representative what I can and I
appreciate the discussion on
this I think we have a robust
discussion on some of these
issues local control versus
state control and I appreciate
that and like the Representative
I do have concerns about you
know the the fact that the.
Might take a couple like to
officials to change policy the
local.
At the local level at the state
level we all have constituencies
that come to us for various
things sometimes we have to make
the hard
I have a hard conversation about
saying well this may not be
appropriate for the state level.
We have to hold back on this
but I think especially the local
level where you get so much
public input you can just so
much involvement around
particular issues
I think that's a good thing.
In the center of.
You know our elected officials
as trying to force the origin.
Through online a little bit on
that sort of of of.
Proposition I think.
The other thing I will say about
the bill because I don't know
I'm not on government committee
I called you will follow the
conversation if this bill goes
that far in there all the nose a
conversation from here bill they
have from the one of the things
that really makes me
uncomfortable is that in the
shall not portion we have
included with resolution.
That could be non finding just
expressions of we wish to go in
that direction all.
Yes.
A local government could not
pass a solution not only are we
talking about in laws ordinances
regulations by going as far as
to say resolutions we hope that.
G. two X.
I think that's incredibly
problem.
I.
In the bill I think the
discussions great.
Appreciating from my colleagues
on this but this bill makes.
The representative
Representative.
Thank you madam chair this is a
very difficult and complex issue
it's it's difficult because for
me right out the gate madam
chair I believe that climate
change is a goal of ours on the
other hand similar to
Representative Garcia of heard
speaking for the economics for
many of our community
communities are such madam chair
that it's difficult for them to
even contemplate buying
electrical electric vehicle R.
what what we were sitting here I
was looking at the median income
for the area that both
a Representative role metal and
I will serve as well as for New
Mexico the median income for a
family income is forty thousand
dollars in the U. S. income is
about seventy thousand for
families browse full and so the
notion of being able to afford
these vehicles it's just not
realistic it is the working
class blue collar community
so it's it's it's complex how
how can you serve both ends of
this spectrum particularly
particularly economic.
The other thing that I find
And this is more just a fund
manager I was amazed at that you
have to go through the charging
station up and it seems to
change batteries in in our in
our flashlights and in other
Items that we use I don't
understand why catalytic gas
station report on this big
Honkin battery and put in a
little on and off you go I just
just a thought
So that that manager I I feel
compelled to share because
and the one with the chair it's
more of a statement again I
generally support local control
of two of communities by elected
officials I argued and I don't
disagree with the what
Representative gone then or
saying a little while ago as a
former county commissioner we
enacted laws all the time for a
variety of issues so I generally
light of local control on the
other hand I kind of like which
Representative Lundstrom said
that she believes this
conversation is to continue
going forward so just a few
thousand thank you very much hi
anybody else.
Okay it's my turn.
Thank you very much are funded
is reading this I think it's an
extremely interesting bill to
our attention
I guess my first thought when
reading of this is it seems like
we are we have a solution in
search of a problem.
At this point in time that we
don't we don't know what the
future brings right I think that
we're trying to to read the
minds of future legislators or
predict what might happen
as you know renewable energy
continues to evolve and have
their place in our state
My concerns with this bill
gentleman is it opens Pandora's
box.
What's what's next you know what
what are we what are we gonna
regulate or not regulate our
next who are we going to tell
they can or cannot do something
on the state or county level
next and I think that government
has a very particular place and
in that way and so what makes me
extremely uncomfortable about
this bill is
I think we're setting a terrible
precedent.
If we were to up to to go this
far so
You know I also think that it
this bill is not necessary I
think that there's a concept in
the loft called the dormant
Commerce Clause and what the DCC
basically tells us is if you
have products that are moving
within interstate interstate
Commerce from one state to the
next there are being produced in
the state and consumed in
another legislative can't pass
protectionist measures the state
so we can't we won't take that.
Within it won't take that guests
from the other state realty that
other product from the state so
I think that if we were to be
successful in passing something
like this I think it would
definitely see lawsuits from
those lectures the factors or
whoever would be precluded from
from
Possibly being at this gas
station I think we would
definitely see that so I I
appreciate.
Spirit of the bill I see where
you're going with this I can
understand that you're trying to
you're you're just trying to
protect the status quo you're
just trying to protect those
people that are dependent upon
of those fuels that are already
readily available now but I just
feel as a lawmaker if they feel
extremely nervous that we would
be setting a bad precedent here
and opening Pandora's box so I I
will not be supporting your bill
today but I appreciate it yes
Representative Zamora manager
I'd like to take one last stab
at it okay.
Local for a friend I don't I
don't know Madam if you misspoke
or you Miss understanding the
building because you said that
you don't want to have the state
not to be able to regulate and
madam chair this this bill does
not not touching regulations at
the state level whatsoever we're
just trying to keep a disaster
from happening that low of that
town the urban this apology
levels and those counties and
municipalities to still come to
the state level and and and.
Work on the things that we all
need to work with and it's it's
it's first so we can all work
together on issues.
That will affect the poorest of
the poor state and they do that
representative you are correct
let me try and correct what
state I'm gonna use a double
negative that hopefully will
make sense we want we want to
prevent the state from not.
Have a
not having the ability to
regulate at that these levels
right and we we want to allow
municipalities and local and
local governments the ability to
govern themselves but we also
the state has to be able to step
in if there is any sort of
If there's truth problematic
consequences from the passage of
something like this and this is
a local this is the this is a
local control bill right so so
that that's what I meant to say
so I appreciate the opportunity
to to correct myself I hope that
makes a little bit more sense on
that yeah those are my thoughts
on the go to Representative
Lundstrom thank you madam chair
I'd like to move the to pass
without recommendations that way
we can the long government take
a peek at it and say.
That's a good question.
Think of all Representative
Brown.
Of the yes on the bill in the
legislative.
Representative I've been.
Yes to explain.
Representative Chris.
I'm sorry.
Lawsuits.
Act will recommendations just
can.
I will go on the bill but I want
to.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Jones yes
Representative object yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Parker.
No not like to explain more
about.
Senator Romero not.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
now.
Six.
Six four the customer
completion.
And those are there's some of
the.
Thank you home.
Yes thank you madam chair I
think this is an incredibly huge
issue this has implications all
over the board and yes I believe
in to talk to but I also know
democracy can be D. toward when
people and a small group can
actually affect and so we do
have a precedent in our state
for preemption by the state.
And that's in our state
constitution regarding the
second member of cities and
counties are not allowed to
register to read.
So.
It it is known to happen and
there's usually a very good
reason for it so I look forward
to further discussion on this I
think it'll be a very need
discussion going forward thank
you.
Representative.
Of the the whatever.
Madam chair I specifically on
this bill because of the no
recommendation I watched
legislation passed through here
for the last two and a half
years where we to local
government what to do and when
to do it.
This bill again local government
the ability to not require
something.
And took away the state's
ability to stop them.
Which is what we're supposed.
And in just my opinion I don't
agree with no recommendations
and I one hundred percent
support bill do not support the
number.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to appreciate that
replace Representative for
remember touching tribute to
this includes resolution I had
not seen that or that of myself
that is significant concern for
me so of course they said what I
did about the contact I would
just because of the no
Representative but even as a
good faith effort as you all go
to that I am I I appreciate
straight line which again the.
The political interests will
just like our revelations here
that we have
that I sincerely six I could not
be more concerned about the
thank you for Representative
amount of the tension that would
appreciate government but we
need to start that.
With the intention of.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Thank you madam chair the first
ulti I am concerned about the
issue of overriding local
control and I also think.
Let me back up I appreciate
this.
I really do I just think that is
a little premature as a internal
optimist I think that when the
time comes in the very near
future that we have to take
consideration of communities
like the one that I certainly
think that we will find twice
you have to make sure that we
don't exclude those without the
means to move forward invites
for.
And still be able to use fossil
fuel vehicles I think we'll be
wise enough to get there I just
think it's a little premature
madam chair thank you
yes.
Thank you John thank you.
Of the committee.
No.
Health the morning I.
Representative Garrett good
morning to my two favorite
committees.
Transportation.
I just like the personal
privilege thank you
Representative for doing what
Representative Harper did not do
the other day with discretion.
This.
I'm sure I'll forgive.
We will good morning madam chair
and everybody I'm coming today
this bill should actually be
entitled national infrastructure
bank creation so.
We are not creating anything
here
for several years the national
representatives have been trying
to initiate a national
infrastructure bank and I think
the conversation we just had you
just report to the status of our
bridges.
Airports our water system.
All of the national focus my
expert witness.
What is the name of the party
yes you have here yes that live
live here do Sir she is an
economist of the International
Monetary Fund now she works as a
consultant with the.
For our viewers.
the national infrastructure
building purpose is to
develop a mechanism to support
infrastructure development both
within states and among states
and since I was here two years
ago.
We have presented this idea for
support all over food
representatives including that
Carroll who left office before
signing on for other two reps
have signed on the presented to
Senate.
On both pursuant to their staffs
because let's put it up we have
incredible stuff happening over
the next decades plus we have
all the existing problems of
trillions of dollars worth of
stuff so the national
infrastructure bank is a
mechanism and it's thank you
some articles article I believe
and Russia monthly was incorrect
this doesn't involve
appropriations it is also a
mechanism for us that doesn't
come out of the federal budget
but this mechanism would allow
us to do the five interstate
projects that are being talked
about in state projects and all
of this.
More requests is to support it
so that we can add the voice of
New Mexico to the push to do
this doesn't involve any
financial support is show us to
our federal delegation sent to
the other delegations I think
about twenty four state
legislators bipartisan support
that supported this so that's
all that I am asking and I'd
like to ask madam chair four of
that good to explain the funding
mechanism morning this is very.
Thank you very much for having
me and I really appreciated
madam chair and to the committee
members I just wanted to make
perhaps of there are a lot of
details on how this national
infrastructure bank works in the
memorial itself at at eight AM I
but I just wanted to quickly
cover a few things of first of
all well is this national
infrastructure bank structured
and why do we need the principal
reason we needed it because
we're just not able to finance
infrastructure either through
the federal budget through state
and local budgets like your
particular budget for your state
roads and other kinds of
infrastructure through bonding
even though we passed a
bipartisan mall last year it's
all of that is not big enough
large enough to cover everything
and we now accumulated a big
backlog of projects nationwide
and in New Mexico that have not
gotten funding so the purpose of
this bank is to provide funding
for those projects it does
operate
it is a government the National
own public bank it will provide
very very low cost loans
actually it operates even though
with the public thank operates
just like a commercial bank does
when it gives out loans it's
capitalized by all holders of
private holders of treasuries
and then it operates just like a
commercial bank I wanted to give
you a comparison of the order of
what New Mexico might benefit
from compared to for example I
part of some law that passed
last year which will provide New
Mexico with about three point
seven billion dollars over five
years most of that will be in
transportation but New Mexico as
much larger needs than that
especially water especially a
new grid additions to move
renewable energy around the and
just plain.
Baseload energy.
You would get you would qualify
for up to thirty three billion
dollars over ten year period to
fix all of those projects and
the measure of the need is the
American society of civil
engineers who covers the
categories of that are needed in
your state so it'll be things
like that were invested in like
the previous bank invested in
elephant Butte dam rural
electrification in this
iteration we would be doing new
great enhancements big water
projects to bring water into New
Mexico and all of surrounding
states in the southwest you're
suffering still suffering from
drought all high speed rail
which will connect your state
and other states to provide an
alternative transportation
solution.
Are we we we want to make make
sure that there is an aspect of
the state that will ensure that
loans get into rural areas this
was a concern all of your
members and with the way that
ensures is that the local
jurisdiction will be in charge
of coming to the national
infrastructure bank to request a
loan and then it'll be be
assured that it gets a kind of a
loan that will solve
infrastructure problems in their
area according to their needs
and because New Mexico is a very
low income state the bank is
configured not only to provide
low cost loans but in very low
income areas to provide grants
as well and this was passed up
by other state legislators on a
bipartisan basis for example
your neighboring state Nevada
pass it on a bipartisan basis.
I will forget passed it
unanimously on so that meant
everybody voted for it all it
has strong support
and we're asking that you up
pass and up approved H. state
and I to create a national
infrastructure bank thank you.
Thank you very much I'm sorry
there we go to the audience is
there anybody in favor of us
read more I.
Yes Sir.
More stranded international
brotherhood of electrical
electrical workers I have worked
on our power grid for over
thirty six the amount of demand
that we're looking at putting on
is unbelievable we need to make
sure that we have a way to
upgrade our right to make sure
that we build new lines to
support the new plant the new
solar and everything else energy
that we're planning on putting
on we need to make sure that we
can move the power around to the
households back and forth from
state to state to be able to
supply power that we're gonna be
demanding from and this
infrastructure bank is one way
to support and the fact finance
that's right it gives us the
ability to build more lights to
make sure that we can transport
and distribute the power and
upgrade our system to make sure
that the demand and requirement
is there thank you.
Is this.
Thank you madam chair members of
the challenges with The New
Mexico federation of labor
I a lot of course we urge you to
support this measure thank you
father for bringing it again I
you know the way we do this is
this is a win win win for
everyone
you know in our I I need to get
to political with things but in
our our world of kind of
political vitriol especially on
the federal level it really what
is the issue of infrastructure
product parties together to
actually get money out into the
states where it's desperately
needed I thank you all agree
that our infrastructure here in
the state is woefully behind as
far as its upkeep and as was
mentioned by the expert the the
funding that we're going to get
from the federal structure
Funding is just the tip of the
iceberg complicity this is
clearly not a Democrat or
Republican measure this is a
let's get our infrastructure
fixed and even our I would argue
possibly more importantly let's
get people to work let's produce
jobs let's let's really build
our economy with this kind of
measured This Is not hand out
this is a loan a low interest
loan our state has a history of
doing that during the pandemic
again I think this is to
hopefully be disciplined for
ever so thank you very much much
needed just this.
Jareth he is a very high level
senior level discussion.
Of a quite frankly we we like
the concept actually we'd like
to see a side by side certainly
bonding finance authority of
other options but the notion of
these loans exist within the
duty right now there's no
question about it if they can
come at a more affordable long
term right that can of the for
profit sector perhaps keep up
with the light of the
infrastructure project we're
really support with that that
idea and I think the memorial
make some points that we've been
trying to make sure the which is
a bipartisan infrastructure law
right is it talks about the
senator of funding there for me
but we're new programs
competitive grants not just
direct formula dollars
distributed really good thank
you thank you very much anybody
else.
In opposition to the.
For one on.
To this is Mr.
Thank you thank you very much
for listening to me I appreciate
it read Baca I'm from service in
New Mexico the third largest
long low on the director of the
New Mexico legal Latin American
citizens
I'm also president of the
council ages zero three of
servicing New Mexico from
president of the company three
continue Olympics are here in
the local area I totally endorse
the memorial on the and I B. E.
I think it's of very wells
stated the memorial of what I
can do not only for the state of
New Mexico but also of the the
rest of the United States many
but twenty five thousand good
you paying jobs could dog come
out of this you could also help
inflation inflation problem
we're having now high speed
rails and rail systems housing
bridges roads of highways as we
know all and in the very bad
just repair water problems in
New Mexico are tremendous in the
southern part our smaller
communities always struggling
with water problems you could do
a lot for them the high speed
internet of detail about the
rural areas and also the urban
areas of this also has something
for the minorities I think it's
a strong of Bill our memorial
they can really do something for
a lot of people of it's been
done before three four times
past history the only reason it
was not continue was because the
sunset laws.
I believe we're looking at the
future of New Mexico the
wonderful infrastructure bill
passed by Congress only provides
about one tenth of the needs of
in the US and of course in New
Mexico
costs will only go up they will
never come down we may not see
any more money from Congress
into the infrastructure this is
a bipartisan memorial that it's
good for Democrats independents
Republicans it's for the people
of the state of New Mexico
there's no new taxes minimal
into involvement by the
government
Tribal though of from from large
but down to the state line the
highways horrible it's terrible
they're terrible in New Mexico
we need a lot of work I know
there's a current bill being
passed by one of our senators
and Grant County tremendous of
Bill for the infrastructure but
we do a lot more and I thank you
very much and I strongly endorse
it and I thank you very much for
your attention and all the work
that you all do thank you thank
you Mr.
What else is that the one area
want.
Madam chair and representatives
my name is Roy Ellen Smith and
I'm the president of indivisible
Albuquerque our organization is
in strong support of the
national infrastructure bank and
I need to think publicly my
federal representative Melanie
Stansbury for being a co sponsor
of this bill in Congress as
you've already heard the
national infrastructure bank is
an idea whose time has come
since even the federal
bipartisan one trillion dollar
infrastructure bill will only
fund about seventy percent of
all the identified projects
around the nation we clearly
need additional solutions this
national infrastructure bank
this that bill to have something
that can help with inflation
bill all the infrastructure
needs is a tried and true method
and that does not raise taxes
sort of sounds like a panacea
but it's successful history
proves otherwise even
Representative Lundstrom earlier
discussion in this committee of
the infrastructure needs
discussed on house bill four
thirty proves that we need
something like a national
infrastructure bank the banking
system currently fuels our
economy now and using those same
banking methods to fund massive
infrastructure projects through
loans we can help solve the
water crisis the broadband
problems build affordable
housing upgrade the power grid
build roads and bridges and even
more let's have New Mexico get
on board with the many other
states by having our legislature
passed this memorial New Mexico
stands to lead again at the
federal level by supporting this
bill we support American
manufacturing creating twenty
five million family sustaining
jobs and increase overall GDP as
well as improving our own
national security as mentioned
this is not a Democrat or
Republican issue we can do this
as Americans and we've done it
in the past let's come together
for the benefit of all Americans
and more importantly our dear
New Mexicans to support memorial
HM I the creation of the
national infrastructure bank
thank you thank you.
Thanks.
And folks really quickly we are
expected to be on the floor by
ten thirty so if we can kind of
he public committee all
committee to New Mexico senator.
But will do.
Right.
Hi this is Evelyn thank you for
allowing me this time to testify
my name is Evelyn in a grotto
and the chair of the DPM NM
rural caucus and speaking to you
from the grassroots level the
rural caucus has included a
statement of support for the
national infrastructure bank in
its platform and is fully in
favor of H. J. am I we believe
that this innovative forward
looking an exciting initiative
could provide rural New Mexico
with the infrastructure
resources it's been waiting for
quite a long time so thank you
very much and we are in total
support of this memorial.
The house.
Sarah.
Thank you madam chair I speak
for the alliance for local
economic prosperity I am really
pleased and support everything
that all the other supporters
have sent to you today I simply
want to add that this bills
the MLB's affect on our economy
will be wonderful because it
will not only make the TIRS six
X. experience better with our
new roads we will be able to.
Further develop our produce Lucy
at are Chiles and to be able to
have them widely available
including and other states this
will help with local
transportation it will what I
can do is astounding but most
importantly it allows a lot of
control at the local level so
what is important to be done by
one county can be done there in
another county something
different can happen they will
of course coordinate but we
think this is a fabulous use of
existing debt it does not
require any taxes and it will
not affect our federal deficit
thank you very much again we
support the memorial I thank
you.
Thank you.
Okay here you go to the
committee committee members.
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I just have a
couple of quick questions and
now for the Representative
hundred pound expert on page
three is the language on line
can through line fourteen
the system falls other states.
Basis language what we would use
in terms of the how the bank is
operating.
Madam chair thank you can you
just Page three line can claim
yeah the two fifteen my point is
madam chairs when we talk about
infrastructure bank and I'm for
it today is that when you talk
about two percentage points
above the US department treasury
yield.
my question is is how could we
have used right already in terms
of things like inflation so I'm
just curious is this consistent
language of that we see.
Nationally or how how do we how
do we set a fixed rate.
and then we say in this.
The interest would be included
in the United States budget that
tells me the feds to pay for the
interest is that not correct
madam chair thanks for.
Get everything wrong.
Thank you very much for that
they're very unlikely question
so the there are two components
to opening a bank the first is
that we have to get it
capitalized and what capital is
is an investment in the bank to
sort of steady it's books in
hard times and normally banks
are required to maintain a
dollar in capital to ten dollars
in loans and then there's the
loan side of which is separate
where interest is charged on
loans so going back to the first
step we use the same
capitalization method that
Alexander Hamilton used for the
first bank of the United States
and that is we re purpose
already existing that Miss Vigil
by the private sector and ask
would a little bit of that those
holders like to invest in the
national infrastructure bank in
exchange for getting a little
bit better return on their
investment so instead of getting
the treasury rate for the
treasury's there holding the
look at the treasury rate plus.
Up to an extra two percent now
the question is where does that
extra two percent of the money
come from it comes out of the
interest earnings from the and I
these loans and with plenty of
money left over to meet the
bank's other operational needs
this bank is self sustaining
doesn't require infusions from
the budget to subsidize our I'll
get it started or subsidized
operations over time so that is
where the two percent comes from
it it would it would apply to
all investors in the end I be
whoever they work they would be
those investors would be silent
partners by the way because they
get exchange for their
treasuries preferred stock which
means that their non voting
participants.
And madam chair
the other question I had is when
we when we talk about terms and
you talk about the life of a
project how is that how's that.
For it other words.
Is it based on the life of
project or how's it has a
calculated the terms.
So the conditions the lending of
features of the national
infrastructure bank will be a
little bit more generous and
flexible than say the bond
market is it'll offer an
interest rate on loans about
half a percent less than the
bond market and then it could
stretch out the maturity of the
projects over the lifetime of
the of the project as defined by
the engineers so for putting in
a new braces good spectacle to
last for fifty years possibly we
could give out a loan stretched
out payments for for a thirty
year period instead of the ten
years normally that the bond
market would provide.
And madam chair we also have a
New Mexico infrastructure bank
in the New Mexico finance
authority and it's it's similar
to what you're talking about
here is guaranteed by
governmental gross receipts tax
at as opposed to treasury bonds
but I support it we need all the
tools we need we can get in New
Mexico for infrastructure
development but I do think we
need to understand how the
actual loan works if this if
this passes and whether or not
it makes sense for projects in
New Mexico thank you madam
chair.
Yes.
Mr Garcia thank you madam chair
on page two of the line.
Forty.
Mexico will refuse to three
hundred fifty million dollars of
the flight crew is needed.
Chair and representative says of
this is about the federal
infrastructure investment jobs
act that's what this is talking
about.
What's currently happening.
Madam chair but we'd like.
Each to his up the act provides
the
give Mexico three hundred fifty
million dollars is that correct.
Of the world trying to do here
now Madam chair representative
this is the federal structure
investment and jobs I have
that's been done by the federal
government we got three hundred
fifty million from that but we
need lots more this is current
and this is one of the arguments
were saying why is national
structures bank makes sense
because we have access to
millions and millions more of
what we.
Percent year
all of the New Mexico bankers
Association where are they and
this legislation Madam chair
representative I don't know.
Thank you Mr Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair so
Representative I have a few
questions just so I can.
Have some clarity on this bill
so it says in the bill that the
new national infrastructure bank
would perform as a traditional
commercial bank.
And that is in the sense at
least of financing the for long
term loans Madam chair
representative I see from the
analysis that.
And maybe this is where I'm
getting held up that the bill
treats the bank is that
government corporation exempt
from tax.
So madam chair representative is
that not a conflict to say it
would be like a commercial bank
that would be exempt from tax
madam chair and like to lay
expert witness answer that
question.
Thank you very much the you're
correct the bank is incorporated
over the US government
corporations act as a financial
institute yes like the export
import bank is up above and
beyond that and the fact that it
gets a tax exemption because its
government owned it is
responsible for its own internal
operations to provide loans for
infrastructure.
Projects and in doing so because
it's a nonprofit of government
owned any monies that are left
over after meeting other
operational needs then those
monies extra monies would go
into a trust fund that would be
the same trust fund I mentioned
earlier that of New Mexico could
qualify to get grants rather
than loans from the from the
from the national infrastructure
bank and one other thing that I
wanted to mention is that the
the again the local
jurisdictions would be in charge
of what kind of loans they take
on and we will be keeping in
mind doing economic development
and building jobs in the state
over time.
Thank you madam chair
representative us and all this
is that the bank would treat
contributions to the bank is
charitable contributions their
chair representative could we
have that expenses.
The madam chair again I defer to
my experts.
Thank you very much we know that
there are several that there are
quite a number of philanthropic
award organizations who might be
interested in just making a
donation to the national
infrastructure bank to go into
this trust fund to provide
grants rather than loans to low
income communities and that's
the purpose for giving them a
tax exemption for their
contribution.
Thank you
another question and chair
representative so
There would be private investors
in the bank and they would do
not making sure Google
contributions chair but they
would be
they do.
Holders of preferred stock.
and that would be because they
would be giving up some of their
pension savings in order to buy
stock into the bank is that
correct Madam chair
representative mentioned that's
what I understand but would you
like to add anything to that.
Right so currently the private
sector which composes of state
local governments corporations
pension funds are holding twenty
six trillion dollars of our
national debt they keep in
savings accounts essentially
savings accounts what this would
in tale is that and they are and
they're earning interest on
these treasuries from the
federal government of what this
would entail is that they would
swap those treasures a small bit
of them into the N. I. B. to
capitalize the bank and then
they'll get a little extra
return and so the bank would
cover that extra return plus
what the treasury's on as the
base yield.
Okay.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative so I have not
read the the house resolution
three three three nine I'm just
looking at the bill that you
brought to us today and looking
at the analysis that we have in
the little concern that I don't
see here
the.
I don't think they were was
eligibility Kerr yeah that that
there are currently criteria for
preferences in landing in in
this Groeschel bill and I'm a
little uncomfortable voted for
it not knowing what those are so
that that is thank you madam
chair yes.
The motion.
Motioning a motion to table.
Second question table.
Capable.
Representative Brown yes to
table Representative Lara Cadena
no to table Representative
priest no.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Jones yes
Representative Lundstrom no.
Representative Madrid
Representative Pettigrew the yes
it is.
Representative Romero noted.
Representative Garcia table
Representative.
No to table.
Four of six we're back on the
bills.
To pass the.
The whole world.
Representative Brown no
Representative lot of them yes
Representative used yes
Representative Harper no.
Representative Jones no.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative better.
No.
Representative America yes
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
session taxes six point.
Thank you.
I should have given this is just
to support the development thank
you very much chair thank you
for.
Okay folks time for one more
bill four we have been on the
force of the policy house bill
one fifty eight.
The committee said concept.
The beginning of the year this
Madam thank you very much
if you were here about a month
ago and there was simply plan
which is needed to happen and we
did a from the still we added
that
throughout the bill definitely
clear flying.
For the record and things for us
we have been searching for
right into the bills better.
And then madam chair actually
infection fully added language
making it very clear what our
intent was which was the.
The recall is to try to be able
to get a search warrant when
there's probable cause to drop
his demeanor D. W. why this and
so we believe we've corrected
most of the problems and also
again brought of the jobs in the
next me and then lieutenant
Curtis work with the community
on the committee has any
questions thank you very much
Representative profit but a
motion from sure let's trim for
discussion session recess to.
The second set.
The opposition no opposition so
we've adopted your committee
substitute and we are now on the
starship do we have not taking
public comment on this leave.
You have to have a okay so that
we're gonna go straight back to
the committee to I have any.
Committee members who would like
to discuss.
Okay.
Do not pass.
On house bill one fifty eight
and a two passed house
transportation public works and
have approvals Committee
substitute for House Bill which.
Thank.
Okay
stated.
Thank it is.
On.
Representative Brown yes
Representative lot of.
I
have sorry Representative us.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Jones yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative group yes
Representative Romero yes
Representative Garcia yes.
Madam chairman the LCS.
Copy that Representative alerted
in.
Yes to explain my vote.
Yes Representative yes.
This is the foundation.
Kinzer Representative.
I did not get the chance to
review the committees of
sensibly are also like to
construct just trusting to
Sanchez four of this bill and
prostitution yes.
