Presentative
mister vice chair
madam chair.
You've accordingly
now proceeded.
Thanks about him care good
morning good morning members of
the committee and we do it just
today
there are still a tax business
and transportation committee
substitute.
For a house bill center bill
eighty eight.
I remember the committee madame
chair we didn't credential
enhancing the responded
credentials act follow the
taxation riven department to
wish you to clonically digital
for drivers nice and
identification garden.
And the whatever he will do on
this every deal developing uh
security cost free mobile
driver's license for new
mexico's whole wish to have on
this will not this will be
volunteery if you don't want to
do it you don't have to do it
okay.
And nothing what we're trying to
do here is given mexico op
power.
For the future because I did
about ironton stated are you
doing it and it about eighteen
seater and the process are doing
this and with that I will turn
it back to my expert witness
center over taxation and missus
was un.
Good morning members of the
committee and madame chair thank
you to the sponsor for for
bringing on this bill for us
like the sponsor said we are in
the process of wanting to
develop a mobile driver's
license there are eight states
that already offer one and ten
that are in the process the
acceptance of a mobile driver's
license as of today is fairly
limited but over the coming
years that's going to be
expanded there will come a point
in time and then not to dis.
Locations like tsa check in and
things like that an important
part of this bill is that
it will still require any driver
to be able to present their
regular plastic credential if
there were in a traffic stop or
something like that the main
concern in their for law
enforcement and others is that
we don't want you know if I get
pulled over for a traffic stop I
don't want to have to give my
phone to the police officer and
have them take it back to their
car and create all kinds of
doubt in issues around that so
that's one safeguard that's here
but once we get this developed
and it'll you know it'll be
housed in for example the apple
wallet or the google wall that
you can pull it up on your phone
and securely um pull up what's
in the mvd database in real time
and and have that display on
your phone so it's just an
option for a new mexicans and we
think that this technology is
going to grow and we need to be
ready for that in the coming
years and with me today as mbd
director technologists and we
will stand for questions.
Thank you very much I do have
anybody here in the audience in
favor of center bill.
Anybody online
and do we haven't.
I'm sorry yes we have anybody
here in opposition to some of
the eighty eight.
Okay we'll go to the committee
then representative
thank you madame chair
not relative to you to this
particular bill because actually
supported think it's a great
idea overdue actually but i'm
just curious what it takes to
have a a document become part of
it and identification I don't
know it's quite related but we
we typically use our our license
as a identification right pretty
standard so what i'm talking
about is is concealed carry
permits will carry permit and I
had to get finger printed I had
to have a background check in
fact it's more of an
identification than many other
venues.
Have that be recognized.
So as far as conceal carried
permits being utilized in an id
in place of a driver's license
would be.
Right now the driver's license.
It has become the mo.
So I think as concealed.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have a
representative herber
the community makes chair
secretary she agreed to see
while this morning
so
my reading of the legislation is
that
the driver still has to have the
physical driver's license.
And that is what a surrender to
law enforcement if.
So.
That.
That that resolves one of my
concerns which was you know
earlier when we're looking at
could we have digital insurance
cards.
We wanted to make sure that when
we showed that to the one.
That resolves that concern but.
What is this actually gonna be
used for them.
Madame chair and representative
harper thank you for the
question and yes we we were very
concerned about making sure that
law enforcement was on board
with us and that we.
Mandating costs on law
enforcement you know they're
there will come a day sometime
in the future don't know how
many years that will be where
maybe law enforcement will carry
a scanner that they can use to
validate a digital id but we're
not there yet and and we know we
want our bill to mandate that
cost on on law enforcement
stateway
some of the things that this
could be used for that are not
driving
there are some airports in the
united states that currently tsa
will will validate a mobile
driver's license but as the
traveler I wouldn't recommend
that
you know you may have to go
through a certain line and if
the t s a scanner is down that
day.
You'll be out a lot if you don't
have your plastic credential our
passport but in the future that
will be the case more readily
this might be available for
someone who.
By alcohol or tobacco or
something like that I could be
that on your first day of
employment when you're used to
showing your plastic credential
to verify you know your identity
or sign up for benefits it might
be that that they'll accept this
there are other applications for
it but at like like we say right
now we're just trying to get
ourselves poised to deliver this
and for those that find a use
for it at the moment they will
and and the.
Thank you madam chair secretary
and representative they'll go
ahead.
And I think you
have your security
representative.
So so it sounds like we've got
kind of a very limited.
At least a initially that of use
case for this but we just want
to make sure that.
It's in statute.
The.
Come back.
Thank you manager representative
sector.
I just have a couple of
questions for you.
Actually representative brown
does
have a couple before didn't read
him down there representative
thank you so much matter chair
medicine.
As a little bit.
I.
If you still have to h.
Representative one tool that
will be available to law
enforcement is the vehicle
itself so the vehicle aren't
currently our vehicle.
When you title it we tie the dr.
And it should be tied to the.
I know madame chair.
So I didn't have.
Pulled out but we had.
So it in this situation I
remember
the idea where the.
The driver
keep their plastic credential on
them.
Navigate that.
I will say that even.
Cell phone service and they p.
It it'll be you know it'll be
loade.
To the to the same questions are
bringing out.
Yeah.
And then.
So the encryption m.
Or intercept it in any.
To it and more importantly even
once the device at the reader
actually read the normal
driver's license.
Older than holder the
credential.
Representative next week the
representative.
Forget representative are also
doing your district today as
well.
Madam chair and representative
peter grew if we could bring up
our cio we also have we had
introduced previously mike back
uh is the chief information
offer suffer tax and revenue
being kicken speak to the cyber
security aspects of it really.
Good morning many of us make
background the chief information
officer for the motor vehicle
division that the technology
behind this is much better than
we have today
as far as encryption goes there
will be encryption at the motor
vehicle department but also the
wallet providers whether.
I required to.
To provide it so I just got
emphasised this this in terms of
security is far b.
Madam chair and and and
representative period the
responsibility lies holy with
our department.
We are held to standards by
oliver oversight entities
including do it.
Madam chair representative petty
group do it has oversight over
all of our information
technology they review and
approve it but the ultimate
responsibility lies with the
department.
And representative.
I guess just say that we we
actually will with this
legislation produce and deploy a
mobile driver's license and it
will be available for.
So I wouldn't call it a pilot
it's just we're going to produce
the mobile driver's license and
then.
It could be that someti.
And frankly we could do play the
mobile driver's license now
under current la but we wouldn't
do that because it would be
there would be contention and
dispute o.
Just do it while re.
Things like that so it could be
that as technology grows in the.
Occasions of it that we come
back with changes to the
statute.
Yeah.
Representative l.
And okay I just have a couple
questions for you.
Representative and madame
secretary so
it seems to me like one
situation in which this bill
would be applicable be like I
want to go to a concert and i'm
standing align and I don't want
I can't take my person sight so
but I have my phone so there is
my id would there be a correct
kind of a certain statement.
Okay
and it says in the material I
read
representative amount of
secretary that we are unsure if
this would be real ID.
Yet.
Madame chair representative it
would represent the physical
credentials if your physical
credentials really real id it
will show that it's a real idea
if it's a standard credenti.
And also I do not also see the
analysis that you know you're
looking at at different
programming and IT services that
you will need to implement this.
The.
The.
We don't need an appropriation
to to get this up and running.
Two systems are record is it's
called fast we have them for
mbd's tapistry system as well as
the gentax system on our attack
side the option to have them
implement mobile driver's
license is already included in
that contract we just
direct them to do it once we
have this approval very good
thank you good information to
not thank you very much for
being here that concludes my
questions.
Opposition.
Past many substitute for senate
bill eighty eight
next we're going to do
mr bodia from district one or
you.
Well
actually we're going to
we're gonna do one memorial
first and then will go to the
presentations so memorials for
housemore forty six.
The.
Manager committee my first time
actually second I was you're on
a cent bill.
So today i'm presenting a house
memorial forty six
representative search suddenly
on a myself excuse me.
Just writer now
so
basically right now we we are
considering the affordable
connectivity program since the
high speed internet is necessary
for new mexicans to do their
jobs participating school access
health care and stay connected
and affordable connectivity
program in acted under the
bipartisan infrastructure laugh
as the the largest internet
affordability program in our
nation's history is already
helping twenty three million
households across the country
save thirty to seventy five
dollars each per month on their
monthly internet bills new
mexico has received a hundred
hundred and twenty three million
seven hundred and forty eight
thousand eight hundred and forty
two dollars in funding from the
acp which means low income
families across new mexico or
saving a total of six million
dollars.
So we are to crucial juncture
and and crop congressman's
extend this fund for new
mexicans
to have a excuse me through his
drive to continue this program
and to have these savings so
it's vital that new mexicans
have the tools they need to
thrive in our twenty first
century yesterday the fc
announced it paused new
enrollments in the program this
means that households that can
counterport high speed internet
and haven't yet signed up will
stay stuck on the wrong side of
the digital divide unless
congress acts quickly this
memorial shows new mexico
support for this important
program that helps to bridge the
digital divide in request that
congress act swiftly without
madam chair i'm going to have my
guest introduced himself
memchair representatives thank
you for your opportunity to
speak here many mister levice
and the acting director of the
office of broadband access and
expansion and we're very much in
support of the house memorial ac
is an incredibly important
program for affordability when
it comes to broadband and
connectivity you cannot have at
universal access without a
formal broadband we've worked
with the industry on this as
well as multiple associations
and we continue to to stand
support of the affordable
activity program one key element
of this is that other programs
from the federal government such
as the broadband equity access
and deployment funding they are
aligned with the ecp and you are
making sure that those two
things work hand in hand and so
without that thirty dollars
subsidy to new mexico households
without the seventy five dollars
subsidy to world tribal
households in those high cost
areas this is going to be very
impactful where many households
are gonna lose access to the
internet so
we ask you to support house
moral forty six.
Step requirement.
Thank you very much there
anybody I know that there is one
person outside who would like to
speak on the spills or anybody
else here who supports this
bill.
Mr welcome good morning.
And i'm rising today and
supported this memorial on
behalf of a verizon and
windscreen and also molina
health care this affordable
connectivity program is very
important for many of our most
needy new mexicans including
those who have access to
healthcare needs and so this is
a simple memorial and requesting
the congress continue to prompt
find the excellent program and
with that ask the committee to
please support it thank you
madame chairman members of the
committee
thank you mister.
Is there anybody here in
opposition to the bill.
Comma
madame chair members of
committee jason he honestly the
new mexico exchange carrier were
told ten rural telephone and
broadband companies around the
state
this memorial is very important
this program is very important
the ac is is
something that our companies
have have really promoted for
our our most rural customers
that are are very much in need
and and need the connectivity
we urge your support and thank
you
thank you very much mister
santander signally we have
someone online.
Yes good morning on members of
the committee madam sir my name
is only associate state director
of advocacy or new mexico we
represent over two hundred forty
one thousand member state why
who believe that everyone should
have access to affordable
reliable ice internet service
and the acp program is out of
millions of people h that you
know they're good and stay on
mine really ensuring that they
have access to essential
services such as telehealth
visits with doctors a virtual
checking
as well as the ability to combat
social isolation by staying
connected with their friends in
their low points and for these
reasons
more on errors continued finding
for this critical program for
new mexicans thank you.
Thank you mr me okay and is
there anybody here in
opposition.
Will go to the committee
representative pedogram.
Membership represent that's a
great question fcc in the last
two months expanded it to high
cost areas and rural communities
there are twenty four of those
locations around the state and
there's a mostly in this world
communities so seventy five
dollars can be utilized in those
high cost areas we have them
available honor on our broadband
map on.
The.
Representative be happier to
send you the the link to our our
map with the high cost
locations.
The.
Manchester representative that
is correct to a percent of
federal poverty l.
Manager representative we put in
your request to try and not only
do infrastructure but also do
programmatics around this and
even looking at supplemental
support students needing some
extra help with acp as we're
Of the internet and so making
sure that we can actually have
our students have the
connectivity is really important
to us currently where stands
Next week vice charge yeah.
Thank you madame chair thanks
for the presentation you don't
mind my concerns are more into.
My district is more frontier and
these people have no access at
all
you knew we need to address the
issue of how to get it to
everybody you know there's a
subject to you on this bill here
and and I support it but in my
part of the community.
They have an internet they have
no access to anything and was
happening madam chair you know
if you have a community there's
houses all around in my
distributor's houses mother are
from each other and we're not
addressing those issues we're
not me as soon a select few
there are
targeted in the people really
needed out there are not getting
it and what's happened in the
end of the day manager are kids
refined to it to cracks because
they don't have more internet
you know you can go out there
understand our time and don't
we're trying to get service or
side of store.
Yet
there's no possibility they'll
never get into their houses and
year we're trying to do.
For select few which is good i'm
not not condition but we really
need to look at the big picture
and I and I heard on that all
the time could my community is
pretty well left out manager if
you haven't answered that madam
chair representative thank you
as always you know i'd know and
when my predecessor sat in this
chair you know we had very
similar conversations as well
what's interesting about the fcc
program is that it's really
internet technology agnostic in
many ways the providers have to
sign up for it so you know after
times we have conversations
about high speed broadband write
the new definitions and as a
service speeds this as even
beyond that right so you could
even look at dsl you know which
is generally not considering
that high speed category and
what we look at for the new
infrastructure but these
programs you know work across at
from an internet service
provider so if a satellite
provider decides to to join the
ecp program they would be
eligible for it if a dsl
provider you know does that if a
wireless provider so you know
there's phone lines you know I
don't know the specifics you
know for this household you're
your reference in your area but
I would take a pretty good good
guess that one of the providers
in there is at least providing
dsl.
Madame chairman that the
startling get covered another
project manager and
representative starling is not
signed up for ecp.
Okay a minor said you know if
the you don't know if they have
phone number not you know most
of you don't have to price and
you know we're not addressing
the issue that are one of us who
can aside cracking some people.
Or leave in a minute back burner
and everybody else is coming up
good on the
my thoughts of.
Thank you vice jeremy how many
body else.
Welcome representative acting
director level and I like
to create
so before I want them in my old
job I did a lot of work on
broadband infrastructure and
broadband availability and
before there was the pandemic in
carriers funding or are but
the inflation reduction act
there was acp
and
hundred and eighty thousand new
mexico hundred and eighty two
thousand two hundred and forty
one new mexicans would be
affected if this funding funding
of this program were to cease so
i'm in a state like hours where
we are already so.
Concerned about falling behind
in this area that.
And I know a lot of people and
mostly the rural areas.
Take advanta.
Kind of their lifeline so thank
you for bringing this memorial I
will most of.
It's a pleasure.
It's anybody in opposition.
You have yourself memorial past
madame chair thank you committee
I last my sister here so give me
one star.
Representative johnson you're
going to be doing house from oil
fifty five hit right.
You know how this can be loved
visuals
so you have just passed them to
it and assistant.
While that is happening a couple
of announcements so first today
is transportation day yeah
we have a number of contractors
and in our audience right now so
just wanted to say hello thank
you for coming thank you for
being here
providing breakfast to the
committee we appreciate it and
we will see all you on the floor
and enjoy the and others a bunch
of folks in dot downstairs
rapping dot so go downstairs and
say hello and enjoy the day.
Without a ready representative
yes madam chair thank you and
thank you members of the
committee i'm here to present a
house memorial fifty five and it
is a request for the legislature
to prioritize an allocate
funding for new mexico highway
11 improvements and truck bypass
circumnavigating demming.
The memorial sites numerous
reasons for moving forward on
this project I do have the map
that was passed out so i'd like
to point out a few
places here on the map if you
look down toward the bottom
where it says two hour just
above that is the international
border
off to the left you see palomas
and columbus this is highly
eleven that
south into into mexico and then
passes through the port of
entree at at palomas goes
through columbus and then up
north through damming and at
that point you can see
interstate ten east west I
didn't include much of the
the that traveling west because
really the priority would be
access to the east to to go to I
twenty five and also that
highway twenty six if you see if
you just traveled a bit north of
demming and an off eh up to the
northeast that's highway twenty
six it moves up toward hatch and
and
intersects with interstate
twenty five it's that sort of
our shut shortcut to the rest of
new mexico from down south so
you can see that this part of
entry if you look go back down
to the international border you
have columbus palomas on highway
eleven and if you go fifty nine
miles to the east you see santa
teresa so new mexico has three
ports ports of entry senatorsa
well know that that's thriving
and very very busy.
And but polomised columbus is
the next port there's another
port of entry which is down in
the boot heel is very remote and
hardly ever traveled but so
there are really two viable
ports here in new mexico and
that this one is the one we're
going to look at today
so so there are many reasons
that this this project has been
discussed for for lots of years
longer for I took this position
but i've had a constituents come
to me and people who are
involved in economic development
saying we really need to move
forward on this um.
So
currently the highway eleven is
is overused and diminishing and
condition as the heavy trip
truck traffic increases.
I've been told by constituents
that that have farms and ranches
both in new mexico and in mexico
that
mexico and I know this is I
verified this as fact that
mexico has invested in their
rose south of our highway eleven
into mexico they've improved
those roads and so they're there
a lot of the trucks are
preferring them from down south
we have an increased truck
traffic and it we have some
numbers here from maxico
especially during her
agricultural months where
there's a lot of transportation
of produce back in two thousand
and eight we had five thousand
six hundred trucks coming
through the port of entry and
into two thousand twenty three
we had greater than twenty five
thousand trucks coming through
the port of entry those trucks
thus that heavy truck traffic
comes through the port of entry
and goes right through columbus
and write into damning um i've
experienced semi we all
experienced this indemning every
um.
Every season where it's onions
chile
hay has been transported the
trucks will back up and downtown
deming and cause safety issues
traffic is sh.
Back up for two three blocks
through the very center of town
so that that's one issue and of
course it causes problems not
just for safety but just being
able to get around town and of
course those roads are.
Two
hold up well with that increase
kind of traffic.
The.
Their other reasons a lot of
other reasons.
Both current and future that we
need to move forward on this
project.
We do have
plans to improve and move
forward with industrial parks
near the border there's when
you're columbus close to the
border there a couple of other
industrial areas in damning and
just most recently near the
florida mountains you can see
just to the east of highway
eleven there is initial drilling
on a magnesium mind that is.
Possibly the largest magnesium
mine in the united states and
because of that we're going to
see and I don't see those those
numbers right in front of me
a huge number of trucks and lots
of truck traffic associated with
the minds here in the near
future
um that's it's pretty exciting
for our area but it will really
cause some strain on.
This area especially highway
eleven.
So like I said this has been
looked at for a lot of years
even before I was in on this
project there are some numbers
here on on my
information there were two
million dollars and fifteen
million dollars it was cited in
the memorial that were discussed
over six years ago in terms of
getting started on this project.
Er to reprovide access to eye
ten and then mexican twenty six
that moves up to a hatch to
connect with I twenty five.
Highway eleven
although it does need
improvements what we're really
looking at is is just a
interchanges that would make
truck traffic easier
from the port around columbus
and then
around around damning up to I
twenty five.
So it's not it's not as if we
need an entire new road we just
need improvements on highway
eleven and interchanges that
would make it easy for trucks to
navigate those roads and move
around the populated areas
it would facilitate trade
improve freight mobility and
efficiency and create jobs
attract more trade and stimulate
economic growth it would reduce
traffic congestion and enhance
safety and the residents'
quality of life.
The.
Thank you representative is
there anybody in the audience
here for a house more fifty five
to support it.
Is there anyone.
Yeah fun
that share with good with that
yeah this is a good deal I yeah
commerce about a hundred million
miles into days right up that
court or and i've been on this
roadside.
Anybody in opposition to house.
We'll go to the committee first
we have representative long str.
Engineer.
Project is.
The.
Madam chair representative of
lumpstrum of this project is not
currently honor step.
It as representative john said
in twenty twenty eighteen there
was a phase a study that was
conducted.
It was conducted
village of columbus through
economic development department
got a federal fund.
And only phase when he was
completed some out of chair of
is this a state.
The.
Madame chair representative long
strong new mexico eleven is a
stay road.
As you get into the the city
limits of damning
it it's it's still the same road
but it becomes a
city of their mean our
ownership.
And.
Madame chair representative
lumpstrum that is correct so
when we're talking about.
State in our change.
The.
Madam chair representatives from
that is correct so I guess I
need to understand that.
The.
It was
going to give me madame chair
representative from the because
of faithy the the complete study
was not the study was not
completed and it's entirely
that's why we did not move
forward that's why it's not in
our step.
The.
Rural economy earlier.
It is not madam chair
representative lenstrum I do not
believe it is on the art tipper
for the article.
Do you understand for the step
because those are generally
bigger p.
But why wind a project like this
I don't see tons of state roads
and th.
Unless i'm.
At least at a minimum.
Madam chair representative lunch
from I do not believe it is
what would it cost them.
Madame chair representative I
apologize rick pity executive
director department
transportation you know that's a
good question I feel like
probably that's going to be a
component of that
project once we move it forward
in the in the step
continue to complete the study
with or definitely find those.
I would help with this memorial
then madam chair is at the
requesting the legislative
legislature to prioritize it.
If it's not on the plan.
Don't know how.
Projects or well plan.
How you can do that but I reason
I bring all this up mountain.
Primary reason.
Why we had a section nine in the
appropriations act this is the
kind of project that this area
would have brought for and said
we need to have this looked at
outside of the regular fundi.
But it doesn't fi.
That now I have no idea.
But this is the reason you have
a.
Right.
Where it's a general.
Thank you representative next we
have representative day the
cruise.
Thank you madame charge I I
didn't read I apologize if I
didn't catch it but what's the
length of road distance that
we're talking about here I know
it's three miles from columbus
to the border but I didn't quite
understand that length.
The.
Thank you
district engineer did you want
to confirm that.
Yes it so madame chair
representative it's around
thirty two miles from the
portimantry columbus to the city
of them
cheers at it a two lane road is
accurate
yes manager represent and can
you manage can you please
describe the condition of the
road.
Um from the up for us gives me
madame chair representative from
the port of entry
it's it's got a regular wear and
tear on it
our maintenance feature
maintenance we're gonna go and
redo a resurface hair probably
in the next two years within the
next two years
but overall it's it's it's
infershape
thank you manager
thank you representative
delicat.
The.
They came out of chair.
Oh mountain.
The fact that mexico has
invested in p.
The the border.
And.
If this is.
But
is there an accommodation that
the do.
The.
Good morning madame chair
representative I think that's a
great question.
I think if we were to move this
project forward we definitely
need to get him
hook up with the border
authority in economic
development I think the three of
us could probably put something
together but as far as it not
being moving up in the stipulous
quite as maybe as quick as we'd
all like to see I think there's
an opportunity to do that but I
think there's some partners we
need to bring in and and then
see where it fits in and errands
program and then start talking
having those conversations
especially with you all because
it we're going to need to get a
funded right so at some point so
yes yes.
Thank you and my purpose for
this especially being new at all
of this is just to highlight
what I know is is a desperate
well maybe not desperate urgent
need that I think all of us in
the community.
Nice as it's going to be more
and more of a it should be more
and more of a priority
so so I really appreciate the
conversation
I I didn't know how to move
forward with.
The wording about.
Allocating funding I wasn't sure
if that was the right direction
to go because I know we have a
lot of hoops to jump through
before we get there but I was
hoping at least two do what
we've done here already today
which is discussed figure out
whether next steps are because
it's not for for me as the
representative here it's not can
we do it it's like how do we do
this how do we get this done so
I really.
And some direction in moving
for.
Thank you representative and I
appreciate that I know it's
always I have learned so much
sense I became the chair of this
committee in the role of the
committee and how the processes
are work together and so I
certainly appreciate your
enthusiasm and and recognition
of this as an transportation
need why this committee exists I
am though going to read just a
little a section of the legal
analysis that was given to o.
A quarter steady for mexico
highway eleven which was done in
twenty twenty two and funded by
the us department of commerce
and economic development
administration states that there
are historic and cultural
resources to be considered.
Um
trade federal regulations
require studies involving
improvements to our new
construction.
And cultural.
So
wanted to make sure you were
aware of that wanted to make
sure that
that analysis that calculates is
included in and I think that
many of us on this committee
including myself would love to
help you with this project and
can I figure out that the proper
way to get this either included
on the step for to work with DO
t
to make sure that this gets done
because it obvious obviously is
a clear need I I am not sure I
thank you for your memorial i'm
not sure memorial is the correct
way to do it so I represented a
lump strong
talked about a coupl.
So i'm I will I will not be
voting yes on your memorial but
not because I think it's a bad
memorial I just think that this
is misplaced but not the right
place for this issue for this
project and I will and I make
the personal commitment to you
right now to work with you on to
to get this one.
Thank you madame chair really
appreciate.
Appreciate the
just taking note of the historic
and cultural features because
that to me makes this even.
Thank you I really appreciate
your commitment to working on
this.
Absolutely I was pleasure.
Are you are you open to that.
I'm sorry I didn't hear it
because of the issue stated are
you open to just rolling the
bill today and then we can work
with you on it further i'm
absolutely open to that okay
great thank you thank you very
much
and representative.
I appreciate.
We're gonna go to representative
laura cut for a quicker.
Madam chair i'd like to
introduce I have a three
students that are shuttering me
today three and that's a
students I like for up during
fernandes.
Em up there dramas are limits
and emma martinez would like to
welcome the the is massachusetts
or shattering me today they are
experiencing the wonderful world
to transportat.
Thank you very much.
Gake many we still have a lot to
do so
get through it quickly we're
going to go back to the district
one.
Thank you good morning madame
chair members of the committee
again rick video executive
director for the department of
transportation this morning we
are going to go through
districts one and two we will be
brief we will touch in
highlight.
The more.
And i'm trying thing always to
we handle his out as that
I apologize I didn't know it
didn't have.
All right madam chair good
morning who can we're going to
go ahead and proceed in where to
start with district one mr video
is your district one engineer
madam chair and alternate over
to him thank you.
The.
Madame chair members of this
committee thank you very much
for providing me the opportunity
to present before you
like mrperiod said I am the
district one engineer district
one is located on the what will
start with page one
district when this look it in
the southwestern part of the
state.
It encompasses the dallago
county grant county luna county
donate connie sierra counties to
coral county and the southern
portion of patron county
we border arizona to the west
texas to the east and we share a
hundred and eighty miles of
international border with mexico
uh.
We do have to report of entries
and a lot wells columbus on that
the restaurant.
Our district one commissioner
shandler sees narrows.
Done at the bottom you see our
employee breakdown are district
as comprised of four sections
program support which is
administration of the district
we have a maintenance program
construction program and an
engineering sport program we
have a total of two hundred and
ninety seven employees and
district one.
Are.
They're under table on the
bottom right is sir is our
budget
just to let you guys know that
are there needs so i'm not going
through the budget but are needs
significantly exceeder
our budget.
On page two.
We move on to contract
maintenance
so the first table this was a
project were completed last year
you know scope of work ranges
anywhere from sign replacement
to
fancy bridge some bridge work
roadway rehabilitation.
Uh the next table sir are
planned or ongoing maintenance
projects for this year.
It continues the same scope of
work we do have some rehabs
bridge preservation work.
Uh later a lot of worker are
roads are
need a lot of help
and down at the bottom that last
table is some of the
accomplishments we've had a
remained section this year.
Some of the challenges we face
in district one is uh we have
roughly two hundred and fifty
miles of interstate interstate
ten and interstate twenty five.
Maintaining those two
interstates alone is it it's
pretty difficult.
It its dangerous for our mean
his case to be out there traffic
has increased over the last few
years driver behavior has
changed.
There there seems to be a lot of
this respect or disabilities for
traffic science that some of the
issues are are maintenance guys
when they got there and do
routine maintenance that some of
the stuff they have to face.
Um page three we move on to a
construction program.
This first first table were
projects that we we completed
last year.
They total
roughly a hundred and fifty two
million.
And i'm going to continue the
story line throughout my
presentation eighty six percent
to this total are are based
interstate projects so we were
were highly concentrating
just to try and maintain and
keep up with our interstates.
Or our next table are are
current ongoing projects that we
started last year and therefore
twenty three.
Uh.
We have a hundred and thirteen
million going on right now with
those projects
forty five percent of those are
concentrated on the interstates.
Page page war we have fy twenty
four construction projects so
these projects they some of them
have already let or they will
let this year some time.
It's going to be around two
hundred and thirty thirty
million worth of projects for
district one this year.
Again fifty five percent of that
total is concentrating on the
interstates.
Age five is our engineering
support
so the first first table we have
we do have to project
that are there have been funded
thank you guys
the border connector highway
it's a new highway connecting
new mexico one thirty six two
new mexico two seventy three and
that is right at the border area
it it's gonna parallel the
border.
Um we do it we did receive a
information for forty five
million.
And we're gonna make up the
difference with
some hospital money that we
received in twenty two.
And any mexico to thirteen is uh
it's gonna it's an extension of
new mexico or four but it is a
two and a half miles section
it's going to connect to the
text of state line
texas it is we collaborated with
text that they're going to build
a roadway that's going to be a
bypass through all parcel so new
mexico four or four and two
thirteen will serve a a
significant by passed for free
traffic.
It'll it'll avoid the i'll pass
the downto.
The other table or projects and
engineering and design.
Those those are unfunded
those estimates that you see
right there you know that's
that's exactly what they are
their estimates we don't.
A good amount but as you can see
once again I ten twenty five are
on top of the list.
That that's that's a significant
priority for us to to try and
keep up.
The.
Next page six we move on to our
our local government road fund
these tables is this next to a
page six and seven they show
around cooperative
roadfound programs are are coop
programmer or map programmer cap
program.
Page serving continues with her
our school bus route program.
And then the last table there's
other program which is for a
higher educational institu.
The.
P g
we go on to our transportation
project fund.
Uh from fy twenty three
statewide we had a ninety two
point three million so we were
able to find a twenty two
projects with sixteen entities.
Are our the district we received
the sixteen and a half sixteen
point six million approximately.
This last year and if I twenty
four we received stay wide a
little less than that we were at
sixty six million
our district received ten point
one million we were stable to
find thirteen projects for
thirteen entities.
The.
Page page nine.
Or are our house bill laws
page nine is the twenty nineteen
I happy to stay that all those
projects have been completed.
Page ten
laws of twenty twenty is a first
table.
All of those laws of twenty
twenty with the exception of one
we have some restaurant
improvements are we still need
to wrap up but all those have
been completed.
Laws of twenty one
we're moving moving on most of
these are feasibility studies.
They're they're basically
throughout the art district we
have a us sixty and so coral
going through the city limits of
socoro.
Uh san antonio change that I
twenty five.
The gold bridge and I twenty
five that that's the bridge you
see on the front cover that
trust bridge.
We're we're working on those.
Will get those completed here in
the next the problem in next
year or so.
Laws of twenty two here's our
border connector highway that I
that I mentioned earlier.
We're estimated or around forty
million
once a study is complete it will
have a good idea on that one
and then we did receive a money
for us when eighty phase one
from beard just to pass the
railroad tracks in early we had
a twenty nine million on that.
That project we bear in january
and then we're going to rebed in
in april.
And then last year we we
received some money twenty eight
million to continue our two
thirteen corder.
Last pages eleven
this is a summary of some of the
equipment needs that the
district has
by no mean to zero a complete
less
but it is some of the majority
equipment that we are in.
Madame chair that concludes my
presentation i.
Thank you very much mister
chavidia are there any questions
i'm questions from the committee
at this point.
I have one question.
On the fiscal year twenty four
construction projects you said
most of these are interstate
projects and two hundred and
thirty million does that include
is there any federal assistance
money available for that and if
so is does that number include
any federal assistance.
Madam chair yes these are mostly
federally funded projects great
so this is federal money good
now thank you very much.
Manager think you mentioned I
just want to to recognize the
shorty and the hard work that he
and his team.
I have i've developed a very
good relationsh.
With me is is is is is very good
communication and anti just
wanted to acknowledge him and
and the work of his team in all
the work that they're doing down
it's.
Okay we're going to go to
district
but in between the transition
representative chance thank you
madame chair I I just want to.
Communicate with constituents
about issues.
Sounds like you're doing a good
job mister.
All right we're gonna go to the
next presentation while we're
doing we're in transition
members you know we always
recognize dot when they're here
we do that not only out of
respect but because it's
important that members know who
are dot folks are today because
it's transportation day we
actually have all the
contractors here and I think
it's important also that members
know who the contractors are so
if I say your name and you're in
the room can you please stand up
associate it well so see the
contractors new mexico president
sean hammer fisher industries.
I
p patrick share.
Bob wood.
I richard montoya.
Christian has
has
and are david shoop.
Mr ships not here but anyways
these are your contractors
members get to know them today
i'm sure they'd be happy to talk
to you cause that contractors
the other half of this equation
in this committee rate let's go
to district to I think you met
up share we appreciate that
these are some of your heavy
highway contractors and yes they
are the the other half of the
equation force and they do a
tremendous job and I know this
morning they would tell you if
they could that they have enough
capacity to give to provide any
type of construction program to
mexico so thank you for that
minimum chair we'll go ahead and
move on to mister francisco
sanchez he is our district to
engineer
let's go to get away
motivated chair members of the
committee as rextated on the
district to engineer from this
consensus district two serves
eleven counties charities link
in a charle eddie lee rose about
curry debaca and parts of what a
look at toices in sacoral we
also have one tribal nation miss
glarel that we were closely with
not listed here that we also
served three military bases can
include us hollamen in alama
gardo and fort bliss.
By land mass we are the largest
district very diverse you know
we we represent southeast and
mexico we have mount mountainous
areas across to to the planes in
it to the permian basin we have
the most lane miles of any
district we maintain seven
thousand seven seven thousand
and fifty
although we we have no
interstates we do have the most
four blame miles in.
We do all this on an operating
budget of forty five million
with the support overall staff
of three hundred and thirty two
four time employ.
Page two is the summary of our
section I am funding over the
last four years I winning
highlighted our three major
infrastructure projects that we
are using section nine five four
downtown clove is
we are just completing the first
phase of us twenty five from my
post zero to seven point five
and I really want to touch based
on that one in in how section I
finding really helps the
districts
this if we don't receive this
funding
in open going through I step we
were barely be going to
construction right now but now
we're finishing it and and
that's coz of that sanction i'm
funding and that's where us is
distributed to see that benefit
it allows us to move up
priorities in our step and it
really hopes really get to the
significant regional projects
the other one highlighted here
will be coming out latin here
pretty soon and I know this is a
big project down south eastern
mexico the one of the bottom
this is the downtown city jail
limits
that receive section I find in
we're planning to let it hear in
march
the other highlight that I want
it really point out on the sheet
is as you see there's a lot of
complete on here we we we spent
expense ninety percent of the
money that dis.
Pace three this is our overall
i'm going to construction right
now we we have a program of two
hundred seventy nine million I
wouldn't highlight it the the
major projects and some of the
days will be finishing up of the
downtown clove is the thirty
fifty one projected august
twenty five
the
us twenty five the loving
section that's our our third and
final phase of july twenty four
I will get major drainage and
record such a project in loving
to ten thirteen eighty one the
projected june twenty four in
the cordor of fifty four that we
are because reconstructing
between coronant group and cars
also the twenty one twelve and
twenty thirteen projected to
complete that in october twenty
four so just wanted highlight
those and give you some dates
when we're looking.
Below that is our upcoming
maintenance projects in our
contract completed contribute
mean projects we really try to
really take in data when we
select these were look at our
pain management system
a bridge rating system and and
we try to really.
Put this projects where they're
need it but also throughout the
district and and when I present
to our commission our have a map
in it shows how we are economic
throughout the district and have
projects all over artist
economic throughout southeast
new mexico
next page just the beginning of
the summer of our transportation
project fine and if you go over
to page label for.
This project this fine is
brought so much better to the
locals and it's one of my
favorite things the state has
taken on I I get to know all the
communities the mayors the
county managers and and I dread
through this communities and
while some of the projects
they're doing to and has their
communities are amazing out.
And then a page for the if you
go down and you look yavi does a
downs tade and loving marrows
checks going
this was the first time they
have ever apply for funding and
they were aware to find in and
they're going to work and I
think that's amazing because he
small communities for me I think
that was a true attention the
truck transportation project
find a help communities like a
hagglement like a texaco and
we're trying to get all of small
communities to try to apply to
this tpf funding because I think
it's going to make a world
difference within their
communities.
So the top of the pages is the
summary is for this year was
twelve million dollars for FY
twenty four of
five you can see this is the map
of new mexico thirty one in your
mexico one twenty eight this is
the number one priority for our
region for district too
this is the main ardue to the
permian basin this is the main
artery to
the majority of julian
activities going on new mexico
they're spracking producers
drilling at all along this
cordor on major access ties from
the counties and and and lease
roads so.
We look at mix of thirty one and
twenty eight as one prior
together even though there are
two routes they both they both
have different challenges new
mexico thirty one
knees to be expanded
reconstructed the payment is
determined quite rapidly and
this traffic counselor are
increasing significant every
year so thou and really is a
capacity in a payment priority
to expand that road when we go
out to one twenty eight or also
seen an increase in traffic but
this is more a priority.
If you hadn't had a the chance
to drive one choine I some of
the representatives have gone
down there in tears and seeing
the the what's going down there
so.
The majority accidents are
happened at intersections and
act support access points so
what we have down there is rural
driving conditions but with city
conditions coming into the
highways so we got you know high
speed even though we reduced it
the speed limits for saved a
quarter used to have a lot of
traffic going at high speeds
with a lot of activity entering
the highway so that's why which
way is such a major priority is
a safety safety so over off we
took this whole map
that this discussed the summit
was done and twenty twentieth so
we have updated estimates is not
what it's three hundred fifty
years not that anymore we're pay
looking at over four hundred
million to do all the
improvements here so that the
way where dressing this quarter
of course prioritizing it the
the red is the two number one
priorities and then our third
priority be a segment to the
light blue I want twenty eight
and of course the city's jail
which is already funded and
getting ready to let an so
that's how we're looking at
that's how we're going to
develop the core door we do have
we just finish it rfp for design
services to get those
design and get ready for letting
in anticipating and just patient
any funding that may be comi.
And fake six this is our second
priority for this for the
district and southeast mexico
this is us three eighty this is
the gateway engine new mexico
from texas a major tourist
cordor
if the facilitates a lot of
activity from the high schools
of the travel to all the the
chows of southeast in mexico and
this map also shows how we're
going to prioritize our design
and development and how we're
going to go to.
We do have the first priority
funded in our step in twenty
twenty four and we're hoping to
go to letting in august and
hopefully get construction late
w.
The.
Page said abbey in it is just an
overrule of our step our four
year program
of course it has a lot of what I
touched on
and three eighty one twenty
eight just couple things I like
to highlight i'm twenty four
you see a big jump ninety six
million compared to the average
about forty what were received.
That's due to the section I
finding in some highway safety
improving funny we also receive
the total for the next four
years it's two hundred nineteen
million I had the pleasure of
going last week to the permeroe
safety coalition safety words
bank women in odessa and took
really good presentations on by
texas and am on safety comparing
the accident rates what's going
on on their roads to the state
and I think as the inning duty
really need to do to do that for
our area but they're highway
commissioner for the disadistric
also spoke and therefore your
step for the next four years is
one point two billion dollars
and or decide district is quite
comparable in size and lay miles
to new mexico and I just wanted
to highlight some of the
differences I know we're not
checked out but just the scale
in amount of the work they're
doing at the premium based in
was very impressive.
The rest is just a summary on
unfunded priorities then we
haven't prioritised one through
twelve in that's kind of the the
direction will be going district
to in our project development.
And and just their major designs
accide we have the three under
contractor were designed the
whole core door saved thing with
one twenty eight thirty one and
we had just completed our phase
a study on US sixty between
closer for summer and we're
looking to progress that to the
next stage of deb.
Page eight and part of page nine
that's just serral roman needs
over the years you equipment has
become more apporting for the
district especially for us we've
taken a lot of internal projects
ourselves or due to our own
paving on bridge rehabs and that
ticks equipment and over the
years you know we have followed
somewhat behind it in our
criminals are there again so
this is like total list of
everything we would like to see
to bring our program up to the
word needs to be to really
address internal projects and
district you.
Nine and channels just our local
government of funds yard
their school co ops are county
terrible in our are mapped in
our bus school routes.
Manage air community members I
stand for questions great thank
you mister sanchez and thank you
for your advocacy for section
nine we are all united that
advocacy here
representative johnson had.
The.
Thank you very much madame chair
and I thank you for the
presentation
of cheered like to recognize
david shoop one of the.
Madame chair and francisco I
wanted to ask a little bit about
the equipment needs
we see a list of that every time
we have a pre.
But the question is given
the n.
It would necessarily in impedes
but it just helps us to serve
communities better
and
the lack of economy lack of
equipment in our patrols they're
they're united and we have to
share a lot of equipment and so
this will really allow us to
allocate proper equipment we
have sixteen patrols two special
crews and it would really allow
us to get the proper equipment
for each pro each patrol so
emergencies happen when projects
come on we can take on more
individual patrols instead of
sharing some equipment or
transferring climate.
And thank you for their.
I I just really want to express
my thanks to.
That they do
we are in communication I think
quite a bit of a chair and yeah
there's just a lot of public
sentiment that we.
So I think the w.
Not a good thing
maybe we can c.
Madame.
Whether that houses are not.
Thank you representative round
and I will add the intern
transportation revenue
subcommittee will be visiting
visited hobs first and the
interim last year we will be
visiting hopes and all of those
roads again it's important for
all of the transportation
members to see them.
Next to her vice surgery
thank you madame chair no
question one of the things
starting with secretary sure
they're now his crew in other
contracted you're in here in
general and all the people are
involved in fiction or highways
and rowies you know we really
appreciate it and I note a long
full and it's hard some times
because of funding or whatever
reason what I want to see
personally thank god thank you
they're here
well members were only thirty
minutes late to the floor so
thank you to this committee
again for your efficiency I
really appreciate it and that
