Sentative Collin.
Announcements.
Who's got the lobo score?
All right, we're up by 5
earlier, not anymore.
Announcements before we go back.
3rd reading.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Thank
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation
is a gentle lady from Valencia,
Catherine Sierra Socorro
representative Armstrong ready
on item 48 on the regular
calendar. Mr. Speaker, would you
get me to that point? Let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42 as
amended on final passage has
been taken.
And it is subject to debate,
amendment, or substitution. The
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Senate
bill 42, um, I'm pleased to be
uh co-sponsor of it, um, this is
comprehensive addiction and
recovery programs, the health
and safety and well-being of
children in our state is my top
priority. I also want to make
sure that we are taking full
advantage of any and all federal
funds directing to improving
directed to improving child
well-being, um, we are all, uh,
we've all been working really
hard to, uh, to
come to this point, um, and this
is a bill that really helps fix
CYFD and with that, I stand for
questions.
There is from Santa Fe
representative Zansky.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, does the gentle
lady from Katherine Socorro,
Sierra and Valencia Yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
kind lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um.
Uh
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I,
I first wanna thank you for
championing this legislation,
um, and I think it's notable
that so many House members
participated in the crafting of
all the components of this
legislation, um, and, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
Gentle lady, um, I wanna just.
acknowledge um some gentle
ladies from Bernalillo,
Representatives Dixon,
Representatives Eleanor Chavez,
Representative Marion Matthews,
um, gentle ladies from Dona
Anna, uh, Representative Silva,
Representative Cadena, uh, the
gentle lady from Don Donana
Socorro, and Sierra
Representative Dao, um, all of
these folks, uh, and so many
more and I hope I didn't miss
others, but so many more even
even.
remembers that uh did not serve.
Uh, are not serving in the house
anymore, have contributed to the
uh genesis of this, uh,
legislation, um, and.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
I, uh, really had, I was really
pleased to have the opportunity
to bring an amendment in the
House Judiciary Committee to
ensure that this legislation
really reflected um all of the
hard work of so many members of
the house, uh, and, uh, there
were a few things that in
bringing that amendment that we
needed to adjust. So I do have a
floor amendment that I'd like to
present, so I would move house
for amendment number 1 to
Senate.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42.
Gentle lady, will you kindly
read the number on the bottom
left. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's
232-115.7 amendment been passed
out?
It is being passed out. Well,
look at that.
Guys are fast.
And it is ported online, the
general editor explained the
amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, and
thank you gentle lady for uh the
opportunity to bring this
amendment.
Um, so this amendment, uh.
brings the most current version
of the use of state devices for
CYFD business, House Bill 203 as
it was originally introduced,
there was an adjustment made in
the Senate Judiciary Committee
to House Bill 203, and so we
wanted to tweak the language in
Senate Bill 42 to match that
change in the Senate, um, which
just adjusts basically that
individuals are not immediately
terminated if they violate, uh,
the policy of using state.
Um, owned.
communication devices because
they need to follow the SO, the
state personnel office process
so while there still can be
disciplinary disciplinary action
that needs to follow the state
personnel office process.
Um, second, this amendment
strengthens the engagement of
tribes, pueblos and nations, um,
and, and it recognizes the
Indian Child Welfare Act ICWA
and the Indian Family Protection
Act IFFA when safety plans of
care are developed as part of
the CAA, uh, the comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act
section of this legislation, so
we are ensuring that a copy of
the plan of safe care is sent to
every respective tribe within 24
hours.
of a child's discharge, um, if
the parent relative guardian
custodian or caretaker resides
on tribal land. We are requiring
the healthcare authority to
communicate, collaborate, and
consult with an Indian child's
tribe to ensure that these plans
of safe care are developed in a
culturally responsive manner for
each child.
Um, and thirdly and lastly, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady on this
amendment, um, we made uh some
adjustments to the
confidentiality section of this
legislation to ensure that uh
really sensitive information
such as forensic interviews or
other mental health diagnostics
are not released to the public,
um, when relating to a child,
which was not the intention of
the legislation, um, it just
needed some tweaking in the
drafting, um, and Mr. Speaker.
a gentle lady, I would just end
by, uh, I wanna thank everyone
who helped adjust uh and and
work on this amendment which
includes many advocates,
advocates for, uh, children who
are impacted by CYFD for
families that are impacted by
CYFD for foster families and
others that are that care so
deeply about these kids, uh, and
so that Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady is the explanation of the
amendment.
Gentle lady from Catherine
Cerros Coto Valencia. This is a
friendly amendment. Uh, thank
you Mr. Speaker. Um, it is a
friendly amendment. I, um, I
want to, uh, make sure to thank
everyone who worked so hard on
it as well. uh, Mr. Speaker,
with me, I do have Claire Dudley
Chavez and Rachel Garcia, uh,
Rachel's with LFC and Claire's
with the speaker's office, um,
and, and many others, uh, uh,
that are on, um.
Uh, Jennifer Jones, Rep Jennifer
Jones, Rep Anaya, uh, Doo and so
many that have taken this uh
huge lift and um and this is a
friendly amendment, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Is there opposition
to there's debate on the
amendment.
Is there a debate on the
amendment, young lady from Santa
Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Guild.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe. Uh, Mr. Speaker, um,
we got, uh, in, in general, as
you know, we have this in our
committee, um, and we also, I
also got to hear you debate
this, um, in, in, uh, House
Judiciary, and I just wanna say
thank you for for taking all
these considerations in in place
and and and all those, I mean,
there's so many people that
worked on putting this
legislation together, um, I have
just one.
question and that's a
relationship and you may have
covered it already, uh, Mr.
Speaker, General Lee was on the
confidentiality was uh
implemented in your amendment,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, the confidentiality section
of the amendment, uh, which
appears on the 2nd to last page
of this amendment, um, basically
addresses concerns that really
sensitive information uh was
would be unintentionally made
available to the public, um, but
it still allows for
investigations for uh research
to ensure that we're updating,
uh, and making recommendations
to CYFD on best practices and
policy improvements that need to
happen.
At that agency, so, uh, I think
we really struck a very good
balance and that was thanks to
the hard work of many people,
uh, in this building and outside
of this building as well, Mr.
Speaker General Lady, thank you.
I yield back.
Alright.
Is your opposition to adopting
the amendment? Is there more
debate on the amendment?
Is there opposition? See none,
you have an amended bill.
Generally from Santa Fe, you
sell the floor.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
just again appreciate the gentle
lady and appreciate all the hard
work that's gone into this, um,
and with uh with that I would y.
Right, there is further debate
on the bill generated from Leo
and Torrens Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, the
gentle lady from a bunch of
Counties, please yield. Wonder
counties. I yield to the gentle
lady from Burnley and Torrance.
Mr. Speaker Delaney, can you
kind of just briefly summarize
what they changed over on the
Senate side. They did make some
amendments. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, this bill has, has morphed
quite a bit from its original,
uh, bill, but right now what.
On the we made the best
amendments on the House side.
Sorry, Senator, but, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um, this
is including the Kara, we fixed
Kara in this, and it is shall,
not me, and, and offering
services to the, um, substance
exposed parents, uh, any
services that they, that they
need. There is navigators, there
are coordinators, there is a
list of things that, um, shall
be followed.
Uh, the other part of the
amendment is we did the, oh the
family first prevention Services
Act and um we created a state's
multi-level response statute,
um, and then.
We also have.
The confidentiality clause.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
know, um, was there any changes
on, I know we're telling them
that they should go to get rehab
or they need to get help.
Are there suggestions or
guidelines in there of what type
of help they should be getting
if they wanted to get clean and
sober.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady,
there is a mandatory referral to
substance abuse treatment.
And Mr. Speaker J Lady, are they
gonna have a list of where
they're gonna be sent like you
should go to the following place
because before, to be honest,
The list that I saw, Mr. Speaker
Glady was you should probably
just go to 12 step, which does
not work for everyone. So now
it's, I think we're gonna be
given a list of places that they
should go, uh, Mr. Speaker, kind
gentle lady, there will be a
navigator involved and they
will, um, see what services.
Depending on the services that
the family needs, they will be
involved in making that list and
it will be mandated.
And they have to do it, um, or
there is a report that's filed
and, and an investigation.
OK, Mr. Speaker, thank you for
that because I, Mr. gentle lady,
because that was the part that I
was trying to think, I know last
time when it came through that
was my issue because I rather
rather see mandated care, but at
least there's something in there
that if they don't follow
through, there's somebody going
back and saying you didn't do it
because I cannot tell you how
many law enforcement officers
have told me that they go into
houses and they're half dead
babies, the parent smoking
fentanyl in the house. They got
the baby back from Kara and they
have the baby in their
possession and they're smoking
fentanyl in the house and it
doesn't make the.
headlines because the baby isn't
dead, they're just half dead. So
for me, I would rather see a
step further, but I, I'm glad to
see something go through because
for 5 years I fought I was not
asked to be involved in this,
which was very disappointing,
but I have worked very hard and
carried a lot of bills, uh, for
CYFD for 5 years now and it's
been incredibly hard when you
read the reports and you see the
abuse and you see
The parents that have so many
issues and they're raising these
children and, and not the best
circumstances, so I guess I'm
glad to see that something went
through with CFD. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, Jody. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady,
um, uh, I was remiss in thanking
you and I, I do want to thank
everyone in this body who cares
about children and fixing the
problems for New Mexico and uh
there are many so thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Seeing no further debate, you
need to close. Um, Mr. Speaker,
I now move that
Uh, Senate Judiciary Committee
for Senate.
What is it?
Rules Committee for Senate Bill
42 as twice amended do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Rules Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 42 as
twice amended the vote is now
open.
The borders are closed by a vote
of 59 in the affirmative, 2 in
the negative. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 42 as twice amended.
Hauli Paz's house.
With concurrence once it gets to
the Senate.
General lady from.
Santa Fe.
concurrence.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
concurrence.
Young lady from Bern Lee or
Presentative Garrett, are you
ready on concurrence calendar
item number 4. Yes, I am, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, do you need to get me to
that point?
No, ma'am, you need to make a
caution
OK, I moved at the house concur
with the Senate amendments to
House Bill 167 is twice amended.
A gentle lady to explain the
amendments.
Mr. Speaker, the Senate added an
amendment to this bill, and
after much discussion with the
chair of education, the ranking
member of education.
And our leadership I've agreed
to concur with that amendment so
we can move the process on.
Uh
Uh, the amendment adds on.
Uh, structured literacy to a
bill, uh, having higher
education pay the GED in high
school diploma test for adult
education learners.
And with that I asked the body
to concur. Is there a debate on
the motion.
All right, we have a, there is a
debate on the motion, your lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, um, general lady
from, uh, Berlio you yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
yield. Thank you, Mr. gentle
lady. What were those amendments
that were added or changed to
your bill in the in the Senate,
Mr. Speaker, generally.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, uh.
The bill, the First Amendment
removed the appropriation
because the money is in house
bill to the 2nd Amendment added
an amendment.
About structured literacy that
reflected changes that the House
Education Committee requested to
the original, uh,
Senate Bill 242.
Mr. Speaker, uh, generally, and
those, those are very two
different, those are two
different bills if I'm not
mistaken it, would you agree,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady.
I would agree that the 2nd
Amendment brings new elements to
the original bill.
The Speaker gentle lady, um, I
mean, we're here uh to concur on
a, a bill that is rightfully
yours, but was, was, um,
Very much changed, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, I think that
the, um.
With these changes, um, how does
it change the
The bill that you initially had,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, it adds
an amendment about structured
literacy being taught to
students at educational
preparation programs at the 13
education preparation programs
in our state.
Mr. Speaker, General, to
structural literacy wasn't
initially um part of your bill
uh is what I'm gathering and
implementing that component into
what your bill does, does that
create some um
Uh, compromised issues if you
will, Mr. Speaker, General Lady,
relating to what or maybe the
effect of what we we or desire
of the original.
Bill, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, the
amendment does not alter the
intention of the original bill,
it adds a very new section to
the original bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and it's a section that
If you can, can, how is it
related to um
What the original bill.
bill is intended to do, Mr.
Speaker, General.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, the
original bill pays for all of
the testing and preparation
testing for adult learners to
complete their high school
education and the 2nd Amendment.
adds the condition that teacher
prep students who are adult
learners will study the science
of reading and structured
literacy as a basis to deliver
effective reading instruction to
the students of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker General
Lee, thank you very much for
that explanation. That's really
what I was getting at, and, and
I appreciate that. I, I.
I, uh, I think I might have a
Uh, problem on myself with how
this was amended Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, I think what
your bill did initially when we
passed it through this chamber
was, was the was a very uh very
good bill that I voted for and I
appreciated. I feel like putting
something like this uh into this
bill might have some
complications for um, for you or
for the state in doing that sort
of thing. And in regards to
cost, what, what do you, what
would it do?
The cost of getting this or the
time, Mr. Speaker, time and
cost, Mr. Speaker, and kind
lady, the amendments have no
effect on the money that's
already in the budget to do both
projects.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
lady.
understood, but the, the time
and cost it's going to take for
those um educators to then have
the um to go through the
structured um learning and uh.
Curriculum, what is what now do
they have to do in addition to
what they what they maybe didn't
have to do in the first place,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, and kind lady, it's
already a mandate that the 13
programs teach structured
literacy to students in the
programs it was mandated to be
completed by October 2024, so
our 13 teacher prep programs are
already doing what the amended.
Bill asked them to do. Speaker
lady, uh, thank you for saying
that. Then why was it necessary
to implement it or amend it into
this bill Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, and kind lady, it
was, uh, the desire of the
people putting on the amendment
to have it not just as a written
mandate, but to have a codified
in Mexico statute.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General
Lady so before that it was not
um mandated to uh as it is now,
it was what's the difference, I
guess, Mr. Speaker, Speaker and
kind lady, it was a mandate
directed by the public education
department to our teacher prep
programs, but it wasn't in
statue, so this puts it in
statute.
That
Uh, New Mexican teacher
candidates will learn these
strategies and the depth of
understanding associated with
the brain science of structured
literacy.
Mr. Speaker, generally, um, to
me that means that the then
there's a lot there's a, there's
less flexibility, but with that
I'll listen to the rest of the
debate. Thank you for your
answers. Thank you. Is there a
further debate on concurrence, a
gentleman from Presentative
Buck.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady and my friend from
Burley yield.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen
from Los Lunas, I yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, kind lady, um.
Mr. Speaker and uh general ID I
have to speak about the
concurrence of this, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, for
the bodies's information, you
know, we
Like many of you, we give up our
times through the interim. We
sit there and we try to, to vet
out bills.
And to develop policy.
That is committee endorsed
legislation.
So that there's input.
Both from the communities that
we visit.
From the educators and from
those that.
Have or will be impacted by this
and also from a different
perspectives.
Of the members, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, was this?
Vetted through the interim.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
the.
The original bill uh that we're
concurring with the 2nd
Amendment.
Um
Has been discussed for a long
time by her education to further
the work of students who are now
seeking.
hired uh high school diploma. So
that's the First Amendment. The
2nd Amendment is about the
structured literacy for
programs, it's been discussed
quite a bit over the last 2
years, elementary teachers have
been required to study
structured literacy.
The PED in October 2023, um,
mandated that in that year until
last October 2024.
The education prep programs
would teach the system.
So we've studied it and we've
learned about it the specific
bill.
Uh, to which the amendment was
amended, um, was not precisely
studied during the interim,
although key points were
reviewed.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady, and I should
have made my comments more
clear. The fact about when we're
talking about payments for
certain tests is undeniably in
absolutely a must, and we should
do that. So, Mr. Speaker,
My, my comments are directed
more towards the amendment that
was tacked on.
As this bill left our chamber.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Was the
Endorsement or was the
legislative education Study
Committee, did they endorse?
That piece of legislation that
was tacked on to this bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
uh, the bill and its amendment
that changed the bill was not
specifically studied through the
legislative education study
committee process.
Over the previous year.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady was the
committee or those involved ever
given data about the
effectiveness of the um.
Program that's been implicated,
uh, implemented, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, and kind gentlemen,
yes, uh, various reports were
given from schools and districts
who had implemented the
structured literacy science of
reading.
A system and teachers reflected
that it was beneficial to their
teaching practice in their
student results.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
too agree that, um,
That it is effective, but Mr.
Speaker, generally, what I
Did have concerns about
As ranking member.
As a 32 year educator.
Was when we make men that that
mandates.
And we require certain things.
That take away from a local body
or entities.
Decision making or local
control.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm not going to debate this and
drag this out.
Uh, I would, I was tempted to,
but I do think that Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that what this does
to me.
Is it really kind of, uh, makes
it very
You know, it's kind of
disheartening in some ways
because I think as we say
before, we spend 60 days here.
We will spend another 60 days
through the interim process as
we go and we develop policy and
we get information that help us
to do our job more effectively.
And Mr. Speaker, generally, I
would just say that I'd hope in
the future that we vet.
Programs in all committees.
And get information to determine
the effectiveness in all
committees.
And I appreciate that your
initial bill.
I appreciate this, um, and with
that I yield.
All right. Is there
If, if you need to debate you
need to stand up and raise your
mic. You wanna debate?
When we're in concurrence just
so the body knows we don't press
a button because we do the mic,
generally from Berlin.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, that's
new for me, uh, will the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yelled.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the kind
lady from Bertollio.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
uh, we review in our committee
here during these two months,
um, both your original bill and
uh section that was added to the
bill.
Um
And I'm we're just gonna go
expand a little bit, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, for people
who are not in the education
committee one of the part was,
um, we have several concerns.
We expressed
In two different meetings during
our committee.
And we asked the sponsor of the
amendment that was added to your
bill.
To work with us uh Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, like gentleman from
Valencia mentioned.
We have a good collaboration we
have working on that, um, some
of the concerns was the
requirements for colleges, uh,
in the amendment that was added
to your bill.
Are they still there, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
requirement to teach the science
of reading and structure
literacy is still in the
amendment, however, all
references to disallowing um
balance y have been removed 100
hours for people that aren't
elementary teachers has been
removed the sections that our
committee as a whole, uh, deeply
bipartisan committee uh.
Objected to were removed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so is a part where
colleges are responsible for the
students' outcomes no other own
students, the students or their
students is still there Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, this section that
reviews the outcomes of students
of the College of Education that
they will be reviewed is still
in there.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and,
and that's probably one of the
concerns of the people who was
emailing me.
The most, um, it seems to me and
let me know if he's this is how
I understand it, Mr. Speaker,
and the lady.
If a student finished college in
the way that we are telling them
to teach them.
We are telling the students that
teach the colleges to teach the
students to to teach their
candidates in a certain way.
When they graduate, they teach.
They go to the schools and teach
and if they don't do it in the
way that we assigned.
They're their funding could be
at risk. Is that correct Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker and kind lady.
The rigidity of the original
bill has been removed.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
it's just very difficult because
we talk about that in the
committee and it was added
without us noticing, so it, it
is still a big concern of me and
probably some of my colleagues I
don't know about and definitely
some people who have been
emailing us and telling us their
concerns on the imposition that
we are putting in colleges.
And, and with no conversation,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and a
big concern of mine too is um
how much our students are not
receiving the education that is
gonna make them succeed.
When we focus in something that
is being succeeding.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady in
programs and the data that was
presented to us.
was about school who are doing a
holistic approach.
And however, the amendment, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady is focused
in one size fits all.
And that's a big concern for me.
Um, I do not support this
concurrence and I just wanted to
um express it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Right. Mr.
Speaker.
young lady from Berlio,
apologies.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady please yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Bert. Thank you
very much, um, I share similar
um.
If not all
Um, the concerns that were
articulated by the previous two.
Uh, colleagues of mine, I have a
uh.
I'm concerned and so my question
is thus.
Is English.
Still, the foundational
language.
That will be used.
Using the approach of science of
reading.
Mr. Speaker, and kind lady in
one of the first paragraphs of
the amendment, it states that
teachers in the preparation
program will also need to learn
the theories and practice of
biliteracy and teaching uh
students, uh, English language
learners, which I'm actually an
endorsed teacher of English to
language learners so that will
that will be a required part of
the education, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
I'm sorry, but I don't think
that that was um the response
that I was seeking, um, perhaps
I should rephrase this.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
will English learners.
Be taught
Beginning
With their native language or
as.
In English.
Within the structured literacy.
Uh, approach, Mr. Speaker and
kind lady, if they're in an
English language class, yes,
however, I want to remind the
body that teachers that are in
bilingual or dual language or
immersion programs have to get
certified in bilingual education
and that's where they learn how
to teach in other languages and
how to adapt such things as
structured literacy to the
language.
that they're actually teaching.
So Mr. Speaker and and gentle
lady, thank you.
It goes back then to the
approach even in the
institutions of higher learning
that are teaching our uh
teachers.
In bilingual and dual language.
The structured literacy
approach.
The curriculum developed for
structured literacy.
Still is using English as the
foundational language.
That is that has not changed.
From
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
from my.
Um, continued research as far as
I know.
Within those institutions that
are teaching our bilingual
teachers are dual language
teachers are certification
teachers all of those teachers.
The structured literacy
approach.
Is still using English in fact,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, all
of the instructional material is
still English.
Best, um, I have yet, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady to see a
uh curriculum that's available.
In those institutions that are
in um our.
Just as an example, um, our
multi language multicultural
populations here in the state.
Um
And there are very few.
Uh, pieces of, um.
Training curriculum that are
available even in Spanish, so
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that's why we spent so much
time.
In committee discussing these
approaches and our concerns.
Because the people, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady that are the
professionals in our state that
have the capacity.
To provide and um to develop
actually the curriculum in these
languages were not involved.
In the
Development of the.
That other bill that we um have
now amended a portion into this
as a 2nd Amendment.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
I'm not really um.
quite sure why we're in this
spot right now.
I can surmise.
Uh, I don't want to surmise.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, but
I agree with um the previous
colleague that that referred to
one size fits all we're still
with the 2nd Amendment in the
position.
Of offering a standardized.
English only as a foundational
approach.
One size fits all and I don't
know how else to put it approach
to teaching more than 80 quite
possibly 90% of our populations
in the state of New Mexico who
are not English foundational,
Mr. Speaker and general lady who
are in fact foundational in
their native languages.
And um so this brings a great
deal of concern to me.
Again, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady I leave with not
necessarily a question but a
question for all of us to be
asking why um we're
entertaining.
This bill, which is a good bill,
your original bill but amending
it.
Um, in a way in which we have
very little to no control other
than our vote tonight to ensure
that we're not Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady entertaining a
movement of the 70s which was
called the English Arming
movement within our um.
Uh, school system, so I'm very,
very concerned about this. I'm
very concerned about how.
Um, our institutions of higher
learning.
will be responding, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady to what we are,
um.
Going to be requiring of them
which defeats the whole purpose
of being in my opinion, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady in a
bilingual, uh, dual language.
Um
Professional preparedness
program um that's offered in
order to certify.
Sadly, sorely needed.
Bilingual dual language teachers
in our state because of the
populations that I just
addressed so um.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
this place is.
Not just myself but many others
I hope I don't know many, but
perhaps others in a very
difficult position, um, voting.
I'm not in a difficult position,
um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I know how I'm going to vote
however, I would caution all of
us to pay attention to the fine
line that's occurring here, um,
this evening. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
There is further debate on
concurrence. The gentleman from
Monteroent block. Thank you so
much, Mr. Speaker. Would my
friend from Bernalillo please
yield, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Otero. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies. So I appreciate your,
your answers about what the
amendments did. When it comes to
the science of reading though,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, could
you tell me a little more about,
I mean, we've heard this in the
interim, I, I know what it is
and I, I know what it's being
used for, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but how does it affect the
actual purpose?
of the original bill when it
comes to the science of reading,
being, being added to it.
Mr. Speaker, and kind gentlemen,
uh, the purpose of the original
bill 167 as amended is to pay
for GED and high school
equivalency tests and
preparation for adult learners
in our state.
The second
The 2nd Amendment in this
context, meaning the 2nd
Amendment to this bill, um, ads.
A redone amendment from the
original Senate Bill 242 to
require education prep programs
to teach students the science of
reading structured literacy and
to be inclusive about how that
impacts impacts by literacy and
English language learners, and I
would add you can take these
principles like I can't see them
on the top of my head.
followed what is it? morphology,
how you learn a language can be
adapted to Spanish, uh, this
morning we passed Senate bill 13
as amended, which will make 5
pilot, a Native American compact
schools where they'll be doing a
deep dive in how to do the
science of reading in the eight
languages of native tribes, uh,
in our.
State and and in teaching
Spanish, how do you actually
adopt the building blocks of
language for Spanish I've told
this body that I can teach you
Korean using the science reading
in 2 hours because it's so much
easier to read than than uh
English.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That, that sounds
awesome because I've been trying
to learn French for the last
year and I've not been very
successful. So, Mr. Speaker
Generalleti, I think it's good
that we have this as a portion.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
do, I do have some questions
though when it comes to the
actual science of reading those
specifically based upon
The structures that are used,
these are, I'm sure they're
science-based or evidence-based.
And so, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is this currently taught
in schools in the state right
now?
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen.
As of October 2024, all of our
teacher prep programs in the
state were required to teach
this system to new teachers also
over the last 3 years,
elementary school teachers up to
grade 3 and now up to grade 5
have been required to take a
system of learning this uh
called letters when I was an
instructional coach, all of our
EPS coaches did structured
literacy training with the.
Core reading program, which is a
variation.
Um, a lot of schools have
already done this a lot of
teachers already are studying
it, um, it's expanded to Project
Echo where master coaches,
including a fabulous coach in
Alan McGorro and might add, um,
our coaching teachers because
you can learn structure
literacy, but then you have to
learn how to apply it and as
representative uh Girola said a
lot of it isn't just knowing
science or a technique, it's,
it's learning.
how to implement it so now we
have coaches across the state
who are specializing in that.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. That's good to
hear.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle
Liddy, so.
I'm, I, I, I apologize. Uh, do
we know which committee added
this. I'm looking at the
amendments in context and some
of these acronyms are just
difficult for me and I
Maybe it's just late in the day,
but so was it the Senate
Education Committee that added
this?
Mr. Speaker and kind gentlemen,
it was the Senate Finance
Committee that added the
amendment.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So I'm just
wondering why, because I'm when
I think of educators adding
things to bills, I usually am
inclined to support whatever
that would be on an education
bill when it comes to finance
committees, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, was this tied to a dollar
amount that they were trying to,
to add to the bill and if it was
added, do we know if it'll cost
more and if it's included in, in
the budget, thinking about the
former bill that we were talking
about and how how is that
included?
Budgetarily, I guess my, my
question would be based upon
just your amendment on your
bill, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentlemen, this had nothing to
do with budgetary items both the
original bill and the amendment.
Uh, added are already fully
covered in the budget.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I, it's my
understanding that Senate or
House education, they rejected
this.
Bill 9 to 3, or maybe it was
Senate Education Committee when
it came to the science of
reading legislation.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and kind
gentleman, uh, the Senate
Education Committee and uh pass
this bill.
All right, I'm so sorry. Could
you just repeat that for me? I
apologize. I was talking to
somebody. The original, the
original bill.
Uh, about paying for the test
was passed by all of its
committee, all of its committees
in the house in the Senate, but
when it went to the Senate
Finance Committee, this
amendment was added.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlelady,
thank you for the clarification
on that, and I appreciate it,
but I believe the original bill
that we were talking about, the
one that was amended into this.
Was it did not pass, is that my
understanding?
Mr. Speaker, and kind gentlemen.
The original Senate bill 242,
uh, was rolled over an amendment
was brought back and it was
tabled with the amendment,
although I will say that the
amendment moved the sections
that.
We felt
We're the most inappropriate for
the bill.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Thank you for the,
the clarifications and I
appreciate the debate. Thank
you. There's further debate on
concurrence, your lady from Re
Riba.
And all those other counties
presented. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, with a kind lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the kind
lady from Rio Ariba, etc.
Um, I, I'm just trying to catch
up here so I, I hope you'll bear
with me. um, I, I did happen to
be in the education committee. I
think the first time around when
they were talking about uh
structured literacy and the
problems with with um uh Spanish
speaking uh students and uh and
uh uh Native American students
said it wasn't an easy, it
wasn't an easy transition for
them and it didn't seem to work
and I, am I correct in that
assumption?
um, um, kind lady.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, what
I would say is that the original
bill.
Said that only structured
literacy and science of reading
could be used and balanced
literary literacy, uh, which
shares many of the same
characteristics could not be
used, and they cited a specific
technique that some of us didn't
even know what it was, uh.
And so we proceeded to say.
Uh, it was a 22 page bill. The
amendment came back as about.
4 or 5 pages.
Um,
Mr. Speaker and kind lady that
this happened in the education
committee of the house.
Mr. Speaker, and kind lady, yes,
this happened in the education
committee of the house.
And so when it came back with
that amendment did the did the
committee agree to that
amendment at that time?
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, we
adopted the amendment and we
then tabled the bill with the
adopted amendment tabled the
bill with the adopted amendment,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, yes.
So nobody agreed with this, uh,
with the amendment that had a
different bilingual for black
for uh overall term kind of a
bilingual approach to structured
literacy you didn't adopt that
amendment.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady was a
little bit more complicated. I
think a lot of it had to do with
the whole process and and the
fact that it hadn't gone
profoundly through the vetting
process of the legislative
education Study Committee. I
see, so, so, um, a major factor
is that you really had an in,
you hadn't really reviewed it
during the interim and it wasn't
really fully brought to the
front. You didn't have a chance
to discuss it before it was uh
presented to you in committee in
the House. Is that what
happened?
Mr. Speaker, I would say that's
the accurate depiction of what
happened.
OK, and, you know, I.
I know this structured literacy
does work very well with the
English learners. I, I know it
really does, and I, you know, I,
if in that situation and
certainly my grandkids were
brought up in that situation and
certainly did very well in
reading or good readers, most of
their classmates are good, so it
works for certain kids very well
and we do know that but the
proof it's not out there that it
works for other kids and that
would be true, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady.
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, yes, and
what the amendment did do is
acknowledge that you can't limit
teaching reading solely to.
One system and say that you
will, that you shall not use
these other things. They took
out this you shall not use other
things part of the original
bill.
OK, so then, uh, that bill your
bill went over to the house,
which is really do do these
payments for the test for for
all these kids that we care
about and that was, that was a
very bipartisan bill, as I
recall in the house we all
wanted the to pick up the cost
of these tests for all these
kids and so that was just this
sweet little bill that went over
to the Senate, right? Am I
correct here? Yes, Mr. Speaker
and kind lady, you're right, it
was one sweet little bill that
everybody
loved.
How things move in the house and
the Senate. So, OK, so, so Mr.
Speaker, so I went over there
and it this bill went through uh
Senate education without any
amendments and then it got to
Senate Finance as uh the
gentleman from Montero was, uh,
and that's where these
amendments were added.
Mr. Speaker kindly, that's where
the 2nd Amendment was added.
OK, and um,
And was there, was there any
discussion about why this wasn't
added in Senate education.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, it
had not been an issue in Senate,
uh, education.
And, um, Mr. Speaker and kind
lady, and, and when did the
Senate Finance, uh,
Committee meet and hear this
hear this bill.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, uh,
let's see today is Friday, I
believe it was on Sunday.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, and um as I understand it,
what's, what's the total cost in
this bill right now. Well, I
mean, how much money is in this
bill where we're paying for the
sweet little bill we liked how
much money is in that and then
how much money is in the
amendment with a structured
literacy in there.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, both
are already included in House
Bill 2, the committee substitute
for House Bill 2, which if I
recall, was it this morning we
passed it. I can't even
remember. The money is there
that amendment makes no change.
It's already in the budget.
So, uh, can you tell me how much
was in the higher ed payment for
certain tests part of it.
Mr. Speaker and kind lady, uh,
the appropriation was moved the
original request was $2 million
but it's incorporated in the
higher education budget, uh, and
the text.
so if I understand there's a
total package of 150 million
that means 2 million is to pay
for the test and then 148
million is to pay for the
structured literacy, right?
No, Mr. Speaker, there's not 150
million. I think the original
was about 4 million.
And, and this would require all
the colleges to teach structured
literacy, right? Mr. Speaker and
kind lady, they're already
required to do that as of
October 2024. This basically
puts it in statue as opposed to
a directive.
Uh, OK, now it's coming together
for me. I'm sorry I'm a little
slow on the uptake sometimes,
Mr. Speaker, kind lady, but I
just, I just give up on being,
you know, really smart. I just
try to answer the questions now
and I'm just trying to figure
out how this all came about, uh,
when we were just trying to get
all our kids uh test covered and
um that's what I'm trying to
figure out and um.
I, I just think, frankly, we
have sent other bills back in
concurrence. We certainly sent a
big tax bill back in
concurrence.
And um and I think I don't think
we have to accept everything the
Senate says to sends us if we
don't really agree with it and
um
So I'm just gonna suggest that
this body, uh, send this, send
this bill back for uh uh for
more debate and not concur with
the the Senate now and that's
what I would suggest to the
members of this body.
We're on a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to House Bill
167 as.
OK, you have a roll call.
We have a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to House Bill
167 as amended the vote is now
open.
The vote's not closed by a vote
of 16 in the affirmative, 45 in
the negative, the House has
failed to concur with Senate
amendments to House Bill 167 is
twice amended.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have a
score. The lobos have won.
Young lady from Elio 7566.
What a team, proud of that team,
young lady from earlier, when's
this, when's the next game?
OK, she, she'll she'll find out.
It's Sunday.
Oh, we won't be here.
Theoretically, we won't be here.
I don't know, young lady from
Santa Fe.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the
realm of good news to share, um,
for those of you in Santa Fe
County in the um Norte Chimayo
has had been missing its post
office, and we just learned
today that we will have a
permanent location that we will
be looking at um in Chimayo,
it's an old county building in
southern Chimayo and we're so
thrilled about that. So I just
wanted to offer the good news
for everybody waiting for that
news.
Very cool. Thank you, gentle
lady.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business 3rd
reading of legislation
members, I'll direct your
attention to the regular
calendar item number 28 dela
from Bernard Leo Representative
Chavez, are you ready?
On that item.
I am Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point that all action
necessary for placing Senate
tax, business, and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 5959.
A final passage has been taken
and it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. uh Mr. Speaker,
I'd like to also ask that my
expert witnesses be allowed in
the chamber?
House Bill 59 closes a loophole
to prevailing wage requirements
that were created by NMSA
313-4-51978.
By passing this bill, the
legislature will close the
loophole.
That excluded prevailing wage
protection for workers to
perform off-site custom sheet
metal products for public work
projects.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions. There is
debate lady from Catherine
Sierra Socorro Valencia
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady from Berna Leo
Yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I will yield to
the representative.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
how many fabrication shops are
there in the state of New
Mexico?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
anywhere from 20 to 25.
Uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um.
Can you tell me uh what your
bill does, the language that you
added in.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, are
you referring to the um the
committee substitute.
Um, Matt, uh, Mr. Speaker, Madam
uh, Mr. Speaker, Representative.
The language and I'm assuming
that you're referring to the
language on page 2, section 8.
Um, that that language adds the
definition of the side of the
project and also discusses um
the fabrication, um, of the
project.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um, I want to, um,
Talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, I'm gonna
actually read it out loud for
the members. Um, it says site of
the project means the physical
location of a public works
project as well as any off-site
fabrication locations that
engage in the fabrication of
heating, cooling, ventilation,
or exhaust.
Conduct systems that are a part
of a public works project.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I
want to bring to your attention,
um, if I can that.
We have
The public works project.
At point A, we have the
fabrication or manufacturing at
Part B.
Housed Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
at a different location.
The
Manufacturing does not take
place at the public.
Um, at the public works project
area.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
your bill is amending that to
where you have to pay prevailing
wage at the site of the
fabrication, not just for the
installation at the public works
project. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I am all about
fairness in my, um, uh.
Research
Uh, it comes to my attention
that there's only 2 states that
mandate prevailing wage
prefabrication, and that's
Washington and California and so
this does not close a loophole
of any kind, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, they are where it's
fabricated or or built.
Is a location that is off of the
prevailing wage site and so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm going
to give you an example from a
constituent of mine. The example
is that he has 38 employees.
He has, and this is a
fabrication shop. He has 18
different projects on the floor
that he is building at one time.
Only one of those projects.
It is for the public works
project.
So one of them you would require
to pay Davis Bacon.
Prefabbed pieces are made in
bulk months before.
So simple.
Prefabrication of.
The information, the, the thing
that's
The ventilation, heating,
cooling, the duct systems prefab
is made in weeks beforehand.
And so
No one knows the destination of
where these are going until they
are packaging them.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it was
brought to my attention by a
different constituent that if
this bill passes.
It's much cheaper for him to get
it by rail out of Colorado.
And so he'll just shut down his
fabrication shop.
Uh, I believe, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that this is a job
killer.
That this is not fair.
To the people of New Mexico, the
um
price of construction.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Is through the roof, as we all
know through our Capital LA
projects of $6 billion that are
behind schedule.
And $1000 for a square foot at a
school or more maybe it's more
now. And so Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, I would urge the body to
vote against Senate bill 59.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There's for the debate. The
gentleman from Bernalio,
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just
wanted to clarify for the body
and for myself, uh.
Madam Speaker and gentle lady,
does a gentle lady yield?
Madam Speaker, I do yield to the
representative.
Madam Speaker, earlier I had a
conversation with the
representative and I just wanna.
Have it reiterated.
So
Fabrication of things that are.
Off the shelf as an example,
this is for heating and cooling,
right?
Madam Speaker, Representative,
yes.
And so Madam Chair, gentle lady,
if there are items that are
Um, for lack of a better term
that are off the shelf like
tubing and things that go
through through the structure,
through the route through the
The crawlway between the roof
and the ceiling those items.
Are they exemptive? They're
already created out of state.
Already prefabricated somehow.
Uh
Madam Speaker, Representative,
yes they are.
So
Somebody's not gonna get a
litter and
Idaho telling them that they
have to pay a prevailing wage
coming out of New Mexico.
Madam Speaker, gentle lady.
Madam Speaker, Representative,
unless that custom work is
happening out of state.
Madam Speaker, I'm not sure what
you mean by that madam.
Madam Speaker, Representative,
not the prefab work.
No, I'm sorry, um, Madam
Speaker, Representative, not the
off the off the shelf that
you're referring to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, uh,
I've never had a problem with
Davis speaking wages and this
New Mexico version to me is
identical or similar, but my
concern was that there might be
so many.
aspects of the construction that
would require material, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady that would
need to be brought from
somewhere else.
That is already done somewhere
else, and so that's what I
needed clarification. Thank you,
Madam Speaker.
There's for the debate, the
gentle lady from Donana Sierra,
and Socorro County of. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady yield?
Madam Speaker, I will yield to
the representative. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady. I'm
so confused by what you said.
Did you say that if someone made
these identical products out of
state and they ship them to say
Home Depot or somewhere like
that, that this would not, this
would not apply to that work and
we would buy it off the shelf at
a large box store at the same
price. Um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, I think we're
talking about two different
things. The, what we're talking
about in this bill is um what's
designed
What the custom sheet metal duct
work per specifications
following the blueprints as
outlined in mechanical plans.
This is, this is very
specialized work. You can't buy
this off the shelf. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and thank you,
gentle ladies. So when you said
it wouldn't apply to something
out of state, that was a
misunderstanding or someone
could manufacture it according
to the blueprints out of state
and it wouldn't apply.
Um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, if, if it's
Made out of state to
customization to these
specifics, then yes, it would
apply. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. So, so the increased
cost will be equally applied to
people who manufacture out of
state and in-state.
Madam Speaker, Representative,
if they have a public, if
they've entered into a public
works contract with the state of
New Mexico, yes, it would apply.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle ladies. So the
subcontractor in the public's
work, uh, in this instance, if
the bill passes, out of state or
in state would now pay this
price.
Right
Madam Speaker, Representative
correct. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker and thank you gentle
ladies. So the cost is going to
go up, um, regardless. So this
year we've really been focused
on housing, Madam Speaker and
gentle lady, I think there's
been over 120 bills that have
been focused on housing. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, do you
know um what the needs are for
housing in New Mexico. What are,
uh, deficiency is across the
state right now?
Uh, Madam Speaker
Representative, can you restate
your question please? What is
our housing deficit in the state
of New Mexico right now, Madam
Speaker, Representative, I don't
know. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady.
According to Madam Speaker. Hi,
Madam Speaker. According to um
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
according to New Mexico housing
strategy, um, we have a shortage
of um
We are going to to need to build
an average of 1500 units between
now and 2025 just to accommodate
the current current needs and
between 2025 and 2030, an
average of 1140 housing units
per year. I'm sorry, this is per
year. So we need to build over
5000 housing units per year
between now and 2030, uh, for a
10 year average, uh, in the last
10 years, we've only permitted
4,1.
7 housing units in our state. So
not only do we have a deficit
now, but according to the
current cost that we've been
adding, uh, one of the reasons
the housing bills have been
introduced is because we are
driving up the cost of housing
in New Mexico, making it
prohibitive or not advantageous
for anyone to choose to build a
home. Madam Speaker, Madam
Speaker, and gentle lady, do you
believe that by providing this
prevailing rage on the, on the
backside on the manufacturing
side, when costs go up.
That it's gonna make the cost
per square per square foot for
commercial or residential for
housing or commercial, higher or
less in New Mexico.
Speaker, Representative, this
bill has nothing to do with
private housing, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, how much money is
in our budget this year that
will be subsidizing the
construction of housing in the
state of New Mexico, Madam
Speaker, Representative, this
has nothing to do with housing.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, who
does this apply to?
Madam Speaker, Representative
Public works projects.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
which, which dollars in this,
when the state puts out a bid
and they give out a contracts.
What's excluded in a public work
project when we give out
projects for housing for
hospitals, for schools. What's
not what is public works not
applied to?
Um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, we don't
understand your question.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
think we're going to hear a bill
today about a large Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, about a
large project revision at state
parks. It's gonna be the State
Parks District, or, or let's go
with this, in the housing funds.
There's $110 million.
From that $110 million.80
million dollars of it is divided
between Vernalillo County and
Donana County to construct
housing.
Well, is this not a public works
project because it's publicly
funded?
Well, Madam Speaker
representative, if, if it's a
public works project, yes, if
it's private housing, then no,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
don't, I'm asking you if the $80
million that's going to be split
between 40 million in in Donana
and 40 million in Berna Leo
funded by this body in house
Bill 2 is public project works.
Madam Speaker, Representative, I
can't answer that question. I
don't know if those are public
works projects.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies. So you're bringing a
bill to the floor when there's
over
About 400 million in public
funded housing projects with
half a billion carrying over
this year and you cannot tell us
whether it's a public works
project or not.
Madam Speaker, Representative,
unless the state is going to
build and own that housing, then
this bill does not apply.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, who
owns the property at the state
fair where the state fairgrounds
are right now.
Uh, Madam Speaker,
Representative, the state owns
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady. When we
build housing on a property
that's owned by the state, is it
a public works project?
Madam Speaker, Representative
not automatically.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
we enter into agreement with New
Mexico housing and we build
projects on state, uh, land, a
state that's public lands, so
land office, would that be a
public works project?
Uh, Madam Speaker
Representative, the state, um,
in that kind of a
Uh, example that you're
providing the state land office
may enter into a public works
project, uh, a business lease,
um, to, to build that housing.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, young lady. Let, let's just
switch to schools. Um, I believe
that this body was very
committed. There's so many
people in this body who have
school district school sites,
despite the um the Zia Pueblo
lawsuit almost two decades ago
that have schools that are over.
70 years old, and I believe that
we've made a fix on that. We're
hoping that folks are going to
be able to get new schools in
their school district. Um, the
change that we made was to lower
the cost in these rural
low-income areas that can't get
enough bonding capacity to
build. So now we're hoping that
it's going to get fixed and with
the partnerships between
property tax and and other
issues that we can get these
schools replaced. Will this
increase the cost of building
those schools or lower the cost
of building those schools.
Uh, matter, Madam Speaker,
representative, it depends. We
all know that wages are going
up, uh, the cost of construction
is going up and um you know,
this is something that, uh,
obviously I think that we want
to pay prevailing wage,
especially in rural areas, uh,
this bill seeks to um
Make equal what the some of the
um
Uh, workers who are um making
the duck to work on site, the,
the fabrication sites on site,
um, there're receiving a
prevailing wage. It's only fair
that workers in all areas of the
state of New Mexico are also
make a prevailing wage. It adds
to their ability to, to care for
their families. It adds to the
tax base. It creates revenue for
rural areas as well. So Mr.
Speaker in.
lady, do you know how many of
the Capelale projects that are
unfinished right now are
incomplete because of the rising
cost of implementing the project
and had to come back for more
capital outlay year after year
to meet the rising costs.
Uh, Madam Speaker
Representative, I think one of
the problems in terms of
unfinished capital outlay is
that we're not able to give uh
the amount of money that's
needed to complete those
projects all at once. We have to
do a piecemeal. That's one of
the big issues in terms of uh
those projects that are, that
remain unfinished.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, but
they are fully funded projects
by the time they go out to bid
are millions of dollars short
because of the rising cost of
construction, and Mr. Speaker,
in gentle lady, what percentage
of labor is represented in most
of these construction projects.
I mean, the highest cost of any
amount of construction is labor.
What is the cost of construction
on the average project?
Madam Speaker, Representative,
the cost of the fabrication that
we're talking about in this bill
only makes up 1 to 2% of the
cost, Mr. Speaker and gentle
ladies, so even, so you're
saying that it's OK to increase
every project that we have in
the works right now by 2%. I
mean, I, I, I doubt that that
may be accurate, but let's just
go with it. So let's see this
year, what is the cost of our
capital outlay project budget.
Uh, Madam Speaker,
Representative, I don't have
that information.
It's, it's, it's several billion
dollars. So what is 2% of
several billion dollars. That's
a lot of taxpayer funds. Uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, I
think that, um,
What we're trying to do is
reduce the cost of construction
and what we're trying to do is
remove regulation and barriers.
And, and I am, it seems to me
that this takes us in the strong
in the wrong direction, and this
is a perfect example of why we
have 120 some bills relating to
housing and construction and,
and regulations and, and I, I, I
love some of the, the bills that
we've had bipartisan support on
and a lot of them have been
around deregulation, making it
easier to do business in New
Mexico.
We're in the bottom of the good
list in the top of the bad list
and unfortunately, we are now,
we now have the lowest freedom
index for business in our state,
and these are the types of
reasons why. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, in general, Madam
Speaker and, and gentle lady.
lady from Berlio Sandoval,
Representative Kates. Madam
Speaker. This, uh, my gentle
friend from Bernalillo Yield.
Uh, Madam Speaker, I yield to
the representative. I thank you,
um, uh, uh, my gentle friend,
um, Madam Speaker, could you
introduce to me your expert
witnesses. I am so sorry, Madam
Speaker, that I failed to do
that. Um, my expert witnesses
are Surita Najar from Workforce
Solutions and Isaiah Zemke from
Smart.
Uh thank you, um, Madam Speaker
and Representative, so, uh,
Sarita is not just firm
Workforce Solutions. She is the
cabinet secretary, correct?
Madam Speaker, Representative,
that is correct. I assume that
everybody knew her because she's
done some great work. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. I never knew
who's watching. I wanna make
sure that people know that your
expert witnesses put the word
expert um in that sense. So
thank you, Madam Speaker and,
and gentle person, um, let me,
uh, go through this. So Pubbble
Works we talked
a little bit about what public
works are, um, and there are
many different programs within
our workforce solutions
department. Can you give us some
examples of public works that um
that this would apply.
Um, Madam Speaker
Representative, one that I can
think of that has probably gone
through a couple of uh public
works contracts is the
University of New Mexico
Hospital, um, that hospital has
gone through several um
buildings and renovations and
they've entered into public
works, um, schools is another
example, um, cities and counties
also enter into public work
projects. So thank you, thank
you, Madam Speaker and thank
you, um, representative. So this
will not.
apply for uh like a big box
store. If I'm building a Home
Depot or Walmart, this bill will
not apply, correct?
Correct, uh, Madam Speaker
Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Speaker and
Representative and then now
we're talking about it is only
for the HVAC um services
correct? It's not for the, the,
the lumber and, and, and framing
out or the other skilled laborer
on site. This is for our heating
and cooling systems or HVAC. Is
that correct, Madam Speaker and,
and gentle person that, that is
correct, Madam Speaker
Representative, it speaks to
heating, cooling, ventilation,
exhaust duct.
Work, uh, systems, um, that are
of course part of the public
work project. Thank you very
much and thank you Madam
Speaker, and just for the body I
have the utmost respect for our
minority leader here in the
chamber and I do share that
value of putting burden on
businesses and having multiple,
I, I think that that is a, a, a
very uh big uh difficulty, and I
don't want to hinder that, but
these are just for public works
project.
and the HVAC system that in and
I think you did confirm that,
uh, Madam Speaker, gentle
person, correct?
Madam Speaker, Representative,
yes, I did. OK, so thank you so
much. Then just for the body,
I'm, I'm, I'm, I've sort of
taken over the nerdy information
of the chamber. I've noticed the
session, so sorry, I'm the
daughter of an HVAC man, so I
have to say this is a skilled
laborer. This is not Legos where
you go and buy pieces, straight
pieces and curved pieces and
then take them on site and put
them together. There's
engineering, there's
calculations, there's.
flow, there's intake and duct.
So any fabrication that happens
off site is the most basic of,
um,
Of the devices that are brought
in and then through calculation
and skill are individuals are
installing our HVAC system. Is
this an accurate description of
this skilled, uh, labor, uh,
Madam Speaker, as in, in, in the
most unskilled way of saying it.
Thank you, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle person, uh, Madam
Speaker, Representative, yes it
is. So, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle person, could this be,
this bill is requiring and we,
we, we heard today going to
Denver.
So if, if I was building a pro
if I was in charge of a school
and a construction job at a
school and every school is
different, so every HVAC system
is different, doesn't come in a
box. That's why we have skilled
labor to do it. It's an
individual thing.
If I was getting some prefab
pieces made in Denver, uh,
general, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady would um this bill
required me to pay the
prevailing wage that we pay here
in New Mexico, correct? Uh,
Madam Speaker, general person.
Uh, Madam Speaker,
Representative, if it's off the
shelf, then it doesn't apply in
this case. It's only that custom
built um
Fabrication that that would fall
under this bill so it's very
specific. It's very, it's custom
made to the building that is um
that is being um built. So thank
you Madam Speaker and thank you
gentlemen, and, and, and my
father would say it's all custom
built. That's why we have our
skilled labor to do it, but
Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
let's go back because they have
concerns that there is
fabrication whether we're let's
say we're giving our blueprints
to a fabricator out of state.
Does this bill require us to pay
that fabricator, the prevailing
wage here in the state. Is that
correct? Uh, Madam Speaker,
Representative, yes, that is
correct, so, uh, thank you,
madam, uh, Madam Speaker and
gentleperson so it was as a
business person, if I am going
to pay an out of state
fabricator, the same price as my
local business fabricator plus
the transportation cost.
to get the product down to my
site. Would it not benefit me to
make sure that I'm using local
contractors and local
fabricators and businesses,
Madam Speaker, Representative,
it certainly would benefit you.
It would also benefit, uh, the
workers that you employ, um, it
would benefit their families. It
would benefit the city that they
live in because that's where
they're going to be spending
their money. OK, thank you, uh,
uh, Madam Speaker and general
person, so
want us, so we have a, a, a
very, uh, we, we know this is
not the, the deadly. I, I'm
gonna avoid saying the phrase
that we don't want to say about
simplicity, but this is a bill
this only applies to public
works. It only applies to the
HVAC skilled labor, it, it, it
makes an even playing ground of
what you're spending in labor,
whether you fabricate outside
the state or use a local.
New Mexico company to be able to
pay that wage and as well as,
uh, and it does not, it is not
applies to commercial properties
or single family homes. Is that
correct, Madam Speaker general
person?
Uh, Madam Speaker,
Representative, correct. Thank
you, I rest, Madam Speaker.
Thank you. There is further
debate. The gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero,
Representative Henry.
Thank you Madam Speaker. Does
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Guild. Madam Speaker, I do yield
to the representative.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, uh,
General Lady, I've just got a
couple quick quick questions
from earlier debate, uh, you
said you didn't unders you
didn't know or didn't understand
the question, but, uh, as the
question was asked with the
balloon fiesta Park or not the
balloon, the state fair, that
state land, if it's uh what if
it's a NMFA project if it's
funded through there, would that
be public works is public money.
It, um,
Madam Speaker Representative if
a RFP is put out for a public
works project and it's a then
yes it would apply.
Madam Speaker, general lady, so
I'm looking at two major
projects that look like have
happened over the last couple of
years. One of them is uh an
opportunity enterprising uh
housing development program
looks like it's about $125
million fund through NMFA.
That's to build affordable
homes.
Would it apply to this?
Madam Speaker, Representative,
not always.
How is, uh, Madam Speaker,
gentle lady, how is it not
always if you just said NMFA
projects would be public work
projects if Madam Speaker,
Representative, if they put out
a contract asking for a bid on a
public work project then it
would apply.
They don't do that, Madam
Speaker, Representative, then it
doesn't apply. It only applies
in cases where there is a public
works, um, project and, and
whoever is um whoever has, um,
I'm not sure of the right words,
but whoever has um put a bid,
uh, for that project, um, then
it would apply and they
understand when they when
they're, when they're uh
competing for the bid they
understand what the criteria is
for the bed.
And the understand what rules
they have to follow, uh, for
completing that project and that
includes prevailing wage.
Madam Speaker, General lady, uh,
how about the Albuquerque
Affordable Housing initiative,
uh, that's where they, uh, set
target to fund the creation of a
1000 affordable rental units
through new construction of O
good grief Madam Speaker gentle
lady almost done acquisition and
rehab rehabilitation of existing
buildings, so that looks like
that would be a state project,
so I'm assuming that would be N
NMFA which would be a public
works.
Um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, know all of that
is done through.
through private developers, so
those are not public works
projects.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
then the NMFA funds that are
helping with that, they do not
count as pub as public works.
Madam Speaker, Representative
correct.
The next question, because,
because I would somewhat
disagree with that. I think, I
think for those that are really
worried about uh affordable
housing.
I do think this is going to be
an effect on it because I think
you're seeing a lot of that
through the NMFA, but we can
agree to disagree on that, Madam
Speaker, gentle lady, the next
thing I find very interesting is
how does the state of New Mexico
think that they're going to be
able to make an out of state
company.
Pay the prevailing wage.
Mm
Speaker, representative, that is
already taking place, um, there
are already public works
projects in place with out of
state companies, um, and the.
The Department of Workforce
Solutions overseas those
contracts and make sure that
they are in compliance with the
contract, so that is already
happening. The only thing that
this legislation refers to is
the off-site, uh, workers who
are um making the ductwork and
all of the other things that I
mentioned previously, Madam
Speaker, Generalti, no, I, I
hear what you're saying. I
happen to do a little bit of
developing myself, so I'm, I'm a
little familiar with some of
the.
things you're saying, uh, with
the off-site duct work, but
let's say we're building in, in
Las Cruces and we get it
fabricated in El Paso.
If that company's bid came in
lower.
Now what you're saying is our
public works has to just pay
them more because we wanna make
sure.
I, I see you're squinting your
eyes. I'm not that confused.
What I'm saying is if it's an
out of state company.
We're going to make sure that
bid is higher because we're
having to pay the prevailing
wage.
Madam Speaker, Representative,
they know at the time that they
make the bid that they have to
pay the prevailing wage that is
in the contract that they signed
so they understand very clearly
what they have to do in terms of
um the prevailing wage
specifically.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm still confused. How are we
gonna make an out of state
company and or an out of state,
maybe it's, uh, maybe we're
getting some things from Mexico
or Canada, uh, when the tariffs
aren't there, right? We're all
worried about that. uh, if
they're from another country and
coming into New Mexico, how are
we making sure that they are
paying those prevailing wages,
or are we just costing our
public works office more money.
Um, Madam Speaker,
Representative, as I stated
before, this is already taking
place, um, there are out of
state companies who do bid um on
work in New Mexico and the way
that we make sure that they are
paying the prevailing wage is
through a certified payroll they
have to um adhere to certain
reporting requirements and the
director of uh workforce
Solutions also has the ability
to
ask for information and they
submit the information as far as
I understand it, Madam Speaker,
Representative, there has not
been an issue with that.
OK, Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I, and I think this question was
answered earlier, uh, but I
wanna answer one more time to
make sure I understand how many
fabricating companies do we have
in this state?
Madam Speaker Representative, I
believe I stated there were 20
to 25 in the state.
Madam Speaker, general, lady,
and the other thing that you've
stated is this is only for air
conditioners, so the valleys,
the roofs, all the other things
that might have to be
fabricated. Does that not
pertain to this bill?
Madam, Madam Speaker
representative no, um, as we
indicated before, this, uh, is
specific to duck work.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
if I'm going to a fabricating
company, I believe you said
there's 22 to 23 of them in the
state, and they're gonna
fabricate my valleys for my roof
they're gonna fabricate many of
other fabricated items within my
building. Now I'm only having to
have them figure out what piece
of this design, what piece of
this build was fabricated for
air conditioning? Why are we
targeting just air conditioning?
It's very odd to me that that is
such a targeted area when
there's so much other
Being fabricated for a
commercial building, especially
in public works, Madam Speaker
representative, it that's all
part of the bid they are bidding
on the ductwork.
Madam Speaker, generally, no, I
totally understand that. I get
it. Like I said, I've built a
few things.
But what I'm asking is, is why
are we only targeting the air
conditioner vents to be
fabricated.
To pay prevailing wages.
Mm
Madam Speaker Representative,
this is a very specialized
skill, um, this is not a
situation where you can go to,
for example, Home Depot and buy
what you need off the shelf.
Each one of these buildings
requires special blueprints for
that for that buildings special
specifications so again it's a
very specialized skill and again
this bill refers to or or um
includes those who are left out
in the previous state law, um,
and those are the folks who or
those are the workers who
produce off-site.
So Madam Speaker, gentle lady,
I, I don't wanna belabor this
because we have a lot of other
things to do tonight, but I find
it interesting that the air
conditioning vents are the only
special special industry special
field that is being fabricated
in the bill because when I go to
a commercial build site, there's
a lot of fabrication happening a
lot of it is specialized and it
takes a lot of skill to do it,
Madam Speaker, I think this bill
is, is.
is not well written, um, and I
don't think it's gonna help our
public works at all. I think our
schools are gonna have a higher
price to build. I think a lot of
the projects that we put in for
Capitol Outlay are gonna have a
higher price as we build, um,
and, and I think it's
disappointing that we continue
to pass legislation that's going
to continue to hurt, uh, local
businesses and especially our
local school projects with that
I yield
thank further debate generally
close. Thank you, Madam Speaker
and members of the body.
I want to remind everyone that
again this bill speaks to
equalizing the wages between
those workers who uh fabricate
the duct work on site as opposed
to those workers who fabricate
off-site. This is a question of
um equity and wages and again um
it's fairness for the workers
who, who do that work. I think
the other thing to to remember
too is that when you have highly
skilled um workers in a
particular, um,
Industry, it also uh those
workers are also highly trained,
um, and they also um have um
lower cost overruns, higher work
quality and there's much more
safety on the job and with that,
Madam Speaker, I do now move
that Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59.
do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
tax.
Business Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 59, the vote is now open.
Thank you.
Madam Speaker
Never mind it finally finally
worked. OK.
Boat's about to close.
The vote is closed by a vote of
34 in the affirmative, 27 in the
negative.
Senate tax, Business
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 59
has duly passed this House.
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Madam Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
concurrence.
It is so ordered.
gentle lady from Taos.
Uh, thank you, Madam Speaker. I
move that the House concur with
the Senate amendments to House
Bill 93 as twice amended.
The lady to explain the
amendments.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
the amendment that was added.
On the Senate floor is related
to microgrids, um, as it stands,
microgrids are.
Not regulated by the PRC, uh,
they're behind the meteor
generation sources that are not
subject to the ETA. So this
amendment uh put some guardrails
on large microgrids that connect
to the grid, um, and I can, I'll
talk I'll talk about what is in
each section, uh, the first
section, Section A, clarifies
that microgrids can operate and
provide electricity to a public
utility in our state, providing
there's a service agreement, um,
section B sets forth the
requirements that, um, for
public utilities to purchase
power from that microgrid.
Uh, Section C clarifies that
microgrids are allowed to
quickly ramp up generation to
provide power for their tenants
with guardrails to ensure
movement toward decarbonization
goals,
uh, reiterates that current law,
uh, that microgrids are not
interconnected with the grid are
not considered public utilities
and um Mr. Speaker, I urge
everybody to support the
concurrence.
Right, there is a beat on the
motion to concur the gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, this
gentle lady, uh, yield Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juaner and
gentle lady, one of the things
that I liked about this bill was
the um that it wasn't a mandate
on the PRC. Did any of the
changes, uh, change that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, or is
there still, uh, discretion left
in this for the PRC to be able
to do their job. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, it didn't change any
of that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate on the
motion to concur, the gentle
lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, the gentle lady
from Tashi. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I do yield to the
gentle lady from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on the,
um, on the amendments, um.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um.
My question is in regard to the
language around decarb uh.
the goals for decarbonization,
is that going to follow the ETA?
Mr. Speaker
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentle lady, um, it's not
subject to the ETA, but I will
tell you that these, the goals
are related to um the sale of
excess power, um, they're not
gonna be the microgrids won't be
regulated as a public utility,
uh, until 20.
35, it requires that microgrids
reach net zero carbon standard
by 2045.
And requires PRC filings to
certify progress and compliance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. um, thank you for that,
um, I just, I'm just bringing
this up because what how what
how would these microgrids be
generated, Mr. Speaker?
Um
Most microgrids are uh generate
electricity through, you know,
through solar or wind
generation. They often have big
battery, um, storage systems as
well.
Mr. General, but these don't
necessarily under uh uh what the
conditions in
amendments don't necessarily
prioritize that or do they, Mr.
Speaker generally?
Um,
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
there is a net zero carbon
standard that they have to be by
2045 like the ETA. Thank you,
Mr. Thank you. That's what I
need to hear. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, generally. All right,
we're on a motion to concur with
Senate amendments to house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 93 as twice amended.
All those in favor signified by
C I.
Opposed name.
The I have it. The House has
concurred with Senate amendments
to house government elections
and the Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for house 93 as twice
amended.
Young lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Objection is ordered.
Members, I have an announcement.
Our
House taxation and revenue.
Committee's substitute for 14.
Conference committee.
His meeting at 8:30 in room 317.
With the Senate.
Conferes.
If you wish to webcast.
Throw on your AirPod and watch
the action live or you can wait
until we hear from the
conference committee. Any other
announcements before we continue
with this evening's agenda.
You know, lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
Alright, members
I will direct your attention to.
Supplemental
Calendar number 1, item number
item number 8.
Lowrider Capital license plate.
He's a gentle lady from Berlio
Representative Borego ready on
that item.
Mr. Speaker, um.
Senate Bill 327
reflect that all action
necessary for placing.
Senate Bill 327 our final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I guess
I'm a little excited about this,
uh, Senate Bill 327 is creating
the lowrider Capital license
plate, um, competing with um.
Representative Art de la Cruz,
lowrider, or.
Motorcycle license plate. I move
I do pass. Thank you. Oh wow,
look at that no debate or
anything, skipped right through
that. I like that.
We are on final.
OK, the
The member who is least likely
to want a lowrider. Did you know
that?
I remember from
Santa San from Santa McQueen.
Oh.
Mr. Speaker, uh, license plate
might look great on my Honda.
Nothing wrong with the Honda,
sir. Mr. Speaker, does a gentle
lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Joy. So Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentle lady members of the
body, I just want to share with
you, uh, I've talked about
license plates in the past, um,
and I started complained about
it a lot and I felt like maybe I
should actually do something. So
in the interim, I reached out to
TRD and the secretary of TOD set
me up with a zoom with two
people from motor vehicle
divisions who oversee license
plates.
And I asked them,
What do you think about all
these license plates isn't this
kind of out of control.
And they said yes.
It's out of control.
But
And their butt was really
interesting to me and something
I didn't really expect. The butt
was, it's all computerized.
And it's not really the a
management problem that I feared
over at MD MVD.
So I, I, I do still have some
reservations about the
multiplicity of license plates,
um, you know, there are some
things I, I think are really
good to put on our license
plates. We did Smokey Bear,
right? And that's a New Mexico
icon and I love that. Um, I
actually really like this bill.
I, I mean, it's, it's low
riders, it's, it's car-related
on a license plate and that
makes a lot of sense to me.
Um, I, I think as a body we
still need to, you know,
Think about why we deal with so
many license plates.
Whether their standards, uh, we
have, we have one coming up, you
know, tonight.
Which is a commercial enterprise
and should they be treated
differently?
Uh, what if we have license
plates there are political. Like
suppose Numboga wanted their own
license plate or the calibers.
You know, I would vote no on
that.
Uh, I would also vote no on, uh,
Sierra Club or or something like
that. I mean, I, there's some,
some things I just don't think
are on are appropriate to put on
our license plates, and I fear
that we, because we do it on ad
hoc basis. We don't have any
real standards.
So that's my continuing uh
concern, but this bill, I like
this bill, and I will support
this bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Order in the chambers, order in
the chambers.
Now you guys can clap. It's all
good.
It's, it's a surprise. No rules
me out of order, but OK,
whatever, you know from San
Juan.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, there's
generally, generally yield.
I don't think so
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I believe I am now the
legislator most likely to not
vote for license plates.
Sorry.
Seeing no further debate, the
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker.
I do now move that SB 327. Do
you now pass?
We are on funnel passage of
Senate Bill 327. The vote is now
open.
I got it.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 56 in the affirmative.
3 in the negative. Senate Bill
327 has duly passed this house.
Represent McQueen's gonna put
one of them license plates on
his Honda.
Sticking to the theme of license
plates, it's, it's the gentleman
from Bernalillo ready for.
Item number 9 on the
supplemental calendar number
one. Thank you Mr. Speaker. Can
you get me to that point?
That the record reflect that
actually necessary for placing
Senate Bill 377 on final passage
has been taken and it is subject
to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, members.
I'm thrilled to present Senate
Bill 377 to today. This bill
aims to introduce a special New
Mexico United license plate
celebrating our state's lively
soccer culture and boosting
sports related tourism which
will benefit communities
throughout New Mexico and with
that, Mr. Speaker, I will stand
for questions.
gentlemen from Santa Fe and
Sandoval representing McQueen.
Speaker, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, does a
gentleman y.
Mr. Speaker, I yield and I was
really hoping that we would not
have debate from my colleague.
Yes, I yield, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I just have a couple
of questions. Um, so, uh, I'm a
big United fan. I have a, a
soccer crazed 11 year old who
wears mostly United jerseys, uh,
I think it's a great
organization. I think it's a lot
for our state. It, it is a
commercial operation. It was
very consideration of that in,
in doing a license plate for a
commercial business.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Yes, it was a consideration.
At the same time, United has
become so iconic and so beloved,
it's woven itself into the
fabric of the community, so we
decided to dispel that and move
forward.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, was,
was it considered that perhaps
that the company should pay a
fee in order to the state in
order to for us to put them on
the license plate.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it was
not, however, I will share that
the state of New Mexico, the
city of Albuquerque.
Has partnered with the United
and is helping in a variety of
ways as you know, there's a
stadium under construction right
now or soon, I'm sorry had
balloon fiesta, so no, that was
not a consideration.
And Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
I understand there was also an
isotopes, uh, license plate
proposal, uh, I love the
isotopes as well. I believe that
got tabled in house
transportation, uh, is, is there
a reason why we're doing a
united, uh, plate and not an
isotopes plate.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't
recall that that was tabled.
Um, um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
I, I don't know. I, I, I, I
understand that it didn't move
forward out of house
transportation.
Um, Mr. Speaker, the, uh, the
sponsor of that particular bill,
gentlemen, was, uh, not there
and time ran out, so it, it got
rolled and then time ran out,
Mr. Speaker. OK, fair enough.
Um.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
See no further debate. The
gentlemen close.
Mr. Speaker, I now move a do
pass on SB 377.
We're on final passage of House
Bill. Excuse me, Senate bill.
377. The vote is not open.
What about clothes?
The votes are closed by a vote
of 46 in the affirmative, 15 in
the negative. Senate Bill 377
has duly passed this house.
Let's go to supplemental
calendar number one, or rather
let's stay on supplemental
calendar number one.
Item 13, gentle lady from Taos,
are you ready on that item?
I am Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point?
The direct reflect that all
action necessary for replacing
Senate Bill 495 on final passage
has been taken and it is subject
to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill. Senate Bill
495 amends the educational
television equipment replacement
fund to include the expenditure
at public schools, adds radio
equipment, as an eligible use
and makes a technical change to
clarify that the fund is
non-reverting with that I sent
for questions.
Speaker, I move that Senate Bill
1485 do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 495. The vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 55 in the affirmative, 6 in
the negative. Senate Bill 495
has duly passed this house.
She
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in a gross copy of Senate Bill 8
as amended has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Bill 13 as amended by the
House, Senate Bill 31 as amended
by the Senate and further
amended by the House with
emergency clause.
Senate Bill 88 as amended by the
Senate and further amended by
the House.
Senate Bill 170 as amended by
the Senate and further amended
by the House, Senate Bill 375 as
amended by the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson a chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Rural
Development, land grants, and
cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 24.
House Bill 102, House Bill 159
as amended by the House and
returned same herewith
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, son of chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed.
House Bill 117 as amended by the
House and further amended by the
Senate, House Bill 203 as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate and
requests the concurrence of the
House to the Senate amendments,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
You're lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business Committee
reports.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation is so
ordered.
Young lady from Bernali or
representative Hockmanby Hill,
are you ready on item.
Number 50 on the regular
calendar.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you take
me to that point the record
reflect that all action for
placing Senate Bill 66 with an
emergency class on final passage
has been taken, and it is
subject to debate amendment or
substitution to generally to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Senate Bill 66 with an emergency
clause, um, amends the criminal
Offender Employment Act to
exempt certain agencies being
the early childhood education
and care department, the
Healthcare Authority, Children,
Youth and Families Department
and the Public Education
department, uh, section 18 of
the bill specifically covers
applicants and licenses for
employment with childcare
facilities for caregivers in
homes and healthcare facilities
and for all positions at CYFD.
And for uh those licensed
positions in public schools, and
with that, I stand for
questions.
There is a be you lady from
Berlio and Torres,
Representative Lord. Thank you
Mr. Speaker, the gentle lady,
please yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I yield
to my friend from Bernolio in
Torrance. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker Jola, it's been an
interesting evening. Russian
roulette of not knowing what
bills coming up next. So can you
just briefly tell me, I know you
just described a little bit
about the changes. Were there
any amendments, uh, well, I try
to look up the bill, Mr.
Speaker, young lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady, I
do not believe there are any
amendments on this bill.
So Mr. Speaker Dela, so it has
criminal offenders, employment
exemptions, so are weempting
people from getting a criminal
background check, Mr. Speaker,
Joe later, can you tell me what
the exemptions are?
Uh,
Mr. Speaker, so, uh, quite the
opposite. So what we're doing
with this bill is we're actually
allowing exemptions, um, from
the uh in the Employment Act,
certain positions, uh, we don't
do background checks for for
types of felonies obviously and
some misdemeanors and so what
this bill does, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is it exempts these
agencies and these specific
positions within those agencies
from that exemption so that uh
full background check report,
including misdemeanors are
Um, considered.
OK, Mr. Speaker, generally, just
a few more questions. I'm
looking on here. So criminal
offender Employment Act is not
applicable to their early
childhood education care
department for consideration.
Can you explain to me what that
means by uh the criminal
employer.
A criminal offender Employment
Act is not applicable to these
departments.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Jelani, the
criminal offender Employment
Act, um, allows for the
exemption of some background
checks, um, with respect to some
entities and positions within
those entities and so what this
bill does, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, is it exempt from that act
meaning that we still have to do
background checks for these
agencies and these positions and
these agencies. OK, Mr. Silly, I
got the double negative now. So
it used to be they were exempt
so that they're no longer exempt
so that now.
can do a background check on all
these people who especially I
like this, the ones who have
contact with children. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gen lady, they can,
yes. Thank you for explaining.
There is for the debate lady
from Chavez, Key Roosevelt
representative Reebe.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady yield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I, I yield to
my friend from judiciary. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Speaker, um, again,
so as you stated, um, gentle
lady, this is going to um allow
background checks for, um,
Basically daycares, things of
that nature, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, daycare is one of those
things, yes, but it's a number
of other positions, um, that are
considered sensitive, and we
want to make sure that um people
are filling those positions are
fully vetted and um we have a
good idea as to what their
backgrounds are and what they um
Um
What is exists on their records.
All right, and Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, just so because I
was unclear in judiciary, I
think it was yesterday, maybe
even um section C, um, the
subsection A of the section
shall promulgate rules related
to criminal history, screening
for the purposes of determined
eligibility. Can you just
explain that to the body, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle ladies, so
because we're exempting these
agencies from this particular
act, this uh,
That's already in law. These
agencies are going to have to
promulgate rules, um, and or
rules meeting procedures as to
uh what types of background
checks they're, they're still
going to proceed to do what they
want to look for in those
background checks, um,
Yeah. OK, and thank you, Mr.
Speaker, generally, so this
would this give uh this is is a
CYFD that's going to promulgate
the rules or make the decisions
on what is determined to be, um,
I guess something that could
prevent somebody from having a.
Um, a license or whatever it is
under this uh criminal offender
Employment Act, Madam Speaker or
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so, um,
subsection C, any agency exempt
pursuant to subsection A and if
we go back to subsection A,
those agencies enumerated are
the early childhood education
and care department.
Turn the page.
For registration of employment
at a childcare facility, an
agency for consideration of an
applicant for employment as a
caregiver or hospice caregiver
subject to the caregiver's
criminal history Screening Act,
the Children, Youth and Families
Department and the public
education department for
consideration of an applicant
for licensure under the school
Personnel Act.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I noticed
someone an analysis that says
CYFD will be required to
consider certain applicants for
employment who may not be
suitable for roles involving
work with children and families.
This will limit the agency's
discretion in determining which
criminal convictions are
considered disqualifying for
employment within the
department, um, Mr. Speaker,
generally, can you explain if
that is an accurate analysis or
how you interpret that analysis,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker Delini, the way I
interpret that analysis is that,
um, it actually it it expands
what each agency will be able to
consider that's why it's so
important that each agency
promulgate their own rules, um,
because each agency has specific
positions that are, uh, designed
to accomplish specific goals,
for instance, Mr. Speaker Delay,
if we have, um, if we have folks
who are working with, with young
children, we wanna make sure
that they don't have any, you
know, criminal background.
with regards to
You know,
acts having to do with children
and and um distasteful things
like that, so. OK, and thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies,
so this actually will, will give
them the opportunity to instead
of just looking possibly at
felony offenses, they could look
at a misdemeanor offense for
let's say if you're trying to
open a daycare, you would
actually be able to look at
whether there was a conviction
or arrest or I, I, I think it's
just a, a charge arrest or
conviction for like, let's say
enticement of a child or
indecent exposure which is our
misdemeanor offenses that might
not actually be covered under
the current law, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, am I understanding
that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
precisely. That is exactly the
intent of the bill. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker generally. I
just wanted to make it clear to
the body that this could
actually be very beneficial to
make sure we don't have any type
of predators, um, who are
getting licenses on these types
of areas. So I thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Here for the debate, gentlemen
from Lee Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yelled to my
friend from Lee County.
Thank you very much.
I'm hoping this is a pretty
straightforward question, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, but if
not, maybe we can build around
it, um.
A week or so back, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, this body
passed the bill out of here with
respect to juvenile juvenile
arrests and what happens from a
second degree felony at the age
of 21 when they're released from
prison.
Uh, Joe and, um, the records are
expunged. What guardrails do you
have inside of here that ensures
that we're able to guarantee
that those people cannot be one
of the groups listed in item 3
on page 2 or anywhere else.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentleman from
Lee so the um rules applicable
to expungement, specifically
those discussed, um, you know,
expunsion of records of
juveniles have absolutely
nothing to do with this bill.
um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so,
I mean, if there's expungement
to someone's record prior to,
um,
Prior to them apply applying for
one of these types of jobs at
this agency. That's not going to
be, um, but again covered within
the purview of this bill. This
is only for a record that is
incurred, uh, once someone is in
a is an adult.
Ex expungement has nothing to do
with this bill.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
understand it's not within the
language of this bill, but Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we
consider somebody an adult, uh,
at 18, not necessarily at 21. I
understand with respect to the
2nd degree felony as a juvenile,
you're released at the age of
21.
One of the concerns that we had
with that piece of legislation
that went across was where, um,
we're clearing a record.
And now, if I read this section,
an agency for consideration of
an applicant for employment as a
caregiver or a hospital
caregiver subject to the
caregiver's criminal history
Screening Act. um
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
So if your record's cleared,
What good does the criminal
history screening do?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
mean, if the record is clear,
subject to that person meaning
the requirements of expungement,
um, due to previous offenses,
then it's, it's irrelevant. It's
not applicable. However, if that
person were to have a record
that was not subject to
expungement, um, for any reason,
then that record would, would of
course be considered, looked at.
considered as part of the
requirements of this bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle ladies. So I guess
I'm asking my questions wrong.
I understood from the
legislation that we passed, like
I said, a week or so back. I
don't remember the bill number.
But at the, you could, you
could.
Be convicted of the 2nd degree
felony.
Um, murder.
Um, and at the age of 21,
because it's a 2nd degree or
lesser penalty.
When they released at the age of
21, the record is sealed or
expunged. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that same person could
then turn around and go apply as
a caregiver, and there's no way
in the criminal history
screening that that would come
up. Is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, yes,
that is correct, because again,
we're only considering those
individuals that um were not
subject to expungement for any
reason prior to their
application for employment with
these agencies.
Mr. Speaker, thank you for
helping me clarify that point,
um.
Are you back.
You know, for the debate
generally to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now
move that Senate Bill 66 with an
emergency clause do not pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 66 with an emergency
clause.
The vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
OK
In 10 seconds.
The voices aren't closed by a
vote of 52 in the affirmative, 9
in the negative. Senate Bill 66.
With an emergency clause has
duly passed his house.
Item 57 on the regular calendar
that would be sent a bill 221.
The gentle lady from Torres in
San Miguel Representative
Gonzalez, that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing Senate
Bill 221 as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point, or?
Um, Senate Bill 221 adds a new
prohibited unfair claims
practice that would prevent
insurers from improperly
categorizing policyholder
inquiries as claims when no
coverage applies, no payment is
made, and there is no fraud
involved.
Mm
Generally the close.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that
Senate Bill 221 as amended do
now pass our passage of Senate
Bill 221 as amended, the vote is
not open.
The boys aren't closed by a vote
of 57 in the affirmative, 4 in
the negative. Senate Bill 221 as
amended.
A Zulu pass his house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
An objection to this order.
Gentle lady from
Torrance and San Miguel.
Are you ready on item number 73.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point?
action necessary for placing
House Memorial 62 on final
passage has been taken and it is
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentilated to
explain the memorial.
Um, House Memorial 62 is
memorial, a memorial recognizing
the impact of the hermit's peak
Caf Canyon fire on the residents
and communities of Northeastern
New Mexico.
See, no debate generally close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Memorial 62 do now passage of
Memorial 62. The vote is now
open.
No
It's too bad when members don't
care about.
Wildfires.
Is there objection to allowing
the gentleman from Donana to
cast his vote.
You guys can boo him boo.
How do you wish to vote?
Only if you slip in turkey
hunting later on.
The vote is not closed by one of
63 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative. How's Memorial 62 has
Julie passed his house.
You're a lady from Berlin, are
you ready on item 49 on the
regular calendar? Yes, Mr.
Speaker, can you get me to that
point that all action necessary
for placing Senate Bill 53 on
final passage has been taken,
and it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
general lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So this
changes the definition of
independently licensed
prescribing clinician, um, it
would add prescribing
psychologists with at least 4
years of independent experience
prescribing psychotropic drugs
to the definition. With that, I
stand for questions. There is a
gentle lady from Donana Hidalgo
and Luna, Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, does the
gentle lady yield, Mr. Speaker,
I yield to the ranking member on
Health and Human Services. Thank
you gentle lady, um, I, I
noticed that.
I was absent that day. I may
have been sick that day. I, I
had a few days that I was out,
Mr. Speaker, so I, I was hoping
that you could just expand on
this a bit. It looks like we've
looked at this bill before.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
this is actually I'm a I'm pinch
hitting so I'll do the best that
I can so it what what was said
by the sponsor was that that
that was inadvertently left off
when the law was changed in 2024
and it's just kind of um
cleaning up an air an omission
that was made in last session.
Thank you, gentle lady and uh
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so I,
I, I think this would meet a
real need for um access to care
to behavioral health, mental
health needs all around the
state. Do you agree with that,
gentle ladies and gentle lady,
100%.
I do as well. I'm supportive.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
There is for the debate
generally from Berlio and
Torrens, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentle lady from Berlin County,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernal Leo in
Torrance. Thank you, um, Mr. I'm
just looking through it because
these things are getting thrown
at us so fast, and if I haven't
seen him, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it's just this one change
right here independently
licensed prescribing clinician,
a clinicians, and then it goes
on to say prescribing
psychologists who have at least
4 years of independent
experience prescribing
psychotropics. That was the only
change the addition there, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, Joy.
Seeing no further debate you're
close. Mr. Speaker, I move that
Senate Bill 53 do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Bill 53, the vote is now open.
It's about to close?
The boys aren't closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 1 in
Gentle lady from Bern Lear
onornu. Are you ready on
supplemental calendar.
Number
2
Item number 2.
Let the record reflect that all
action for placing Senate tax,
business, and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 481 as amended on final
passage has been taken.
And it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, Senate Bill 481
creates a first ever state id
type district at the New Mexico
State Fair. It's a Marshall Plan
that will create a district that
captures the gross receipts
generated on the real estate
owned by the state, including
gaming taxes.
Generated from the reino at the
fairgrounds and ensure the money
is spent there.
A half a million dollar RFP has
been issued by the GST to
develop a master plan for the
area.
That was appropriated last year.
The legislation will allow for
bonds backed by the gross
receipts and gaming tax
proceeds. The tit will operate
only from the gross receipts and
gaming taxes and if no bonds are
issued after 4 years, all monies
will revert back to the general
fund, so there are a couple of
things that this does not do. It
doesn't decide if the fair
should stay or move. It doesn't
authorize the sale of state
land, and it does not see state
control any more than any other
kid, and because it is
land, the legislature will have
even greater control over that
land than under a traditional
tid, and I have two experts.
One, I have one expert soon to
have 2.
Um, and this is.
Bond attorney Justin Horwitz of
the Rody firm. And with that,
Mr. Speaker, I stand for
questions.
There is debate. We have first
on the list a gentleman from
Colfax Curry Quay Harding, San
Miguel and Union Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
I yield to the gentleman.
Gentle lady, I saw this.
Bill last night.
Mr. Speaker, I hope this doesn't
go as long as it did last night.
Uh, I think we were in the wee
hours of the morning when we
finished up.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
can you tell me just a little
bit more about what this bill
does.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
it is a one of a kind tid
because most Tids are operated
by the county.
This is a state ed because it's
uh the state fairgrounds is
state owned land, so we will
take the um.
The gross receipts tax generated
by that land and put it in the
tin.
Mr. Speaker, Representative.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what about, uh, local input? Has
there been, uh, surveys ran of
the local residents been, uh,
acquired about whether they
support this or not.
Mr. Speaker Representative, yes,
there have been several
community meetings and um we
have.
A letter circulating, um, signed
by members of the community who
support this plan.
So how long is this plan, uh,
been going on?
Um, it's been about a year,
there was money in the, in HB 2
in the budget last year to
create the tin for this year. So
a little over a year.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I apologize. I know that
we went over most of this last
night, but I, I learned a lot a
lot and, uh, I'm trying to kind
of bring it out for the folks
that hadn't, had never heard it,
so can you tell me a little bit
about what this community would
look like.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, um,
representative, there's an RFP
out for the development of the
land currently, we do not have
that back. There are several
options that we could do with
this land. There is a chance
that the fair moves, there's a
chance that the fair stays if
the first stays, we would revamp
it, um, update it, a lot of
parts of the fair, especially if
you've been lately, you know
that it's getting kind of old,
getting a little long in the
tooth, so give her a, give her a
makeover, give her an update if
the fair moves and
would be using that land as
mixed-use land for green space,
mixed income affordable housing,
um, single-use and multi-family
homes and some commercial
property as well.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
would there be a, a grocery
store? Would there be walking
past, biking paths.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, it
is hard to say again without
that RFP having been back, but
as the representative of the
area that is a part of my vision
personally.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
Uh, on this property, there's a
colosseum, and I've been there
with my kids rodeo, and they ran
barrels there.
I've been there with my
grandkids to the Bigfoot, uh,
truck.
Uh, deal. I've, I've been to a
lot of things there, bull
riding, PRCA bull riding.
Uh, does the Colosseum stay or
go?
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative
again without that RFP coming
out, I can't say for sure.
However, the the rodeo and all
those activities are very much
part of the fair, so we would
have to have some sort of
accommodation to have those
events go with the fair.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Here this, this kind of gets
back to my big question last
night, uh, why are we planning
the destruction of the old fair
before we planned the
construction of new Fair.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
would not say that we are at all
because that RFP is out and part
of that RFP is if there's an
excellent plan out there to just
revitalize the fair where it is
if Expo New Mexico decides
that's the direction that they
wanna go, that's where we will
go.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
The RFP comes back that you are
going to move the fare.
Will the racetrack be moved.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
not at this time. The racetrack
and Raino are on a separate
lease. They have a separate
compact, I believe it's a
twenty-year lease they're
currently under, so if it is not
part of the plan at the moment
to have the Raino and racetrack
move.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and, as I said, we went over a
lot of this last night. I'm not
trying to trouble you, but I
want to bring out some bring
some of it out for these other
folks, uh, if the racetrack
stays, then you, you're going to
have houses.
And horses and people, all kind
of
In in one spot, is that true? I
mean, is that gonna be handy or?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
again without that RFP having
been settled, I cannot say, but
we would not be the first or
second city to have a racetrack
in the middle of town.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Another concern I have is at, at
the end of the fair area,
there's a huge, beautiful indoor
arena, that all has multiple
equine activities there all the
time.
Um
I've, I've seen every type from,
from ratings to, to, uh, cart
contest, uh, uh, little draft
horses and, uh, and it's got
also an outdoor arena for, and
so sometimes they'll have
ropings and they'll be roping
outside and inside at the same
time. Do you perceive that to
stay or go, I, I understand that
the RFP is not back, but you
have to have a dream before you
let the RFP. So, so, uh, you
know, I've been through that
process quite a bit.
You have to be thinking about
where you're going and, and,
and, uh,
You know, if it were me, I would
be for, for planning where we're
going to put the fair first and
what we're going to do with the
old fairground second, but as
long as we're talking about it,
let's, let's talk about that big
nice arena down there at the
end.
Speaker representative, like I
said, um, those activities like
the roping, the rodeo type
activities are integral to the
fair, even though we don't, and
sometimes like you mentioned, we
have events like that that
aren't during fair time as well,
but.
Same, same answer really we
would have to have a space and
an area to have rodeotype
activities cause it's, it's so
much part of the fair. That's
what.
I don't know, I'd say at least
50% of the people who attend the
fair attend for um activities
like that, so it would have to
go wherever the fair goes we
would have to include a space
for activities like that.
Um, oh sorry, and I meant to say
also, um, Mr. Speaker
Representative since Expo New
Mexico does have say over which
plan which RFP we will be
following those activities are
integral to the Expo New Mexico
board, so I'm very confident
that they would make sure that
there would be a space for those
activities.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
I suppose you're talking about
the state fair commission.
That's correct, yes. Expo New
Mexico's State Fair Commission
Board.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, you
also talked about a board that
would be appointed by the
governor, and it would be, I, I
believe you said a six-member
board. Can you talk to us a
little bit about, uh, about that
board, how
fits in with the RFP how it fits
in with the decision making to
move or stay, go or stay in the
planning process if you move.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
I'll try to hit all those
points. So first off, it's not a
government appointed board. It
is a seven member board of which
the governor would be a member
as well as a commu a member from
the community appointed by the
governor, the other members
would include the mayor, the
state senator for the area, the
state rep for the area, the city
councilor, and also the county
commissioner.
That sounds fair.
So who has the, uh, that sounds
fair for the fair.
Sorry, I thought it was starting
to get late.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, uh, who,
who, who ultimately will make
the decisions that we're talking
about, the state fair commission
or the appointed board?
So that would be a mixture, Mr.
Speaker Representative, like I
say the um state fair commission
board will select the master
plan, as it were, as for what
the future of the fair will be,
um, I know it is in the
governor's prerogative to keep
it in central New Mexico. I know
it is very important to Mayor
Keller to keep the state fair in
Albuquerque so that they have
control over the future of the
fair. The board that I
mentioned, the TI board will
oversee the TI.
The, it's a tad of a tid. Sorry,
it is getting late. It's a tear.
Yeah
it did.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um,
How long will this process take?
Mr. Speaker, representative, it
it is hard to say we are
anticipating a response on the
RFP any day. The tid board will
sit for 6 years as is before new
members are elected, so if the
plan ends up being that we move
the fare.
I don't see us breaking ground
on any new houses sooner than 6
years.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I, I really, uh,
I'm not too familiar with kids.
I've heard, I've worked around
and her and heard of them
before. Where do they draw their
taxing authority from.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
the statute provides those
distributions.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
also one of the things that we
talked about was possible, uh,
possibly that even if you did
move the some of the art center
buildings might be left, uh, can
you talk a little bit about
that?
Yes, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, um, the African
American Performing Arts Center,
um, there is a plan to keep that
there we would have to do
further negotiations with Expo
New Mexico, but it is a
beautiful purporting arts center
and a lot of the community uses
it year round, so we would be in
discussions to keep that where
it's at.
Because that's much newer than
the surrounding fair buildings.
That sounds like a good idea,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, has
anybody
Thought about the replacement
cost.
If we did move to a new
fairgrounds.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I know
that we're talking 6 years out.
I know that prices change. I
know that we, we, we've changed
some things in here this year
that will affect that price.
But Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
can you just give me a
One of those big old ballpark
guesses of what that might be.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
just so I make sure I get you
the correct approximate answer.
Are you talking about the cost
of relocating the fare or the
cost of building new
fairgrounds, revamping.
Can you, sorry, Mr. Speaker
Representative, can you be like
a little bit more specific about
what number you're looking for,
I, I love that you want to be
more specific. I'm basically
talking about building a new
fairgrounds.
Mr. Speaker, representative, the
maximum spending authority under
the act is $500 million.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
That might be half enough.
Do we think?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I
would say so.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
thank you, gentle lady, for your
time.
I
yield my time.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo and
Torrance Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Well, the gentle lady from
Bernalillo County, please yield?
I will yield to the gentle lady.
OK, give me a second. It's late.
We're tired, but I got to get
all my stuff together here.
So let me ask some questions,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
about this bill.
So the first time I heard about
this was when our governor,
said that she wants to
We develop move, um.
The fairgrounds, Mr. Speaker, so
it seems to be a lot of push on
her end.
To move that out of the area.
And the first question I'm gonna
ask is, do we know where it's
gonna go because I know there
was some talk about moving it
where my old area was, was
Edgewood, which would be a
horrible idea. um, do we have
any insight and what does the
mayor of Albuquerque have to say
about if it was moved out of the
area. Does he want to stay
there? What about the city
councilors and the county
commissioners, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, um, there are, I
think, at least 3 sites at least
3 sites being scouted to um.
How's the new fairgrounds?
Should it be moved, but Mayor
Keller is very passionate about
keeping it in the Albuquerque
area.
Yeah, Mr. Speaker Delaney, one
of the big issues when I heard
when they were talking about
Edgewood, it does not have the
infrastructure of the hotels or
the water. we don't have enough
water out there as it is, so
that would be a big issue. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um, do
we have a water study and how
much water that the state, uh,
fairgrounds uses now compared to
if we moved houses and
businesses into that area, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, no, we
do not.
Is there a reason Mr. speaking
why we, because it, it almost
feels like we're putting the
cart before the horse on this
thing and almost seems like we
needed a task force to look at
this to say, OK,
Uh, the state fair generates 10
amount of income. It's a big
thing for tourism. It's gonna
cost this versus this to move
it. Do I have those numbers
anywhere, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so as
far as this bill pertains we're
just setting up the financing.
Should the fair move should the
fare get redone.
We're just looking to set up the
financing for that so as far as
studies go, that would be.
That really wouldn't pertain to
this bill.
Well, Mr. Speaker and gentleman,
I would disagree on that because
to me it seems like
We do, normally what we do with
everything here is we do a
study. I've been in health
committee for a long time and
everything we do is a study.
It's about $350,000 for every
study, every time.
We do a study to find out if we
need X or if X is needed or if
we need to draft some bills on
X, but instead it seems instead
of us looking to see how much it
was gonna cost if it's worth it,
it seems like, you know, the
governor came on and said she
wants it to be housing, and now
we're trying to secure funds,
but we don't know what the funds
are for, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, because we don't know
what's happening next.
Mr. Speaker Representative, I
don't even necessarily disagree
with that statement, but the
studies would have to happen
before any bonds from the tit
get approved.
So Mr. Speaker Deli, that leads
me to another question that I
had.
Um, and when I I was looking
here to analysis by taxation.
And it says that this um.
It provides authority for the
district to establish a property
tax levy on real property within
the boundaries.
So does that mean that the
houses in the district says a
maximum $5 50,000 dollars. So
who is paying that tax levy on
real property, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, uh, Representative
residents in the district could
vote to impose that tax on
themselves.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so we would then ask, so then we
go back and say,
OK, we've allocated this we
think we're going to do this. If
we do this, then they would
have, would it be on the ballot
then, Mr. Speaker General, that
they would vote to say they want
to pay that bond in that
district X amount of dollars.
To move the state fair out and
then put housing in there or
whatever is gonna happen. I'm
assuming it's gonna be housing a
Speaker and John Lenny.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, so
the only thing subject to
election would be whether or not
to do the property tax.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady
so has anyone gone, is there,
um, housing committees in that
area, HOAs or anything has
anybody gone out and talked to
them and said, hey, we're going
to possibly make a bunch of
changes, take the state fair
out. How do you feel about that?
And would you be, uh, amenable
to paying taxes for this change.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes, in those discussions are
ongoing.
And Mr. Speaker, generally are
those people, because it's a
You know, it's a very
interesting district down there,
um.
It's some of the area is not
extremely prosperous. I know
there's an American Legion
that's right across the street.
There's some other businesses
that need to move along. The
district kind of changes, so.
Are those it's just.
The residents are the ones that
would get the bond or would do
uh go against businesses as
well, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that would be state tax revenue
that would pay that bond.
Not the residents.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, my
computer's about to die, as is
my wit.
Mr. Speaker and De lady, so.
We don't know where it's going
to move to.
Do we know why they, because I
know the governor keeps pushing
for the move. Do, thank you so
much. Do we know why?
We would want it moved to
another location.
And have we done a feasibility
study, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
to say if we left it was where
it is and revamped it would be X
and if we moved it, it would be
why.
Mr. Speaker Representative, a
feas feasibility study, much
like the housing or sorry, the
water study that you mentioned
before, again, those things
would have to be done before we
issue any bonds, but in terms of
why we're moving the fare,
essentially, when we put the
fair there up at Louisiana and
Lomas that was the edge of town
when it was built so it made
sense to have it there. It was
easily accessible for all the
ranchers coming in from other
parts of the state but that was
almost 80.
years ago and it's very much not
the edge of town anymore. It's
very hard to get to. I live
blocks, literal blocks away from
the state fairgrounds and when
the fair is going on, that area
is under lockdown. There are
times of day where if I have to
go somewhere, I will check the
time. I won't even leave because
I know the traffic is so bad and
if I'm not near my house, I wait
to come home until I know the
traffic is cleared out. It
absolutely chokes that
neighborhood, um, it's, it's
hard to access it's hard to.
Ingress and egress are
impossible, not to mention the
fact that we're starting to kind
of outgrow the area.
Mrs.
sorry.
Generally, I would agree with
you on that because when I had
to go to American Legion
meetings, you have to plan kind
of around the fair when you get
around that. I do understand
that, although there's other
ways we could address it, um,
what kind of impact is it gonna
have?
Uh, what kind of money does a
state fair bring into us? Well,
how much money does it bring in
and let's see if, if there was a
commission for all was being
moved, how much of a loss are we
going to have, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker,
Representative, in terms of
gross receipts, it's very low.
It's about one.
a million dollars a year.
OK, but OK, so we got.
GRT, but then we have also
tourism, hotels, restaurants,
people coming in from all over
to come to that. Does that get
figured into that as well, Mr.
Speaker, gen lady.
Yes, um, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I think it's
important to remember that we're
not talking about ending the
fair. We're talking about moving
it so we wouldn't, we wouldn't
see an end to those monies
coming into the state and there
would just be in another part of
town.
true, Mr. Speaker, but it would
be
The money that would be lost to
the restaurants, the hotels,
everything around that area, so
there would be a loss for that
neighborhood, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentlelani, so we don't have
a water study. Do we do
Because
I know with my district this
might be a little bit different
from in Albuquerque, but water
is a huge issue, and Mr. Speaker
Delaney, it's hard to, I kind of
look at making this decision and
thinking, I don't even have a
water study yet, so I don't even
know if I would even want this
to be approved because let's say
a housing district uses this,
nobody know home knows what I'm
doing water uses more with, uh,
let's say housing and parks and
whatever versus the uh.
The um state fairgrounds that's
there right now so we don't have
that. So, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, have we talked to
Law enforcement or the fire
department because that's we're
now if we're moving from one to
another if it's going from a
state park, let's say, to a
housing community, you're gonna
need more law enforcement for
calls and such, and there could
be more possibility of fires.
Have you talked to them about
the impact uh on our law
enforcement and fire
departments, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker, uh,
representative, again.
Those studies would have to be
done before any bonds are
issued.
OK, that's why.
Which be generally, I guess I
would be more on board if it was
like, OK, we've done all this
stuff and we realized that, you
know, the it would it makes more
sense to have somewhere else
because we've done all these
studies or we've looked at the
water issue and if we move
houses in there that would use
more water than what this state
fairground is using, so Mr.
Speaker and General Lady, um,
So I'm understanding there's
there's really no plan, there's
no design, there's nothing
really going on. We're just
setting up that if this would
happen that would be a board.
And the
So does a board have
Do, are they gonna have any
representation from outside the
location, for example, somebody
from Roswell, maybe we find out
most of the people come from
Roswell, and most of the people,
let's say, uh, Ridoso they have
horses, they bring them in, um,
for the races and whatnot that
impact that's gonna be on them
moving to another location
anybody taking that into
consideration, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, and will there be
people from outside.
Hold on, I'm almost done.
I know
don't sign language with you
from girls there. Um, has
anybody taken into consideration
that people outside that
district also have an impact,
um, the, the vendors, the people
from all over, the horse racing,
all that stuff, they any, well
anybody on that be on the board
or is it only going to be people
in that local area, Mr. Speaker
and John Ley. Mr. Speaker,
representative, since the TI is
going to be overseeing what
happens to that plot of land in
that area? No, just the people
who have immediate.
What's the word jurisdiction
over that particular 286 acres
in House District 19 will have.
Um, a say on the board now,
however, if the fair were to
move.
That would be up to the um
Fairground commission Expo New
Mexico if they want to create a
board of their own with um input
from people around the state
about the future location that
would be under their purview.
OK, so Mr. Speaker, ladies, let
me go into the bill. So there's
gonna be a board and
I'm going down here looking in
here. How many people
are going, I'm looking real
quickly because it's so late and
I haven't read through all this
yet. How many people are on this
board and who is appointing
them, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, Representative,
there will be 7 people, the
governor, um, a community member
appointed by the governor, the
mayor, the state rep, the state
senator, the county
commissioner, and the city
councilor.
OK, you're gonna see my dilemma
in this question that I have
next. So Mr. Speaker John Le so
my issue with that is.
If the governor is appointing 7
people.
What are, what are the um
requirements for these 7 people?
Let me start with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, I'm
sorry, um.
One, the governor doesn't
appoint anybody except the
community member and I and I,
I'm really sorry, Mr. Speaker
Representative, I missed the
second half of your question.
Well you young lady, so did I.
So
Ah, Mrs. Julie, OK, so she
There's 7 members, the governor
only appoints the community
member, then there's a
representative and a senator.
Yeah, you, yeah,
and then the mayor.
And then who are the other
The county commissioner for, oh,
Mr. Speaker, represented the
county commissioner for the area
and the city councilor.
OK
OK, so then there are the ones
that are all getting together to
make the decision. OK, Mr.
Speaker, are they gonna have
open meetings, uh, like are they
gonna have open meetings in that
district and advertise like
we're gonna be having this
meeting about this. We want like
town halls, that's the word I
was looking for, man, I could
not find that word at all. Like
where people go and talk and
they talk to you at the town
hall, uh, Miss Milla, are they
gonna have town halls so that
people can come in and talk
about this.
Issue about what happens next?
Yes, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, those meetings
will all be subject to the Open
Meetings Act and all members of
the board are subject to the
governmental Conduct Act as
well.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um,
You said, OK, I'm going through
your community benefit project
public entity.
Um, so I see in here so when we
get to here.
Mr. Speaker, I'm looking on,
maybe you can help me understand
this on page 3, I'm looking at
amendments and context, so I
don't know what line it is. It
says F public entity needs an
agency department institution,
county municipality or public
subdivision and public
improvements and then we go down
to looks like.
This public entity is going to
be.
They're gonna be in charge of
making the sanitary sewage or in
the transportation and all that
stuff, drainage, are those gonna
be people overseeing it or
developing it? Can you explain
to me or advising it, can you
explain to me what these uh with
these public entity is gonna be
doing with that whole section,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
And Mr. Speaker General said
look through it almost looks
like they're the people because
if they go on it's water
systems, highways, trails.
Parks, landscape, and it looks
like that public entity is gonna
be in charge and maybe I'm not
understanding, maybe you can
help me understand who is this
public agency, which means the
agency department institutions
and going to be in control of
all that, Mr. Speaker Joe Leni.
So Mr. Speaker, representative
of public improvements they be
in charge of um.
procurement
And
And development.
But not operational.
Was that a question.
Sorry, so, so they're the ones.
They're going to set that up,
but not going to be the ones
that do it. Like they're going
to set up.
Uh, the sanitary or they just
oversee, can you explain a
little bit more what that is
because I'm not fully
understanding much bigger young
lady. Yes, so um,
Correct. They would set it up,
not necessarily oversee it, and
that's typical language for a
tit.
That or
Typical structure.
So Mr. Speaker, lady, so
It looks like there because also
talks about a school library,
some other things. So those
could all be things that could
end up in the district Mr.
Speaker general, and if that's
gonna happen, do we have an
analysis, I guess it'd be by DOT
to determine because there's
just a lot of trap because, you
know, it's going down towards
the base. There's a lot of
people seem to be going up down
Louisiana and that street and
then cross on Central is there
gonna be any study to see what
the impact is.
going to be on more drivers
going into neighborhoods and
maybe a school being in their
library have we, we don't, we
haven't seen any of that. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker
Delaney? Mr. Speaker,
Representative, will there be?
Yes, absolutely, that will have
to happen before any bonds are
issued.
So Mr. Speaker, we don't have
that yet, OK.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
when we go down
Um, I'm on going from page 5.
So dumb question, because it
says in here, Mr. Speaker gentle
lady. So that land is owned by
the state. That's why it's
called the state fairground. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady? Mr. Speaker,
Representative, yes. Thank you
for answering the obvious. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle ladies, so.
If it were to be moved.
Explain to me because I don't
know how the rules go with this.
I, I apologize this is not my
bailiwick, but how does that how
does state lands get sold and
then how does all the zoning
then take into effect, Mr.
Speaker Dela, how would they
change all the zoning in that
area?
Mr. Speaker, Representative, the
district wouldn't own the land,
the GST owns the land.
And would, would continue to do
so.
So Mr. Speaker and young ladies,
so
So in that transfer, so that, so
it's still owned by them, but
yet there's gonna be housing
developments they're allowed to
come in. So Mr. Speaker, young
lady,
do we know what those, because
as you had mentioned something
about the housing communities.
Do you know how they're going to
look in that area if that was to
happen, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, when
you say how they're going to
look, do you?
OK
Would they be tall, short,
skinny. No, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, will we do like a
normal neighborhoods where we
have a higher end, middle,
lower, so that there's, you
know, some condos, there's some
middle class houses and upper
how, how would that area look
overall because usually when you
go into the communities, that's
how they're all laid out. That's
what I see and I hate to I hate
to put labels on things is the
only way I know how to. OK,
here's a house worth 750, 350,
250. How's that? Is that better?
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, um mixed income
housing is key to this program.
OK, so Mr. Delaney is a very key
question.
How do we assure in the future.
That in the mixed housing that
the houses are the most
affordable are right next to the
motorcycle racing or the racing
track and the horse racing
track. Do you understand what
I'm trying to say in that, Mr.
Speaker, young lady, Mr.
Speaker, generally, yes, and as
part as a member of the TI
board, um, I know that the 4 of
us, the 4 electeds on that tid
board.
That is going to be our main
focus is making sure that the
housing that we do provide is
going to be fair and equitable.
We're speaking gently because I
think if this were to happen,
it's one of the things I thought
of it almost seems like there
needs to be a buffer between
that area so that
The more affordable housing
isn't next to the least
desirable areas, if you
understand what I'm saying on
that, Mr. Speaker, gen lady, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, I
absolutely understand. I agree.
And when I say mixed income, I
also mean like mixed housing. We
won't do like specific zones of
housing, Mr. Speaker,
Representative so I'm trying to
envision in my head if this did
happen that there needs to be
some sort of buffer. So, um,
Mrs. Speer Deling, how
How long, uh, is it the Raino
that they're leasing the
property, how long is their
lease? When would that expire,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
OK, Mr. Speaker, representative,
so there are 23 years left on
their lease.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I'm sure you probably have
talked to them. Do they have
interest in wanting to stay, or
do they want to relocate and you
know, negate there or get out of
their lease and move with the
state fair. What are their
thoughts on this, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady?
Um, Mr. Speaker Representative,
so we have had talks with them,
um, the owners of the Raino and
Racetrack are very supportive of
this TI plan, um, and they may
want to move with the fair just.
As a matter of course, or they
may want to stay.
It's me and Julian, I the reason
I'm asking so many questions,
this is like a big, it's like a
big thing. I understand the
traffic, I understand all that
stuff too. I also understand
that, you know, that I, you
know, the governor I know really
wants us for housing. I'm trying
to figure out the because when
you have something that's
iconic, it makes it different,
right? It's not like we're
moving a baseball park, and this
would be like removing the very
first baseball park ever in New
Mexico, you know what I mean?
It's, it's more iconic.
So, Mr. Speaker, and young lady
that does give me some issues
and concerns. Oh, and I did find
the part, so I did on here we
everybody's on the board. I did
find it on page 8. So Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, um, if
it ends up after all this, let's
say all these analysis come in,
um, we have everything that
comes in on here. We have, you
know, requests for proposals we
have everything, Mr. Speaker
Delaney, how, what would be the
next step.
Who would make the decisions
about if it became a new housing
district who ends up with the
final say so maybe there's 5
bidders, 6 bidders, they all
come in. Is it the people on the
board that are making the
decision on what you want that
to look like, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
ultimately GSD Expo New Mexico
we'll decide.
What happens there as part of
the RFP.
Because it's a Mr. Speaker
representative, the RFP that is
out is all encompassing. It
includes the future of the fair
and the future of the site. OK,
that's what I was gonna ask you,
Annette if it includes both. And
sorry, who is it? It's the
Say the other name of the
organization, the Expo, blah
blah blah blah blah, Mr.
Speaker. Mr. Speaker,
representative Expo New Mexico
because it's not just the fair
that is.
There, it's
A non-fair time events as well.
Mm
So, I must, I don't know why
that just seems so funny, the
non-fair fair things are at the
fair. Miss lady, yeah, because
there's the um.
Is that part of the fairgrounds
too where they have those events
in there like sometimes they'll
have all like even a gun show in
there they have events or these
two in there. Is that also part
or is that the expo New Mexico
portion, those buildings that
are there.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
all one and the same state fair,
Expo, New Mexico, same thing.
OK, so Mr. Springerdale lady, so
who, who makes up the board of
the Expo New Mexico that would
be making that decision and are
they gonna come to this other
board for this to say this is
what we want to do. I'm just so
they have the final say so this
Expo New Mexico and who's on the
board? Yeah, the state fair
commission is Expo New Mexico,
so they would make the final
decision of the RFP.
And Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm gonna ask you as a
representative of the area,
would you have would you have
any say so because it's
important. I mean, things happen
in your backyard, right? It's
more important that you have a
say so than I, right? Because
that's your, your district minds
I just have Burling County and I
have people that go and I don't
necessarily want to Edgewood
until we understand the water
and the infrastructure and where
it's going to go, but would you
have any say so with this expo
in Mexico to say, hey, you know
what? I don't like this idea.
You don't, this isn't the right
kind of housing. I don't think
this is appropriate for my area.
Would you have any say so, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
gentle lady, yes.
All right, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, I know a few
more questions on this.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and young lady,
I, I think.
I think my, my biggest problem
is that uh.
Before we wrote to me and, and,
you know, you may see it
differently, but I see it as we
should at least have a direction
on where we're going, we should
look at, you know, the DOT, you
know, the, the cars going in and
out, we should be looking at,
there's a lot of players, a lot
of stakeholders in this, a lot,
a lot, a lot, including the
people that lived there so for
me I I would feel more
comfortable if we had all these
things in play. We had had uh a
a year of people coming in and
talking, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
And um that they were able to, I
want to make sure that everybody
would have a voice in this, Mr.
Speaker Delaney, especially
where would it go? Where would
that housing look like? Delaney
and you know, law enforcement,
that's gonna be a big thing too
because we Delaney, we have such
a shortage of law enforcement. I
would also like that taken into
consideration that uh
Albuquerque Police Department
was part because they're,
they're the ones that's going to
change everything for them if
all of a sudden there's a bunch
of housing that moves in there.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, and
talking to the schools if 10
amount of people go in there, do
you need a new school? Is that
going to be able to be
supported, uh, fire department,
all these, I mean, there's a
lot, a lot, a lot of moving
parts in here, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady and including, you
know, this bond issue and all
these other things that are
inside of this bill, uh, besides
it's iconic, but I also
understand, Mr. Speaker Deli, we
talk about the traffic that I do
understand, uh, because it has
become an issue.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
trying to think if there's any
other questions I have, I think
you answered most of them, um,
and with that Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I yield my time.
Thank you for answering all my
questions.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Sandoval and
Santa Fe representative McQueen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, does the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, representative, as
soon as I get myself
re-situated, yes, I, I yield to
my friend from Sandoval and
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, generally, I just
have a couple of questions, um,
uh, aid is basically a financing
mechanism, right?
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
yes.
OK, so this is the part I don't
understand like.
Shouldn't we figure out what we
want to do with the property
before we approve of financing
mechanism?
Mr. Speaker Representative, so
it's very important to point out
that we have to come back within
4 years with the plan and the
legislature will have the
opportunity to see the plan
either vote the plan up or down
if we decide we don't like it,
we don't want to do it, the
money from the TED will revert
back into the general fund.
So Mr. Speaker, general lady,
can't we do the tit in 4 years
when we have the plan?
Mr. Speaker Representative, I'm
my understanding is that this is
the same process that we do
with.
Your average county kid.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gently.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Cater and
Sierra Socorro and Valencia,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, uh, gentle lady, would you
please yield?
I will happily yield to the
gentle lady.
I might be getting the hint that
I shouldn't be talking if my
microphone's not working, so I
just had a quick question. I, I
really have the same kind of
question that the past
representative, the previous
representative asked, um,
We don't know what, we don't
have a plan of what we're doing.
We don't know where or if.
For sure, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that the fair is
moving or are we, do we have a
plan for sure that the fair is
moving?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no,
um, it's part of the RFP if the
RFP comes back that they want to
keep the fare where it is and
just kind of give it an overhaul
and we decided that that is and
we decide that that is the best
plan, that that is what we'll
move forward with.
Uh thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I, um, I.
I have been told and maybe you
can confirm or deny that there
are historical buildings on the
fairground property that have,
that are, uh, actually under the
New Mexico historical marker is,
do you know if that's true or
not, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, um, generally,
excuse me, um, the fair, I
believe I was informed was built
around 1936, 1937, so it would
not surprise me in the least if
that is true and we certainly
wouldn't want to bulldoze
history.
And so that is also taking an
account in the RFP to make sure
that we have like there's also
like legacy trees in that area
if you like walk down the main
street so we will certainly be
taking all of that into
consideration, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because again.
We have 4 years as a legislature
to determine the future, like to
see the RFP to decide if that's
something that we want to move
forward with as a body, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I
just find it really interesting
that, um, you know, we're the
people that are appointed to
the, the board, um, because it
is New Mexico Expo and so I
would think that we might have
a, a broader, um,
Uh, pool of people making some
of those decisions because Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady,
During the expo in New Mexico,
the majority of the time I hang
out in the barns, the pig barn,
the sheep barn, the cattle barn,
uh, all of, all of that area,
but there's a different type of
people that may hang out in
like,
The, the Midway section may be a
different type of people that
hang out in the rodeo section.
So I found it really interesting
when, um, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when the governor came out
and made that announcement, I
got a lot of phone calls.
It was funny. I, I got phone
calls from my district saying we
don't want the fair to move. We
like where the fair is. I've got
them from my district, which is
not Bern Leo. Uh, we want the
fair to move. We don't like
being in the middle of
Albuquerque and then I got Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, there, uh,
calls from the.
Community of the surrounds the
fair, saying we don't want the
fair to move. And so I just
found it really interesting, all
the different phone calls I
received. I don't know why they
were calling me, have no clue,
but, uh, maybe because that I
answered the phone, I don't
know, but I, I just, um, I think
that we're putting the cart
before the horse. That's pun
intended for fair stuff and, um,
I think that it would be really
nice to have a plan in place
before.
we implement because it's, it's
really scaring people and, and
I'm, uh, like I said, I received
a lot of phone calls, um, mostly
against moving the fare. Then I
had Valencia County like.
Wanting to, uh, they're lobbying
for the fair. They're like,
we'll take the fairgrounds, and
I represent Valencia County, so
I will do whatever my counties,
uh, desire and direct me to do,
but, um, I do think that I would
rather have a plan in place, but
I do, uh, madam, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, appreciate
that you will bring it back to
the legislature and make those
decisions, um, so good luck is
further debate. The gentle lady
from Bernna Leo, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you Mr. Chair and will the
gentle lady from Bernna Leo
please yield to my friend from
Bernalillo.
Thank you. And you know, gentle
lady, as I've listened to the
discussion today. One of the
things that I, I think is
missing from the larger
conversation is that this that
this New Mexico State Fair, also
known as Expo New Mexico is
located in the heart of
culturally rich international
district. And I do know, Mr.
Chair, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that people in the
international district have been
talking about ways for
improving.
their, their district improving
where they live for a long time,
so they really do have a plan
and a thought process that has
been put into areas that would
include right now what is
considered expo New Mexico and
the state fair. And I just want
to go back to uh a couple of
things that you've said. Number
one, you've talked about the an
RFP that's gonna be distributed
and um Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
has had RSP or RFP already been
distributed.
Did it
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, that RFP is out live right
now. Speaker, gentle lady, when
is the deadline for submitting
the results of that RFP.
are responding to the RFP. I'm
sorry.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't know the exact date, but
it is very soon. Speaker, gentle
lady, how widely was that RFP
distributed. Where was it put so
that others who might not have
received it can still respond to
it if the opening period is
still available. Mr. Speaker,
are you asking where it's
currently published for viewing?
I'm asking you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, where is
it published so that people can
know who are listening to this
uh uh conversation.
tonight.
Mr. Speaker, representative, it
should be listed on the GSD
website.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because what we
want to make sure happens is
that the largest number of of
people, the largest
multicultural group of people as
possible will be responding and
looking at that RFP and um
Madam Chair, I mean, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, you've
also talked about the number of
organizations that were
consulted. Can you tell me some
of those organizations in the
international district who've
been consulted on this idea.
Mr. Speaker, representative, so,
um, HOAs were mentioned earlier
by a previous speaker. We
actually don't have any HOAs in
the International District, but
we do have um community just
community activist organizers
and um.
Neighborhood Associations,
that's the word I'm thinking of,
and we have been in touch with
them.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
wanna tell you about some of the
main organizations in the
International District who are
highly involved in the community
and that development. They
include places like the East
Central Ministries. The
international district Economic
Development Corporation, the
International District Health
Communities Coalition and the
black leadership organizing
collaborative. Have any of them
been consulted, um, Mr. Speaker
Delady
Speaker, Representative, yes
they have. Oh.
And a quick follow up, the RFP
is also listed on the Expo New
Mexico website.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker Den
little lady, I'm happy to hear
that those yeah, organizations
have been considered. They do
know about the RFP and I'm glad
that we are able to announce
broadly on this conversation
with that RFP is located. Also,
um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you know, we've talked a lot
about uh historical buildings.
There are two really great
historical buildings, maybe not
necessarily in time but in
purpose that our list that are
built on Expo New Mexico's
property.
and one is an Alice Fay Hopper's
Center. That building has been
there supposed to support art
exhibits and all sorts of other
um
Uh, economical, uh, and
theatrical uh influence,
influential items. Is that
building gonna remain or do you
know now?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, as we
have, um, currently we are
working on moving the African
American Performing Arts Center
and that organization out from
under Expo New Mexico to the
performer to the cultural
affairs department and so those
talks are ongoing. It is my
personal goal that they stay
there because they are used um
as like by the community year
round and it's such a special
space.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's really important to hear
because the Alice Fay Hopper
Center, named after a woman who
has indelibly been planted in
the historical uh
Evolution of New Mexico, it
would be a disaster to make sure
if that, if something were to
happen to that building. And
then the African American
performing Arts Center. It was
many years in the, in the making
before it was actually built and
so that also has great
historical, uh,
Yeah, importance as it exists
right there. And in terms of
bringing up cultural uh aspects
of um New Mexico that might not
otherwise be seen, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, we can
absolutely see it there at the
African American Performing Arts
Center. And Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, you know we are
always, there's been this
conversation about the about the
About the um
Fair and about where it is. You
know, it's in the heart again of
that international district, and
there is an opportunity for it
to grow and be a big tourist
even, even bigger than it may
already be if it's moved outside
of the area where, where it is
located. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker, General Lady. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, yes,
absolutely. where the fair is
located now they're absolutely
landlocked. There is no
opportunity to expand and it is.
Quite crowded if you're there on
a particularly busy day, so
moving it back to the edge of
town as my personal preference,
um, where it was initially
placed when it was built nearly
100 years ago now, um, so yes,
absolutely there's more
opportunities for the fair to
grow were it to move.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
just a couple of more questions
for you and a a couple of more
observations. You know, we've
talked about there being at
least one public member who'll
be a part of that bigger board
that's gonna be looking at this
process. I hope that there's a
guarantee and I don't know that
you can make that now because
it's the governor's appointment
that that person will come from
the international district. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, can
you think about making sure that
that happens. Speaker, gentle
lady, I can tell you as of
sit on the board. It is a
community member appointed by
the governor so for myself for
the senator, current senator,
current um city councilwoman and
current County commissioner, it
is very important to us as well
that that community member come
from the district.
So thank you. And last of all,
madam, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, you know, for years
the International District has
talked about 3 things, and I
want to bring this up to you
now. If you haven't been uh
having that conversation about
them, number one, they need a
community building initiatives.
They've been working on that for
a long time. Ways in which they
can grow the economic
development area where those
individuals are living now. #2,
they want to change the, the
The um aura of what is now
considered the international
district. It doesn't always have
the greatest uh thought
processes that come along with
that mentioning, but people who
live there I think very highly
of the place in which they live.
And in addition, they have a
strong desire for revitalization
of their neighborhood and
talking with members of the
International District and not
only that, but numerous,
numerous ways in which to grow
and make sure that the area
Uh, expands has been something
again that's been on their list
for a long time. I just want to
commend you for leading this
effort is in whatever way you
are and thank you for your
experts who are there with you
to make sure that they're
following in your direction and
the direction of that community
at the International District,
and we look forward to seeing
what happens next and thank you
Mr. Chair and general.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Otero,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Would my friend from Bernalillo
County, please yield.
I will yield to my almost
neighbor from Montero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle.
I'm only about 3.5 hours' drive
away, so we're, yeah, we're and
we're like one person away on
the, on the floor. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
apologize in advance. I have so
many things highlighted in the
FIR and I read the bill and I
went to the FIR and the FIR kind
of scared me a little bit. So I,
I'm just gonna go hopefully
rapid fire here and just start
on that. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, the first thing I saw in
the FIR
Was
The appointment of the people on
the board, so it, they said
there is no restriction on who
the
Senator or representative could
designate. That was one of the
problems on the summary. That's
the first.
Paragraph
And so I'm just wondering if you
could answer that for me, and
then while I'm there, I'm just
gonna add another one in there
so we can speed it up a little
bit. Why is it that there's only
one member of the community on
the board because I think if I
was on the board, it'd be kind
of weird for me to, let's just
say if I was someone who's not
elected to be the only person
not elected on the board, which
might
In my opinion, maybe
disadvantaged that potential
person who's the one person
who's not elected.
So Mr. Speaker, Representative,
there is one community member
because it's really critical
since that is state owned land
that the board be made up of
elected body members and as the
legislature has so much say over
what happens on state land. We
really want to make sure that we
have elected members on that
board. The second part, since
I'm kind of answering your
questions and reverse order is
if you look at the amendments in
context, which is the most
current version of the bill, the
um senator and the
representative at the time of
the board's.
and going forward, it says the
elected or their designate.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
Gentleti. OK, got it. Thank you
for that. Then I'm gonna go down
on the FIR and it's weird. I
usually go down on the bill and
look at it, but the bill is
quite intricate, so I just don't
want to get in the weeds too
much. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
Lenny, it says the bill creates
a seven member.
And oh, that was my first
question, so never mind. I'm
gonna skip past that one. So I'm
gonna go to the page 3 of the
FIR first paragraph, the bottom
it says private property owners
in the state fairgrounds
district would not be required
to pay, for example, the
property tax levies imposed by
the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District. So, Mr.
Speaker, General, I'm just
wondering if that is fair for
them to not pay that if they
live there because it could
benefit that place extra versus
places that are around.
surrounding areas that are not
specifically in that area.
Mr. Speaker Representative, um,
yes.
I believe it's fair they have
the option to vote to raise
their property taxes should they
wish to do so.
Sounds good, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and uh appreciate that.
So, uh, no, I actually did have
a question about that, and I
forget we're in the FIR it is,
but let me see, one second. I'm
just gonna keyword search here.
to be quick.
OK, I believe, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I forget where
it is on the FIR it was saying
that since there is nobody who
lives there, then there's no way
that they can levy a tax or vote
on attacks cause no one lives in
the actual fairgrounds right
now. So they said that was a
problem. And I forget which page
that's on, but can you address
that for me?
Some
Can you, can you synthesize that
a little bit? I mean, just, I
mean, there's nobody living
there at the moment, but when if
if and when residential homes
are created, then that will no
longer be an issue.
Speaker representative sorry
I apologize. I have so many
things highlighted in this
document, it's almost insane. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
I believe.
Let me, let me check real quick.
OK, perfect. I found it. I found
it. Yay. OK, page 6 of the FIR
on the taxation revenue
Department section first bullet
point at the bottom of that one.
That's the 2nd paragraph on that
page. It says there are
currently no qualified electors
in the district, and so no one
could vote.
No vote could be taken to
authorize property taxes and so
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
just wondering how we can
address that.
There wouldn't, sorry, Mr.
Speaker represent there would
not be any.
There would not be any property
taxes until there are people
there paying property taxes to
impose any tax.
OK, Mr. Speaker, generally,
because it says in the FIR that
The earliest the property tax
could be levied would be 2026.
And payments posted in FY 27,
however, TRD notes that there
are no current qualified
electors residing there.
Hence, no property tax could be
imposed, and they also said that
it conflicts.
Because it would restrict local
option GRT changes to July 1st.
And they said this would mean
that the 3 month lead time.
And the restriction, the
earliest GRT diversion to the
fairgrounds fund would be July
1st, 2026. So would that delay
projects in any way?
Mr. Speaker, a representative,
no.
Um, again, like we can't levy a
property tax until there's
properties to be taxed so that
wouldn't go into effect until
there are people there paying
property taxes.
Totally understand. And so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
I appreciate that. And so I, I
believe also one thing that I
that popped out at me was page
5.
At the top of page 5 of the FIR.
Not the bill.
Actually, let's start on page 4,
pardon me. It says unlike prior
TI applications under
SB 4481, it does not include
financial participation from
local governments like city and
county and then down at the
second paragraph it says,
To generate sufficient GRT
transfers, Ted would need to
generate 750 million in taxable
activity annually for the entire
25 year period. It also says
down on the bottom of there even
a large scale development with
the within the TI is unlikely to
generate sufficient revenue to
meet bond repayment obligations.
So my, my concern here, Mr.
Speaker, is it says, for
example, Walmart Supercenter.
it's 2.8 million GRT.
Of which 2.1 would be diverted
to the district, and they said
to generate $33 million in
annual revenue, it would require
the equivalent of 16 Walmart
supercenters. So, Mr. Speaker,
general lady, my question is,
how can we hit that? I just want
to make sure we're able to hit
that when it comes to bonding
capacity, because we would need
to generate 750 million in the
25 year period and how do, how
do we think we can do that, Mr.
Speaker, Representative, so we
wouldn't do that, um, the
Those are, those numbers are
based on the maximum, so we
would only levy the max if we
hit the max. Does that, does
that make sense, Mr. Speaker,
Representative, I think so. It's
so late. I, I don't recall if I
remember how good that sounds to
me. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I believe so, but I'm
gonna just continue here because
I know we are pressed for time.
We only have like, I don't know
how many hours left. Let's see
we've like 1413 hours left. So,
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and that's of the entire
session, by the way, not, not
this bill. Praise the Lord.
So Mr. Speaker,
Gentle lady, uh, it also says at
the bottom of page 4, it should
also be noted that affordable
housing projects wouldn't
generate appreciable GRT after
the construction phase.
And they, they said that might
be a problem. So could you just
address that part for me at the
bottom of page 4.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker
Representative, I was doing 3
things at once. You want, which
part did you want addressed? I
apologize.
no worries of 4.
The last paragraph, uh, it says
on the last sentence on that
paragraph, it should also be
noted that affordable housing
projects would not generate any
appreciable GRT after the
construction phase. So Mister
Speaker, gentle lady, I just
want to make sure that we're not
losing out on GRT with this.
Problem here.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no,
because as we've addressed
before, um, we're talking about
mixed income housing mixed use
space, so also percentage will
likely go to commercial so it'll
be different activities
generating GRT.
Not just the low income housing.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
so, but I, I guess I'm gonna go
back to my previous question
where we talked about the
supercenter, the Walmart
supercenter, we need 33 of them
just to hit that maximum
requirement, and that was the
maximum we talked about, not,
not whatever we need to bond. So
I'm just wondering how we can.
So are we prioritizing in the
building of this the mixed use
first, so we can start making
money on this first, then
whatever the surrounding area
housing could be.
Mr. Speaker, Representative.
We're prioritizing the needs of
the community first, um, that my
community, I will tell you that
that is housing, however, we are
not, we know that since we need
to generate GRT that we cannot
be explicitly housing.
Sounds good, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and uh I, you know, you,
you've talked to the
stakeholders. I don't, I don't
live in the, the district, so I
just wanted to make sure that we
would be able to generate that
GRT for the district so that it
would continue to to build on
itself. We don't want to.
We just don't wanna
Build something that's set up to
fail, you know what I mean? Like
I want to make sure it's gonna
be great when it's built and we
can actually get some GRT out of
it because it's always nice. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
just gonna continue down here
and I apologize, there's so many
pages on this. Why is there so
many pages on this FIR my
speaker. Goodness me, but it's a
big bill, so I understand. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
We already went through the, the
whole thing about loving taxes,
so I won't believe that. I'm
just gonna go to the bottom of
page 6 then.
It says that while the structure
may streamline management and
decision making, it also reduces
state oversight and transparency
in the district's financial
operations. It says although the
bill does not require
legislative approval of the
bond, it does not require
legislative approval of
projects, which may mean
relocation of state fair to a
remote site that does not
require legislative approval. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
just wondering how, how we can
reconcile that legislative
approval portion of it.
Mr. Speaker Representative,
that.
question actually confuses me a
little bit because legislative
approval is required in the
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
lady. That is just what I saw in
the FIR if it's wrong, then I, I
completely understand. I, I just
wanna make sure that that's not
a concern because it's a
significant issues and I was
like number one district
authority and state oversight.
So if that's not a problem, then
I'm just gonna continue here.
Also, Mr. Speaker, General, I,
I'm just concerned. I believe
earlier in the debate we talked
a little bit about the fair, not
the fairgrounds, but the, the
Raino.
And I believe in the FIR
somewhere and Lord knows where
it is because I don't have it
printed out to actually flip
through it. It said that the
bonding capacity would be
contingent upon the Rainos
staying in the district. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
address that if they do have
plans to move, how can we
Keep the bonding capacity in
that case.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
that is where the revenue is
coming from now initially, um,
so if the, if the race you know
were to move.
I mean that would not happen
until the fair moves until we've
got the RFP until we're moving
forward with the process anyway
so none of that's going to come
into effect until we have a
master plan that we are taking
action on.
OK, got it. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady that,
thanks for clearing that one up
and then.
Oh my goodness, there's so many
things in here. I'm trying to be
as quick as possible. So, page
7, a deviation from standard
development district practices.
It says typically TIS require
multiple approvals, including
master plan and economic
feasibility analysis before
legislative authorization.
It says these safeguards ensure
project viability and confirm
the anticipated revenues would
cover public investment costs.
This one says the bill seeks
legislative authority to issue
bonds before planning and after
planning with the requirement
that the legislature approve
proposed issuances and bonds and
so I'm just wondering if that,
if we're uh reinventing what a
TI means. I know it's not
technically a tit because it's
on the state level, but I'm just
wondering how we can.
Ensure that those checks and
balances from a TI are applied
as well to this, Mr. Speaker,
Representative again.
I think that portion of the FIR
was written before the amended
bill.
So those have been handled with
the um version of the bill
that's amendments in context.
Because all of that now is
required before approval.
Cool. That's good to hear.
Awesome. So Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, I don't think, oh, I
did have 11 more page, page 9.
Let's go to page 9 real quick.
Last page, promise you, Mr.
Speaker, promise.
Pinky square. OK, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, first, uh,
First paragraph, page 9, it says
the dual role of the director
could create potential conflicts
of interest, although the
director would not be a voting
member. So Mr. Speaker,
generally, do we think that
there could be conflicts of
interest because they're
required to serve as treasurer
and clerk for the board.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, no.
to hear. All right.
And then Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, uh, the last thing on page
9, it says LFC staff notes that
on page 19, line 18, that the
plan would recommend financing
from portion of the activities
of the district with property
tax bonds, but it also says,
however, the 5 mil property
taxes limited to 4 years and
subject to repeal by petition.
Thus the property tax would not
be a suitable bonding pledge.
Can we just address that concern
of the suitability of that
bonding pledge.
That is, uh, Mr. Speaker
Representative, that is correct
and property tax would not be
used for bonds.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady. And then I also
have kind of maybe a few
concerns with the bottom of page
9 to 10 where it talks about tax
expenditure policy principles
and I don't see many of these
being met except for expiration
date. The rest of them have
question marks on it. So I'm
just, I don't, I think there's
probably an LFC thing
potentially, and I'm just
wondering if this complies with
some of those best practices
with LFC.
Mr. Speaker, Representative, so
as I mentioned with other um
questioners, debaters earlier in
the debate.
This is the tit is mostly set up
prospectively in the sense that.
This doesn't go into effect
until we have a master plan so
these boxes can't be checked yet
because we do not have the
master plan. This is just
setting up a funding mechanism
that when we get that master
plan, then we can check all
these boxes but we wanna get
ahead of the funding issue.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Thank you for all
those answers and I'm sure I
missed a bunch of highlights. I
mean, I, I'm gonna print this
out for you and like show it to
you later, all the highlights
that I found because I had a lot
of little highlights and one of
the highlights that I found
was, 011 thing, sorry, so sorry.
OK.
Promise you this is the last one
on this page, page 3 says in
addition to the bill allowing
the district to impose a 5-mil
property tax, 5 per 1000, uh,
with the concurrence of the
majority of qualified electors,
I'm wondering, would this
require a new election or would
it just be like in in a general
election, how would we, how do
we do that with the, uh, tax.
Mr. Speaker Representative, so
in terms of election of the TI
board.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
believe when it's just talking
about the mill, the mill levy.
Sorry, Mr. Speaker
Representative, I get it now, so
that would be with the um
election of the property tax
should the
Residents decide that they want
to do that.
OK, OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I'm just
wondering who, like who is the
body that runs the election,
because I know in a city
election, the city runs it. Is
this a quasi city, county,
state, cyborg looking thing like
what is this entity that we're
creating? Is it the state that
That oversees it. Do we, do
they, can it be a new city
within Albuquerque where they
look like like the little
council or a a homeowners
association. I'm just wondering
what kind of governmental
structure would that require to
put it on a ballot.
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker
Representative, nothing so
complicated as that. It would
just be a local election.
So the like Albuquerque local or
how, how local Mr. Speaker lady.
It would appear, Mr. Speaker,
representative, the regular, um,
it's like on the regular local
election portion ballot portion
in November, unlike the general
election.
OK, perfect. OK, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you so much for
bearing with me. I really
appreciate you. You're a trooper
and a good answers to these
questions. Sorry, a lot of them
were based upon some archaic
version of the bill from Lord
knows when, but thank you so
much for the answers. I will let
the body continue asking
questions if they so desire.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate. The
gentle lady from Donana, Sierra
and Socorro, Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield? I will
yield. So I, all things
considered, you know, if we
were, if we were building this
vision of what we, we all know
that this is going to become a
live, work, play, beautiful
community that's going to
revitalize this area. Um, I can
hear your passion when you talk
about it. I can hear it in other
members of the body when they
talk about it. And it's a
beautiful thing, and I think um
all things considered, if we
were having this conversation in
a parallel conversation about
this beautiful new fairgrounds
that I
25% of New Mexicans visit during
the annual state fair. I think
you see a lot of bipartisan
support, probably all by
bipartisan support. Um, but, um,
so I have a few questions. Um,
so will the transition of the
current fairgrounds.
What, what will this transition
of the current fairgrounds look
like when it goes to the new
fairgrounds location.
Mr. Speaker, Representative,
again, we don't have the RFP
yet.
So there may not be any
transition of the fairground.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
the problem with this entire
conversation is we're not
willing to be honest about what
the plans are for this 188
acres, which we can all buy
into. We know there's a housing
crisis. We know that the area
needs to is blight. We know that
it's, it's an issue and it needs
to be revitalized and I actually
think it's a really cool idea.
um, but I mean, we know the
fairgrounds are moving. Um, so
if, if we did, uh, do this, if
we do if the RFPs come back
we do choose to move the
fairgrounds, can any of the
allow for bonding for the
construction of the new state
fairgrounds at a different
location.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, no.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. So the tit is tied
to this 188 acres.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
is correct. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Do you think it would be fair
for that neighborhood and that
area to pay this half a billion
dollars for the construction of
a new fairground that they never
ever visit.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
residents of that area are not
going to pay that. OK, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. It'll go out
to bonding. And then how much
capital is in this year, this
year's capital Olay Fund. How
much money is being dedicated to
the current fairgrounds.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you asking how many capital
requests are being placed or
came from the current
fairgrounds, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, it is a tradition
of this body to invest capital
outlay into the state
fairgrounds. Did we do that this
year in this year's budget?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
don't know.
Mr. Speaker, generally the
answer is no. Um, but how much
has the state averaged in the
past? How much do they generally
give to the state fairgrounds.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
not sure, but I bet you could
tell me. No, I, I, I really
don't know, but I know it's,
it's more than 0. it just
indicates that we already know
the direction that this is
going, which
In theory, I, I truly do
support. We do need new housing,
we do need to vitalize the area.
I love it when they're small
businesses. It's a great, the
whole concept of live, work,
play, single family duplexes,
quads, multi-family, you know,
even if it's a single, these um
units where people share a
restroom on a floor or share a
kitchen on the floor, almost
dormitory to lower the average
cost of housing and to
revitalize an area. I think it's
an amazing concept and a
wonderful opportunity.
Um,
so will the tip be subject to
prevailing wages?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, not
the private development on the
tit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
thank you, gentle lady. Um, so
the people on the board, they're
all elected officials that
represent that area, including
yourself, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady? Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, save the
appointee of the community
member by the governor. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker and thank you
gentle lady. I think probably
that's the part that I like the
most in this concept of you
choosing, I, I truly believe and
I've heard from the testimony
that you have
small, a strong connection to
the area that you know the
economic development needs that
you know and understand the will
of the people.
You live there, you, you, you're
dealing with the crime, you're,
you're, you're vested in those
small businesses and their
success. Um, I think that that's
probably one of the most
beautiful things about this
piece of legislation as the
people that are closest
connected to the land or the
ones that are making the
decision, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I'm sure you
appreciate that as well.
Do you appreciate that?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I do
appreciate that the people who
represent the area will have
control of the TED.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
what else will they have control
over?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm,
I'm sorry, can you be a little
bit more Mr. Speaker, in general
they'll only have control over
the tip.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm,
I'm not positive what you're
driving at, but to my
understanding, yes. Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, if, uh, if the
RFP comes back and the decisions
made to keep, it's an RFP that
comes back. Who's who's choosing
what, which RFP is implemented,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
would be under the control of
the state fair commission.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, who
are the members of the state
fair board, the state.
Commission.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
can't give you their names
offhand, but I can look that up
for you, I'm sure. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and thank you,
gentle lady. I just, I, I, I
just want to reiterate, you're
probably gonna get some no votes
over here because most of us
grew up heavily involved in 4H
and FFA and what we see is a
commitment to converting that
area to something that is
beautiful and wonderful for your
community, but nothing in
parallel to give any assurances
to the a community again, um,
where they will
be. And I think um when all,
when this comes back,
If there's a parallel process, I
think you're gonna see a lot of
bipartisan support, but instead
what we live in our community is
people far away making decisions
about the businesses that we
know and understand about the
people that we have strong
connections to. We live in our
communities and we understand
the crime that's impacting us,
especially at the border. The
differences here that you're
deciding for your community,
what's going to happen in your
community, and the example of
something where that
is not happening is happening in
the Floridian right now when
members of this body are leading
the task to create a designation
in the Floridian where there is
the commission and the city have
written letters that they don't
support it. But in this case,
you get to have local control,
and I'm glad that you do, and I
would really appreciate the same
courtesy being extended to the
rest of the body. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
So you know for the debate
generally close.
Mr. Speaker
of the International District
and surrounding area has been an
area affected by crime and has
been left neglected for several
decades, so I'm very excited for
myself for my fellow electeds
from the area, and mostly from
my community members that we are
actually taking some time and
taking an opportunity to invest
in this community in a real way
for the first time in a very,
very long time. So Mr. Speaker,
with that
I now move.
The Senate tax business,
transportation committee sub for
Senate Bill 481 as amended do
now pass.
We are on final passage.
Of Senate tax, Business and
transportation committees
substitute for Senate Bill 481.
As amended
The vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 39 in the affirmative, 26 in
the negative.
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 481
as amended has duly passed this
house.
Members, we will be standing in
place for uh a short.
While, please, please do not
leave the chamber.
Gentle lady from uh Bernalillo
Representative Parajon.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I move that we
go to that order of businesses,
business messages.
See no object to the sword.
clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm, uh, Mr. Speaker, I
need a cough drop.
I am directed to inform the
House that the Senate has passed
House Bill 449 as amended by the
House and return same herewith
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, son of chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 77, House Bill
171 as amended by the House.
House Bill 172.
House Bill 195 as amended by the
House.
House Bill 209 as amended by the
House. House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 291 as amended by the
House. House Bill 336.
House Bill 361.
Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 398, House Bill 433 as
amended by the House. House Bill
456 and return same herewith,
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan Senate chief clerk.
message will be entered. Thank
you.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill 20 as
amended by the House.
House Bill 89 and return same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhan, Senate chief
clerk will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 36 as amended
by the House in return. same
herewith respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message be entered.
Message from the Senate.
Coming from everywhere now. It's
like Halloween.
Easter.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 63 as amended
by the House and further amended
by the Senate and requests the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhansson,
a chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Appropriations and
Finance Committee substitute for
House Bill 493 as amended by the
Senate and requests the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments, respectfully
submitted, Sherry De Luhan sent
a chief clerk.
The lady from San from Bern Leo
Representative Hobi.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business community
reports.
Gentlemen from Riba, San Juan
Sandoval representative Valente.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr.
Speaker and body, I'm here to
report on the conference
committee that took place
related to the this year's tax
omnibus package.
Over the course of about 12
hours, maybe a little maybe
closer to 15 hours, uh, members
of this body that were appointed
to the conference committee that
include.
Represented Parajon, ranking
member Duncan and myself met
with members of the Senate that
I'm, I'm gonna stop you for a
minute. We, we are gonna get
the, uh, committee report passed
out.
Just so that the members have it
and they know what they're
All right, here come the
reports. So gentlemen, I'll, I'm
gonna come back to you in a
couple of minutes while these uh
conference committee reports get
passed out.
Stand by everybody.
So last night's session is very
fluid Representative Vincent.
It's a good thing you have a
stash of tamarindos in my drawer
over here, so I can just munch
on my tamarindos on my spicy.
All right gentlemen from San
Juan, Sandoval and Tria Riva, we
have the conference committee
report in front of us. I'll go
back to you to explain the
committee report and I believe
you've made a motion to adopt
the committee report.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, yes, sir. So
over the course of the past 15
hours, members of this body in
the house that include
Representative Parajo ranking
member Duncan and myself met
with members of the Senate in
conference committee members of
the Senate included, uh, Leader
Wirth, uh, included Chairwoman
Hamblin from the Taxation
Committee for the Senate as well
as their ranking member Sanchez.
Over the course of those 15
hours we looked at the
amendments that we did not
concur to in this chamber just
yesterday and over the course of
those 15 hours, we came up with
uh salvaging inability to.
Be able to fund this.
Package as well as minimalize it
to help accommodate the lack of
fun by which.
By, by art's playing tricks on
me, by which
OK.
We found a way by which to help
fund this, this.
This package, uh, without the
use of what they had stripped
out in the Senate, which was the
House Bill 548, which was the uh
surtax on oil and gas.
So in doing so, uh, I think it's
important to also make mention
that we were able to work
alongside members of the Senate
Finance Committee members of the
House Appropriations Committee,
uh, staff was extremely helpful
regarding to identifying funds
that we could utilize and so
being able to utilize, we're
looking at keeping uh reserves
fully, uh, untouched, which
leaves us again at a 30% um
Reserve uh uh level as well as
then using future funds to help
fund this, so initiatives in
this tax package, uh, all but
one go into effect a year from
uh this legislative session. So
a part of this tax package again
will include a section one
earned income tax credit.
This is the initiative that the
House sent over that again
reflects that all of those that
are making between minimum wage
all the way up to families of 3
that are making $70,000 per
year. Again, those uh, those
individuals will see their tax
state tax liability completely
extinguished, and we're talking
again about families, uh, that
may be level 12 or 3 teachers,
we're talking about police men
and women. We're talking about
firefighters, we're talking
about the people in this
building as I made mention.
Last week that helped to clean
this building. So I think that's
a great benefit that we were, we
were able to keep home that
includes then again that those
existing 200,000 New Mexicans
that are able to claim this
benefit currently and expands it
to 101 more New Mexicans that
will be eligible to begin to
claim this credit.
Further, we uh left in place uh
Senate taxation uh initiative,
which was also a governor's
initiative that is a bipartisan
bill, which is uh foster parent,
guardian tax credit, and that is
under Senate Bill 335.
Uh, again, what this initiative
does is it makes sure that those
foster parents and guardians
that in many cases, in some
cases, uh, we have grandparents
not taking care of their
grandkids will be able to
receive some type of, of benefit
or tax credit to help them to
offset the cost of raising, uh,
children.
Furthermore, we have section 3
that stayed in this bill. Again,
a Senate initiative, foster
parent and guardian tax credit
that is Senate Bill 335 and what
this does is it makes sure that
medical GRT, uh, to bring
doctors in New Mexico is helpful
for that initiative. And so, in
this day and age where we want
to make sure that we can attract
doctors or keep doctors in New
Mexico. This is a great
initiative.
Finally, uh, we're looking at
sections 4 through 6 in, in, in
the new house taxation and
revenue, uh, tax omnibus bill
and that is the liquor excise
tax which will go into effect
underdelayed in 2026 and that is
uh a Republican initiative to
increase the li the tax on
liquor excise to 20%, which will
help fetch a little less than
$10 million per year.
Uh, change was made in committee
to not
Directed towards the general
fund, but instead directed
towards uh an initiative that we
heard in house taxation and
revenue through House Bill 417
to a tribal alcohol alleviations
fund uh rather than going to the
general fund, uh, and with that,
Mr. Speaker and body, uh, that
is what we worked on today and I
would uh hope that the body at
this point in time could fully
support this initiative. There
is gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, will
the gentleman yield?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen from
San Juan Ayil.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Chair, um,
You know, I, I, uh, when, when
this uh package went out, I
voted against it in, in uh uh
committee and I voted against it
on the floor.
And uh reason I voted against it
was because there was no
Um
No Republican or minority I
should say no minority and put
it all on that.
Um, and I didn't think that was
fair at the time and I still
don't think that's fair. um, but
going from here, so we're gonna
have
We're gonna give chair small
$113 million worth of debt next
year when we start off the year,
would that be correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, this is a part of the, the
conversation that we had
throughout the day when we
recognize that the Senate was
unwilling or unwilling to put
back the surtax on oil and gas
through House Bill 548 as the
main funding mechanism. So at
that point in time, we couldn't
have, we couldn't afford it,
right? So we had to find other
ways to go around and try to
fund these initiatives, albeit
in a more pared down version as
we see it tonight. So in those
conversations we in consultation
with.
the chairman and
As we move into the interim, uh,
the house will then also be
taking the reins as LFC
chairperson, uh, making sure
that we don't tie the hands or
bind the hands that will then be
taking over LFC as we look to to
future years so in consultation
with those individuals, uh, we
were making sure that we're not
tying their hands, but it does
not create a debt. It simply
cuts in the spending capacity,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
on future tax capacity.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and, and
Chair. Um,
So this money that the 113
million that's going to be spent
then, um, is that coming out of
reserve?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no,
sir, it's not.
OK, um, did we, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, did we, did it take
$171 million from our reserves
just to to uh in our budget this
year to balance it.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
don't know the answer to that
because this is not that bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and,
uh, Chair, um, I guess my point
is that we're gonna be spending
money.
Next year and the year after, in
order to fulfill something that
we're doing today. We've had
many, many discussions about
what the price of oil was.
60 days ago what it may be.
You know, 20 days, 30 days, 60
days from now, and, uh, and
we're gonna be obligating money
that we should have been able to
just write a check for.
Um, and I don't think we're
going to be able to do that.
So, um, Mr. Speaker and Mr.
Chair, I've got one quick
question for you, and I came
over and, and visited with you
briefly about it. Um, I'm on
page 13.
And section B.
You struck out.
Um
Farmington's um alcohol fund.
Which brings our community about
20,000, a little over 20,000 a
month and we've got a great
program that's been very, very,
very successful.
Can you show me or tell me in
this bill where anybody can tap
into those funds.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
As it relates to Farmington, uh
in this bill, while we followed
the, the language from House
Bill 417 that was heard in our
committee Farmington as a
community or as a city will
continue to have access to
funding through the local DWI
grant funds.
Uh, and through the new local,
uh, not local, but the new
alcohol harms alleviation fund.
Which will help level the
playing field between all of our
communities that are impacted by
the harms of overconsumption and
alcoholism.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
I, I see in section A where it
says that it's gonna be the
excise tax will be made to the
local DWI grant fund, so that's
where folks are gonna be able to
apply to this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
sir.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair, on
page 14 at the very top.
It's talking about the
alleviations fund.
And uh in there, it states um
Line 2 treatment and recovery
services to individuals on lands
of Indian nation, tribes,
pueblos to make grants to Indian
nation tribes, pueblos to
provide those services to those
individuals. Money in the funds
shall be expended by warrant of
the Secretary of Finance.
Authorized representative
nowhere in there does it say
that city farming can can apply
for this, Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, the city cannot
under this provision, but again,
as I may mention before, under
the, under the local DWI, uh,
what is it?
The local DWI, Mr. Speaker,
local DWI grant program, the,
the city of Farmington will be
eligible to apply for that grant
funding.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So can you tell me
how much money is anticipated
going into that DWI grant fund.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the grant fund will stay flat as
we move forward, which the
number would be about $25
million.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, is
that what it has been in the
past 25 million?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
sir. It is a reference to flat.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So how many people
have or how many municipalities
or counties have applied for
that, those funds in the past.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh,
And then I, I failed to
introduce my, my two experts, we
have Brendan, uh, Gray and
Jennifer Fabian, both from the
LFC, uh, but related to your
question, uh, they don't have
the information on how many
Counties have applied for that
funding.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
so with this fund, does that
open it up to more people
applying for that fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, no,
sir, it stays the same as it was
always available and offered
through this program.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr. Chair, can you,
can you ask your experts, is
that money, uh, in, in that
fund, is it zeroed out every
year?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
they are telling me that they do
not have the answer to your
question.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
that concerns me because
Farmington had its own.
We've had a very successful
program. We had our own funding
mechanism and now if we don't
know that there is funds in
those, in this category that we
can get to in the DWI fund as we
and everybody else in the state
applies for that, um, where does
that leave funds or what does
that leave programs that are
already in place to do a heck of
a good job, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think, I think again,
Because there's 25 million in
the grant fund and because it's
successful grant fund, it would,
it would seem to me that it
would be more than eligible and
probably
ability to, to, to win the award
time and time again because it's
so successful. So I think that
through this uh DWA grant funds
that allows you that capacity.
Mr. Speaker and, and Mr. Chair,
I hope that's the case.
Um, but we don't know, and your
experts don't know right now how
much is in that fund, how much
it's depleted every year and so
where does that leave the city
of Farmington. That's my
concern, um, that's a, that's a
representation of the folks that
I'm, I represent and to see this
taken out and, and so Mr.
Speaker and Chair, can you ask
your experts as, as they did the
work on this and, and they're uh
they're really, really good
folks at what they do. Can you
ask them as they did that, can
they?
tell me, um, precisely that
every community in the state of
New Mexico is gonna be able to
access funds and have enough for
their programs.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, they
are assuring.
Us, yes.
OK.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and, and
uh gentlemen, um,
I did not vote for this package
and I'm not gonna vote for it
tonight, um, and I hope that I'm
not back next year, Mr. Speaker,
and Mr. Chair, saying those
funds aren't enough. We're not
able to access them all, and I
hope they are for everybody. I
hope we all are able to access
funds and use them, but right
now it's a big question mark.
And my city just got.
The short end of the stick, I'm
afraid. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right, there's the debate on the
motion. The gentle lady from Los
Alamos Sandoval Santa Fe,
Representative Chandler. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentleman from Bernalillo, um,
please yield.
Mr. Speaker, the gentleman from
San Juan, Sandoval, and, uh, Ri
Ribo yields you. Thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. So, um, gentlemen,
could.
Could you remind us this is $113
million tax expenditure, is that
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Speaker, uh, lady from Burner uh
Los Alamos County. Uh yes,
ma'am.
Could you tell us what the tax
expenditure amount is for the
foster child tax credit, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, the foster child cash credit
is marked at $8.8 million.
Um, per year, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, yes, ma'am.
And is there a sunset on that
provision, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, ma'am, 5 years.
Thank you very much. So, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, could you
tell us what the tax expenditure
is on the medical tax deduction
piece, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, the total for both of
those, uh, is 31.3.
Million dollars per year.
OK
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, do
you have the number for what the
um local governments will lose
um through that.
Um, tax deduction, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
The number is $18.5 million. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, when we
reviewed this item in tax
committee. My recollection is
the numbers were much higher,
um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, did
we change the.
The amount or did we change
something about that particular
item that would bring the number
down to this level, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
uh, absolutely. It was, it was
much, it was pared down much
narrower now just to
co-insurance.
OK, thank you very much, Mr.
Speaker. I find that somewhat
more reassuring, Mr. Speaker,
um, gentlemen, in terms of our
uh the package that we had
presented, we had the earned
income tax credit, and we were
paying for it with.
Um, what we're calling an
equalization between oil and gas
and then um.
And and gas in terms of how we
tax the two and making them more
level in terms of how we tax
them, Mr. Speaker. Is that not
right, um, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is the way that it was
passed out of this chamber, but
mind you again, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady that in the Senate,
on the Senate floor, there was a
friendly amendment accepted to
strip that aspect and that
funding mechanism from the bill
itself. Uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, so essentially we are
not touching what we thought was
a really fair approach, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, in terms
of how we tax the tax, uh, the
gas, the oil industry.
versus the gas industry, is that
correct? That was all pulled out
on the Senate side, is that not
right, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes, ma'am, and, and that's the
reason why we spent most of the
day trying to find a way to help
fund this, this, this
initiative, uh, large and in
part, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, that there was a point
where maybe we just threw up our
hands and said, you know, let's
just not have a tax package
because
We don't have a funding
mechanism, and that's where
again these long and tough
conversations with uh
legislative, uh, finance
committee, House Appropriations
Committee Chairman Small was a
part of those in a way to create
a path forward to help make sure
that we are providing a prudent
responsible and transparent path
forward so that we can fund
these types of benefits for our
citizens and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I'm gonna say
something that is not a
criticism of our team.
Because I feel I could see how
hard everyone on, on the house
side was working to make sure,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
we are acting responsibly, but I
do feel, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that may be no tax
package would be better, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, um,
there's nothing in the world
that says we have to have have a
tax, um, these kinds of texts
initiatives every year if we
don't have a payment mechanism
for it, Mr. Speaker and.
gentleman, I think it is
reasonable, um, to.
think about a year where we're
not doing a tax package, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. And as I
say, I just want to reiterate, I
have been very impressed with
your leadership and others on
the team in terms of how we have
tried and moved forward and I
can see that the um very
expansive or relatively
expansive proposals that were
being made by the Senate that
they were unwilling to pay for
has been pared down
significantly from where it was.
So I commend you and the others
for that.
But, um, at a certain point.
I think that we do need to.
Say no, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen and, and move, move
forward without a tax package
this year if it's not something
we want, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle, I, I, I
didn't, I didn't, I don't hear a
question there, but I have a
comment just to quickly uh wrap
this up in terms of a dialogue
is that it it we still feel that
this is a a a good approach.
To compromise that allows us
this legislature to pass a
balanced budget as we did in
House Bill 2 while still
providing tax relief to
communities all across the state
and so this will be built into
next year's budget framework and
we are assured by that through
the conversations that we've had
with our, our house
appropriations Committee and,
and I'll I'll mind you again is
that um
In, in our conference committee
that we, we stuck, we stuck to
our, our guns. I mean, there,
there was, there was a hard
votes taken there, uh, and, uh,
we were just outvoted in regards
to the ability to want to pass
on and export this tax liability
to outside uh corporations, so
that being said, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, uh, that's where we
find ourselves this evening. Um,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I
just want to thank you for, for
all your hard work and the
others who are part of the team,
because I know it would, you
work very hard and with that
I'll yield.
Right, there's further the
debate on the motion to adopt
the committee report, gentlemen
from Donana Representative
Small. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, uh, with the
gentleman from Sandoval and Rio
Riba yield.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to my
friend from Donana County. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, I wanna, uh, number
of the questions have been
asked, I think, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the, uh, the package
as it stands now has a 3 very
clear things, affordability and
supporting middle class New
Mexico families. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, beginning to um help
healthcare practitioners in a
way that most other states do,
but historically New Mexico.
Has not, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, by reducing the gross
receipts tax burden, which, uh,
as the gentle lady from uh Los
Alamos pointed out your bill
takes a measure, this, this
conference report, it takes a,
an important but measured
approach uh on Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then, uh, with
a session that's been focused
around, uh, reform at CYFD
obviously, uh, a lot of work
within our foster system to
include.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the
foster care family tax credit
seems to me uh a very important
piece. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
uh, those are the three
components, right?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, 3
components in addition to the
liquor excise tax that was also
applied in this bill, yes sir.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. And that part,
uh, and its direction, uh, seems
to me very important as well,
Mr. gentlemen, I wanna, uh, very
clearly thank you for the
diligence with which you
approach the work. I think even
as there are
even as we see different
approaches, uh, your
steadfastness to public open
transparent process.
And,
uh, doing right by the state
financially and fiscally, which
is of course of, of the most
importance. I deeply appreciate,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I'll
gladly support this, uh,
package. I am excited as we go
into, uh, as we look towards the
interim session to have what has
been started here in the house,
a very sober, uh, values-based
conversation, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, about a tax.
Code that supports people in the
state, helps folks in the state,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, who need
that help the most and also Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, supports
the state functions. So, uh, I'm
excited to help set that tone uh
deeply appreciate with uh you as
tax chair being a member of LFC,
all the perspectives we've
heard, uh, during this
conversation, uh, and again, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I am very
proud to support this package
and even more excited.
To go into the interim, working
closely together. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is for the debate on
adoption of conference committee
report from Montero
representative block.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker.
Would my friend, uh, the
gentleman from
Beautiful counties, please yield
all the counties I forgot.
Mr. Speaker, what, what, what
counties are those? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I believe those
beautiful amazing counties
you know what I do, I yield to
my friend.
From Otero County.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I guess I'm a little
easier because I have one county
and you've like all kinds of
beautiful counties as well. I
have one, so
he only has 33.
Does he? OK, let me make sure I
know what those counties are
actually. OK, Re Rebu Sandoval
San Juan. OK, good counties. I
like those. I got them. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I'm not
gonna keep us all, all night,
but
I do have a big problem, huge,
ginormous problem with this bill
and it's on section.
For.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
My concern
Is this entire portion,
honestly, that we're adding this
as well as section 5, honestly,
creating a new fund, which I'm
not a fan of. But Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, how did we arrive at
this 20% increase in liquor
taxes figure.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, it, this was an initiative
from Senator Scher in, in the
Senate.
And uh,
As Republicans raising taxes on,
on alcohol.
I would just say that that that
was the initiative, that was a
low blow.
And, uh, wasn't funny.
But, uh, what I mean by that is
that it's an initiative that was
proposed by Senator Scher. Uh,
it's, it's an offshoot, I
imagine of the work that was
trying to uh.
Had been accomplished in a
number of of House and Senate
bills looking to uh increase the
taxation on alcohol and so this
was his approach to which was
adopted by their taxation
committee to increase the
taxation on wholesale of 20% to
alcohol.
And, and while, pardon me, and,
and while excluding those
breweries and and local
distilleries.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and uh yeah there's.
One pesky Republican who puts a
bill like this forward,
unfortunately. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I, I would vehemently
disagree with the good senator,
respectfully.
This is a bad idea, but it is, I
mean, theoretically, it is
better than some other tax
increases that I've seen.
You know, that there were kind
of wasteful spending of a way
that has proposed been proposed
during this last session that
was confusing and could hurt
businesses that have died in
committees on bipartisan votes.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are
any of these
provisions that we see like
liquid excise tax. So is this a
bill that was proposed first, or
was it just an idea in the
conference committee?
and gentlemen, so the way it
initially uh was approached in
this, in, in their amendments to
the tax package was that it was
all directed the money raised
from this, uh, increase in
taxation was all directed
towards the general fund and if
you do that you you're, you're
not helping but to pad more the
general fund, right? And so, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen from
Otero.
County, uh, the discussion was
had this morning in committee by
which was adopted to add a
language from in, in this case,
our reference point would be
House Bill 417 to which the
House Taxation Committee, uh,
did here and did pass out of its
committee that created this
tribal alcohol alleviations
fund, uh, to which would
intercept.
This amount of money to then
help to uh battle the the uh
issues of alcoholism for this
particular group.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I appreciate that
answer and, and so I, I had to
build a session as well
regarding alcohol taxes, which
would have put it back in the
local communities and I feel
like that would be a better way
to do this. And so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I
I do not think that this is the
best option because I've seen
the data since 1993, we've
increased alcohol taxes in 1993
and since then our alcohol harms
rate has skyrocketed almost 100%
since then. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, these, these issues
are clearly something that I
would love to have more dialogue
about and I, I know it's
unfortunate, but I think that
20% increase on alcohol taxes,
it just hurts the poorest of the
poor, in my opinion, and some
people say it's only a few cents
per, per liter, etc.
But that does add up, especially
in a community like mine, and
not every single New Mexican is
an alcoholic, and I think that's
something that we need to
consider when it, when we're
putting forward this, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, so I, I
think this is a terrible,
horrific, bad tax policy. I
don't believe in raising these
taxes whatsoever, but I also
have concerns with the creation
of this new fund and I'm just,
I'm just wondering.
This new front, so it's a tribal
alcohol harms alleviation fund.
Do we know if this is equally
transferred to each tribe by
population. How do we get it to
these tribes.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
at this point in time, it's
subject to appropriation.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
thank you for that and I
appreciate that answer, but
The appropriate, so, OK, so once
we get these funds from the
increase in alcohol taxes.
And let's just say there's,
there's money appropriated. How
do we know who gets most? It
does because I know the Navajo
Nation has a lot more population
and, for example, Mescalero
Apache. So can you just give me
a little more info on how that
works. Uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, great question. So
at, at this point in time, this
creates the fun, but at the end
of the day, the legislature will
be able to establish the
spending priorities based again
on the communities that need it
the most and so in a large in
part be directed with help from
the Indian Affairs department.
of this state. OK, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So, all
right, I guess I will look
forward to seeing this in a
year's time, I suppose. I think
it's the first of June.
I'm sorry, January or July,
effective July 1st, 2026 for
section 3 of this.
Maybe so.
When, I guess when would be the
earliest we're getting these
funds there. Would it be next
session that we'd appropriate or
could it be potentially now? Uh,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as
noted, uh,
Previously is that this is the
only part of the uh of of this
bill that goes into effect once
the bill is hopefully signed by
the governor and then so we
would be able to see uh those
types of taxation taxes raised
next legislative session.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you for the
information. And so I, I just
still want to echo some of my
concerns. I don't think 20%
increase on alcohol taxes is a
fair thing to do in my opinion,
and I, I think it's bad tax
policy. It's better than some
bills I've seen that have been
really anti-business, but I also
think that this will also hurt
businesses since they have to
pay, they have to put taxes on
the consumer who has to pay them
at the end of the day. And I
think our constituents should
not be the ones subject to that.
So, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you so much, gentlemen,
for all the answers, and I
appreciate, uh.
the conversation. Thank you.
Right, folks, we are on a motion
to adopt.
Conference committee
Oh, apologies, young lady from
Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, with general um and
from
Uh, those counties yield.
Mr. Speaker, and, and, and
gentle lady, I yield to you,
gentle lady from Santa Fe
County. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. Um, I'm
just trying to.
Just makes, I get some
clarification and, and maybe a
couple of questions under uh.
The new provisions in Section 3,
Our health, home health care
providers included in
Mm
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and generally,
please repeat your question.
Our under section 3.
And then under the amendments.
Our home health care providers
or those that provide health
care at homes and home settings
included.
In this amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, if
I understand your question, the
answer would be yes.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. General,
I'm just not finding it yet. I'm
really tired, but uh, I mean, I,
I tend to like this kind of
thing and and I wanna say thank
you. I don't know who brought
his provision. This was um
thought through or brought
forward, but, um, I've been
asked by my, my, uh, um.
Healthcare providers to look at
some kind of tax exemptions or
tax, um.
Credits, um, so under the
section 3, did you say it was?
3
31
$1 million would be there.
The exception there, Mr. Speaker
can you clarify that for me, Mr.
Speaker. Absolutely, Mister
Speaker and gentle lady, uh,
we're looking at $31.3 million
and, and to further I think
answer your question as I
understand it a little bit
better now is that if the
service that you're talking
about is covered partially by
insurance?
This deduction would cover the
copay deductible and now
co-insurance for the patient pay
portion of that.
Well, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
can't argue that, um.
Um,
but is this an
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I know
that, uh, in-house
appropriations, we had a, a
request.
And I don't know if this is any
way like kind of a a reckon.
reconciliation type of uh
attempt for the, I think it was
up to $30 million or $25 million
that was asked for, um,
In their special appropriations.
To help our health providers, is
this any way like a a workaround
but to use our tax code to do
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's, it's no way tied to, I
think what you're talking about,
but it does still yet affect
health care practitioners to
fulfill their, their, their
duties.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I, I
mean, I really can't argue that
when there's too much, it's just
a little surprising that this
came about. The next section I,
I have questions or maybe some
clarification if you can is a
section 4 with the uh liquor,
um.
Was this, uh, was this, uh,
anyway, uh, proposal that was on
the house side through the I
know that there is a there's a
group of of our members who are
trying to work towards getting a
package, uh, uh, together for
um.
I believe it was.
For
Was it a point of sale rather
than the excise tax that we're
seeing here is this anywhere
anyway related to that or does
that help that that effort that
they were trying to do, that
they were trying to accomplish,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it's only really related because
of our auditions in our
conference committee to add the
tribal harms alleviation fund to
this program, but as it relates
to the initiative of House Bill
417 that uh some of our members
here were sponsoring it's not
that, right? They, they, their
program was much more extensive.
It created a tax at the at the
at the excise or the, at the
wholesale rate and also at the
retail rate and so their numbers
were completely different.
But I think the only thing that
is salvaged from, from, from
those two bills in this bill is
again that creation of the of
the tribal harms alleviation
fund.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So if we were to come
back next year, uh, with that,
the that bill that House bill.
It'd be a
I don't know if we would be more
accepting of it because we're
gonna have this in place with
that, could you clarify that for
me, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
uh, it, it would be, it creates
the framework at this point
through this mechanism and so
should we come back next year
with the same type of
initiatives, uh, frameworks
created, money's gonna start
flowing into there by next
legislative session. So the
answer long-winded is yes. Thank
you Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. I
yield.
Right, we are on a motion to
adopt.
The house taxation revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 1 as amended. Conference
committee report. All those in
favor signified by say I.
Closing 8.
The I have it, the conference
committee report is adopted.
That may have been the best one,
save the best for last.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
That was my mistake.
lady from Santa Fe, are you
ready on supplemental calendar
number 2 item 3.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, you get to
that point?
I'm sorry.
That the direct reflect that all
action is necessary for place in
the Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535
as amended on final passage has
been taken, and it is subject to
debate amend or substitution,
the general lady to explain the
bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
This bill updates the worker
comp fees which haven't been
adjusted in 35 years since 1990
and increases them by $1 over 8
years to ensure that the
workers' comp revenues can match
the expenses. It also adjust the
fee percentages for the telecom
surcharge and the PRC inspection
fees to pay for sorely needed
improvements in the 988 and the
911 system.
Uh, to improve the speeds and
location accuracy with other
updates as well. And with that,
I stand for questions. lady from
Santa Fe, Representative
Sapansky. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, with the gentle lady
from Santa Fe Yield, Mr.
Speaker, I yield to the gentle
lady from Santa Fe. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. Um, Mr. Speaker, um, this
body considered a really
important uh bill on supported
decision making.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um, the, the topic of this
legislation is quite broad and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
would like for us to have
another opportunity to consider
supported decision making, um,
and send that over to the
Senate, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, that, uh, legislation
passed this body 64 to 0.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I would move House for amendment
number 1 to Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 535.
Right, the amendments being
passed out just for the benefit
of the body, this we've, uh,
We've been working on this the
last few hours with, uh, both
leaders, so folks more or less
you know what's in here.
Uh, but we will also explain it.
Your lady, can you please
confirm the 232 number.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's 232.
151.1.
Right, that is what we have.
It'll get posted online, it'll
get passed out, and then I'll
come back to you to explain the
amendment, Mr. Speaker, um, may
I just introduce my experts,
please. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I have Cecilia Moromiis with um
DFA on 911, uh, Miranda
Mascarenas with PRC and Heather
Jordan with the Workmen's
compensation.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Right, do you remember the
amendment's been passed out and
it's posted online to explain
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So,
uh,
House for Amendment number 1 to
this legislation encompasses all
of House Bill 149 with the
amendments adopted in the Senate
Judiciary Committee, um, and it
relates to supported decision
making, which allows uh
individuals to not uh be a
guardians or powers of attorney
for individuals who need
assistance in decision making
but allows for uh a supportive
individual to participate in
that decision.
making and its support, uh, the
individual that needs that
support.
Is this a friendly amendment,
uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, it is a
debate on the amendment?
Right, is your opposition to
adopting the amendment see none
we have an amended bill.
Back to the sponsor. I mean back
to the gentle lady apologies you
have to stay off the floor,
young lady from Santa Feen
Zansky, you yield the floor.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, I
appreciate the support.
Back to the sponsor.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, that we
stand for questions.
So you know division and later
to, Mr. Speaker, I move that
Senate Bill 535 as twice amended
do now pass. We are on final
passage of Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 535 as twice amended, the
vote is now open.
Well, it's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 40 in the affirmative, 23 in
the negative. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 535 is twice amended as
duly passed this house.
Alright folks, we're almost done
lied at the end of the tunnel.
We're almost done.
Thank you.
Have one fan over there.
The gentle lady to my left.
That's pretty bad.
And so left they come back
around sometimes.
All right, gentlemen from
San Rio Riva San Juan
representative Lee.
Yes sir, Mr. Speaker, would you
please get me to that point?
All right, we're looking at item
12 on supplemental calendar
number one.
scribbled up, but it's
Senate Bill 490 apologies Senate
Bill 425. These are capital
reauthorizations. Let, let the
record reflect that all action
has served for place in the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 425
with an emergency class on final
passage has been taken, and it
is subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the gentleman
to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All of
you should have received a table
that was just passed out and
what this is is the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 425 reauthorizes 423
capital outlay projects that had
been authorized in previous
years from various funds. The
estimated balance on projects
included in the bill as of
January of this year is $262.7
million. In this case, uh,
projects may be reauthorized to
extend.
the reversion date expand or
change the purpose or change the
administrative agency, uh, there
have been a number of reasons
why we have to reauthorize
dollars, but in this case and in
many cases it's likely due to
supply chain delays, labor
shortages, cost escalations and
capacity limitations that have
made delayed the project and
again reference to the chart for
your for for all of you to look
at, uh, and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I sta for questions
Mr. Speaker, I now move that the
committee
substitute the Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 425 do not pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 425
with an emergency clause. The
vote is now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 62 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 425.
With an emergency clause has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that or a business messages.
an objection is ordered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
adopted the conference committee
report on house taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 14 as amended,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhansson a chief clerk.
If you think this is fluid, wait
till tomorrow. It's real fluid.
Just waiting around forever.
till 12 noon.
When representing Montoya makes
a sine DA motion.
Usually start making that motion
like at 9:30 and I have to just
not recognize it. You're
probably trying to make it right
now.
With a roll call.
To a party somewhere or what? I
heard about a party that I was
not invited to.
Gentle lady from.
Were you trying to hide behind
your flowers, Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m. I moved the house adjourned
until 12:01 p.m. The House will
come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session or present
in this afternoon session.
It is so ordered.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and proved, subject
to revision and approval of the
rules and order of Business
Committee. no objection. It is
so ordered.
gentle lady from Bernard Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I'm gonna go to the
next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business. It is ordered.
I have an announcement. We are
done for the night.
Good work everybody. That was a
very productive day, uh, truly,
truly appreciate everybody's
hard work, strong debate, fiery
debate at times, um, and just
good.
Old fashioned legislating,
really appreciate you all. Other
announcements before we break
for the evening.
Recess until recess until 10
a.m.
Gentlemen from Donana.
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee will be meeting 15
minutes after the floor, no.
OK
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I've had a
rough week.
And my wife's had kind of a
rough week as well.
And we were talking about things
and, and I told her, you know,
as I was working through some
things, I said,
You know, you just gotta you
just gotta embrace your mistakes
and, and just own them.
Mr. Speaker, she came over and
hugged me.
Wow
Uh
That's a good one.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
house stand in recess until 8:30
a.m. sharp.
8:30 a.m. sharp tomorrow
morning.
I deserve it, I get it. The
house is standing in recess
until 8:30.
Tomorrow morning
