Here and in turn the chair of
the two thousand.
That.
Morning.
Eight public schools are just a
bit so.
So you all can see.
I called this meeting for us for
our first presenter this
Senator Ferreira.
By.
Thanks for.
Representative thank you thank
you ad campaign and I'm gonna
I'm gonna turn the floor over to
Senator Wirth who has been a
real leader and this effort and
that he'll be in the
presentation.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee
we are here today to percent
Senate Judiciary Committee some
three percent bill one let me
just say up front to expert
witnesses with us more on this
skates and Ronald Cerro both
with the rural community
assistance corporation a
nonprofit that works with.
All around the state and around
the country this Morales fate
actually is now the national
director so out of the sea
so they have worked on this bill
for many years so what Senate
bill one the committee
substitute this is the following
and what I'll do is lay out that
kind of legal framework that we
created in this bill and then
chair that can.
Kind of give a flavour for why
this bill is someone for.
So let me say right up front of
this bill is not of the and the
on eighty dollars.
What the bill is create a
template that allows two or more
entities that choose to
consolidate
to voluntarily enter into a
regional water utility authority
what what are the advantages of
doing act of the those
individuals water authorities
can consider well certainly
there's huge economies of scale
and terms of operation
iterations
think about point think about
infrastructure think about the
system having is a lawyer the
system having it's own engineer
well when you regional allies
there's all of those get
narrowed down the bill is
modeled after bill that passed
in two thousand and nine that
then Representative survived a
scare Heat and I think
Representative Ezzell you and I
are the only ones still around
from that discussion but
Representative Servan tastes
created well Rio Grande public
water works authority it was
some mutual domestics that came
together and came to the
legislature to form a regional
system of that water authority
has been an incredible success
story started with three or four
for I will need I I mutual
domestics and it is now loan
And and has a number of other
systems that are part of the
authority and it has received
over seventy million dollars in
funding because of it is stable
to falsify as a larger entity so
it really is the model
that we used for this
legislation
so a couple of additional points
that are that are important in
the bill if you can't find for
water and wastewater services
and other operations essential
to the authorities are is that
yes the entities the ability to
choose those if they so choose
and again that's the key to it
and I just think as we deal
with.
Fires has we deal with droughts
More important than ever that
systems have the opportunity to
consider if it makes sense to
regional and and again I think
this is a.
Get yours up north we just
passed Senate bill six through
both chambers all those small
systems are at a point where
they're kind of they've got to
figure out what direction to go
they can come to us and ask for
individual capital outlay is
trying for work on an individual
basis or they want to gather and
regional allies and and get the
advantages that come up the
final thing I'll say is that our
water trust board has really put
an emphasis on regionalization
so when those systems come with
a water trust board they're
looking to see if there's been
an effort to reach analyzed if
there is there's a whole bunch
of additional benefits that come
to the systems that have moved
in that direction so this built
around for awhile and you know I
think for many years there was
fear here comes the government
telling us what we have to do
and I want to be real clear that
this is not a mandate and so it
really it's a it's an
opportunity it's a choice for
entities to enter into and I
think this year through the work
and the effort and I really
appreciate having chair have off
on this bill and explaining the
story from her perspective and
what she seen after the war
we've we've worked through the
interim committees we work with
the different constituencies I
think you'll see that there
really has been a coming
together in terms of support for
this effort this year so with
that I would to share that a.
This Morales rate and Mr feral
here as as experts and and I
think that you're also has a
technical amendment that we want
for our.
I.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you committee
This is a I've been working on
this issue really since I since
I came to the house
I really love the way the issue
is going to be education but you
know eighty percent of my time
no water can you explain that
all okay I'm sorry
Mr chair we made page for these
are really just clarifying its
on page four line twenty one
aftershow you insert highlighted
the state engineer and now just
to clarify that with that was
the state engineers office and
on eight one ten strike and
subsequent boards and then and
soon in lieu of the.
Of the.
This makes.
Mr Chairman the man that for
discussion purposes.
This motion to the and the
second for this whole process Mr
chair where where is the it's a
separate piece of.
So in a very in fact that has
already.
More questions.
Mr chairman.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Madam chair on page a.
You're you're a amendment states
that.
Destroyed and Services code
board and just make initial
court.
Give me an explanation of why it
was done that.
Chair and members of the
committee the reason for it is
because once the entity has been
established.
This is not the language should
be specific to the initial board
after has been established they
have to go through the election
code and so that would create a
conflict with.
So if you probable paragraph.
Bob.
They will the correlation would
have to go through the election
close of business the state of
what what place and that's the
reason why.
Okay Mister chairman.
And madam chairman and expert
witness so it does give the
forty fourth for the courts to
be able to tweet whatever their
rules and regulations of the is
that correct thank you very
much.
Yes are there are further
questions from the committee.
On the amendment.
Mr Chairman is a long.
Mr Chairman
Representative career and
senator.
On your first amendment on page
four for every year inserting
applied to this state engineers
office.
That is your addition right
there.
Authority shall file still apply
to the state to the state
engineer to follow change of
ownership form with the state
engineer is that a little bit
redundant.
So I can I can take that one
madam chair I I think what we've
tried to do in the special and
we had this discussion as you
might imagine seven feet issue
of.
Because Senator was in his
representatives or office we
used a lot of his language and
he didn't like the fact that I
call them out that this was his
is language from the bill but
one of the things we try to
really make this piece of
legislation that can be
understood by the entities when
they go through the process and
walk them through it and a
challenge was on page four line
twenty one it simply says that
forty shall file a change of
ownership form with the state
engineer and says and shell
change the place of use and
point of diversion so adding the
state engineer apply to the
state engineer is just making it
crystal clear that that's where
you go to apply for that change
to change the point of use so
really it's it's stating it
again you're correct but I think
it doesn't hurt at all this was
a request that came as I
understand from.
From the state engineers office
so that's why it's there well
maybe they're part of the
educational system here instead
Mexico because we've done not so
well for many of.
If you want to leave it that way
that's great but the this is the
wide range right now the
authority shall apply to the
state engineer to follow change
of ownership form with the state
engineer.
And then the the amendment
stance also takes the place of
use appointed person should we
insert state engineer there also
just make twelve that's that's
what the amendment us.
So and I'll just read it when a
founding are joining into the
transfers of water right to the
story the authority shall file a
change of ownership form with
the state engineer and shall
apply to the state engineer to
change the place of use or point
of diversion of the transport
right.
Mr Chairman representative
Representative working for got
that amendment in you didn't
rate with that amendment in
there I think I did not applaud
twenty one and shell twenty one
twenty with the.
Twenty excuse me my that that
that okay.
You provided that way that's
fine.
Page.
Okay.
Members of the committee any
further questions on the
amendment Mr I move that the
number of thanks.
Most except
a man with a second.
Any objections.
Actions that member has been
accepted now on to the main menu
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair.
So my work in the north.
Then we're in the north it's
really been working with water
systems small mutual domestic
water systems in my district
alone we have over sixty.
and it before there was never
any incentive to really regional
said it was a big issue for
those of you who don't know if
you wanted to do regional ice to
water systems that could come
together you have to come to the
legislature get separate
legislation to do that you know
how many bills we have before us
you know how hard it is to get.
It was a man of peace support
for people to do that and there
was really no incentive to do
that and my my over riding
concern is really how can we
conserve protect and sustain the
water that we have in the north
that is the critical that we're
dealing with and
And this bill creates an
opportunity for the first time
in many years to really change
the way we do business to make
it
to put it at the local level and
to have them come together to
form a sustainable water system
and I think it's always.
This I'm just going to start
with and then okay most of money
the tokenistic water systems in
the north have less than a
hundred households okay so they
pay about fifty Bucks a month
that's kind of the the the
average.
So fifty times a hundred gives
you five thousand a month times
twelve gives you sixty thousand
a year so what this system has
to do is some houses state of
water systems drinking water
system that provides twenty four
hour round the clock drinking
water to every household with
aging infrastructure old pipes
leaking pipes they are maxed out
with loans and and they have to
you know put a bill that every
month they have to keep those
pipes for making
They have huge systems that come
in are huge problems that come
in and they don't have the money
to release system so it's all
put together with what it was
just it was what did they say a
prayer and a half and a wish to
that the state in place it
really is and and they come to
me for capital outlay and I feel
like I put fifty thousand
dollars mandate some five
million dollar project that's
really what it's about
so so what I have seen what we
know now that is if you can put
together households about five
hundred that's kind of that
that's kind of the.
The deciding place where you can
have a sustainable system I can
do the math yes five hundred
households times fifty a month
it's about twenty five thousand
a month times twelve is about
three hundred thousand a year
that will pay the money you need
to hire an operator to hire
director to hire an operator and
to hire an accountant and then
you know you have to stay in
office you you know you have
money that you can save and work
toward and put together plans
you need about five hundred
households to create a
sustainable system.
Now again most of the systems in
the in the north and I think all
over New Mexico we're still in
the in the fifties donor built
after World War two so this is a
very sophisticated of my city
okay this is a city of death all
right this is the main highway
this is highly Sixtyeight that
goes up it up to the task can.
Then you have another majority
of this is highway seventy five
that goes at the at include it
comes up and it runs through the
town of Dixon so in the fifties
because they had a river running
through the town this is the
include over there they built
for mutual domestic water
systems little of the drive up
in the corner has about twenty
households on the other side
they have a tendency to go which
has about a hundred households
to pay Dixon has about two
hundred fifty households is the
most sophisticated New Mexico
domestic and I will stay this
system is kind of run down they
have about a hundred councils
now why
would a system up to fifty who
has good meters that systems
engineering plant partner with
postgame who's really
deteriorate.
Why because they all share the
same off of her and if we don't
protect those officers were in
big trouble so it but there was
never any incentive before and I
hate you know remember I talked
about the.
We talked about the water you
know the water challenges and
that in the report this was the
second recommendation might have
came in and talked about that it
is it has been better but a lot
of people this plan is very
important.
I just wanna say the NMFA has
put in really important measures
Marquita came before this
committee to talk about.
Grants are now available for
five hundred thousand for people
to put together a water plant if
the regional lines okay skin is
a sea change if if we do this
bill plus what the MMI plus
build on the work of the NMFA of
the wait period match
requirements for
for water systems with less than
two hundred fifty people and at
that we've there's a hundred
million going into the water
transport hopefully that'll get
past a lot of things are
culminating of that we need to
Senate bill one to pass to make
sure that we can do the same
said without.
I'll stand for questions.
Representative can I just have
one more things for the
emphasize is that currently if
you want to create a regional
system you've got to come to the
legislature and we talked about
the one that Representative
survived a thin I want to talk
about another one that should
make everyone your kind of
policy and that's the burly
Albuquerque water authority that
was created.
At the very end of the session
by one senator who kind of for
staff through over huge
objections from then City of
Albuquerque didn't want to join
it's taken a number of years for
that to kind of coalescing
malfunction terrific but you
know the idea that that you
could have a political situation
where certain members are able
to our power through something
here where there's not agreement
I think it's really those status
quo without this bill so this
bill by creating this template.
Basically puts the burden on the
different groups to work
together and if they decide to
come forward they come forward I
think if we have this in place
the days of systems coming over
here trying to our power
something through are going to
be greatly diminished because
there will be a process here
it's done I just wanted to
highlight that because that
really is the history of what's
what's happened in terms of
regionalization and it's
interesting because Albuquerque
Bernalillo now I think I mean
it's there's still some
criticism of it but it's
worthwhile it but it took awhile
to get there and the way it was
created was not this
collaborative approach thank you
Mr chair thank you for that yeah
before we take questions maybe
we're gonna go to the audience
and we're gonna ask how many are
in support of the Senate bill
one.
Okay and then how many would be
against said.
There's no opposition so we're
gonna start with the back row
and you give us your comments on
your support so.
Okay good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is always more waters's you
would conservation voters New
Mexico we urge your support
press one we think that you have
no budget for community members
and there were a lot of other
water systems and we'll make
them overall more resilient to a
function differs water issues
thanks
Before.
Thank you for that.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Katherine Porsche and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
water foundation first of all we
would like to thank the sponsors
for continuing to work on this
critical piece of legislation
for New Mexico Senate bill will
help solve common challenges
like affordable supplies
Schering costs of operators and
make rates ones all.
Passage of Senate bill one will
also provide streamline
framework community water
systems need for regional
operation water internalization
has broader impacts on the
environment it will foster
resiliency in the face of
climate change changing
population and natural disasters
here to support.
Thank you for that.
to the front row.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of finance bill Connor
secretary director New Mexico
overwater Association.
We stand in support of Senate
bill one
been fortunate enough to be
able.
Of these folks pretty closely
and and developing the existing
bill as it stands today as
everyone knows we still have
some very minor questions about
work Smith thing some of the
things but nothing of substance
but if you think that we would
like to see correct it but.
Regardless of that we do stand
in support of Senate bill thank
you for that the next person.
also.
Committee my name is Mike I'm of
the state engineer
and I also service the chair of
the water trust board
I want to thank the sponsors the
programs forward
I have spent forty years one of.
Public service New Mexico and
I've seen hard braking
situations communities that have
for the duration of forcible
repairs.
And and.
One of one of the committee
using take your time over to
that I work with from on for for
on on for years as a poster
child of of not to to fund
systems is just a band aid
approach capital outlay and
various.
Within a mile of a regional
system that they could hook up
to.
Agreements between communities
for the work.
that was solved problems for
them for for a long term.
Of this this bill will.
The opportunities for
collaborations.
So these smaller utilities and
and and individual households
that are firmly on show wells in
contaminated aquifers elected
party well Mexico very difficult
situation there and they're
within miles of.
Our edges of them up if they
have the funding and all those
things that we're working on
here in this legislation right
now so
under those conditions so I
think having these opportunities
of this legislation is is
outstanding for the state of New
Mexico and also.
surface to air just as the other
Mention for drought resiliency
and.
Chair.
Thank you for that there was
some late entries so one more
question on the back.
This is a Mr chairman and
members of the committee Romero.
to the that water systems yes
Water System these two systems
are about a hundred feet apart
from each other there is a
system is about sixty years old
and needs a lot of repairs of
these to be improved they're
trying to they're trying to
merge into the I've seen that
system or two weeks of the.
I just so the question was
system they could if they could
find a that to us in the C. for
the full support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you for that of there is
no more hands from the audience
we're going to go to the there's
a person on line that would like
to ask questions what.
the loss you're all.
Okay fourteen let's go to Sophia
Jenkins.
So you're all.
Hello can you hear
we can hear you yes go ahead.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name Sophia
Jenkins met though and I'm here
today to give a statement on
behalf of youth United
requirement crisis action are
got that which is a project of
earth care.
This care is based on the south
side of Santa Fe but we have
thousands of members throughout
northern and central New Mexico
yeah stand in strong support of
this bill regional water system
return to act as the climate
crisis worsens and New Mexicans
in every corner of the state
bill it's wrong it's important
that we ensure communities have
the resources they need to
become more resilient when faced
with devastating drought.
As our state continues down a
path of total climate
catastrophe our state is only
going to see more violence eight
longer wildfires and dryer
monsoons now more than ever we
need to be making investments
like this to ensure communities
are ready to respond we're proud
to see our lawmakers innings
make New Mexico more resilient
in the face of devastating
disasters and we think the
Sanchez for bringing for this
important piece of legislation
thank you.
Thank you Mr conciliatory now
let's go back to.
teen Locsin.
Miss losses here on.
Okay you can okay this excuse me
this is John Ogston I sent the
league of women voters of New
Mexico the league has strongly
supported regional water
planning for several decades we
believe that.
The continued funding for
regional planning is essential
in order to provide for.
Water access and quality
especially in light of climate
change issues and so we endorse
SB one thank you very much.
Thank you whether we're gonna
for questions as the first
person is representative
Armstrong thank you Mr chairman
and thank you for the
presentation you know we always
hear inklings about what's going
on and.
In during a time in our life
this.
Crazy and unfounded with the
amount of money that the state
house right now.
just to I was adding up Mr
chairman and and
Committee members I got over
thirty six million dollars in
requests for water
infrastructure in the four
counties that I represent.
For capital outlay.
And I might get to point
million.
And how to a spread that out and
how do I share it and what's an
emergency and once a bandaid.
I know Mr chairman that a lot of
people have probably seen what's
going on in truth or
consequences.
Stewart Williams Burke put up to
the consequences and now tier
sees failing.
In other whole water systems
fail.
And it's going to be an
emergency.
And so I like the idea of
regional icing I'm just not sure
how it would work.
in.
I I need to explain it not Mr
chairman Representative had it
up very well to be in your area
and all areas are going to be
very different so I think
northern New Mexico this would
be very helpful I don't know
that it's going to be helpful so
much in my area but that doesn't
mean I'm not supportive of it.
I know that you know the
Valencia County areas looked at
regional icing and trying to
make a water authority because
all and doesn't know a las
Colinas is doing awesome this is
an awful and doing and it's I
think this would possibly be
helpful for that
so I don't really have any
questions I just want people to
understand the kind of requests
that we get.
And the the you know we want to
help everybody and we want to we
want to fix the problems but we
can't always fix the problems
and unless you're able to
regional lies three July so I I
appreciate that they all and
there was one concern that was
brought up.
This was actually.
Senate Judiciary.
It was the the administrative
implications is the PRC going to
be involved in this at all.
Representative Armstrong.
Chairman members of the
committee no this is to be a
political subdivision of the
state of public education
programs is not receive
public what was okay thank you
and so this will be a political
subdivisions.
Interesting okay thank you Mr
chairman that's that's all I
Representative Armstrong next
week Representative Ezzell Mr
chairman thank you very much
some of the questions I have.
My concern here is from the
restocking.
This is my first the public
hearing we're talking about
expertise throughout the state
that I want to be able to do
this and whenever they have to.
Given those of the public.
I guess all the on the we have
one newspaper that's called the
daily press comes out on
Thursday then we have another
paper that's also that in the
newspaper that comes out.
Just on the days that donation
lie seems like in the.
So my concern is how the smaller
entities that we may want to
join this how are they going to
give this.
Representative Ezzell
The committee the existing
currently we have over three
hundred and six in the state
each one of them has to set of
articles of incorporation and
bylaws in the require lost its
stipulate.
What the process is for
communicating with the members
so anything to do this
interested in joining
potentially trouble our regional
authority we have to follow
their own established procedures
to communicate so it's either
mail notice just or
in most cases because they're so
small mail notice okay thank you
for that.
Response.
If the federal if if the.
To domestics decide to join
together become part of this
regionalization effort.
Is there a possibility if they
make a decision later on of
dissolution.
Mr chairman chairman Senator yes
there is so they have to go
through the same process kind of
like the process right now and
so they have to register with
the secretary of state mmhm they
would have to go through the
same solution process and one of
the one of the things that the
the legislation template is
proposing is that they spell
that out in their own documents
because we're not not obviously
the focus is usually less
expensive because we have so
many of them right but the idea
is that other entities such as
cities.
Allergies will be also part of a
regional effort and so the idea
is that in their own corporation
documents the sellers the
process for dissolution because
of that time we're talking about
assets that we have to be in all
we allocate it differently okay
thank you Mr chairman and
representative and senator
thanks for witness I know in the
past and I think the centre
committee is to guess whenever
we're saying did the dispersal
of assets in their bank but
whenever there's definitely
seeing this because of what did
you say there was.
Mr chairman and Representative
how much money is being
allocated towards re regional
sessions.
Five hundred.
Well we we we're working on
getting a hundred million and
water transport it but then of
the NMFA's really has set up new
guidelines so that
board regionalization said
Amanda hi.
Okay Mister chairman.
Like I was saying whenever
Senator Wirth and I've been here
long time discussing water
issues thank and I know that
once upon a time there was a
push to put in real time meters.
Will that be part of the.
This may be the water transport
can strongly recommend I see the
need for.
I is it going to be up to the
local entities or Mr chair and
and and Representative resale I
know in my area the more
sophisticated systems to have
meters and a you know they can
do them over the internet now so
they have very said the older
systems have no meters acted
people have to walk the fields
it and look at those meters
one eight times so yeah that's
alright it's improving systems
all over the state really okay
thank you very much Mr chairman
representative and senator maybe
I section five.
Your new material forty hours
do.
This is an authority may provide
for water and wastewater
services I get that.
Improvements for the protection
of the thirties infrastructure I
get that can you expect a little
bit on the renewable energy
projects how does that fall into
this this round that we are
discussing today.
Mr chairman Representative
Ezzell and members of the
committee yes the idea behind
it.
One thing so one of the areas
that we're seeing in this is at
the national level is on
stormwater having more of a
reach out I hope hundred
comprehensive occasional Water
the management of the water
resources so for example
Solar energy is one of the
things that could be used for
four meters for example for for
processing for buildings and
things like that J. D. I. is to
be able to reduce the cost of
operating utilities as much as
possible if the authority has
the ability to use that they can
apply for funding if it's an you
know it's one of the power
supply.
And if I could just answer
chairman key language there it
has to be integral to the
operations of the facilities so
it just gives on option it makes
sense if the four sides that's
what they want to do okay so
Mr Chairman representative and
senators if they do decide to
use the renewable think that it
would be their decision okay
have just one make that very
clear at absolutely
C..
Our top guys took care of the
set up part of it
we're talking about the board on
page nine slide four.
I can see a membership.
So this is going to allow it K.
there is a resignation
relocation of death with the
members just have to be filled
in it this is not really in my
opinion.
Not giving the board any
specific time frame can they
just leave that position up
until the next election.
So I think that I thank Mr
chairman and senator Ezzell.
The by laws are going to spell
that out okay so it and and
remember they've already used
ones already have their own
bylaws and so now the new bylaws
of the regional status so it is
it is spelled out I did local
basis absolutely thank you I'm
really big on local control of
it's very important to me.
thank you I guess my last
question here maybe it's my last
question on the shop and get
something else that I'm
interested in.
Whenever you were talking about
these entities being able to
make application to the water
trust board is there going to be
in the.
Steps they should follow up with
a.
Can get this done where they
moved to the top of the list of
where they can just to keep it
well you're one out of town the
next year you have to go through
the process again and it's like
well now you thirty ninth on the
list tell me how that's gonna
work because I've seen time and
time again and I'm kind of tired
of.
Well
if I may Mister chair and
Representative Ezzell the NMFA
has revise kind of that their
policy so urgent matters go to
the top the list obviously if
there's a crisis and then and
then they're really they're
really putting at the top people
that are trying to reach analyze
and in its two or more and and
so they're really trying to
encourage small water systems to
come together and the and it's
kind of all set out they have a
huge website may go over that
I'm gonna be holding my district
in our town hall meetings for
mutual domestics to taken
through the process and that to
do is there's going to be a lot
of education that's going to
have to go on with this and NMFA
is stepping forward with their
online website but I think we as
legislators really need to work
to take this to the people Mr
Chairman representative I
appreciate that explanation but
it doesn't always help to
there's an emergency situation
because right now I do have a
small community there will has
failed to have the opportunity
to buy it will water rights and
they're like well you didn't do
it till next year so we're
talking about.
Of five hundred.
We listen to.
Three hundred because.
It's gonna be a little tough for
me.
Mr chairman thank you very much
thank you Representative Ezzell
next Representative Kate's thank
you very much Mr chairman and
committee
thank you Senator and for
bringing this bill forward it is
so important is my understanding
just one of.
This.
Nine hours.
Committee aides I understand
that allows for a local control
because they know they're
stating what the community needs
but by organizing it makes them
eligible for all kinds of
support including monetary I
mean this is the best of of of
of what this legislation is so
thank you for.
putting it together in this
manner I just I am buying them I
guess I'm asking a question that
Representative Ezzell restating
it and different way.
The process of applying for
support including monetary I'm
sure.
Oil change by the water tests
given we we don't know the
future of twenty years and given
what what kind of money isn't it
in water in the the with their
needs so we're would of we're
with the regional water systems
provide that information so that
they know at any time this is
the process to be able to apply
for emergency status for for for
any of the other ways of
prioritizing.
I'm happy to take a shot at that
Mr chair and representative so
Marquita Russel has testified
during the journey of this bill
through other committees and
interim process that there have
been recent changes at the
waterfront for the prioritize
regionalization so I think
critical to to this model
building in place assuming we
passed the bill there's gonna be
an education component
Representative Garratt I've
talked about going on to
committees but I also think for
the water trust board.
Educating how exactly this works
and and I want to point I want.
I was very encouraging to see in
the paper you all are probably
gonna miss the budget today
perhaps that a hundred million
dollars going into the water
permanent fund is a little
different than what
Representative Harris at this.
It fund which we are able
through legislation to access to
address water issues and so one
of the beauties one of the
reasons the lower Rio Grande
water authority work back in two
thousand nine if the governor
Richards and was able to get
some extra money to help their
authority just take that initial
job and I think it's going to be
I look forward to being able to
use and help push money towards
a regional effort versus what I
have in my district which is a
tiny mutual domestic community
sound most there are water
twenty people and the speaker
and I speaker he often I live
session seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars in capital
outlay they want to look into a
system but it gets complicated
workout but we also another
private system to get them to
the county system which is
willing to help them so there's
going to need some more
resources and they've indicated
a willingness to begin moving
that direction which makes me
much more willing to put them on
the top of all the water
projects because here they're
realizing our system is just not
gonna work and it's bandaid if
we just keep it status quo but
if we start moving towards that
regionalization but I think
having the resources to help
make this happen is critical
especially as Representative
said if if one of the mutual
domestic is not in a financial
situation similar to the others
we're going to help that so that
the overall regional system
doesn't negatively hurt the
system is working I think that's
gonna be part of our job the
state thank you.
Just add to that it is a process
it is not in the here it takes a
year to kind of get your crap
together and to get ready to
apply
the NMFA they have healthy they
have experts to come in and help
you do the planning and design
the taxes that it is a process
so this money just doesn't
happen you know you have to go
through a lot of steps but there
is reward in doing that now if
you regional that's in part of
this.
Thank you very much
Representative and and and thank
you Mr chair and he committee I
will say out of all the bills
for this particular legislative
session and right before I came
in this morning I come through
my emails again I don't have one
single native email about this
stuff so thank you again for.
Thank you Representative next we
go to Representative Zamora
thank you Mr chair and Mr vice
chair and madam chair members of
Representative.
I just want to put the first
mutual domestic on record in
history was when I was a kid
are the my neighbor had a hand
of wealth in the bucket with the
police's.
And there's like six homes there
that would sure that well so
everybody would go there take
their personal market temple to
get to their house so I just
wanted to tell that those start
Mr chair and representative.
Your witness is not said a word.
And I'm wondering what what your
testimony is going to be about
why you had such a hard time
hooking up
our ability to relation with
your other mutual domestic next
week.
Good morning Mr chair
representative someone thank you
so much for the question so I
think this is important we and
working Group One of the water
task force identified the lack
of capacity to be able to move
forward with the small
communities right so we have all
the small communities out there
that we're talking about and
because of the lack of capacity
there there really challenged
with keeping up with fund the
applications of the regulatory
process and things like that
this I think that this bill
really creates the framework to
create capacity so that to
answer a lot of the questions
that been here today so that
these communities can prioritize
that there needs of our
community I have the capacity
that to apply for funding to
keep up with the regulatory.
Calendars and things like that
and so I think that one of the
things that I've witnessed over
the years is that and I've
worked on a few regional
collaboration projects one of
them is your district decided it
could be still regional water
association and and in some here
County for off from the of our
water lines one of the things
that we saw at the at the end of
that process is that those
systems were like Representative
that are it and I was describing
and that they were having a hard
time just keeping up with the
infrastructure needs they were
all volunteer board so having
child keeping up with the
regulatory calendar and after
that process what they did and
they did this internally they're
all is the prioritized amongst
the communities that decided to
work with each other the
prioritize what their
infrastructure needs were per
community and then they and then
they came to the funders based
on our priorities and then they
just continue that cycle to the
got through that process for
where I was from and Senator
from some to get funding needed
exactly the same thing we had
twelve different waters
Committee water systems we did
exactly the same people we came
together we prioritize what our
needs were and and then and then
started kind of addressing our
infrastructure needs that we but
to answer your question
specifically was the most
challenging definitely when we
first started having the
conversation about about
regional collaboration there was
lots of questions about one of
our water rights water water a
ton of the and what about.
What about you know taking on
the death of another those are
all really difficult questions
that we have with each other but
but it was a good process for us
to go through because it helped
us to understand what it really
meant to what what do I really
only Water Rights why wanted to
an adult and so was a he was an
educational process from that
perspective and then the same
thing with the idea of taking on
debt for you know another system
what we found was that entities
that have did was because they
had just requested the structure
systems that didn't have that
they have really old
infrastructure we're gonna need
to take on debt and by building
capacity by coming together than
that made it more affordable
than for everyone to you know
take on additional debt for
infrastructure work so you know
some of them were really
difficult conversations it was
it was a good process for us to
walk through as a larger regents
Representative editor of money
to because if you were really
looking for water resource
management in our region
collectively as opposed to
individually so that really
brought a lot of value that to
you know what we were working on
and what direction you want to
go.
Thank you thank you for your
statement and Mr chair and and
and the presenters so so now we
have a mutual Water System
nobody's gonna get deprived of
their water rights say if they
have a domestic well on their
acreage.
On their acreage.
None of that's going to happen
right.
Mr chair and representative no I
mean they they absolutely have
the right to keep their well and
that's not and and Lester some
agreement to do something
different that they're part of
but I think that this system I
mean it's going to be similar to
the overlay that exists with
their mutual domestic where
they've got a well and then they
got a right to use the mutual
domestic if they have both of
those and again I don't think
there's no no one's taking
anyone's Water and Mr shared and
presenters for a commercial well
I could see if I can see in
anchorage with the house on it
maybe some great money maybe
some fruit trees and they have
their own well the fact that
they're there for their
investment.
These people are going to get by
the many of the non water
anything like that.
Mr chair representative no again
at that that the states take
take the status quo that they
have so they've got a right to
use the system plus they've got
a domestic well maybe they've
got a commercial well again when
they when they make the decision
to for all those rights are
going to come with it and again
they're not going to lose those
separate rights by joining into
the entity okay and and and
that's kind of Mr chairman and
senator that's kind of leading
to my next question so here we
have a system.
And.
We're running out of water
because the wells going dry for
whatever reasons.
Maybe one drill deep enough at
the time into the water tables
going down maybe it's plugging
up maybe the cases rust
whatever.
So now you find out that
there's.
Water under.
Jane doe's property.
Over here.
How are you going to.
Proceed forward.
What taking their water for the
need for the for the mutual
domestic.
What kind of rules are set in
place for that.
And we all work with the state
water engineer about things like
that I mean you're gonna you're
gonna if you run out of water
somewhere you don't have to
drill a well if you need a new
well and how are you gonna go
about that.
Enough encroach on somebody's
water rights if they're not
willing to let.
So Mr Chairman representative
someone Mr Hammond this year I
potentially but you left a must
at all contracts of that sort
you know so the state engineers
office several years ago created
a rules that allows for the
creation of a water right from a
domestic well I to be
transferred over to a table
mystic for example so others are
given example so you did not
this just north of us find
another several systems there
that come together and they
created a regional entity and
also the there was already in
the individual community water
systems that have their
individual rights but as they
started to expand the regional
system and going to areas that
were on private with private
wells you gave those individuals
the option to connect if they
chose to if they chose to that
what they could do is and this
is the process of the state
engineers office they could
create a quarter acre for
transfer quarter before from
their domestic well over to the
mutual domestic with state which
would allow them then to create
more water rights to serve a
larger group of individuals
while retaining water on that
private well so that they could
use it for all purposes.
So so we have that process in
place currently with the state
engineers office there is again
that former Iraqi suppression
water rights for for expansion.
And Mr chairman and and
presenters.
I could see were used you might
run into a problem with that one
individuals holding back and say
maybe I could make some money
off the still and and then it it
starts to get into some kind of
dispute or negotiations were.
What's gonna happen here you
know how we're gonna play this
out and how how's the state
engineer gonna roll on these
things when we come into
situations like that is get into
harsher and harsher
and then some people already
have it for the where they are
facing some pretty harsh
decisions as to as to how and
why and and do we do we affect
our people to supply somebody
else or or how are we going to
do all this
and I was hoping to just.
The the state engineer some
questions Mr chairman.
And the maybe you all can answer
this is how how.
Is it is this gonna help the
state engineer is going to
create more work.
And we always come up with the
question is does he have enough
help in the funds to do to take
care of of of what's going to
happen if we pass Senate bill
one.
Pop Mr chairman Representative
it's more I think to to your
first question about what
happens if a well goes down and
there's property that owns well
they tractors well there's a lot
of that happening right now
there's always the option to
negotiate to fire out your the
well ordered water rights it
doesn't always work especially
because the last case we're
talking about our culture wells
which are not designed for
municipal purposes sometimes
retrofitting the wells is
sometimes more expensive than
actually drove off so that's a
very common practice that
happens all the time right now
to your second question about
the past.
One of the things that we have
seen I was
we.
Or one of the people that work
on the on the floor rather
wonderfully one of the things
that we've seen in this budget
are currently talked about.
Long term.
The lower Manhattan is currently
serving seventeen colonial
communities something like
twelve systems.
They will longer needing support
from technical assistance like
like us the no longer need
assistance from the state
engineer from the environment
department from other agencies
because they help build capacity
so one of the positions long
term vision for us for me the
national entities is to begin to
eliminate the need for this
entities to call one on one on
one to to the agencies because
the agencies cities was well
when you bring regional
solutions you all the money in a
lot of that on the server this
in in in place you also build
some reinforcement.
That led me from the state
agencies and federal agencies
and agencies like basketball
Water significantly diminished.
And and I like the bill of like
what you're doing I like that
it's been refined I remember Mr
chair and and the presenters
that I believe said the same
rural and farmers Representative
from us on the side running a
bill to to create a mutual
domestic but there was so much a
brace of stuff in it is like now
we can be doing this to to
people we're not we're not gonna
head over the head and and this
is are you gonna line up and.
So so I I do think I'm I'm
stunned.
The to refine the bill for the
poor the freedoms are there and
and we're not going to coach on
people I do think that we'll
learn something along the way as
we go and and like.
I believe is representative
Armstrong said there there will
be some things that.
Don't work for one that work for
the other bodies different but
but I do like your bill and I
tend to support just Mr chair
one thing really quick again
having been in the chair with
all households are the earlier
bill and quite frankly the bill
goes back more than ten years
former senator Phil Griego.
Again attempted to run this bill
you're right we really.
With instruction from Senator
Bob days there were a lot of
things that were just not needed
you know that went too far and
so we've narrowed it down I just
wanna give you one more thing
that'll give you an additional
cover on page six in terms of
the authority's ability to
acquire water rights I want to
pay six lines and it's already
showing choir from a willing
seller.
That is incredibly important
piece of that addresses I think
the concerned authorities going
to come in and start taking.
Happens what rights the willing
seller and Mr chairman and
senator and and are of the bill
in over ten times and and I knew
that was there and I just wanted
the public to be able to hear
that in committee coming out of
this committee of.
I tried on one last question I
think we're good with that the
help all I know I was going to
make a statement Mr chair is I
have visited with the
representative and out and we do
have a situation in my district
that I represent or this is good
going to be real helpful for
their for three different
communities they're they're
trying to work.
On the water issues and kept all
the money has gone into the.
And it hasn't fixed anything
till today up today so thank you
Mr chairman thank you thank you
Representative Zamora one quick
question from Representative
office thank you Mr chair for
your indulgence for us a second
question when I heard that the
regional allies water systems
we're going to move to the top.
Kind of perks my ears up because
Magdalena doesn't have many
options to regional lies and so
what happens to those entities
that can't regional allies have
no options to reserves
Regionali.
Are they going to get sent to
the bottom because the regional
station will be sent to the top.
House second work Mr chair and
representative are they trying
to expand their water system to
people within the community that
aren't served now they're always
trying to expand Mr chairman and
they're always trying to upgrade
you know they have it's all
wells so of course are always
trying to upgrade so I don't
know I just want to make sure
they're not from it.
Mr Mr Chairman representative
Armstrong give up if I could try
to answer that so the nice thing
about the water transport
policies is that they're very
well established and so then any
applicant that's applying
whether a regional entity or a
single entity really qualify or
gate score based on the merits
of the applications that
everyone's working towards right
so the policy is the same for
everyone but there are
additional points for regional
collaboration but but regardless
the policy really outlines the
merits that you know everyone
supplied under which really
makes a in my mind over the fair
processes for every application
that we.
I thank you Mr chairman but
there is they get extra points
for regionalization but is there
a map is there a mask you wear
that shows who can regional ice
hassles option and who doesn't
because it should be used
against them that they can't
regional office Mr Mr Chairman
representative I'm sorry about
my it may not address the
question.
Regionalization itself is a very
broad term it can mean it can
consolidation but it can also
mean a so called joint you know
mutual aid agreement where the
agreement for example make only
know what support can can
possibly agree on in the parking
lot we have disagreements on on
an emergency on supporting
equipment and things like that
so regionalization is very broad
and we actually have been
working on that so that entities
like bundling up were next to
nobody are not excluded from
that process so so there's like
I said it could be as simple as
a great man with with the city
of Sapporo or or one of the
other level you know that that
one of the commodities.
To support each other during the
tenth in the event of an
emergency and things like that
so that basically sent into that
regionalization.
It's not always physical
interconnect okay perfect thank
you Mr chairman.
I'm always amazed at how much
profit you can make as a people
if we communicate cooperate and
collaborate.
We had excellent we had an
excellent presentation Sanchez
excellent questions from the
committee so with that I want to
ask the sponsor if they have any
closing comments after that we
will go to ask for that we are
of the panel so close comments
the Sanchez use me Mr chair I
raise my hand earlier to ask
questions Representative
Matthews have a question yes is
that okay thank you thank you Mr
chair of.
The it is is this in in your
discussion that the decision to
scale up these water systems and
so forth is this is clearly the
right decision I just have a
couple of questions so and I and
I have to say that your map
place yes Representative.
All improve it I think you.
Sep Mr chair but I'm I'm
interested in a couple of things
of course and I and
unfortunately I had to leave for
a moment when when at as senator
was talking about the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water authority and so I didn't
hear what his comment was
but it's as a as a customer that
my perception is it is a pretty
good system because when I turn
on the water it always comes
out.
And it's actually relatively
inexpensive that with prices
from going up
But the comment made me think
about a couple things first of
all we have a water system.
You also and I noticed that this
does cover waste water.
And I'm curious what.
All.
Focus if any of Mr chair and
presenters that that would be
impacted will this kind of
scaling up into regional
systems have on wastewater
issues.
I can tell you from a local
perspective again and Dixon
story.
Because it's curious because
most rural villages don't even
think about waste water but
there's new technology now and
you know as you know I'm
probably the least difficult
person you know Mr Chairman
representative that they have
systems where you only have to
do down about twelve inches with
PPC and the rider on that on the
septic tank and then the they
call this stuff out and they
take it to water treatment plant
in the local area and and we do
that water I mean technology has
really advanced in in the sense
regional far more than I do that
that's what we're looking at
what we're looking at Dixon
remaking at not only doing on
the drinking water systems
collectively but also seeing if
we can't be one of the first
rural villages to do a waste
water treatment facility and
I don't even know how many
millions this is going to cost
set so we need the money for so
that we can relate to that
engineering study to get it
straight so we you know drinking
water is first and foremost but
equally important are these
aging sex sex that are believed
in and destroying contaminant
contaminating water below so so
we're working on all those
things simultaneously.
Thank you for that answer and Mr
chair presenters does the
finance authority also from your
answer I'm I'm taking
it to handle the answer is yes
there is also money available
for doing wastewater projects
needs grow areas yes okay
you madam chair I'm sorry Mr
chair.
The presenters and one other
question
The.
The comment about the
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
water authority maybe think a
little bit about.
What is the inner action because
sometimes I think there are some
tensions
wow and I don't know how if this
bill seeks a way to deal with
those tensions that we've
learned from the urban area but
I'm curious how the water
authority being a political
entity is going to interact with
the county commissions other
governmental.
Political entities in these
counties
and
I just a sense of how that will
work and along the same lines
based upon it attorney general's
comment what's going to protect
the public from.
Having an of from from rate
increases from other kinds of
issues since there is since as
the AG indicates that they're
not going to have a roll into T.
R. C. isn't going to have a role
in it the staff of concern at
all.
Mr chairman Representative
Matthews one of the things that
that we have put in place is to
that it's it's the
accountability.
There is a great number of
agencies that are involved in
overseeing of this this entities
their niece hello bility piece
towards the public to this to
the customers of the server and
so yes yes process obviously
because there are public
entities they have to comply
with open meetings act and
everything else that all public
entities have to comply with so
this level three it's pretty
significant okay.
And I would just
close by saying that.
Mr chair and presenters staff
I'm just really happy to see
this because obviously we have
so many water issues in the
state and and we making steps
forward is really absolutely
critical at this time in our
history thank you so much for
presenting this bill.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
Mr Chairman question.
Just before we do that one of
the for the Sanchez.
Make a closing comment and all
as for rural.
And.
Thank you all for listening and
for considering this bill it's a
it's so you know I'm working on
the shoulders of many people
there as all as we know that
this is an important piece of
legislation and Mr chair of the
state that you're summation of
what happens when you
collaborate and work together is
what brings us here today with
the legislation and quite
frankly it's what all these
water entities need to be doing
we need to all be working
together here as this resource
is diminished and more more more
traveling so I think you friend.
Thank you Sir and the what is
the will of the committee.
This gentleman a little bit past
second.
Okay there's a motion to do to
pass in the second.
Because.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Kate's.
Yes I vote yes for do passed as
amended.
Representative.
Representative law.
Yes some of the.
Matthew yes.
More of yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The math.
What is the.
Okay what is seventy zero.
Sanchez has.
The.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Additional in this.
Mexico.
Thank you right now we have our
second row.
Before the committee.
Representative practice Mr back
which is.
Thank you madam chair will be
for you have is House Bill three
ninety eighths of an and I I
have to say mentor to me it was
different the CV and not
something educational of the
because of this is actually this
is actually a franchise
terminations involving farm
equipment farm dealers
dealerships local dealerships
of every communication so madam
chair committee with this bill
does is simply that has four
goals and I.
One of the first second with
madam chair is that it clarifies
terms that may be associated
with a any kind of contract.
The second thing that interests
talk about just copy paper
termination which basically
means is that if there.
Is a termination of the contract
between the supplier for the
dealer the most before a reason
that is specified of or just a.
A reasonable way to terminate
the contract.
What it also Madam talks about
how we communicated as far as
identifies right how will be
communicated to the dealer and
also the time was that are
associated in different
scenarios regarding the
termination of contract.
If I may madam chair committee
this this contract or this of
this legislation really is about
Mary was been done in other
states regarding use similar
between dealers and suppliers
also madam chair I I do have an
expert of online I I kind of sit
here as I said before I'm the
least qualified to talk about
this Madam because of my farm
that we use we use in nineteen
thirty five formal tractor and
so we started in nineteen eighty
eight we send it straight to the
museum so I I don't know of
course the of much about
important requirement that this
is an issue that we have it does
offers farger clarifies Health
sections are and how we
communicate with the local
dealers of the so companies like
a vote of John Deere road this
So madam chair that is kind of
my overview of the bill at a
very high level and I will stand
for questions.
Do the thank you thank you
Representative.
Ostentation do we have the I'll
go to the audience valiant's in
support of this legislation.
The opposing this legislation.
For online.
I don't see any Hanson.
Expert you madam chair my
expertise where half of.
There is yes that is our.
Madam chair members of the
committee
The impact was provided to us
all search loading into
panelists and then we'll be able
to see thank you ma'am for the
one that you want where I before
up Mr Stewart and does speak is
it you know when you talk about
the they have fired people with
about there's no financial
impact regarding this
legislation this is more just
clarifying language in defining
contract in terms of how the
dealership will communicate with
the supplier I first met her
thank you Representative we had
a short meeting offline last
night because I couldn't I
couldn't figure out the FIR
either so we and and
Representative Armstrong said
you know it really doesn't
involvement that's probably what
we don't have so we had had a
previous conversation with the
membership some of the members
of the committee on the floor
and we have your expert on thank
you madam chair.
Here members of the committee I
don't know if you like me to
begin with listen yes wanted at
that or will be available for
questions.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee of four Sir can you
basically the questions we will
I've I've kind of given the
overview of this but what I
would do like as far as what.
What other states have adopted
isn't really what this bill is
intended to do it just a you
know a couple minutes for
so just to to kind of talk about
why this will be for this
legislation.
Madam chair representative Bach
and I know you said that that
you're you're not extra farm
equipment but I think you and
all the members of the committee
understand the importance of
farm equipment dealers to the
economy in New Mexico and
particularly to the farmers and
ranchers rely on parts and
service so I am more aware and
I'm vice president of government
affairs for the north American
equipment dealers association of
our international trade
association representing a round
forty five hundred dealers in
the US and Canada we have eleven
dealer locations in New Mexico
so it's not one of our largest
states as far as membership or
locations go but that makes this
bill all the more important
because Mexico so as of our
state and if you have a
dealership that is terminated
that the independent dealer goes
away it it puts a real burden on
the farmers and ranchers to
travel for parts and service in
the expertise and relationships
they have and also to.
Purchase equipment
so this is a very important bill
and as a representative Bachus
point this is a an update the
staff to I think the last time
the statute was touched with
probably over forty years ago
our industry has changed
tremendously in that time
as anybody knows the technology
and everything else goes in the
farm equipment has necessitated
a greater investment by dealers
so far from being a small shop
just wrenches or something there
there's a lot of a lot of
investment by dealers in the
technology to keep up with
modeling technology changes and
to serve their customers there's
huge investments in inventory
the average dealership has about
a million dollars parts on hand
from ranging back probably that
formal tractor from nineteen
thirty believe it or not all the
way up to current models and so
that's a huge amount of
investment that right now under
the statute New Mexico which is
is probably the most.
Barebones statute as far as
dealer statutes in the whole
country.
it doesn't have a lot of
substance when it comes to as
were the representative said
termination having good cause
for doing that and so this bill
we're bringing to you H. V.
three ninety eight would create
and.
Language that mirrors nearly
exactly what's in Oklahoma Texas
and other neighboring states.
Those updates were probably a
decade or so ago and we work
with manufacturers on those
updates in those states and we
want to do the same here we want
to.
New Mexico dealers viable
certainly Mexico farmers
ranchers but we also want to
work with manufacturers and
believe this bill represents
best practices for our industry
so
you know as far as the actual
substance of the bill it does
create a good costs for
termination it spells out out so
that it can't just be an
arbitrary reason it's also not
just termination it's if you own
your franchise and you want to
sell it or you want to transfer
to the next generation your kids
a lot of times that was really
difficult and so there's also
provisions in the bill that that
Spell out that process keep it
fair for both sides find the
notice the and
Madam here it's do that and and
then if if there is a situation
where there's a termination as a
representative Baca said that
lays out what that needs to be
and and so we've got will stand
for questions on substance in
the bill or or anything else
you.
Thank you and and we'll go to
the committee questions
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and thank you
for your presentation I to a co
sponsoring this bill but I have
a I had a quick question on the
what if you sell what if someone
wants to sell the dealership do
they have to have a written
consent from the franchise.
Yes they do and and well in
under current.
They it's governed by the
contracts in the agreements
between the the manufacture and
the dealer and and so you know
there's not a lot of.
Bargaining strength on the
dealer side to say if I want to
sell my business who can you
sell it to the manufacture
somewhat dictates that this
statute what I think find more
or restricts the dealer to say
here so I'm selecting it and it
could be here your kids it could
be your nephew could be so
family member or someone else
entirely but what this statute
lays out is if you choose
someone to sell to they still
have to meet the qualifications
of the of the manufacture so
that could be funding that could
be you know financing also
reputation it lays spells out
out statute
but that the manufacturer if
they object to the cell has to
put in writing of what their
reasons are state those reasons
may have to be.
Thank you so much for that
answer thank you madam chair I I
just think it's a in my opinion
it's it's due diligence on both
sides and about fairness
just a quick really short story
is that we my husband and I
bought a gas station.
And it has a franchise on.
What what did you think about
that part we just didn't want to
get gas station to go under it
the only.
Reliable gas station in the area
and come to find out the
franchisor was really upset and
started making all kinds of
mandates on my husband and I and
we said you know.
We we we worked this was not
disclosed to us so take your
stuff and leave and we'll put
you know what's in it it's an
independent now it's not a
franchise so there there's
issues with franchises that are
negative there's issues that are
positive I think this spells it
out to be helpful on both sides
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
and I think the this might be
the opportunity to also
introduce I guess and madam
chair thank you very much for
this opportunity and I would
like for the.
You know of students from the
cross that FFA and they're
advised to stand up and energy
uses so.
All right and would.
So.
Chris is also.
Trying.
We collect thank you.
Madam chair I there appeared
there walking the halls Stacey
and what's going on in our
state.
We're looking at our future
leaders out there madam chair
thank you all very much the.
Madam chair along the lines of
questioning now I New Mexico
Center on this bill to.
And many many years ago to prior
live we did by John Deere
dealership of the courthouse
steps.
And the that.
Franchise.
decided to go in and terminate
their policy with the prior
owner and face kind of went
south from there so we turned it
into a.
Very successful business again
with two at two additional
locations there.
My concern is I guess when we
are talking about.
It is used to price in this bill
and I just want clarification.
On page.
Two and a page I.
Page two it slide nine on page
five it's light for whenever
talking about name and and use
farm tractors.
I know that this I know what the
needs for tractors means that
whenever there's a tried it on
track to this to us and mortgage
on its side from John Deere
Kubota whatever the case may be
and that is trying to do and and
and then the love just made
through that particular country
where is that going to fall into
into this designation of new or
unused farm tractors.
Share committee it has.
This presents a report mines
nineteen you know in nineteen
know that the nineteen thirties
factor so I don't think we
awarded that thank you expired
so but I'm sure if I may I'd
like to defer to other states.
Representative Ezzell that is if
you're looking at inventory.
New or unused is that the in the
definitions so I'm tracking.
Mr Madam chairman and
Representative an expert
witness.
Under the slide Iglesias dealer
means a person in the business
of the retail sales of new or
underuse farm tractors and my
question was how to trade in
uncertain that they're making
requiring more horsepower or
whatever the case may be and
that tractor they're trading in
still has a lien on it by the
company that sold it the data
not to do dealership of the
franchise that sold it.
I have is that tractor fitted to
the language that she used in
this bill.
Well Representative the new are
on use I think goes to
What's on the floor and I get
that I did get that corrected it
is is just used for defining
because if you take use then it
could be right as you all know
when you take Houston you're
you're you're kind of branded
gnostic you do traits you may be
selling a John Deere but you're
gonna take into K. I. H. on
trade right so what we're
talking about use that for
definitional purposes is the and
you know a a branded single
Don't use the term single line
but one brand of farming.
So it's that new or unused and
work we're just talking about
for those purposes
what that equipment is it
doesn't this for the purposes of
this con of this statute it
doesn't regulate the you know
that.
In use or use the equipment
that's been traded in so if you
had in the state at a dealer was
terminated
for the purposes were unused is
that is inventory and in the
definition for dealer and that
was already an existing
definition by the way
that manufacture would not be
required to buy back.
So another brand of equipment
that excuse so it doesn't it
doesn't it's not really relevant
to the purposes of that statute
it's only the the inventory this
new or underuse and that could
include demos as well but it
doesn't include the use that's
why that's excluded.
Okay that makes yes it does it
makes it does make sense to me
because of the situation I was
in in the past it might be kind
of money though if there is
litigation that does take place
here.
Whether the question I have and
it's over a.
This is
a page a section six.
What is.
will in the okay good at the end
of the line seventy.
Do you may bring an action
against such supplier in a court
of competent jurisdiction can
you tell me by the word
competition sure station instead
of having for the French the
jurisdiction where the franchise
is located.
madam chair
I'll defer to my experts would
propose for that.
And Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell that
shared the thank you this is a a
choice of law provision and it
does
allow the dealer to choose New
Mexico and the reason for that
is that you know a lot of these
manufacturers are located
elsewhere and so some of those
contracts may require a big
dealer to go to another state
that would be of a burden and
these these choices
appropriations what competent
jurisdiction it's just
you know language kind of
boilerplate language used in
these statutes.
But gives the dealer the option
to if they need to pursue
something or something for
students that that it would be
in New Mexico maybe what okay
madam chair Representative
Representative maybe I should
just stated.
Sen such player in the court of.
Jurisdiction where the dealer
franchises let okay maybe that
would clear it up because I do
understand why this would need
to happen in New Mexico because
that's what we're dealing with
here I'm not talking about
having to go to Mali to have a
lawsuit filed or whatever the
case may be so maybe it I'm my
question is.
A competent jurisdiction.
I mean would you want to.
If there was a dealership in.
Malaca Mexico would you want
that competent jurisdiction to
be Bernalillo county.
I think madam
Committee Representative Ezzell
I do believe like Eric you would
be local sort of having somebody
to go somewhere else you will be
in New Mexico member as of for
the dealership is I do think
that's kind of what it is so if
in you said regulatory or would
you say look at a good member of
the rooted in the Malcolm but
I'm sure it's a wonderful place
to have but you probably believe
to.
but resisted madam chair my
understanding of that as far as
it just really because this is
only for New Mexico that this
agreement is would be or any
kind of all.
As far as litigation or the
violations this would actually
be handled for New Mexico
member is identified as a place
that can handle such a thing
madam chair and representatives
all and madam chair Senator
budget plan of support this bill
along with.
The.
Franchise you should talk about
this particular bill there have
been two automobile dealerships
that that's happened to in the
past several years without any
notice lots.
Madam chair
Centers.
I I agree with Representative
Is out of that.
On page eight were talks about
civil actions and so forth
to try that damn the truth is
I'm assuming that the franchise
or has a kind of important
contracted people sign and that
may have to choice of law
provisions and also mentioned
that you provisions but I'm so
would suggest that to make it
clear
on page eight line eighteen that
certain words in a court of
competent jurisdiction in New
Mexico.
And and that's going to tight
here instead of holding.
Madam chair members of the
committee of and I'm gonna have
to do for I I do believe what
you're maybe talking chair and
Representative Matthews is maybe
an amendment that this was far
clarifying language to say in
New Mexico is that.
Madam chair representative Adam
hearing Madam chair
representative yes and I think
that we could probably do that
committee.
Of without having to.
Thank you away and come back and
do all of that.
You too clarification if it's
the will of the committee.
If you would like to ask madam
chair I'm gonna just departed
just to make sure that this part
of the competent jurisdiction in
fact that is a amendment that
fits into your or home phone
from the amendment madam chair
So I would refer you to section
four I don't think the amendment
is necessary so searching for
its choice of law and it
provides that a franchise.
Point to elect the applications
while the state other than the
state shall be employed.
and so we've use the same
language in many states and it's
been challenged.
We have case law that.
With the sexuality of this of
the statutes together
are that it's the dealer has a
choice to stay in New Mexico and
the New Mexico Law.
Rules that contract and so then
it would be it would have to buy
for that the action in New
Mexico court because New Mexico
state laws so I don't think the
amendment is necessary.
And I and I know that that would
be to the benefit our dealers
but again it's saying that I
don't think that it's necessary.
It's implied in the in the in
the provisions this
sometimes implications not just
here to.
I guess and living just up to
the committee at that the
members Senator the sponsoring
members of this legislation
Representative Armstrong madam
chair goes to Judiciary next yes
and I'm sure they'll either
terrace offer help lesser to
kill us so I think my personal
wish would be that we could
hopefully move it on to the
judiciary and let them help us
make it better.
Just before we do that of.
I have a.
There's a statement under the
house committee analysis.
This significantly additional
should be reviewed by the
Attorney General for complex
log base for findings for this.
Also made by commerce and the
leftovers close so if.
Of.
There is a premium home state.
Yes Representative thanks for
the question the the fact is
this bill and language and it
almost identically mirrors what
is in Oklahoma and Texas already
and has been there for over a
decade now an estimate on
challenge or withstood
challenges there have been cases
and that issue has never come up
as for the dormant Commerce
Clause this issue for this
statute this bill particularly
affects the hate here and
conduct takes place in the state
of New Mexico the dormant
Commerce Clause only comes into
our account when it when the
state seeks to regulate behavior
conduct that is.
Extra territorial outside of the
state of New Mexico this bill
does not do that it only affects
behavior conduct in the state so
that's not an issue from my
point of view and then the other
unfair trade practices
I don't see how this has
ramifications for that again we
have this in almost every every
state every all fifty states
have a version of this and I
would say that.
The vast majority of those
states have this exact language
already and they have never been
hello and they have been jobs
there there was statutes that
went much further that statute
in North Dakota
recently and in the last couple
years and that was federal
education laws and was up help
so and everything was thrown out
we this bill does not go that
far it's not radical by any
means it doesn't push the
envelope and I think that it
would would withstand any
scrutiny legal script.
For that
questions.
Would you like to wrap up your
presentation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for parents feel for you and
committee I think madam chair is
a second because some up as far
as it you know farming and
ranching this is a big part in
New Mexico with this does it
actually talks about in defiance
as far as helping can be
communicated to protect the
dealerships madam chair what we
don't want to seize great
suppliers without good cause to
close the dealership as possible
to help must be communicated in
the finances part of terms it
also does he recourse if there
is a violation there's anything
that's found
on the the report as well the
given time for them to correct
behavior it also talks about how
the dealership could be
transferred to another person so
madam chair I do I do well I do
appreciate the call the comments
from the committee I do
appreciate your consideration of
House Bill three ninety eight
thank you madam chair of
entertaining I move to pass on
house bill three ninety eight
second we have a we have a
motion for I do have a second is
there any opposition to this
motion.
okay and where to take their
own.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative Kate's yes.
Yes.
Representative Lara.
Representative Matthews noted
like to explain my vote.
Representative Zamora yes.
What else yes.
Yes.
Representative Matthews thank
you
As we sort of looked at some of
the legal pieces of this I
became concerned there.
I don't want to disagree with
the file I'm not sure.
We're.
Or whether he is a lawyer and
state New Mexico but.
My understanding there is a
difference between choice of law
provisions and venue provision.
And the concerned in any of
these kind of contractors that
you end up having to go to
another state and it's very
expensive and selling it could
speed up the people at a great
disadvantage it also puts it
great disadvantage if you're
having to apply law from a
different jurisdictions that
this appears to require New
Mexico lost but the court piece
I think it's not tied down by
the judiciary.
Weigh in on this.
I have some.
Concern.
That is not good and this
protective New Mexicans action.
Thank you for that and the
Representative after I think you
have to.
Thank you committee thank
You madam chair because I had
to.
Offices the says.
Madam.
