Ferrari president.
The.
We have a corner and are
excuse.
And our first in probably our
final bill for the session I
first bill today only bill today
and last when probably for this
session is um.
Said a bill one thirty forty six
hospital acceptance of health
care health plans
senator steinborn if you'd like
to.
Talk about the bill and then we
do have an amendment that I
believe is on its way.
And cherry on the can the
amendments being delivered so
copies for everyone sure
should be usual process thank
you so I start like the going in
the bill you bet madam chair
yeah and the memories kind of
add some technical language to
to the bill so many chair
committee great to be with you
glad we crossed over to the
house
senate bill one forty six is a
bill to help out.
People who are in life
threatening medical situations
and it basically requires a.
A county on hospital or what
they call a contracting hospital
which is a county hospital it's
a health care facility
agreement.
Like we have a hospital in last
cruises county owned but they
have a lease memorial medical
center where the private
provider if you are one of those
kinds of hospitals and you were
the only provider in your county
medical care for a potential
life threatening condition they
knew
have to provide an affordable
payment plan to somebody who is
uninsured.
And the reason for the bill is
you know we have people
living in these communities who
sometimes
may have a life threatening
situation like cancer and their
basically precluded from getting
care because of a big massive up
front bill and an expensive
treatment so it basically says
if you are in that situation
then the hospital has to work
with you and and work with the
unaffordable payment plan and
the amendment we have that's
coming defines exactly what an
affordable payment plan means
it's along with some other
provisions such as being very
clear that when someone comes to
a hospital the hospital will
work with them to verify that
they fact.
Or whether or not they qualify
for imaging care the medical
insurance poor of the state.
I'm county and agent funds.
And then and then.
The the person will work to get
on those programs but in the
meantime they will get medical
treatment and the county will
work the hospital will work with
them an unaffordable payment
plan until those policies become
effective.
And without also probably stop
right there stand for questions
I have the officers who pretend
of insurance here purely as
technical support if you have
questions about that
and was it stopped for
questions.
Most of time we discussed the
amendment but it is still on its
way
and
so some of the things the
audience fight mentioned.
Will be.
Um the man charles is safe for
the committee that you know
we've been working with the
hospital association and was
some of the members of the
insurance industry to make sure
that the language works for
everyone involved so the
amendment that's coming today as
a result of further.
Really precise so it's night at
a left feel this language has
been agreed to and just
the process so
senator can you tell us a little
bit about the amendment even
though we don't have it before
us some of those I think the
language does kind of sorry
I can or whatever you want we
need to have a motion for the
amendment right.
But we don't have it okay.
It'll be here in a minute
okay go ahead and then when we
get it will.
Chair I think i'll try try to
summarise it basically does
there for things it defines what
an affordable payment plan is
fine to an unaffordable payment
plan is which is not to exceed
five percent of some was
adjusted gross monthly income.
That's really important it says
that the total cost of the
service that they are going to
bill someone in this affordable
payment plan for an uninsured
person will be basically the
cost of medicaid or medicare
reimbursement whichever is
higher so that way we know this
person is getting stuck with
some exorbitant bill for that
service number three it really
delaney eggs further the process
for the hospital in taking
someone in that the person
basically took language from
the.
Fair billing act or whatever
that.
They were that way was that we
passed last session the
basically says that a person has
to work with the hospital and
show paperwork to be able to you
know verify they are financial
situations.
And then the final the four
thing is just has a little more
clarity on the delivery of
health services to a person when
they arrive we had some language
in there before that they had to
be given immediate assistance
which we were making a certain
point but we the hospitals want
to kind of refine that to say
standard of care so you know
sometimes a service may be not
right there on the spot it may
be scheduled but it's a
standard.
Integration of when they treat
that person based upon their
scheduling locally and stuff so
reasonable staff that they
wanted that's just kind of makes
it further precise and that's I
think the totality of what the
amendment says manager okay
thank you senator we just
checked in it had n.
So I will go to the audience is
there anyone in opposition.
The.
Anyone in support.
No you can stand right there
there's microphones it should
pick out manager members of the
committee my name's nicholas
court though with the new
messages poverty we stand
because this still represents
significant progress for
ensuring patience can mean the
access to portal care
we know the classes the most.
In the fact the patients who run
insured or didn't qualify for
their counties in each and care
program and we're stuck with
hundreds thousands of dollars in
our.
But often their hospital does
not provide them with a
realistic opportunity to do so
so requiring this really
provides patience with a
meaningful
Sure.
Hospital association I was start
off by thinking center start
probably spent the last seventy
two hours.
I've got a copy of what I think
are the draft amendment that is
improving that you're working
with and it does reflect a lot
of the changes that we talked
about I I will say just a couple
of things which is that this
bill is really just one part of
a much larger conversation.
And.
And puts a s.
At this time with the amendments
whenever you see them.
The.
The.
The.
That.
I'm sorry go ahead july on.
Okay thank you
madame chairman he was gillian
on this and I live in an
activity mexico and going on the
county and i'm a health care
organization for strong families
new mexico we stand in support
or senate bill one forty six I
live in dona and this bill would
help so many role communities
taxes life saving care and make
a horrible possible so many of
our families here and roll
communities will forgo care
because we can afford it or
because the hospital doesn't
accept their insurance or have
payment plans
threatens our every day lives
and impacts our retired families
we bank the sponsored for this
bill and we urge you pass thank
you.
Thank you.
Did you have anything else to
like to add for some of my my
colleagues here from donate
county you know this bill.
There's a great community
advocate in our community only
the as she runs an organization
called care which basically she.
Then unpaid volunteer raises
money for people with cancer for
their non medical bells and
she's seen many patients and
lost curses it turned away
because it couldn't afford care
and literally have to choose
we'll have to
watch a cancer diagnosed as
progress because they didn't
have thousands of dollars for
care and and trying to kind of
close that gap.
And and there's I think as i'll
say there's multiple pieces to
doing this this is one of the
pieces and.
And your way I know because
unfortunately I probably let her
know a little too many race into
a computer right now i'm sure
joining us by attack just want
to share that contacts with you.
Okay thank you committee.
Oh yes
representative black I was
really counting on you asking
some questions that you're
really breaking your street and
then i'd give you a break
minimum chair
thank you our less heartless
committee
I think we do need to wait
because
if we pass it in in on the floor
make the amendment when.
Yeah I thought we were.
So this is a wonderful bill as
as a cance.
I had good insurance.
The.
Really scary and so thank you
for bringing this and i'm glad
that you are.
What affordable is because but
some people consider affordable
is not what a lot of his cons.
And in
medame chair and senator what's
that what's the path of this
bill from here there's under the
house for.
Well and I hope that you ds has
been able.
As met with many
multi levels of elected.
Maybe two years at least now and
to be able to have this as
a solution for you know some of
the horror stories that we've
heard over that time
I think is a really.
Wonderful helping so many people
share with the committee that
you know the bill already and I
think drawing attention to the
people that aren't being covered
the fact that
many of our hospitals don't
accept all the insurance on the
exchange originally this bill
had in a provision in there
requiring that these same
hospitals had essentially have a
path recovering everybody who
had a health plan on the
exchange.
That part ended up coming out
but there is now an awareness in
a commitment of the industry
that they've made to ask when we
took that out that they were
going to work over the next year
to get all these hospitals to
get call coverage of everybody
so that way people have real
insurance when they go into a
hospital but that's a piece of
this and especially now that
we're passing o.
Billion dollars a session that
you know it's it's really
important that these hospitals
are able to provide that care
course we appreciate what they
do but.
That's one piece of it then we
got another bill madam chair
colleagues to
to require expand the use of a
county health find that allows
that will allow counties to
directly cover more.
Costs of people's prem.
That's another gonna be about
valuable peace that looks like
it's gonna have to happen
accession but that way we turned
this population into an insured
population.
And of course we need more work
on the medical and.
Is affordable as possible for
representative of a mirror.
Think you madame chair senator
do we did you also craft a
definition around county
hospital versus a contracting
hospital great class amount of
chair representative that's
actually in the hospital act
there there those terms already
defined and tell me what the
difference is the county
hospitals are county on hospital
and a contracting hospitals like
a county hospital that has what
they call health care facility
contract with a private energy
to run it.
That includes many of the
hospitals in our state.
And madame chair senator so if
they don't put together a plan
for this are their consequences
that you foresee happening
I do I mean I think it's I mean
I think they're subject to being
sued frankly their subject to
action by the attorney general
so.
There's no extra penalty built
into the law built into this
that if they violate it but.
Those are certainly remedies
that can happen if a hospital
chooses to not follow this line
somebody got forbid diesel in
the law says this bill says that
it has a life threatening
condition so
yeah I think they have quite a
bit of a legal exposure if they
don't want us think you're out
of chair thank you for that yeah
I
hear what that what you're
saying and I think one of you
know what I would love to look
at because I think this is such
a great bill is you know one of
the concerns about having like a
certain categorized group or
whatever once they're labeled
that you want to just make sure
that they have the same level of
care as everybody else and um
just ensuring that any of that
pipeline sort of process is the
same and um would love to just
be able to figure out how to
check in balance that is this
moves through and what programs
look like if they're back as
practices good models for
certain hospitals that are doing
it extremely well
that there would be like a
follow up in the sixty day
around you know how to
improve upon whatever we get
from the spell which is very
simple and I appreciate that as
well you got it well madam chair
committee it's pretty cool you
know in the budget this year
we're going to be hiring three
new health care south members to
the lfc.
So really we're going to have
more of a policy shop in the
legislature to be able to
evaluate healthcare policy so
that's going to be a pretty
essential for us digging in the
things like this.
And other issues pharmaceutical
pricing etcetera etc.
Think you since we're talking
about staff for lhs we have
three people in
hbt HB one I think we put it in
and one of their missions is
with in within a year figure out
how we can transition them to be
a stand alone health and human
services committee and like lesc
and like lfc that's the that's
the plan in the dream of many of
us so fingers crossed that we
can finally put some investments
in in this pot where worse you
know were spending over twelve
billion dollars on health care
and we have we are a peace meal
committee that fires.
And chairs that in the budget
it met yes it is in the budget
they will start out.
But the plan and well the hope
you know how things go up here
but the hope is that within
about a year.
The.
And senator I think you're
talking about the same thing I
think we are just okay just want
to make sure.
Yes
thank you
we are waiting it was lcs that
you had drafting and going
through the proofing yeah but I
was told it should have been
here ten minutes because I
literally think it's going to be
here any second.
So maybe we could just stand in
place manager for a second the
deputy directors following up on
it
I appreciate your patience sure
I know
I hate to recess because then
everybody will leave so if we
discount.
They call us the council.
The.
The.
That.
It's being printed and being
brought down stairs so it's out
of proofing being premium.
Check is in the may exactly.
Exactly well in some mountain
how many of the committee are
on.
The interim committee.
The interim yeah so we
have a great bipartisan memorial
which hopefully.
Represent lord is one of the
cospons reservein representative
thompson that myself is in a
branch to study medical
solicitor which I know represent
remarrial you been working on
this part of me.
Interesting well there's
advocates around the state you
know colorado and not organ in
our colorado have passed medical
programs and the va is now
studying at the fda his twice
doesn't need it to break through
therapy for major depressive
disorder.
And so it's.
It's been studied and proven
applicatious for various things.
So little bipartisan support
perculating
for those who might be listening
do you want to explain a little
bit more about.
Society yes a medical mushrooms
there are.
You know you've heard of.
You've heard of them being used
as a psychedelic substance.
By tom but what they found is
that it has certain effications
medically effective treatments
for work.
Certain behavioral health
issues.
That's why the va is now
studying they just announced a
few months ago that they're
launching a study on this fda's
grant at this break through
therapy license too.
Um several different providers
and yeah so we're urging our
state if they can help people
out were urging our state to
study the research and then
consider moving down the path
of.
Creating a program cause lottery
search has been done on it now.
And you know it's it's
interesting you know with
something like a m.
Illness you know the side
effects of all the conventional
pharmaceuticals it treated our
pretty.
Can be really tough so something
natural and that's how I got
involved I would constitute of
ours who called us from doing in
a county before the session
saying she knew about your bell
she wanted to wider pass what
we're redoing and I said we all
research it and then I
researched your bell and I
found.
This quite a bit of bipartisan
support and try to advance it I
will tell you there's also
funding in a different colleague
in the senate.
You and m is doing research on
this subject and actually
there's funding in junior money
to con.
So that's happening in this
include.
And looking at this with the
state.
So.
Yeah people are pretty excited.
So anyway I would ask I wanted
to bring up the part because I
think represent thompson you're
the chair of the committee
right.
You're the chair about.
The.
The paper here in the paper so I
got me excited but anyway I hope
we can have a hearing in the
interim.
Senator steinborn i'm not sure
if you're needed in another
committee for a vote it's
another ten minutes before your
do you want to tell me less than
ten minutes
I don't know if i'm needed an
i'm not getting a text that i'm
new okay not yet you're yeah
okay okay and I just I just
assume write this out ma'am
chairs.
But they told me less than ten.
The.
The.
Good jokes.
The.
Oh.
You have any and have any bills
at her moment.
What is a pink out.
Okay all right does my semi
reddish hair qualify.
Yeah.
Although I appreciate it thanks.
The.
I would love a county
great.
The.
To get a couple extra co.
The.
The.
The.
The.
I'm sorry didn't turn on my
mike.
No matter i'm trying to think I
covered it before I just
clarifies some staff and I think
I would look at the bottom of
the amendment I think from my
standpoint that's a really
important thing because that
defines what an affordable
payment plan is and also the
total price of the service not
to exceed medica.
The language before that is what
the hospital wanted to just kind
of clarify the procedure.
The.
Either their financial need.
Are there questi.
Percussions think you madame
chair
still in this amendment on page
two i'm just trying to follow
through um with just the plane
reading
so we're striking out validated
so we start online three
striking all of the rest after
the word as.
So when we're looking at what
they have to do so person comes
in and
they're in a
emergency situation
they have to provide
the hospital all of the
necessary docu.
So in an emergency situation
which just walks
i'm curious okay
where i'm seeing I had shaken
behind you but you want to talk
to us about what this change
does sir this is basically taken
from the surprise billing that
law that that requirement.
Right okay as yeah
i'll start with that in power
there is for federal law that
treats an emergent situation if
you were emergent federal law
requires that someone be treated
okay this is is this kind of
goes beyond that this lot this
proposal because it would talk
about treatment of that not just
stabilizing someone for you know
that momentary emergency it's
under this circumstance you know
treating someone for cancer that
they have to go through this
validation process if you have a
medical emergency work you know
whatever that is federal law
requires them to treat your
right away.
Okay so um.
I get that i'm i'm with you on
that that makes sense and so
then and the the subsequent
change for items see is that
after they've sort of gone
through the verification process
out.
They get treatment immediately
and affordably and then
following that is when
this edition of saying
the affordability is based on
medicator medicare
callifications and then that
we're making sure that they
would pay that that fees out of
a certain fund and
not not more than five perc.
Yeah that makes sense manager
i'm not familiar with like help
legal health terms so the all
feel very
broad so whether or not we need
till look at that in the future
year as to how we can better
define.
Progress but never the last
month here
senator I think it's a it's a
good bill.
For.
We will take.
Representative block now
representative of ramira yes
representative thompson yes made
advise to rubio yes madam chair
ferrari yes.
Okay
you have a do pass the ford one
and on committee substitute for
senate bill one forty six as
amended
mount chair committee I really
appreciate replacements for me
today
now I appreciate you working
with me and thanks for passing
the bill thanks for the
discussion good luck in your
next county.
Thanks for doing that
and committee thank you again
for a great session
and all of our staff thank you
we appreciate everyone late
night sometimes
and
see as you.
