Raise the waters which were on
these ones.
One bad share that should
probably switch as I said.
F. eleven.
That was when I was.
This.
Yes Sir yeah I would just
highlighted by.
I think that there was a.
Thank you.
This.
Yes.
We.
Yeah.
Is.
The interviewer.
Is
there.
Also.
So.
This is
the.
The small.
Mr.
The of the agriculture sentence
letters will come to order of
the secretary.
C. Representative Armstrong.
Representative Kate here.
Well here.
The water here.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Zamora care.
Vice chair out from here.
Here let's get to see everybody
this morning thanks for coming
and
I am the for those of you who
don't know marketing here at
your back to meet somebody who's
really been up I just I really
here in the state for so many
years and and we're really
So
I think you have to work.
It would.
Is that better.
Okay thank you for any help
she's certainly taught me many
things over the years I first
met her when I came to the
legislature and going as soon as
I.
Since I found her I.
I didn't stop asking your
questions let me put it that way
so.
I just want you to know that you
know we started with the the
state engineer Mike Hammond
talking about of what was you
know what the water task force
recommendations were I want you
to know Marquita was a huge part
of that that operation involved
deeply.
In all the work that was being
done there and so there are a
lot of changes happening in the
New Mexico finance authority
with regard to water and the
proposed water projects it's
it's most of us not only this
but a lot most of us are from
rural districts this is really
important to be on top of that
and so I wanted her to coming
give us an overview of the
changes that have happened and
are going and that are going on
at the.
And to create and see so with
that.
All introduce have Marquita.
Chair members of the committee
I'm almost afraid to say
something.
This goes down this.
I appreciate the opportunity to
talk to you about some of the
things that have been going on
at the water trust board so this
is one of the purpose of the
finance authority operates we've
been doing so since so now
almost twenty two years twenty
three years so it's been a while
we've learned a lot over those
years and and have some so well
or scar tissue built up in some
experience to share
The things that I want to focus
on today will really relate to
legislation you'll see later
you'll be seeing a bill that
would come through I think it's
starting on the Senate foreign
over to the house of that
authorizes a list of projects to
be funded from the water project
funds this presentation is to
give you a sense of what happens
before you see that bill and
then a little bit of what
happens after you see that bill
so you will be presented with a
list of projects it was endorsed
by the New Mexico finances
Authority oversight committee
back in November as a list of
about fifty nine entities to
receive funding at that because
the court projects in total some
of them have to duplicate
projects so you'll be seeing
that later on this.
Session of if I could just get
you started.
Several of the for these
presentations before I hate to
be repetitive but I'm going to
be a little repetitive so as I
said the water project finance
act which was up created a
passed in two thousand and one
created the water trust board
it's been amended a couple of
times but its current
composition is sixteen members
and they're listed on the back
page of this presentation
it's currently chaired by the
state engineer.
and he has that's a really good
thing since he came off forty
year ago at the water transport
level that's what I'm going to
share with you today the purpose
of the water project finance act
was to help fund a variety of
projects from the dangers
Species Act watershed
restoration up to your your
basic pilot projects your basic
water conservation projects so
the whole span is included in in
the eligible uses of the water
project finance act the
importantly the Act creates the
water project fund which is
placed at the NMFA and it
receives annually a distribution
now when people to nine percent
of the senior set of senior
severance tax bonds.
And four million dollars from
the water trust fund so there's
a separate fund that's created
it was sent later
constitutionally protected by
our voters and it is managed and
overseen by the state investment
council there are similarly a
bill this year of that's been
introduced I believe by Senator
Wirth to increase the water
trust fund right now it I think
it was initially appropriated
forty million dollars there was
an additional fifteen million
dollars of put into that but
it's been receiving since the
moment it got a dollar it
started receiving a four million
dollar distribution annually so
that that amount of money has
the
decreased about I think the
current balances roughly forty
one million state investment
council stun amazing job of the
last fifteen years this is
really not for fifty five
million down to forty million
and you look at our.
Earnings over the last couple of
years and I'm just amazed that
they kept it where they have but
that the pace at which we are
making those distributions it's
likely not going to be here in
ten or fifteen years so that
bill is really important bill
for you to note eight again the
only uses for that are eligible
water projects so.
I want to make that plug
although again it's not of water
transport Bill B. indorse a
similar bill last year but it is
an important on I would I would
ask you to take note of that
bill I would like the committee
to note they're asking for two
hundred fifty million to be put
in that sport we I carry the
bill for seventy million we got
slammed well it didn't pass
it actually made it through the
house and I think we can animus
in the house and we take it over
to we got hung up in the Senate
finance so they're starting at
now in Senate finance coming
this way so I think there's a
good chance in this particular
year coming out so I I hope but
we certainly can work.
Yes chair if you need my
interest and I would certainly
suggest that you take some
consideration on that particular
bills important in prior years
the severance tax bonds have
been as little as your nine
million dollars this year of
course we're blessed last year
we had a high number of our last
year severance tax bond amount
was.
No approximately sixty nine
million dollars and this year
it's about a thirty five percent
increase for expecting to see
another file for next year but
that's obviously going to be
declining over time because
severance tax you know what hold
on long term set putting away
some money now so that that fund
becomes bigger can be relied
upon more when severance tax
capacity may not be as great I
think it's a wise thing for you
to consider so.
Two hundred fifty million
awfully those numbers of
policymakers about something
north forty one I think it's a
good idea.
so in addition to those earmarks
that come in we also have to
send a statutorily ten percent
of those dollars of the
severance to nine percent of the
severance tax you're more
consumers four million dollars
annually comes from the trust
fund and then we net out and
sent over to the office of the
state engineer.
For ten percent of those so.
Basically eight point one
percent of the senior center
severance tax I.
The projects that we say nine
but by the time in net LCS the
statutorily required probation
or eight point one percent.
the water trust board makes sort
of selects and recommends
projects it does not fund
projects that's the role of the
finance authority
but what they do is that
applications make
recommendations to the
legislature about which projects
should be authorized for funding
and then ultimately the finance
authority board will make that
final determination on the on
the loans and grants that are
made I would know over twenty
two years that we've been doing
this we've not had a
disagreement between the water
trust board and the New Mexico
finance authority board there is
some overlap in membership and
of course it's the same staff
the finance authority staff
staff the water trust board and
as a result you see a lot of it
is not there's a there's a good
statutory break between the two
decision bodies but it works
seamlessly.
Of we have been for the last
fifteen years or so delivering
the funds as part Grant Park
loan so depending on the kind of
project it may require I got a
great rate constituency like a
water system or if some sort of
activity there will be a
required loan as part of that
four and it starts at ten
percent goes as high as forty
percent depending on the of
financial viability of the
system so if it's a well run
system relatively wealthy
they're more likely going to
have a higher loan component
than someone from a small system
was just barely getting by we
put that little component and
for a couple of reasons one is
to increase the ownership of
some of this project when you
deliver a hundred percent
requests there is just a
difference in the way projects
are overseen that's one of the
first lessons we learned in
those first five or six years is
that there is a greater
the judiciary oversight of
project if there's a long
component even a modest
component of ten percent of
changes the way in which systems
oversee their projects that was
the first race of the second of
those lower payments of the ways
of the way in which the finance
authority actually pays for the
administration of the program so
we don't receive any
administrative fee from the
severance tax bond or the water
trust fund distribution we wait
for loans to be repaired and we
know that our cost of
administration from that loan
repayment so we do have to have
some kind of funding going into
we would not have the capacity
to operate the program in
annually this program costs us
somewhere in the range of
million dollars to operate so we
do need the funds in some form
to come over so those are the
two reasons we put in the the
loan component of one of the
other early lessons we learned
is that you have to fully fund
faces standalone faces.
And so in some instances a multi
phase project that's come to the
finance of the company water
transport maybe Dawn over
multiple years of because we
want to see that they can get
the first phase done and then
move on to the next phase we
want to see a good expenditure
quickly responded to of those
dollars
for the smallest of systems that
has meant taking on loan after
loan in order to continue their
project and that becomes a
difficult for those who are
trying to do increase the
membership so if they're
expanding their services come to
the water transport in order to
broaden their infrastructure.
as they have to raise rates in
order to make those loan
payments the.
Individuals are less likely to
join the mutual domestic or the
small system so becomes a little
bit of a push pull here on on
how you complete a project to
conserve the majority of the
community without putting it out
of the range of a lot of the
underlying rate payers so that
was something that we have been
struggling with over the last
many years and with state
engineer Hammond came on he made
some really good recommendations
I want to touch on now so now we
can turn the
public
Again a question touched on this
in my first portion of the
presentation but what I've got
for you on page three are the
ways in which the water
transport selects the projects
and that is there's a statutory
requirement at the Ford look at
projects that have been
identified as being urgent to
the needs of our regional water
planning area
And that the water plant has
been accepted by the Interstate
Stream Commission that they have
matching contributions from
federal funding sources and that
they've obtained dollars
requisite permit so they need to
be ready to go have some
leverage and have a connection
to the regional water plant that
those were the directions that
the legislature gave us back in
two thousand and one so our
policies have the state in to
the selection criteria they've
also the policies of also got
elements of whether or not the
project is curing a health or
safety issue whether it's
addressing the sentiment of
press existing or imminent
threats and has been properly
plant so those are those the six
basic criteria that we look at
every project for depending on
the kind of project.
The way in which we gauge better
measure that will be different
but in fact it's the same
elements exist for all of the
projects selections over the
last last year for sure and as a
result of this year's amount of
funding a hundred percent of the
projects that are qualified have
been recommended so while this
important screening criteria in
the years of which there's a
shortage of funding this year
and last year we have no funding
in place to fund a hundred
percent of the qualified
applicants so your bill this
year your bill last year we
haven't selected one out so
while these projects have been
vetted and prioritized a hundred
percent of the project can for
this year for your
consideration.
Of the in order to get some of
that on page four you'll see
that we've we've acquired some
technical information for about
the last eight years or so and
that's been the form of a
preliminary engineering report
or some other appropriate
planning document that's how we
know that the project has all
the requisite things that in
order to get the completed the
successful so if it needs
additional water rights we need
to know that if the project
requires permitting from even a
federal agency we need to know
that because that will affect
the timing of their of their
expenditure of funds and how
soon they can actually get
started
so those are things that are
included in the preliminary
engineering report as well as
some really good cost estimate
so we know that we are fully
funding the project and not just
a really good guess about the
project the fully funding those
projects.
Or early on there were enough
luminary engineer point enough
systems that we're ready to meet
this condition.
Over the last several years
we've noted that there are fewer
preliminary engineering report
to be completed I think
engineers are working actually
in the field and getting
projects completed so this
planning phase they're not
spending very much time there so
we are seeing fewer happen
seeing few were ready to go
projects that meet this
technical requirement.
so what we did in advance of
this year's application cycle is
to loosen that requirement allow
slightly lower.
The reading this document
technical memorandum that covers
many of the same things but
doesn't go into the same kind of
death as a preliminary
engineering report goes into
supplement aeration report could
cost fifty thousand dollars and
take a year to complete
asked of technical memorandum
should cost far less than that
and depending on the system and
should be you know a four month
process so you should be able to
get that a technical memorandum
done in a much sooner way maybe
just up some more applications
sooner rather than later so that
was an important first step
the other is to change the way
in which we fund some of these
applications again noting that
those loan requirements local
match requirements and
technical memoranda have been
impediment for small systems
they don't have the P. E. R. if
they can't take on another loan
if they don't have a local match
they really can't come to the
water transport and expect to be
funded so why go through in a
process if you're not going to
be able to meet the requirements
as the as the requirements have
become better known to be seen a
decrease in applications so
early on if they didn't have
that they applied anyway their
hopes were raised and of course
we alternately didn't fund the
presenters we take a fairly hard
line on these requirements
so what we had to do was really
think differently about why we
need the requirements what we
were hoping to gain from them to
see what we could do to take
that kind of in a way to reduce
the barrier.
The small systems so the
technical memorandum was at the
top of that list the second is
to start looking at the water
trust board as a kind of us the
feeder to federal funds.
So they the water trust board
approved policies allow for
great design only requests so no
load component if you serve
fewer than five hundred
connections.
you are eligible to receive
design requests and I don't know
another granting program that
does that finance authority has
a program to fund political
every engineer reports and
funders want construction ready
projects well there's a there's
a gap between the preliminaries
engineering report and a
construction ready project and
there wasn't a funding mechanism
for that so what we have done by
by changing this to a grant only
processes increased the number
of systems that can that get
themselves ready for a myriad of
programs not not only the water
trust board but federal funds
the state revolving funds so
this grant only process for
again we started with five
hundred connections or fewer
because we really want to see
what the impacts are water
transport has the ability to
change that later date so far we
have ten applications this year
so of the sixty three that
sixty four that you're looking
at ten of them have applied for
that design only grant and so
we're really excited to see that
that happens pretty quickly
again we want to get the money
into the hands and put the
systems in a position to be
successful for funding whether
that's through the water
transportable to you're not so
that was a big first step
The other two to page five this
is where I think most systems
benefited if is that local match
requirement that I talked about
when you have a week paying
constituency will the mystics
utility projects
there is a that requirement that
can be now waived as a result of
the change we've made if you've
already taken on one loan for
this project so your preliminary
engineering report or technical
memorandum is gonna define your
project it's gonna say what's
included in that project and
again as I mentioned we may be
funding them over multiple years
so if you've already had a loan
for some phase of that project
he served fewer than two hundred
fifty connections.
and you've done what you're
supposed to do with that first
clone which primarily hinges on
completing an asset management
planning meeting the milestones
then you that that
Hello component for the
subsequent phases is than waived
that's huge.
Right so that is
This allows for a number of
projects to move for that kind
of stalled again that concept of
how many loans does it take to
get your infrastructure place to
expand.
membership and then self in a
position where your rates are
too high for the members to
access it and we are currently
looking at the finance authority
level at how many if we look
backwards what that what that
universe would look like to see
if we could take the step to do
something about those other
loans is it you know we have
several small systems who are
having difficulty making their
loan payments the program that
the finance authority operates
that has the highest delinquency
rate is the water transport.
And largely it's those very
small systems we want to be in
the position to help them
succeed there are provisions in
the the court loan agreement
that says if something.
That you didn't expect happened
and you know your budget loan
payment can't be made you can
apply for forgiveness we're
still not seeing enough systems
between their kind of I said
administrative of capacity
issues there's a they're not
making the connection so we're
not of approving as many
forgiveness work request as we
anticipated we would in this
process and instead people just
ending up on a delinquent list
that doesn't make anybody
successful and certainly not the
kind of calls we want to be
making monthly but that's what
we're seeing so it's the
combination of reducing the
barriers and and putting people
in a position where they can be
successful if they are in
delinquent on loans they can't
apply for planning grant they
can't apply for a drinking water
state revolving loan they can't
they really can't access
anything until they cleared up
the sterling would cease in some
manner so this doesn't this but
effort that we're undertaking in
the finest Authority board has
not yet approved anything but we
are currently looking backwards
as well as fifteen point I
wanted to just put that out
there because I'm always asked
that question is usually the
first the other way if you don't
don't have two hundred fifty
connections the other way that
the loan component can be waived
is if there's a consolidation as
for the project so
regionalization the actual form
once taking over another system
so and we're doing it you know
there are many appropriate forms
of regionalization but the place
in which we see systems not
being successful is really
because they're just too small
they are think there's no
efficiencies there's no.
Administrative capacity all of
that so we are using these
policies to incentivise
consolidation merging of systems
in order to get the regional
system built out again we made
the largest board may consider
other appropriate forms those
are much harder to monitor you
can enter into a collaborative
agreement and then.
The complete the project and
break that agreement and end up
back with to inefficient system
so consolidations pre permanent
and that's one of the reasons we
started there.
And then similarly we have a
waiver of the match requirement
for basically the same
components I apologize I got the
mac.
Next up for the match
requirement is two hundred and
fifty the loan waiver is for
five hundred that is my can't
even read my own presentation
top page five pretty clear but
missed it so the match
requirement is for two hundred
and fifty and the we were
requirements for five hundred
connections again they have that
basic
the same basic requirements and
so there's a possibility for
your small mutual domestics
having come to the water trust
board once secured a loan come
back for again another phase of
that project.
Has to be another phase of that
project built into that P. E. R.
that they had done
and they could have their match
waived and have their loans
waived going forward so we
really hope that these steps
address the things that you're
hearing from your small systems
and I know you happen hearing
thanks for your small system
this should address all that we
want some ownership some skin in
the game that's that first loans
we want the fiduciary oversight
that really does still come in
that first loan but we also want
the systems to be successful
long term so that's where these
waivers come play.
and madam chair I anticipate six
is our current board roster and
with that uncertainty happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you Marquita and we'll
start with the Representative he
said.
Solution almost this board for
many years if you don't.
Right you know what you remember
the board of directors I don't
know how I got that wrong sorry.
I wouldn't mind.
Thank you for your presentation
today madam chair led to Prof
this Russell and talk to this
group and everything and more at
this Russell I wrote this was
originally set up to help far
more universities struggle to
get cell site.
The standardized.
Water for all these residents
Madam think if you go back to
the very first iteration of the
program it was amended a year
later but the very first
iteration was for
big regional systems like
eastern New Mexico gal Gadot
plan so yes it.
It started out that way but is
realize that the help is more
needed in our more rural areas
excuse me.
Of.
Question though I'm going page
by page.
On page two he's.
It shows that there's sixteen
members of the water trust.
And there's some people here
that I do want to question about
the amendment why would the
secretary and the director of
the New Mexico department of
game and fish be on this list.
Madam chair because Endangered
Species Act projects are part of
an eligible project and believe
that's why that that connection
was made okay.
And that only makes sense and
like I said I'm just bringing
this up for the information of
our New York members may not
know this but if we're talking
about irrigation or Conservancy
district madam chair mistrustful
I'm seeing that there are two
members on here Mister trick out
person I know him and Timothy
McKeon can you tell me your.
Are you all trying to balances
out on the east side versus the
west side or south side
services.
What is a big and quality there.
As far as representation so
madam chair there's a statutory
requirement for some of these
members so there needs to be an
irrigation Conservancy district
member of that relies on grant
similarly one that relies on
surface water
there's of statutory requirement
that a soil and water
conservation district number the
appointed that one member.
The environmental community
In thank think that's it in
those members are all appointed
by the governor.
With the advice and consent of
the Senate okay.
Thank you for the response.
Of you said that there is fifty
nine entities that were
authorized this year and that.
I believe that closed last week
as far as getting all of them.
Going to the next step is that
corrected it ended last week so
madam chair yes the there's two
brings us to our application
process in those years in which
there some filtering out of
systems the ones that are that
are recommended to the
legislature then invited to
complete what we call reading
this application to see where
they are are they do they really
have their water rights have
they submitted all their
financial documents that are
required if you're using
severance tax bonds that sort of
thing so that face to that phase
application ended last Friday
okay thank you very much for the
response.
As far as any any of the lands
that have been made have there
been any.
Major delinquencies in the
difficulty.
Roger we've had one.
And again we have we have
provided the opportunity for
them to ask for principal
forgiveness and do other things
and we still have one system
that is has not made a payment
over several years okay so madam
chair mistrust of when was that
long maybe there were several
loans maybe if it's a mutual
domestic that has at least three
loans I think maybe for total of
wards going back to the late two
thousand and two thousand eight
two thousand nine
And you know they were in good
standing for awhile but have
recently fall out of the
following out of.
Good standing so the most recent
one I believe was made in two
thousand and eighteen okay so
madam chair miss Russell.
What is the course of action
that water transport is going to
take to either get them in
compliance or if they don't do
it get in compliance with what
your rules and regulations state
what is recourse so madam chair
it's the finance authority that
deals with delinquencies because
where the body that makes the
loan and the grant so we are
we've currently escalated the
legal elements of that so we are
in our legal department we've
tried the working at a staff
level again most of these mutual
domestics this one but they
don't have professional staff
relying on board members that
turnover and personal things
things happen and they don't
have the real focus that we need
them to have as a I salute our
work and I think that's part of
it
there's just a lack of
leadership in some of these
communities I think that's
what's happened here as well but
it's out of the department okay
thank you for the response.
this is a market off the list is
that a good idea okay.
on page three of your bill.
In the states here miss Russell
the second paragraph starts at
the act requires water drugs
would gives priority to projects
that have been identified as
being urgent to meet the needs
of the lead to water water
planning Gary.
And but it also drops down under
the second star Chris is
additional and water trust board
policies and valuation.
I cherry give priority to
projects that and I'm skip the
line address existing or
imminent emergency is talk to me
about the imminent emergency
conditions so Madam depending on
the project you may have that in
defense system that has one
source of water one well back up
and that well has dropped in its
water capacity and so you'll be
you'll be facing very soon or
currently facing a water
shortage because you can't
access your one single source of
water within back up we would
see that as an emerging or
existing or imminent threat
Of post wildfire flooding you
would have that similar kind of
thing with of water should
restoration and management that
reseeding project and trying to
stop the flooding so those are
areas those are the kinds of
things that most recently have
come to mind correct thank you
very much for that madam chair
I do have broken this Russell.
She doesn't excellent job I had
a problem last week with my
sixteen had gotten hold.
My first call was to mistrust
there well is fixing to run at
for the whole village at the
extra New Mexico.
Is she said has more to offer
call maybe.
And I was follow up from there
but still.
Because due to make that phone
call and I think that you.
Pointed out to him the steps
that he needed to tech and I do
appreciate that very much and
none of those
constituents of mud that do live
within the village of dexter.
Hopefully we'll be able to see
some of the problem down there
was
well as just shocked they have
the opportunity to by joining
Farm.
That had the water rights on it
that was supplied that needed
water for the villages of dexter
and so I hope this process.
Madam chair mistrust of going on
page four you're talking about.
Updated the policy for the
federal funding that is coming
in is going to
make a big impact on thank but
under the third star.
Listening to technical
requirements for allowing
technical memoranda is to
eliminate or into more of this
point for most non treatment
projects can you tell me what
effect this is going to have
madam chair mistrustful Fund are
you working in conjunction with
the hello this aspects of this
because I this there's a
certain.
Number of miles away from the
border that there are flown
these projects going on and I
didn't know if they were
involved in being able to make
application here requests or
even lines.
Madam chair that's an excellent
question to the finance
authority operates a similar
program came along ten years
later to serve a variety of
infrastructure projects within
designated colonia so within
that hundred fifty mile and
madam chair I is that question
because you know that I never
ask a question Senator know the
answer so and that that
particular board gets a four and
a half percent of your mark of
of the severance tax bonds they
have a the the colonias
imprecise say we just sit on the
board as well and we service
staff to that point so we have a
policy that gives additional
priority and points to systems
that have their technical
documents completed so there
preliminary engineering report
but there is not a requirement
so you do not have to have your
order to access the funding
which you are given an
additional priority if you have
that the because of that
difference between
discretionary but priority
points given and requirement we
haven't followed suit yet with
the colonias we don't have the
same issues of
that scares of having to manage
money relative to projects in
the colonias area because it
serves a variety of
infrastructure projects
including waste water solid
waste of food.
Ways housing infrastructure so
right now we don't see that
changing necessarily but we're
certainly ask our administrators
to look at that and see what
something we should do okay
thank you for the response madam
chairman miss Russell I do know
that you have worked with me on
a project down and the like are
shares wastewater treatment
plant down there I know that
they've recently it's possible
that the structure
It's not.
Standard I'll put it that way.
For the money through capital
out I'm not able to be able to
help them out because of the
magnitude of this.
Right to have their treatment
plants.
The considered an emergency
project taken place with that
the federal funding priority
list on getting help to replace
or not to replace that to repair
that system.
madam chair that might be an
emergency condition again
through the water transport but
the next opportunity because of
the annual cycle the next
opportunity to apply for that
would begin next August okay
with funding next August or this
this well I'm sorry August of
twenty twenty three I funding
for the nation reported in may
or June of twenty twenty four
okay likely accessing the funds
August or September of twenty
twenty four so that the water
transport because of the way in
which the authorization is
required it's a it's about a ten
month process to before you know
the award at about at sixteen
eighteen month process before
you can really start drawing
down the funds that's just part
but I would note that that we
have closed the application
cycle for the reading this
portion of the water trust for
the colonias application cycle
just opened okay so and may our
thirties colonia okay and madam
chair mistrust of can you get
the rest of the committee.
The distance requirements to be
considered declines from the
south for at State madam chair
believe fifteen hundred fifty
miles started.
Technical expert.
Okay of.
And madam chair for on page four
also ended the requests for
design only projects to be
considered the applicant service
to your amendment five hundred
connections I know that there's
one mutual domestic water system
in my particular area and.
For the while there.
Seem like every two years
there's no person place and they
would start this process started
out in started over again is
finally like.
This this get this state so
somebody can continue following
up on these this project the
Johnny to have done and I think
that Hispana here the
consistency and what the
application contains is very
very important they have to
follow through.
let's see here.
That was covered.
Okay so madam chair and miss
Russell on page five the very
top.
Match requirement two hundred
connected to a fifty
connections.
So they have previously had to
secure a loan or that funding
from the water trust for their
for that that proposed project
what happens if.
In the evolution of the day
putting in the system what
happens if there's a failure and
they have to go back to say they
get a bad batch of plastic line
for these the sewer system part
of the case may be.
Are they allowed to go back and
make repairs of the existing
stuff or is it to complete and
then go back to make repairs can
you.
I don't know if you save us and
because there has been that
instance a couple of times and I
what we're of the pipe system
itself as I.
And so.
To be able to complete the
project they would have to fix
that before it is finished.
So madam chair in those
instances typically we would
look to see if they have other
resources up there's another
funding mechanism we have been
trying to put some money aside
both last year in anticipate
this year will do it as well for
cost overruns or unanticipated
costs so we of when you get
usually when you've got a when
the project's been properly
planned and designed they've
looked at things like that but
it happens so we've been trying
to use a portion of the money to
set aside for again construction
over runs and thanks to make
certain that our our priority
projects are getting completed.
what we see through no fault of
our our communities is that
these the cost of construction
have just skyrocketed you all
seen it I want to make sure that
we keep these folks in the
position to complete the project
so we're putting aside money to
support that that dollar amount
get bigger it hasn't been it's
been tapped once or twice I
think so far I think what's
happening is the project due to
skyrocket so much that there is
re consideration about
completing the project we
haven't had too many instances
in which the costs have been you
know of a ten or fifteen percent
of the.
But usually thirty to fifty
percent coverage and sometimes
that puts the entire project
peril.
And madam chair mistrustful I
fully understand what you're
saying because with this
pandemic and everything and
trying to get supplies back and
its overwhelm it really is I
don't have the construction
industry is.
Managing to get through this
with the labor shortage that is
still in place with the supply
list that is order backlog with
getting those drugs into our
communities is just.
Unbelievable believe Madam chair
in addition to that I would know
because they're such high levels
of federal funding.
Across the nation so we in New
Mexico or benefiting from and
joined unusually high levels of
severance tax money so the the
capital outlay and the federal
money so you see these increases
and nationally we're competing
because federal money is please
is everywhere Representative
competing for those same
resources so it fits in New
Mexico it's still twice as hard
honestly we don't have the same
construction industry
infrastructure set up we don't
have the same consulting
engineering community set up to
handle this level of volume so
in addition to just the raw
materials we have difficulty you
know getting enough contractors
and engineers to complete the
number of projects that could
have access to funding and so
that's also driving up those
costs aside initiatives that
devastating to some areas madam
chair mistrustful and speaking
of the devastation.
For as far as we've had first
started out in the rid of so
airy whenever those high winds
cause that are of.
Breaking over power lines and we
saw the.
Believable section of their
unfortunately there were two
lives that were lost at their
but when ever did start raining
and the roads were washed out
the systems were washed out of
the water systems lost at did
you all participate in any way
to get those areas back up and
running madam chair no I think
that that I don't like with your
and Representative at mistrust
did famous step in and help with
that or or they completely to
our that may be what happened
they don't typically come to us
with those kinds of emerging
projects because we don't have
the capacity to provide
emergency funding right so what
we can serve more what we
prioritize projects that have
existing or imminent threats we
can't fund a project unless
you've authorized okay and the
authorization can't happen
unless the water transport is
vetted the project and
recommended to the Legislative
so it requires a eight month
lead time Representative can
tell someone whether or not the
project is eligible so if there
were up heart out for us to do
projects that don't require
legislative authorization under
some emergency conditions we
would be in a position to across
those again.
In most years we have.
S. historically we've had more
applicants than money right now
that's certainly not true more
emergencies than we've ever seen
before okay so that I would just
note that that's the reason
people don't call us we can help
them okay and madam chair and
miss Russell were I'm not.
minimizes Cascadian fire in any
way shape or form because that
too was devastating in once
again a.
US Forest Service there they're
not doing this in the service
they've tried to burn down our
state.
And.
Madam chair.
On page five again in there
about read that here.
Of the waiver of loan
requirements for water systems
with the applicant's service
fewer than five hundred
connection so how did they go
about making this application
for the loan waiver.
madam chair they would just
become automatically eligible to
receive it so we will be in
contact with them if they state
they meet these conditions but
we are asking them now did you
know this is just the same.
having completed dress and
management plans so this is a
process that we're undergoing
okay and madam chair following
up with that question miss
Russell whenever there is a
small system that is really
needed help and I know they're
located throughout our state
they need assistance to get this
project started do you have the
manpower to actually help them
with this are there ways that
they can make applications to
this is it does treat the county
or how how does that process
take place okay so the bodies
listening does not make
application so madam chair if
they are is of some sort of
formally organized entity of
mutual domestic and they are
very small and need help we
don't provide that kind of
technical assistance we are our
our manpower is overseeing
project develop a project of
construction oversight sixpenny
Jr funding making sure they're
doing what they're supposed to
do if they need help on the
front and the environment
department currently has
technical systems group of very
helpful they also contract
dollars that they can use to
find.
Rural community assistance
corporation R. C. AC can help
with some of that of rural water
there's some really good
technical assistance providers
in the state there's not enough
for the need to be identified
and we do not as a state have
enough help for those kinds of
kids communities on that point
this plan is something bill
Connors New Mexico girl Water
ciation they get their nonprofit
get free advice to
mutual domestic water systems as
does remote in RCC RCC.
The also the they're probably
the two organizations that
mutual domestic account to bring
technical assistance into their
community to tell them how to go
about planning getting a
preliminary engine reporter
attacked they probably do the
technical assistance reports for
them and and then you can start
from there so I I have found
them to be the most.
And madam chair miss Russell I
do that that the we do have the
gentleman down on our part of
the world working through our
costs that is very knowledgeable
of this and he is the tool to
the small small areas that do
require this assistance madam
chair for let me take up all
this time right here us like
this is a this Russell does.
Stellar job in getting all the
stuff I appreciate it very much
thank you and I'd like to
recognize and vice chair
representative that this.
Thank you madam.
Of this Russell my first
question is two fold.
Of the first part is what
involvement did you have in the
gold king mine spill that
contaminated of San Juan river
that affected a lot of farmers
in northwest New Mexico and.
New floor Representative all the
way across of the four with the
very zone four was when we stop
to page Arizona and the the
second part of my question is
the farmers.
Of that were effective do they
qualify for the loans and grants
from the New Mexico finance
authority and what are the
eligibility and the where do
they apply.
thank you madam chair Mr chair
so the finance authority did not
participate in any of its
purpose in helping the the
cleanup of that spilled over the
in in addressing the emergency
that current as a result again
getting to the fact that we
don't park right programs the
ones that have are fascinated
grant don't have ability to do
emergency projects so we're not
in a position to respond to
those currently water transport
would be the ideal place but we
don't have the authorization to
address the conditions you've
just described and farmers
currently are not eligible for
funding.
Programs so they're not eligible
for our trust board and well we
have some very small loan
programs for for profit entities
none of them really address the
needs of farmers.
Thank you for that and then my
second question would.
Better answer this.
It feels with the we call the
farmers mutual community deaths
incurred.
This is it's an irrigation.
That doubles as an irrigation
canal and also a source of
drinking water we've been having
problems where we draw water
from the San Juan river and the
canal starts underneath the
bluff and every spring of we
have a cave in on our irrigation
system and we've been trying to
get help to put it all in
counseling and.
You have to do is water what
assistance.
Would you be able to assist us
with.
Madam chair Mister vice chair I
don't like giving these concerns
but unfortunately that ditch
association is not
Not in a sick it's a for profit
ditch as I understand it and for
profit association so I'm not
eligible for the public funding
programs that we offer so if
they became some sort of
political subdivision addition
under that I think it's like the
way ended which thank yes our
organize or association there is
eligibility for public ditch
associations but but as I
understand that one of it's a
private association which then
takes them out of eligibility
under the water project fund the
weights described.
Okay thank you for that and I
will.
just some questions back home
and get back with you thank you
for that of.
Miss Russell and thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Serrato thank you madam chair
thank you Mr also you don't job
here today really educated me on
this I have never been.
to.
One of your presentation I
believe.
have you dealt with any madam
chairman miss Russell have you
dealt with any P. false
contamination.
Areas that needed.
Clean water to their homes.
Madam chair not specifically
with this program I mean there
may be a project that deals with
that one of our other programs
the federal of drinking water
state revolving loan fund has
been earmarked for of
capitalization grant for P. fast
so I understand that we are
ready ourselves I say we because
we operate the program
statutorily with the environment
department to get that
capitalization grant down so
that we can make a requests over
to communities dealing with PFAS
contamination so that's in the
works right now
we have a little bit of a snafu
because our statute only allows
us to make loans so we are
looking at what we need to do so
you may see a bill from us later
that allows us to make requests
from that federal fund so that
we can deliver the terms that
the Feds has asked has have
asked us to to deliver them but
we are looking at that we
understand there's about three
projects that have significant
be fast a contamination that are
eligible to receive that grant
once we make the application and
potentially get a much changed
and madam chair and and
mistrustful what time frame are
we looking at on the.
I think this quarter of this
fiscal year my understanding is
that we are trying to get
ourselves in a position to apply
for the funding this fiscal year
the EPA is usually pretty fast
and turning around grant
applications but we have to have
as a state a priority list for
determining which projects get
access to funding first and that
framework has to be developed by
the drinking water pure of the
environment department so that's
you know that we just didn't
have that framework in place our
current framework for priority
for prioritization and that
program deals with drinking
water clean drinking water and
not contamination so there are a
couple of new grants that
requires new policy frameworks
that I know that they're working
on okay thank you for that
answer madam chair missile
do you know off the top of your
head if you're working in the
Clovis area on some of the.
You madam chair Representative
my understanding is that is one
of them that that is one of the
three that have been identified
the CDC funds.
so that thank you mistrustful
madam chair mistrustful
I've heard time and time again
from my constituents in Santa
Rosa that their water lines are
corroded and plugging up and
really restricted
do you know if you're working
with centers on any of those
issues.
Madam chair I don't believe
we're working on them with our
federally funded drinking water
program and though it's noted as
a loan program the federal
requirements currently dictate
that we deliver much of it in a
grant like form so we do
principal forgiveness so it is
really honestly a great long
combination very similar to the
water transport I don't believe
that they're on that priority
list and I don't recall the last
time we saw them on the water
transport priority so I don't
think they're taking advantage
of the of the programs that we
offer thank you for that and
mistrust madam chair I'll I'll
take that to my constituents and
make sure that thank.
Maybe looking at the station.
Chair as I say that I would just
want to double check.
Because.
I think you're right I will and
then mistrustful what is the
number that filler for
procurement manager there it was
endorsed by the New Mexico
finance oversight committee on
November tenth and I believe it
is today on the Senate side so I
don't know that we have a number
yet we don't have there was just
a little hello Act as we get all
thank you to.
I'm not seeing that here but.
It is it today apparently.
Yeah I'm not saying that I'll
double check and get back to
recession with them and make
sure they understand thank you
madam chair and thank you miss
Russell who.
addition thank you and
Nobody I would like to just
COVID make some of really just
thank you for this up for those
of you who don't know I probably
have about sixty mutual domestic
water systems in district forty
one I mean and the most wired
mutual domestics I have the most
to process is we have the most
land grants and all of these are
volunteer organizations
Most of them are run by people I
used to say sixty five now I'm
saying seventy most of them are
really over seventy I'm not
getting and the offices are in
the second bedroom of someone's
house I so when the first time I
heard about D. B. ID in that
middle ground Rio.
The middle grant Conservancy I
said.
What we have nothing in the
north like this we have nothing
to do this and and so I just
want to explain in a little
billion to Dixon I'm gonna show
you this map this is highway
sixty eight going to up through
that task canyon and this is the
little village of Dixon and good
okay where are so this is a
highway I mean this is a river
this is the the Rio Grande you
know you you go up the hiatus
house you're going on the Rio
Grande river there's a highway
in red and then we have seventy
five that goes up here in this
district I have one water system
here that has about two hundred
people I have another water
system up here that probably has
about fifty people these are all
separate mutual domestic water
systems we have one here that
has about a hundred people and
we have one here they're so old
that they have twenty people
okay they aren't even registered
on state registry because.
Of there so they never even they
made it under the wire down here
there's probably another two
hundred homes along here and
none of them have access to
to a mutual domestic water okay
because of drought and because
of climate change all these
wells are drying up and then we
have all the septic tanks okay
and they're old and they're
leaking
this this organization is the
most sophisticated right right.
and they I think they're going
to they have the they have their
engineering market just like
this for those of you who don't
know a truly me and that they're
strong and they're going in and
I I think that one and then I
think it's not the issue it's
next year that probably get that
many because it's a strong point
so what we're doing is trying to
reach by these four systems so
because what I have found in
working with the mutual
domestics in the north if you if
you can get about five hundred
customers you can probably make
it as a that me and when I say
making it you can hire director
you know it because it let's
just say you have five hundred
times five hundred water users
or what every customers times
you know fifty dollars a month
is about twenty five thousand
times at times trial it's about
three hundred thousand a year
which is kind of what you need
for director an operator and an
account you know somebody to run
the place run the board somebody
to somebody to go out fix the
system supply this is a lake or
whatever and then you can count
on that's gonna do all the
billing and keep all of that
straight into all the reports
that they have to do to be a
mutual domestic water system so
what I'm trying to encourage in
the north is for people to
regional allies and we're
carrying that bill and caring
that field with Peter Wirth
that'll be healthier here
tomorrow in that judiciary it
pastor conservation in the
Senate and then I'll come over
to the house so we're trying to
really encourage people that was
one of the recommendations of
the water task force was to do
regionalization in the state and
really.
The cities are fine the cities
have people who run these things
they're fine it's the it's the
rural parts of our state they're
really struggling I just want
you guys to understand this and
it's all falling here so
Marquita.
Really in this piece of work you
know the loan forgiveness
requests all these things it's
it's a sea change I just want to
tell you for the mutual Water
does domestic water associations
in the north so you know that's
the first part getting this in
place the next part is how then
do we go out to communities and
make them aware of this help
them with grant writing all the
things we need to do is I'm just
telling you as a full court
press in the north.
I'm putting junior money into
really.
Looking at the ground water
systems in our in in Rio Arriba
county right now you know let's
just say how much groundwater do
we have we don't even know we do
not even know so doing it acting
on groundwater and that takes a
lot of money but will start and
also getting an organizer to
meet monthly you know so that
people have we have to have
watershed districts you have
mutual domestic she have the
same yes and you know the
results so and just going to
tell you where it goes through
is who's in charge of the renter
I mean that's a little less but
that's how we do it and most of
the north coast of the staff you
should you should know that we
don't really take very much of
that up at the time in the Rio
Grande so most of them close to
the south with water laws that
were done back in nineteen
thirty eight so so we really
need to kind of think about
water in the rural parts of our
state the city's do a pretty
good job and they've done a
pretty good job of conserving I
mean seven that uses less water
today that use twenty years ago
about doubling the population so
if we're going to be smart about
water we first we have to budget
you know how much we have and
then we have to help small
communities take advantage of
systems we have to to better
allocate water into and to help
preserve water that's really
what we need to do so I just
wanted everybody to understand
what a huge game change
the NMFA has done for mutual
water systems and I am so
appreciative of this even
knowing that it's created you
know about two hundred times
more the work I have because now
I have to get out there and help
everybody kind of do this but
you know that's my job and I'm
I'm happy to do that but I'm
just saying.
For those of you who don't know
this is a game changer and
that's why I wanted you to know
especially if you're from
growth.
and I I right here here part of
the colonias more.
Right you're part of the
colonias and there's also
something called and tribal
infrastructure I don't know if
you know about that but there's
a whole water they take another
four to half percent of the
severance tax money that goes to
the trouble
What do they call the tribal
waters would have a
infrastructure from tribal
infrastructure thank you so I
just want you to know that that
to us we haven't really talked
very much about that they are
not under the NMFA they come
under the the office of the
Indian Affairs I think it's so
anyhow that's how it works I
just want to know you know how
grateful I am.
I also want you to know that.
Who we've put together we we try
passcode legislation I just
can't talk about and bringing
that forward to give the cubs
two hundred thousand dollars
each to do grant writing for all
this federal money that's coming
in.
You know.
These guys can run water systems
but they can't read Graham just
going to tell you you know in a
different skill set so we put I
put junior money last year into
our costs we got all of our
group together to do that we
ended up they ended up having
more than three hundred thousand
direct grants but I want to tell
you three hundred thousand
sounds like a lot of money to
date they have read we have
fifty forty four million out
grant applications they have
delivered eight million two of
cost to the district in the
north so I'm introducing
legislation so that the costs
can do grant writing for small
communities or general cities or
whatever so they have money to
do grant writing and what
they've done.
Is amazing they have ten grant
writers on on file and the you
know grant writers have
specialties takes a different
person to ride Water grant that
it takes to run a team and that
prepped for to ride a road grant
you know I transportation grant
so they have a team that's great
writers on staff ten of them and
you know they they portion out
these requests as the needs are
made so I'm just say that's
another way to help help your
communities with your local
costs to help communities to
that grant writing because they
can sit down listen to the
people and then for that
Instagram so I just I just want
to say that I think that's
really important and them.
I guess will close you have
another question Senator can
presents on my bills in
committee.
Sorry.
I was just using that as an
example right there on the.
In the session.
Representative madam chair.
Is item of this pertains to the
water flows for but I just
received a call from a cell
money.
License has a.
Recreational marijuana okay from
my particular area.
And their concern is and correct
me if I'm wrong with some of the
environment department that was
originally awarded.
Authorization and dollars.
Make sure that these New Mexico
growers were in compliance with
all the right rules and
regulations.
And with that a Mister Kinney.
What the reason I'm asking is
is.
These are the only people that
have gotten a hold of me.
But this seems to be an influx
of.
Non New Mexico grown product
that just come across the state
line that is being sold as New
Mexico products however that
product does come across the
state line that is official
stance is taken away from our
license growers that we have
here in the state.
And there is a concern out there
and I think it would be
beneficial to all of us to have
Mister Kitty if he is the one
that we need to have because
this is a long list that.
Jeff with the secretary
Department back.
