Representative Grola, here.
Representative Henry.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Representative small, vice
chairerana.
Chair McQueen.
Here.
We have Quorum.
Thank you. Um, so, good morning,
everyone. Uh, first off, uh,
change on the agenda. We're
going to roll House Bill 259,
um, so sorry for the late notice
on that, uh, that decision was
made this morning.
Um, we're still working on that
bill. uh may come back at a
later date.
Um, so we just have, we
potentially have a pretty short
agenda today.
You know, we'll, we'll see.
Um,
any, uh, questions at me for
some reason.
I, I think I glanced at both,
both sides of the room. Um.
Uh, any, um,
Uh, questions, comments, or
announcements from the committee
before we begin.
OK, so first, our first bill
this morning will be
House 289 geothermal projects
Development Fund with uh
Representative Royal Caballero
whenever you're ready. Thank
you. Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
I am here to present house bill.
289, which is known as the
geothermal Projects Development
Fund.
And before I begin, I'd like to
introduce the experts that will
be with me today. We have Tom
Solomon, who is on Zoom.
And he is with 350 New Mexico.
Uh, we have Lucy Darigo who was
with the geothermal working
group and also the chief
council, uh, I mean commercial
officer of XJC director stay
here with us from the
department.
Excuse me.
up
I will just briefly identify.
The um purpose of the bill.
HB 289 would expand the state's
economic support.
For development of the state's
geothermal resources as a
reliable renewable constant
source of dispatchable electric
power.
To reduce the state's use of
coal.
And natural gas generators and
provide round the clock.
Backup for solar and wind energy
sources.
This briefly
Explains what we're doing. We're
expanding the fund, Mister Chair
and members of the committee,
and this was part of an effort
last year of which all of you
support it.
In which we established the
fund.
However, it was, it did not
receive through the negotiation
process.
So with that, uh, Mister Chair,
I would witnesses would like to
say a few words briefly.
Sure, thank you, Chair and
members of the committee, um, my
name is Pucker and I'm the
director of conservation and
minerals energy conservation
management division of energy,
minerals and natural resources
department,
um, many of you know many of
these things, uh, the positive
aspects of geothermal, you know,
that we can crosswalk our
existing oil and gas, um,
workforce, crosswalk our
existing oil and gas vendors
into some, um, I will also just
briefly say we've been able to
begin some of the mapping, um,
of where the the geological
resources are highest.
in the state, as you know, the
entire state potential and so
this is economic benefit to the
entire state and especially.
Um, Sandoval County, San Miguel,
Donna Anna.
Theron Hidalgo, Rio Ariba.
Sandoval to Valencia Socorro.
It's a long list. Sierra, Luna,
Otero, Grant, about half the
state that's 15, more than half
of our counties are listed as
high as far as we know, um.
In the instance of brevity, I'll
pause there and I can answer any
other questions as the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, my name is
Lucy Darigo. I'm the chief
commercial officer with XGS
Energy.
Um, we're a geothermal projects
developer, or terrifically
excited about Mexico, um, in
particular to develop a
reliable, resilient geothermal
energy, domestic energy supply
to support increased domestic
industrial, and economic
activity here in New Mexico and
I think Mr.
Solomon will uh join us to say
if you opening.
Yes, uh, representative and, and
Mr. Chair, I am on.
I can make a brief comment
support this effort to expand
the the scope of the incentives
offered by the state of New
Mexico, the New Mexico
geothermal Working Group has
been continuing to meet since we
passed HP91 last year and uh it
has been expanding, um, a number
of private developers as well as
uh
Capital funders and others have
joined the working group, which
just shows the excitement that
this industry um has for the
state of New Mexico and its
potential and I think we
realized that there was another
step up in the uh availability
incentives that would be
necessary to compete with some
of the other geothermal
development states like Colorado
and California, and that's the
purpose of this bill here.
Thank you very much.
Thank you and just in closing,
Mister Chair.
HB 289 makes a recurring
non-dollar from the general fund
to the geothermal projects
Development Fund, which will
begin in fiscal year 26, and
then thereafter subsequent years
with that, Mr. Chair, um, we
stand for questions.
OK, um,
Uh, well, uh, give the audience
first, uh, just to show of hands
who is here in support of this
bill?
Uh
Who's here in the opposition?
OK, let's um.
We do support, uh, if you'd like
to speak, we'll take maybe 3
people, 2 minutes each and then
we'll check online.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm here with
the Sierra Club Rio Grande
chapter in support of this bill.
My name is Melissa Bernardin.
Anything we can do to build out
geothermal in this state
deserves our attention. It's one
of those energy sources.
notes.
That most everyone agrees on. If
we compare data centers with
geothermal, we avoid emissions
that otherwise might go
unregulated.
Allowing grants to private
entities will help move this
technology forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Jared Najar on
behalf of Interspace Action, um,
I don't want to be repetitive,
but in addition to the
environmental benefits of an
additional renewable clean
energy resource. This bill will
also encourage investment in our
state. We fully support this
bill and thank the sponsor for
bringing it forward. Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm Travis Kellerman,
the senior climate advisor for
the governor, and I stand in
support of this bill, geothermal
resources in the state are
Just at the start. We've just
started to explore them, to map
them, to realize their full
potential. The 2019 Energy
Transition Act, uh, says that we
need to decarbonize our grid,
clean, firm power from
geothermal does that. We have to
get to utility scale power. We
took a big step last year. This
is the next step in that
process. I urge your support.
Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go online. Uh,
is there anyone online who would
like to speak in opposition to
this bill, please raise your
hand. OK. Is there anyone who
would like to speak in support.
Please raise your hand.
Michael Barrio?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee for the
opportunity to testify in
support of this bill. Uh, my
name is Michael Barrio and I
represent Advanced Energy United
and we are a national trade
association that represents
clean energy producers,
consumers.
And the spectrum of technologies
that support the energy
transition.
Um, you know, I don't, I don't
want to be repetitive, but, um,
as as the sponsor pointed out,
this bill builds on past efforts
and does align with the energy
transition Act. I think the
benefits are clear. It supports
grid reliability offers a just
transition for oil and gas
workers and transferable skills,
and it enhances our energy
resilience. Um, it's simply a
smart investment in New Mexico's
economic growth, our energy
security and climate goals. So
we urge your support and uh do
pass recommendation. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll take one more,
Jeanie Lugston.
Technology that support that
transition, um, you know, I
don't, I don't want to be
repetitive, but, um, add it as a
sponsor pointed out it's still
building efforts and does align
with energy transition. This is
Watson.
I'm
gas workers skills
and their energy resilience, um,
typically smart investment in
that I know on the road
um and finally develop the
the.
OK, let's try it now.
Hello, may I speak now? Yes,
please.
This is Gene Larson from the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. We eagerly support the
bill because of the reasons
given by the other uh
individuals who have spoken.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK.
So that's it with the uh um for
the public comment. Thank you
very much.
Um, members of the committee.
Ruan Murphy.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative and experts,
um.
You're
My recollection from being a
student and.
Most more recently in industry
advisor to the Mexico Tech and
having a geoscience background.
Um, in Mexico is truly rich in
geothermal, and we do need to
tap it.
Um, I'm thinking of, um, all the
hot springs from TRC.
The Ojo Caliente just northwest
of of here all the way to the
hippie Hot Springs northwest of
Taos who.
Folks have been up there
Um, a couple of questions is
that.
From my recollection, um, of
The the geology I feel like it's
fairly well known. We know, we
know the best spots.
Um, am I mistaken in that
because it's been many years
since I've looked at some of the
studies.
Mr. Jarrett
Director Sta, go ahead.
Uh, chair and Representative,
some geology is well known, uh,
as you know, we're abundant in
resources in the diagonal
corners of the state and so
there's a a strong understanding
of the subsurface in the oil and
gas areas, however, a lot less
is known about the subsurface
along the areas that have higher
geothermic potential, which is
everywhere else, essentially the
cent the central west of my
house and also down by Silver
City to be very roughly
speaking.
Um, so there is a lot more to be
geothermal resources depth at
times and different, um, geology
than oil and gas, so we do have
a head start as a state with oil
and gas subsurface knowledge,
but um there's a lot. So, um,
the majority of the money is uh
Mr. Chairman representative
experts, pardon me.
And the majority of the money
will be going to to further the
geologic studies primarily or
Did you go into that a little
bit? Thank you.
Mr. Chair director stare.
Thank you Chair Representative,
uh, the money will go apart to
mapping, but there is a lot
other work that needs doing as
well, for example, we need to
stand up a whole regulatory body
to make sure that, you know,
environmental and business
friendly way, so that's
something my office is also.
It's an industry at the
beginning, so there's some work
to be done to support this
budding industry in terms of
pilot wells, um, developing the
technology here, and we're
making some headway, not, for
example, the existing lightning
dot state just.
For lack of a better term, did a
refresh and was able to generate
many, many more watts out of the
same wall that they've been
drilling out of, and that kind
of technological advance is
something we want to help.
Using these funds and partnering
with our labs here as well.
Um,
Mister Chair Representative, um,
From, from my perspective, it
seems like and perhaps you can
educate me and everybody else um
has a similar question. It seems
like the technology is
relatively well established. I
mean there are geothermal
massive geothermal projects all
over the world. I think of
Iceland in particular, um, um,
and so, I guess I'm just going
If we, if we need more work in
the geology area.
Is it really then permitting and
and regulatory structure that
we're talking about here because
Uh, or their, or their uh
restrictions in the technology
that we can't apply.
Chair Representative, it's both,
um, so yes, some technology is
established, but it's in its
early stages, um, and that
example I just gave you of
Lightning Dock was an example of
an existing well we had here in
New Mexico that got sort of
refurbished for lack of a better
word, and is now performing much
better. There is also advances
in directional drilling, drill
bits, equipment that can
tolerate hotter and hotter
temperatures, as you know, the
hotter right representative I
think our
second expert can speak more to
the technology.
Sure, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, um.
So technology that's fully
mature, for example, that used
in Iceland as well as the
lightning do plant, um, is best
applied to resources known as
hydrothermal resources, and they
appear at locations that are hot
springs for lack of a better
word, um.
You know, XGS energy is part of
uh what's called a next
generation to unlock a resource
that could be.
10 or even 100 times greater.
Um, so it's this next generation
of technology that still
requires, um, both regulatory,
um, you know, Mr. Chairman
Representative, thank you for
that answer. I'm actually old
enough and enough of a nerd to
remember the Los Alamos National
Lab hot dry ro program worked on
some of the simulation code on.
Um
Let's see here.
Next question has to do with the
expansion of entity. It appears
that in and correct me if I'm
wrong, the purpose of that is
actually to probably open this
up to private or nonprofit
entities where it was restricted
to
Um, tribes.
Um, some sort of government
entity, is that correct?
Mr. Chan representative, that's
correct.
So, um, and I note that the, uh,
it, it's limited to, I think
250,000, Mr. Chair
Representative experts $250,000
per grant.
Mr. Chen Representative, up to
$250,000 per grant, that's
correct.
So Mr. Chair represented what
you anticipate is basically a
competitive process for private
entities would come in and make,
make their best case for their
project and why it should be
granted something my
It's been my experience of those
types of arrangements are
usually best if the entity, the
private entity has skin in the
game.
I don't see that.
Um, can you, uh, and by that I
mean matching money at some
level, um, uh, be it in kind or
perhaps in in cash, Mr. Chairman
Representative, have I missed
that?
Directors.
Chair and Representative, uh,
it's not in the bill, it could
be if you so choose to be,
however, my department does that
actively, as you know, at ECAM,
we oversee almost 40 of which
are structured exactly as you
suggest with skin in the game.
So we have experience
administering lots of money and
lots of competitive processes
with grants in.
Hitting that balance between
advancing and supporting the
technology and also making sure
they have skin in the game and
that New Mexicans benefit at the
end of it.
Mr.
Chairman, pardon me add that
the beauty in these types of
partnerships is that the private
entities that are will be
bidding or or applying for this
in this process.
Um
Always use.
Public uh private types of
partnerships and they leverage.
Um, the the their funds, their
private funds, whatever they
bring to the table.
As you refer to skin in the
game, whatever they bring to the
table will help leverage.
And so that's the anticipation,
so even though it's up to
$250,000 the anticipation is
that this will be
Uh, for lack of a better term,
seed money or a way in which to
allow them to expand even to the
anticipation.
And uh directors there.
I just want to add one more uh
comment since we're talking
about funding and funding
private entities. I just want to
clarify that the way this is
structured does not violate the
anti-donation clause in the
Constitution because there is a
carve out for energy services
that serve residential, and so
that's something that we would
oversee.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
experts, thank you. I think the
the the really critical
component to me is the cost
sharer and, and I would like,
like to see that in the
legislation if possible. Um, the
last point I'll make is, and I,
and I think it is a valid point
and is the oil and gas um
service industry being able to
compete in this market.
Uh, we have our service centers,
unfortunately are probably
located the furthest away.
From some of our best geothermal
resources, I would guess, but
that does give the opportunity
for business expansion and new
jobs in that area with those.
Very
Highly technical skills. So I'll
just end with uh.
Oil and gas industry will need
to be involved because we do
what we do best and that's drill
baby drill.
Um, Mr. Chair, just briefly,
chair and Representative, it
does seem like they're the
furthest away, but from a a
developer's point of view,
they're a lot closer than other
vendors in other states who
would have to ship their
equipment across multiple
states, so.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
I, I acknowledge that as a
matter of fact, I, I know one of
the drilling contractors has
worked on geothermal wells and
so United drilling.
Thank you very much.
Further questions from the
committee.
OK, um.
I have a question.
Um
Uh, reenter of Caballero and
director Stahr. So the um
Analysis from your own agency.
Says it likely violates the
anti-donation clause. So can you
please explain to me how the
that exception applies.
Yes,
chair,
members of the committee, I'll
just quote you the Constitution,
this is, um.
Article 9, Section 14,
subsection H.
regarding the antenation.
Nothing in this section
prohibits the state from
expending state funds or
resources for the purposes of
providing essential services to.
If the assistance is granted
pursuant to the general
implementing legislation
approved of the legislature.
An essential services is defined
two sentences later, meaning
infrastructure that allows
Internet, energy, water,
wastewater or other similar so.
And um resemble a caballero and
uh director Stai, uh, where in
the bill does it say um
That this energy will be used
primarily for residential
purposes.
It does not say that explicitly,
Bill, that's something we would
follow it in rulemaking.
Uh, Representative and director,
is there a rulemaking procedure?
Chair and members of the
committee, yes, there's a
rulemaking passed that merits,
um, and of course, if this is.
As
We would implement.
And, uh, representative and
director.
So I didn't pull up the
implementing legislation, I
believe we passed that. Is that
correct?
Mr. Jerry, yes, that's correct.
OK, and this is Bill.
Comply with that.
That's correct.
I'm um
I'm not convinced.
And I'm troubled by opening up.
Like when, when we passed that
constitution.
Constitutional exception to the
anti-Donation clause.
The articulated purpose was
basically to provide
Um
Uh, utilities.
In the Navajo Nation.
You know, where people don't
have electricity or don't have
um are aren't hooked up to a
water system.
Uh, if that is read to include
any energy project.
I think that's a problem.
Um, and that's certainly not my
understanding of the exception.
So
Concerned about this language.
Um, is there a reason we need to
open this up to private entities
and not keep it as it's
currently in, in law.
Chair, let me read the M middle
sentence from the Constitution,
of course, to the members of the
legislature, um, the
implementing legislation shall
provide for accessibility to
essential services primarily for
residential purposes.
And shall include safeguards to
protect public money and other
public resources used for the
purposes authorized in this
subsection, so that would.
You would have to go back to 91
and see if that meets muster or
if there's some amendments um
proposed.
Um, your second question
regarding whether we.
This needs public funds, I would
argue yes, this is a nascent
industry. We have supported oil
and gas early on in this way.
We, when we did some funding
studies to determine where the
wind in the state is struck.
Mr. Chair, excuse me, I have,
um, house 91.
And when we, I'm so sorry the is
affecting me.
Um, the director addressed that
there would be specific
rulemaking, I go back to the
rulemaking process because
there's a on page 5 of the bill
itself, Section E, it defines
what the division will be doing
is setting up, administering all
the laws and rules relating
geothermal resources and it
continues to outline, and then
there's a section.
Mister Chair, I'm sorry. Uh,
let's see. House Bill 91, what's
House Bill 91 was the passage of
the geothermal resources
last year.
Yes, so that's why I wanted to
kind of go through it, and I
think that um those questions.
came up.
However, because the we were
deferring.
All of the processes,
applications, everything aligned
with House Bill 91 to the
department and um.
There was not an issue of
anti-donation, Mister, uh,
chair, because as the processes
were set up, the application
processes, uh, funds were going
to the department to disperse,
and that's common practice, I
think New Mexico finance
Authority and others uh of our
state mortgage finance Authority
and others follow the same uh.
rules and processes, so thank
you.
The representative, um.
Giving money to a state agency
does not absolve the state
agency of the anti- donation
clause.
They're still subject to the
same restriction.
Uh, what's the pleasure of the
committee?
Uh, we have a motion for Du pass
in a second, uh, Nina.
Representative Ubeda? Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garrola? Yes.
Representative Henry,
Representative Montoya? No.
Represented Murphy? No.
Representative Senator Cortez?
No.
Representative small.
Vice Chairana.
Chair McQueen.
Uh, I will vote yes.
So by about 64.
You have a do pass
Um
I'd like to see the
anti-donation clause, uh issue
addressed?
Uh, I voted yes so the bill
could advance.
Uh, if it's not addressed, I'll
put it on the floor.
Mr. Cherry, I forgot to mention
something very important. We do
have some reg uh.
Legislation in the um.
In line that will address that
too. So thank you so much. No,
no, I know. I just wanted to
clarify. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, our next bill is House Bill
333, cleanup of contaminated
sites representative Fernandez.
She
Representative Fernandez,
whenever you're ready.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee.
My name is
Uh
Representative Joseph Hernandez
and.
I am from uh uh the community of
Shiprock, uh.
Representing the Mexico House
District 4 with me is deputy
secretary Roderick.
And uh he's gonna be my expert
witness.
Uh, and I do apologize, Mr.
Chairman, I also have another uh
co-sponsor who's on his way,
that's uh.
Representative uh Martin Duncan,
so he'll be here shortly as
well.
And um to to get us started, uh,
before you, Mr. Chairman, is
House Bill 333. This is an
appropriations bill.
Um
This is an appropriations bill,
that uh will be uh used to
ensure that.
The, the legacy of of of uranium
in New Mexico.
Uh, gets cleaned up.
And,
and Mr. Chairman, um.
My, uh
My family, uh,
and many other family members
throughout.
Uh, New Mexico.
Have
gone through.
Numerous doctor's appointments.
Numerous, um,
Sometimes taking care of our of
our elders.
Who, who, who, who either
Worked in the industry.
Um
Or
Or are family members of someone
who who who worked there and,
and, and, um.
Stories that my late mother told
me was when my grandfather would
come home from work.
uh
uh, uh, getting off a a long
ship at the uranium mill.
In Shiprock
He would, he would leave his
clothes at the door.
And, and, and the, and the kids,
my, my, my aunts and my uncles
were happy and they would hug
him.
And, and this was full of, of,
uh.
The uranium dust.
And this dust today continues to
get blown through our
communities, not just on Navajo.
This is communities
Throughout New Mexico.
Many, many families.
feel left behind.
And, and, uh, um, at this time
I'm gonna turn it over to the my
my expert to go into further
details about what we're
requesting.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members again, my
name's John Roderick. I'm the
deputy cabinet secretary at the
Environment Department. This
bill appropriates $50 million to
the department.
using in cleaning up abandoned
uranium contaminated sites.
When we talk about those
neglected contaminated y
cleaners, vehicle repair shops,
plating shops.
Uh, even areas where disposed of
chemicals.
And there's not a responsible
party.
To date we have not had the the
options of, of addressing these
sites.
I have to say that that this is
an exciting time as the
representative said this is an
opportunity to change the legacy
in this state.
And it's uh.
It's a good first start.
One uranium mine that we
anticipate going into cleanup
early in July.
We've got uh a neglected
contaminated site over in near
to carry.
That we've characterized and
identified and ready to go on.
This funding would go towards
that, I will say that.
Uh, my sight, there's two types.
There's what we call a website
and a dry site. Wet site,
there's contamination.
ya we're looking at primarily
surface features, the costs vary
for a dry site can run anywhere
from.
A website can run a particular
site we have identified first.
So we anticipate the other
neglected contaminated site
we're talking about right now,
the estimate is about 5 million
to address that one in Tucum
carry.
The issue with these, these
types of cleanups.
Be quite honest, is, is.
You don't know for sure what you
have until you get and so
anytime we put a number out
there, there's a caveat that
that's based on what we know up
they can go down.
The other intent of this funding
is to allow us to move forward
with additional characterization
of other sites.
There are approximately 300
plus.
Uh, abandoned uranium mines in
New Mexico, both on the land.
There's about 1000 sites.
Within those 300 uranium sites
as each different added is is a
separate side.
The neglected contaminated sites
we've identified over.
Significantly impacted sites
across the state.
And roughly 1000 abandoned dry
cleaners, so the, the need is
huge.
This is our opportunity to
start.
I will also say that this
supports von Grisham's 50-year
water action plan. This was a
critical piece there.
And it's exciting to me that
We're seeing the nexus of
legislative efforts and the
governor's efforts to address
this our state for far too long.
The other value uh as this is
written and funded is that it
does allow us to utilize this
funding.
Uh, in conjunction with our
tribal.
partners in our our pueblos.
And so with that.
That's the basis and use for the
money.
The need is is far greater but
we do anticipate that.
50 million will give us a good
start.
And that when we come back and
deliver the results of that,
we'll be in a position to.
Look at additional funding
moving forward.
Mr. Chairman, I, I would like to
allow for my co-sponsor to also
make a statement.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, committee
The, uh, I guess the question we
should ask ourselves is, uh
when's the best time to plant a
tree?
When's the next best time to
plant a tree today.
And this thing could be the
finished product.
Unfortunately, we have mined.
Um, product that we've used, Mr.
Chairman, that concludes our,
our, and we now stand for
question. Thank you. um.
In the public, uh, show of hands
who's who's here in support of
this bill.
was here in opposition.
OK, so we'll, we'll take uh 3
speakers in support, if you
would like to speak in support,
please step forward.
And you have 2 minutes.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Adela Duran. I represent
3 uranium mining companies, uh,
they have never operated in New
Mexico anticipate that they
might sometime in the future.
Uh, they certainly support house
cleaning up these legacy sites.
I have long advocated on their
behalf that uh they be part of
this solution even though they
did because they can bring a lot
of expertise to the table.
Mr. Chair, with your permission,
I'd like to acknowledge this
one.
Uh, because of his efforts in
this area, he was a friend of
mine, I know, especially
Representative Garcia.
But he really started this
conversation, and yesterday I
went back to look at a bill that
he introduced, and it was, I
found it, it was in $2000.
But the very same uh uh effort
looking for that bill, I found
12 memorials and 7 bills, and
not including the three that
have been introduced just in the
last 10, so I just thought it
was appropriate ones efforts in
getting this conversation
started, even though that was a
decade ago and certainly
representative Hernandez
deserves some applause for in
his very first session, uh, not
to mention following in
representative Allison.
Who, uh, this issue was very
near and dear to his heart. He
was very passionate about
getting these uh uh legacy
sites, cleaning them up well.
Well, help and benefit everyone
in the
Thank you for that and I'll just
add as the prerogative of the
chair, um,
I remember that, Bill.
Uh, that was my freshman year.
And Representative Valcone's
idea was
dirty money to clean up one
site.
And he thought just cleaning up
one site with
He get the progress.
Get the process started and so
shows some progress and clearly
300,000 was never intended to be
enough and wouldn't be enough,
but that was his idea was let's
just start with one.
Yes ma'am.
Uh, cool, let's see him at all
hope, Alicia Chrismatic on my
boota
New Mexico native Eoan. Uh, good
morning, chair and members of
the committee. My name is Alicia
Carris. I am from the Pueblo of
Santo Domingo, and I am a
lobbyist with New Mexico Native
vote. In her work at New Mexico
Native Vote. We interact with
the community members,
especially in the Navajo Nation
and then the Four Corners
region, and, you know, as we
look towards um a beneficial
future for all of our citizens
of New Mexico.
We need to continue to support,
um, a just transition, of
course, and also to work to
protect those that are impacted
by um, you know, our
contaminated sites, you know, as
oil and gas continues to
encroach on our uh tribal lands
and lands that are significant
to our life ways, such as our
sacred sites and the greater
Chaco region, we need to
continue to uh perform
restorative justice and
restorative practices to help
preserve our lifeways.
So I urge your support in this
bill and thank you so much for
those that have been advocating
so far. Thank you.
Good morning, chair and
committee. My name is Susan
Gordon. I am the coordinator for
the multicultural Alliance for
Safe Environment. We represent
in um communities that have been
impacted by the legacy of
uranium mining, the
The um eastern Navajo Dane
against uranium mining, the
redwater pond Road community.
The Bluewater Valley downstream
Alliance and the Laguna Ama
Coalition for a Safe
Environment.
Um, I, we stand in in strong
support of this bill, and I, I
want to point out that this is a
natural outcome of the um bill
passed a few years ago that
created staffing positions
within the Environment
department to focus exclusively
on uranium mining cleanup, and
they, um, the office of
strategic initiatives issued
their final strategic plan for
the uranium mining cleanup in
December. It's an excellent.
Do it identifies many of the
sites that um need cleaning up
in, well, all of the sites that
need cleaning up in New Mexico.
And so, we stand and support
it's past time. Um, I'm happy
that the conversation in has
changed from
Supporting restart of uranium
mining in the state, uh, we are
definitely threatened with some
new initiatives at this point,
but the focus should be on the
cleanup and on the economic um
opportunities that come from
doing cleanup and bringing our
higher ed students into the
uranium cleanup industry. Thank
you.
You Nix will go online if you
please raise your hand if you're
in support of this bill online.
Start with Rose. Go ahead.
Hello, good morning. Um, my name
is Rose Rushing and I'm a
lobbyist with the Western
Environmental Law Center. We're
here today to support HB 333
assessment and cleanup of
contaminated sites, including
and especiallybandoned uranium
sites is desperately needed, uh,
cleanup will be good for New
Mexico communities, health and
longevity.
As well as their opportunity to
just transition, um,
environmental justice as well as
the New Mexico economy, which
has an opportunity to expand
into a cleanup and remediation
sector. Um, this funding
allocation is the important
first step. We'd like to thank
Representative Hernandez for
bringing this to the table.
Thank you all so much for the
opportunity to comment and
strongly here to support for HB
333.
Thank you for your comment.
Next, we'll go to Clara Sims.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
honorable members of the
committee. I'm Clara Sims, and
I'm here representing New Mexico
Interfaith, Power and Light. We
work with faith communities all
over the state of New Mexico,
and we are strongly in support
of HB 333 for the reasons that
people have already uplifted and
especially in solidarity with
the communities on the front
lines who have been impacted by
these industries for decades. So
please do the moral thing and
support the cleanup of these
sites for the well-being of all
our communities.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
You don't see anybody else in
support. Do we have any
opposition online?
All right. Doesn't look like we
have any, so we're gonna go
ahead and go um to the
committee.
First
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives for
presenting this bill and uh Mr.
Roderick.
Thank you.
Um, just a couple of questions,
um, a little bit more background
is uh Adam Chair, uh
representatives, what I'm hoping
to learn. Um, could you remind
me, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative, how many, um,
uh, how many sites are there
approximately in New Mexico.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, as I mentioned earlier,
there are.
Uranium mines, there's about 300
sites or 300 uranium mines which
encompasses about 1000 sites as
each added tunnel is a different
site, emanated sites, we've got
about.
Um, 300 plus identified sites
that are not, this is fuel
spills, everything else.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Um, and what is um do we
have a sense of uh how much it
costs on average to clean up one
site. Could you remind me?
Certainly, uh, Madam Chair and,
and Representative Dixon, so for
the neglected contaminated
sites. I'll use a dry cleaner as
an example.
Depending on the extent of
contamination if it's just in
the sun.
You're looking at somewhere in
the it goes up substantially.
The
With the uranium based on site
by site cases, a dry mine. I
think it's important to note.
Madam Char, thank you. Um, how
will, um, New Mexico Environment
Department prioritize which
sites to begin with.
So we, uh, whenever, as well as
our staff that's working the
rest that this work has been
going on for.
We prioritize the.
The abandoned uranium mine sites
based on proximity to
populations.
Um
You know, what's at risk.
versus a dry sight. The other
neglected contaminated sites
very.
That uh where the syrian.
Watched
You never want to be in a pick
and choose situation because he
is.
You know
Directly by summoning
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Mr. Roderick. You
mentioned, um, a coordinator,
um, at the Environment
department, and I'm wondering,
um, is there funding uh for
appropriate staffing to
implement this. How will that
work?
Madam Chair and and
Representative Dixon so the
legislature has has been good
about funding us for the
position so far.
We have hired additional staff.
The majority of the work, um, we
will.
Add a couple of additional
staff, ultimately up to 5 to
oversee the work.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
thank you. Um, let's see, I
think I just have, uh, perhaps
one more.
question.
Um, Madam Chair, um, and
representatives, what, um, will
there be a process for um
community engagement.
Um, how will, how will
communities be apprised of
progress and.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Representative
Dixon, uh
There, there's been a really um
thorough process with with the
federal government.
Engagement
Uh, Navajo Nation did receive a
settlement from the
Etronics
Uh, known as the Tronic
settlement.
And uh they are um in that
process of cleaning up 200, they
only have enough money for 200
of the 500 abandoned uranium
mines.
And, uh, and I, I have a grown
up going to those community
meetings on on the priority of
of those uh abandoned uranium
mines. It does get um.
You know, a bit technical, but,
uh, there, there has been a lot
of experts in the community who
are able to translate this into
the, you know, into our Navajo
language and so, um, uh, it, it
that's something that I've I've
noticed.
Uh, done
Um, effectively is, is the
communication of, of exactly how
this process will go through,
um, and, and I, I believe, um,
my expert can probably talk
about uh how.
Uh, community engagement works
in other communities throughout
New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Dixon, so.
We, uh
Pretty much everything we do is
in the public eye, and so we are
very cognizant scientists we
identify.
You know, potential cleanups.
We hold public meetings, um.
I think it's important to stress
that it's not just about
cleaning up sites on our own,
the other thing we're doing is
we're looking to see if we can
identify a responsible party.
He
Enjoin us with this cleanup
effort and pay for it.
The other thing we do is we
identify these sites and we
characterize them to see if they
will rise to the level that we
can approach USC essentially as
a Superfund site.
We just successfully did that in
Albuquerque, uh.
facility called the Carlisle Dry
Cleaners where we went in, we
did an investigation, get
involved.
They did so based on the extent
of the contamination and the
impact site.
Unfortunately, I'll give you
this caveat just because it gets
on the list doesn't necessarily
enough timely.
That's what we want to be able
to address these issues far too
long.
And we need to be able to to
To move it if we need to go
after the US EPA. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, thank you, Mr.
Roderick, and thank you
Representatives for bringing
this. I think it's a really
wonderful step and, um,
hopefully the first, uh, sort of
tranche of support.
Uh, in terms of appropriations.
And I look forward to hearing
back on the progress, um, that,
uh, can be made. Thank you.
your representative. Next will
be the co-sponsor, uh
representative Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Hernandez, Representative
Duncan, and Deputy Secretary
Roderick.
I appreciate
The bipartisan effort for this
bill, and I'm so proud to stand
as a co-sponsor with you all.
Happy to hear the support that's
here today.
As you know, I represent
District 69, which covers a lot
of.
Uranium mines, a lot of citizens
that have been impacted.
And for the last 20 years, I've
been good friends with and have
heard directly about the impacts
of this.
And uh Patty Martinez is a
Navajo citizen who was one of
the first people to.
And
Excuse me, traveling my
district, I heard a lot about
this and the need for cleanup,
and so I'm very excited about
what this is gonna do. And just
a few days ago, you all heard
from my visitor association who
were here and they're concerned
about this because their
waterways are contaminated.
When I was out in Lake Valley.
They were unable to use a lot of
their land because of the.
Above ground contamination that
had occurred there in their
waterways as well.
So
On behalf of the Pueblo Vacama
and the Pueblo of Laguna, who I
also represent.
City of Grants and the areas
near us near Milan, I know
they're gonna be very happy to
hear Has, uh, one of my first
questions though is how soon can
we begin efforts will
start this year.
in the process
of one of the mine sites that
we're going to start with.
Actually, I dare to a section
32, it's actual.
And it's on um.
property that's owned by the
state land office.
And so now.
I will say that this is one of
the reasons we chose this was
because it was a little easier
access.
For this initial and and this is
our, our startup of aligning the
contractors we anticipate
starting down at that mine site.
Early in FY 26, so July, August
of this year.
And then we are prepared to
start with the two can carry
side about the same time frame
again we've eaten up sights so
that when we talking about it
and planning for what we need to
show results on the ground.
One of the things that we
anticipate sharing and
representative is it with us
beginning in July.
our progress on these sites.
We believe it's important that
this legislature understands
what
You're getting for the money
they're investing.
And uh
And initially working with the
abandoned injunction with Andre
Minerals and natural resources
department who also has
developed and stood up a
dashboard. You can go to that
and it will show you the status
of sight to your area, breaks it
out by area.
Breaks out property ownership
we're doing the same thing with
the dash contaminated sites
currently on our website,
there's something called the
orphan site report.
That's what we started off
colonies that we've finally get
to neglected contaminated sites.
That particular report though
breaks out what kind of sites
there are where they're at.
So it's, it's a real good tool.
And it's something that will be
enhancing, but we expected it to
have work started.
Early F flight 26 and some of
that work hopefully.
completed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and.
Mr. Roderick, I appreciate that.
I'm very excited to hear that. I
was hopeful that it would begin
this year, I'm very glad to hear
that there's already a plan in
place, um, with that, I just
want to lend my full support and
advocacy for this urge my fellow
committee members to support
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
thank you for, uh,
representatives for bringing
this legislation.
Um
And to the expert, I'm sorry I
didn't catch your name earlier.
Um,
John Roderick, sir.
Well Rick Roderick, Roderick,
OK.
Um
So Mr. Roderick
Um
OK, we're calling these
neglected contaminated sites,
um, and you mentioned 1000 dry
cleaners.
Sights plus how many more sites?
Madam Chair and Representative
Montoya, there's approximately
1000 dry cleaner sites.
Over 300 identified other
contaminated sites consisting of
sides with fuel oil spills,
chemical spills, illegal dump
sites of all types.
OK. Uh, would that include gas
stations, that type of thing,
OK.
So, um,
I'm looking at the request, and
I believe I heard in in
conversation earlier that
Uh
Each one of these sites would be
somewhere between 500,000 to a
to a million dollars to clean up
each site.
Did I miss here?
Madam Chair and Representative
know that, uh, that's the low
end actually.
site cleanups. OK.
So I, I appreciate this bill.
But I, the vast majority of the
folks who stood up in support.
Or it was specifically because
of uranium.
And I know that there is a, a
uranium cleanup fund that has
been in
In place for years and for the
last several years, I know the
fund has been
Completely depleted. There
hasn't been any money in that
fund.
Is there any reason we didn't?
Just run this bill.
To put money in that fund for
uranium cleanup because
As I'm looking at this,
If we have a 1000 sites,
potentially non-uranium sites.
That are to be cleaned up.
Or that could apply for these
funds.
In communities, uh, that 1000.
Dry cleaners.
Sites just alone.
Uh, at 500,000.
Clean up on the low end.
You multiply that out, that's a
$500 million.
Price tag.
That's not including any uranium
sites.
So I'm, I'm a little concerned.
I, I, I like what we're trying
to do here, and I think those
sites need to be dealt with, but
Frankly,
My entire life I've grown up
with.
The, the Navajo legacy.
uranium mines that need
attention.
I would have much more greatly
preferred to see this.
Divert all of this $50 million
to uranium cleanup.
Um, the reality is these other
sites are in cities.
In counties and where there are
a lot more funds.
On the Navajo Nation in
particular, they're not.
Funds for this and frankly, the
federal government has neglected
this and ignored it.
4 years.
Um, so I, I'm
And I, as I was listening to if
I may, Madam Chair, as I was
listening to
Discussion of how things would
be prioritized.
It was going to be in
Priority would be
In correlation to the number of
people affected, and, and my, my
concern with that is if you go
out on the Navajo reservation.
There might not be a high
concentration of people near a
sight.
Um
And yet
Those sites had been
Open vacant for years.
Um
My concern, Madam Chair, is that
That there's not at least a
percentage. I'd like to see at
least 50% of this uh for, for
me, going forward.
If you guys don't address this
on the on the path forward, and
it gets to the floor, I'm gonna
Probably provide an amendment
that at least 50% of this total
$50,000 prioritizes.
uranium mines.
Because I, I think we've heard
this year after year after year,
and of course I've heard it my
entire life of the folks who
During uh
Our, our world wars and, and
rush to
Get nuclear weapons, um, that we
That's a that's the the country.
From the federal government
said, hey, we need uranium. We
need to do this right now. And
so we had people going out
there.
Um
And mines were opened without
any ever any
Actual plan to actually mine
them, but they were just opened.
So I'm, I'm not trying to
put down this legislation. I'm
glad to see this legislation
going forward. And by the way, I
believe those dry cleaners.
Madam Chair, that they need to
be addressed as well.
In my mind
It should be way down the
priority list.
From those open uranium mines.
So I don't know if anybody wants
to respond to that, but that is
a concern I have. I would, I
would have much preferred to
see.
$50 million going towards
Uranium mines because that
Has, hasn't been a blight on New
Mexico.
For years and years and years,
and I, and I'm.
And, and not to be
harsh. I don't mean for this to
sound harsh, but I, I, but I
don't want to see.
Most of these dollars.
Going towards other projects and
not uranium cleanup.
I do not want to see the folks
who
have been waiting for this
cleanup for years and years and
years, see these dollars
diverted away.
And
As we heard today in testimony.
What everybody is concerned with
is uranium mines. So, um, I
don't know if you if if I guess
the question is, why not put
this $50 million just into the
uranium cleanup me chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um.
Representative Montoya, I also
want to let the committee know
as well that that this is a
parallel bill.
With, uh, Senator Steinborn, who
is also carrying.
It, uh, on the Senate side, and
that is Senate Bill 2260.
And uh
um, and, and I, I, I definitely
do, um, uh, um, understand the
urgency for this.
And, and, uh,
I'm gonna have to
Circle back with with uh with.
My co-sponsors.
On, on the bill as well as the
environment department in the
co-sponsors of the Senate
version as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative, I would just, I
would just encourage you.
I know your heart in this is for
the uranium mines.
Um, it's your bill.
If you want the dollars to go to
uranium mines.
Put that in there and you'll get
a lot of support.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Nix is
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives, um,
Deputy Secretary Roderick, I
believe.
Um, I'm very supportive of this
bill and I think it's, it's a
great move for, uh, we need to
clean up all of those types of
legacy sites. I support and
echo, uh, my good friend, uh,
representative Montoya's
comments directed to where you
guys are focused. I totally
support that. And now my
question, um,
We have companies in the state
to have the expertise to do this
and where I'm headed is is that
and if we don't.
Uh, well, I, I
I always see things like
activities like this is is
really good potential jobs,
right?
And so, um, can you talk a
little bit about that and what
that might mean. Um,
As part of this effort. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, allow me to to uh address
that.
So first a little background I
in grants for several years
happily I find myself on the
other side.
There are uh contractors both in
state um workforce solutions and
some of our other state agencies
is working active in San Juan.
expanding it because
As we've talked about the scope
of.
Lifetimes it's gonna take to
clean this up.
We need should be local.
But we need to train them.
Initially, we're likely going to
have to bring in some
contractors. We'll see who bids
on this type of work.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That
concludes my question.
They representative next is
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representatives and experts, I
really appreciate, uh, as you've
heard from other
representatives. I, I fully
support what we're trying to get
accomplished here. Um, the only
reason I, I want to make a
statement is just to echo the
concerns. I would very much.
As this moves forward.
I'd like to see that go to
uranium mines.
Um, so I just wanted to toss
that out there as to what I
would expect, hopefully by the
time it gets to the floor, uh.
Again, as representative Montoya
said, this is y'all's bill. I'm
not.
I would like to see uh.
That move into very much the
uranium.
Mind cleaner, so just wanted to
make this.
And I'd also like to stand in
support of this bill. Thank you
for bringing it. We have, um,
cleanup that needs to be done
all over the state, and I
appreciate you bringing it here.
So I'd like to go to
Representative Obeda for the
motion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to make a motion to.
OK
Uh
Do pass. Thank you.
OK.
You.
Representative Obeda.
Yes.
Representative Dixon, yes.
Representative Garcia.
It was in a gola, yes.
Representative Henry.
Represented Montoya, yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Senator Cortez.
Yes.
Representative Small.
Vice Chairana.
Chemical
happened in this committee, so
thank you.
