this morning in the beautiful
weather, the mountainscape that
reminds us
Of your power and your authority
over all things.
Thank you that your word is as
true today as it was yesterday,
and that you never change.
Laurie just ask that you give us
wisdom.
Prudence
And that we are able to reflect
your will.
And all that we do and say.
And Laura, I just thank you for
health over all of this body,
this incubator here will not
touch us that we're, we're able
to be here and be present and um
pray, pray for your protection
and provision over every family
that's represented here as we're
away from them, and we just
thank you that you provide us
with comfort and, um, with hope
and peace when we ask for it,
and we pray these things in the
name of your risen Son Jesus
Christ. Amen.
gentleman from Donana
Representative Lara, lead us in
the Pledge of Allegiance.
And with the gentleman from San
Juan, Representative Hall
leaders in the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
Jan lady from Bernallio
representative Hogmanby Hill.
Mr. Speaker, I move that we now
go to the next order of
business, uh, announcements and
miscellaneous business is
ordered.
Good morning members. Happy day
too.
Just legislative day -7.
For the new members, you'll find
out real quick what the
legislative day is. Hopefully
quicker than me, I still have
not quite figured that out, but,
um, at any rate, happy, happy
Wednesday, good morning to us,
to you all, uh, just a quick run
of show we will be, uh, doing
some intro, um, this morning we
will break about 1020 or so. I
know there's at least one
committee that's meeting for
organizational purposes and
Um, I also understand that there
are other meetings with uh
respective members and caucuses
and whatnot. So, um, that'll be
the end of business for today,
um, after we break this morning,
um, you do have financial
disclosure statements that are
due at the end of business
January 31st. That will be your
last day to file with the
Secretary of State. Let's go to
your state's office will also be
present in the house lounge on
January 30th and 31st to assist
you all.
In filing those statements
online.
Uh, we also have a doctor of the
day upstairs. The number is
986-479-99864799. They're here
to help support you if you
You know, have the sniffles or,
or lightheaded or whatever, feel
free to go see those folks, um,
and then there's also, there's
also also a social calendar
online uh with some stuff
happening tonight including um
some, uh, celebrations this
evening, and I believe there was
a breakfast this morning with
the judiciary as well, um, so if
you miss that too late, it
already happened, uh, eastern
New Mexico University this
evening as well as the New
Mexico counties, uh, black and
white gay.
Uh
Wow, sounds fancy.
Um, and then also, and you know.
You saw my kids here yesterday
and
Um, they behaved for the most
part, but they did want me to
make an announcement. I promised
I would, so I'm going to, you
don't have to abide by it, it's
totally optional, but they came
up with Spirit Week next week.
Um
And so Monday will be your
favorite sports jersey day. I
don't know how you pull that off
and not violate the dress code,
but
Optional
Right? Optional Tuesday is
throwback day so representative
Lara wear your old suit.
Uh, Wednesday's ugly sweater
day.
Uh, I don't think anyone here
owns any ugly sweaters, I'm
sure. Uh, well, maybe your
representative Hernandez, I
think I might have seen him in
one.
Uh, Thursday is stuffy day which
apparently is like your favorite
stuffed animal.
Um, that one might be easier
because you could just put it on
the desk and Friday's ugly ties
scarf day and representative
Rehm is no longer here, but he
would probably take the prize
for the ugly tie.
Um, anyway, that spirit week
next week totally optional.
Um
I is delivered. There we go.
Um, any other announcements from
the floor.
Perhaps serious announcements.
Represented, uh, the gentleman
from
the Baca, Guadalupe, Roosevelt,
and San Miguel, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Sorry about that, and I might
need to go see the doctor, but.
On your, on your desk, you'll
see a bag of peanuts from
eastern New Mexico University.
We have a great university there
in eastern New Mexico that we're
very proud of our president Mr.
Johnson, you'll see him tonight,
probably if you go to the to the
reception.
Uh
Hope you enjoy your peanuts.
Uh, think about Eastern New
Mexico for your kids when it
comes to education. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you for that.
Gentle lady from Burn Lee or
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and uh
members I just wanna take this
moment to reflect on uh what's
happening in California with the
fires, um, I think that.
incumbent upon us to, I mean
we've had two severe fires that
I remember in the in the past 22
years, um, in uh Mona County
and, uh.
And down south in um.
And uh
I'm remembering, not remembering
the name of the city right now.
Sorry, I haven't had my coffee
yet. um, but down south.
Uh, and I just want us to take
one minute if we can to just
You know, wish that.
The fires will stop and then our
neighbors, um, for whatever it's
worth that we're sending good
vibrations to California.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Thank you Mr. Speaker
lady from Burnley of Herndon.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I would like to take
this moment to invite all
members of the chamber. Tomorrow
morning at 9:15 to room 321 to
meet the residents of La
Vidalena senior living facility.
This is the first time in the
history of the facility that
they have brought residents to
the roundhouse, and they're
looking forward to meeting
members from the chamber. So I
hope you will all stop by, have
some coffee with them, say
hello. Again, that's in room 321
tomorrow.
morning, Thursday, January 23rd,
the, the senior living center
Lavita Yena residence, and thank
you.
Thank you gentle lady.
Any other announcements, gentle
lady from Taos Ruben Ortez.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted
to remind the women of the
house, the gentle ladies, that
there is a dinner tonight at
Restaurant Martin at 6:30. Only
the women.
It's going to be amazing, so
make sure you come.
tonight 6:30.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady.
Remember taking out any other
announcements.
Right, young lady from Berlin
representative how can we be
here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I'm
going to go to the next order of
business, introduction of
legislation.
See, no objection.
It is so ordered.
House Bill 13, introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
An act relating to public
electric public utilities
establishing distribution
systems. That's not what I have
here. Sorry, pause pause sorry
take a break.
up
House Bill 30.
Introduced by Representative
Cates, an act relating to motor
carriers amending and enacting
sections of the motor carrier
Safety Act, providing
requirements for motor carriers
of railroad employees, providing
requirements for the drivers,
vehicles, and equipment of motor
carriers of railroad employees,
authorizing the Department of
Transportation to inspect,
review, audit, and investigate
to ensure compliance with the
motor carrier Safety Act
relating hours of service,
limiting hours of service of
drivers of.
carriers of railroad employees
applying existing safety belt
requirements to all motor
carriers. House Bill 30.
House Bill 30 have been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house
transportation, public works and
capital Improvements Committee,
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee and the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 31, introduced by
Representative Garrett, an act
relating to crime, making the
offense of making a shooting
threat a 4th degree felony.
House Bill 31.
House Bill 31, having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and Public
Affairs Committee.
Thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 32 introduced by
Representative Sareana, an act
relating to schools, providing
school districts the option to
replace school buses with the
electric or zero emission
alternative fuel school buses,
allowing school districts to
enter into agreements for the
use of their electric school
buses as electric energy storage
for providing grid services or
for use by schools. House Bill
32.
I was Bill 32 have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee,
the the House Education
Committee.
House Bill 33 introduced by
Representative Sareana, an act
relating to the environment
prohibiting the construction of
new sources of emissions and
activities relating to oil and
gas in counties where ozone
concentrations are in excess of
the primary national ambient air
quality standards for ozone.
House Bill 33.
House Bill 33 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house.
Energy environment and natural
resources Committee, thence the
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 34 introduced by
Representative Sariana, an act
relating to the environment,
requiring the oil conservation
commission and the Oil
Conservation division of the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department to protect
public health and the
environment. House Bill 34.
House Bill 34. Have been read
twice by Tidal. I order printed
and referred to the house
agriculture and Water Resources
Committee.
The the house energy and natural
resources Committee.
House Bill 35, introduced by
Representative Sareana, an act
relating to the environment,
restricting oil and gas
operations in children's health
protection zones, requiring oil
and gas operators to create a
protection zone inventory and
map requiring oil and gas
operators located in a
children's health protection
zone to develop and implement a
leak response and detection plan
and alarm response protocol and
conduct water quality sampling
and testing.
Suspending oil and gas
operations and children's health
protection zones that are in
violation of the air Quality
Control Act, providing
penalties. House Bill 35.
Is Bill 35 haven't been in it
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
energy, environment, and Natural
Resources Committee, the House
Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 36, introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill.
An act relating to licensing,
amending sections of the
Optometry Act to expand the
scope of practice and provide
the board of optometry with
additional powers and duties.
House Bill 36.
House Bill 36 have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 37 introduced by
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
an act making an appropriation
for a feasibility study to
assess the potential acquisition
by the state of the star axis
sculptural observatory, House
Bill 37.
I think you have to look this
one up.
What is Star Axis?
Mr. Speaker, Star Access is an
amazing art installation, um,
using
Earth
And geography and it is a 45
year project by Charles Ross,
who is an artist, um, near Las
Vegas and you got to go see it
to see, you gotta see it to
know. It's incredible.
the rules.
She was explaining her bill
during introduction.
We were testing you and no one
said anything. Wow, come on
guys. I got away with its
representative block, where are
you?
House Bill 37 have been there
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee and then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 38, introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to crime committing,
creating the crime of unlawful
possession of a weapon
conversion device, providing a
penalty. House Bill 38.
House Bill 38 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
consumer and Public Affairs
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 39 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to children.
Providing access to juvenile
delinquency records for firearm
background checks prohibiting an
adult subject to a juvenile
disposition involving use of a
firearm from receiving,
transporting, or possessing a
firearm or destructive device.
House Bill 39.
OB 39 have been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the house, consumer and
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 40 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to accessibility,
enacting the traveling with
dignity act requiring all
facilities that receive state
funding to install a universal
adult changing stations. House
Bill 40.
House Bill 40 have been read
twice by Tidal is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 41, introduced by
Representative Cates.
An act making appropriations
from the public project
revolving fund to the drinking
water state revolving loan fund.
Local government planning fund
and cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund.
House Bill 4141 have been to us
by title is ordered, printed and
referred to the house rural
development, land grants and
cultural affairs Committee.
The the house appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 42 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
making an appropriation to the
healthcare authority for
providing rate increases to
service providers that receive
reimbursement from certain
Medicaid waiver programs. House
Bill 4242 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 43 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to housing requiring
owners to limit income screening
calculations to the remaining
ratio of income to rent payment
after income from federal,
state, local, or tribal housing
assistance is subtracted from
the total amount of the rent
payment. House Bill 43.
House Bill 43 haven't been read
to us by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
government elections in the
Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 44 introduced by
Representative Block.
An act relating to deceptive
trade practices enacting the
protection of minors from
distribution of harmful material
act defining terms, authorizing
liability, creating a private
right of action. House Bill 44.
House Bill 44 have been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 45 introduced by
Representative Block.
An act relating to taxation,
enacting the renewable energy
production Tax Act imposing an
excise tax on electricity
generated from renewable energy
resources, distributing revenue
from the tax to the severance
tax permanent fund, amending and
repealing certain sections of
the NMSA 1978 and laws 2024,
chapter 41, that enacted the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act to conform the contingent
effective
date and delayed repeal of that
act.
House Bill 45.
House Bill 45 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
energy and natural resources
committee, House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee
and house taxation and revenue
Committee.
House Bill 46, introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
an act relating to the financial
institutions amending the
definition of health-related
equipment by removing real
property, clarifying the
application of the tax exemption
for real property first
purchased, acquired, leased,
financed, or refinanced prior to
July 1st, 2025, with the
proceeds of bonds issued
pursuant to the hospital
equipment loan Act. House Bill
46.
added poorly in property class
in law school, so give me a
second.
All right, here we go. 46
haven't been written to by title
is order printed and referred to
the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House taxation and revenue
Committee.
House Bill 47 introduced by
Representative de la Cruz, an
act relating to property tax,
amending certain property tax
exemptions for veterans to
reflect changes made to the
exemptions pursuant to
constitutional amendments
approved by voters at the
November 5, 2024 general
election. Expanding the
definition of veteran in one of
the exemptions. House Bill 47.
House Bill 47 have been read
twice by Tidal is ordered
printed and referred to the
house.
Government election in Indian
Affairs Committee, thence the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee.
House Bill 48, introduced by
Representative Lundstrom. An act
relating to law enforcement,
amending the law enforcement
Protection Fund, providing funds
for certified law enforcement
training at state-supported
community colleges and certain
institutions of higher learning,
making an appropriation. House
Bill 48.
I was Bill 48, have made it
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 49 introduced by
Representative Borego, an act
relating to disability
accommodations, enacting the
closed captioning Act requiring
places of public accommodation
that display television
programming to provide closed
captioning, requiring the
Attorney General to enforce the
closed captioning Act, providing
penalties. House Bill 49.
House Bill 49 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 50, introduced by
Representative Borego, an act
relating to crime, providing
that multiple violations of
unlawful taking of, embezzlement
of fraudulently obtaining or
receiving or transporting stolen
vehicles or motor vehicles
applied towards sentencing
regardless of which section of
law was violated previously.
Providing penalties. House Bill
50.
As Bill 50 have been in it twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the House consumer
and Public Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 51 introduced by
Representative Saraana, an act
relating to taxation, creating
the energy storage system income
tax credit, creating the energy
storage system corporate income
House Bill 51 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House Energy
and Natural Resources Committee,
the the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
Hm
House Bill 52 introduced by
Representative Garcia.
An act relating to taxation,
expanding the rural healthcare
practitioner tax credit to
include additional eligible
healthcare practitioners. House
Bill 52.
House Bill 52 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house.
to the house obviously rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee and
then the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 53 introduced by
Representative Herndon.
An act making an appropriation
to the healthcare authority to
ensure that healthcare providers
who provide vagus nerve
stimulation to Medicaid
recipients are fully reimbursed
for their services. House Bill
53.
House Bill 53 have been twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 54 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to public schools
requiring every high school to
install an automated external
defibrillator requiring all high
school employees to be trained
in the use of automated external
defibrillators. House Bill 54
have been twice by titles or
reprinted and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, the the House
Education Committee.
House Bill 55 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to labor requiring the
healthcare authority to set a
minimum Medicaid fee schedule
for reimbursing personal care
services requiring at least 70%
of Medicaid reimbursement for
personal care services to be
used for compensating direct
care workers, making an
Is Bill 55 have been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 56, introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to healthcare requiring
the Secretary of Health Care
Authority to ensure that
Medicaid reimbursement for
services provided at birth
centers is the same as
reimbursement for services
provided at hospitals. House
Bill 56.
House Bill 56 have been read to
us by title is ordered, printed
and referred to the House Health
and Human Services Committee,
then the House Commerce and
Economic Development Committee.
House Bill 57 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
relating to family law
recognizecognizing the right of
alleged domestic abuse victims
to be represented by an attorney
in legal matters related to the
domestic abuse or the domestic
House Bill 57 haven't been there
twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House government election in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
House Judiciary Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
How's Bill 58 introduced by
Representative Herndon, an act
making appropriations to the
public education department to
support mental health training
and wellness programs in schools
across the state. House Bill 58.
House Bill 58 have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 59 introduced by
Representative Lujan.
An act relating to wage access,
enacting the earned wage access
Services Act, providing powers
and duties of the financial
institutions division of the
regulation and licensing
department, providing for
licensure of earned wage access
services providers providing for
denial, suspension, or
revocation of licenses,
providing for hearings and
appeals requiring examinations
and investigations, setting
conditions and restrictions,
providing exemptions from the
Act, granting a
Exclusive jurisdiction to the
state requiring annual reports,
prescribing a penalty. House
Bill 59.
How's Bill 59 haven't been read
twice by tidal disorder printed
and referred to the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, the the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 60 introduced by
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to artificial
intelligence enacting the
artificial intelligence Act
requiring notice of use,
documentation of systems,
disclosure of algorithmic
discrimination risk and risk
incidents, providing risk
management policies and impact
assessments providing for
enforcements by the State
Department of Justice and for
civil actions by consumers for
injunctive or declaratory
relief. House Bill 60.
According to chat GBT.
House Bill 60 has been read
twice by title and it should go
to the House Consumer and Public
Affairs Committee and then the
House Judiciary Committee, Chat
GBT said that.
House Bill 61, introduced by
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to consumer protection,
amending definitions and the
unfair Practices Act, increasing
the civil penalty for violations
to that act. House Bill 61.
House Bill 61 have been twice by
title is ordered, printed and
referred to the house commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 62 introduced by
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to civil investigative
demands establishing a uniform
investigative demand procedure,
making technical and conforming
changes amending, repealing, and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978. House Bill 62.
62.
How's 62. I haven't been there
twice by title.
His order printed and referred
to the House government election
and Indian Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 63 introduced by
Representative Andreas Romero.
An act relating to public school
finance, making changes to the
public school funding formula,
increasing the basic program
unit for 6 to 12th grades
defining the family income index
rate, changing the at-risk
program unit calculating the
at-risk index for charter
schools on their membership
after the first year of
operation.
Creating an English learner
program unit providing a hold
harmless provisions for formula
changes, making appropriations,
House Bill 63.
Bill 63.
We're gonna we're gonna
63, haven't been twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house.
Education Committee then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 10 introduced by
representatives.
Gallegos Javier Martinez
Armstrong, Matthews, and De la
Cruz, an act relating to law
enforcement establishing the
enforcement bureau within the
regulation and licensing
department, and acting in a new
section of the cannabis
Regulation Act providing for
enforcement, providing
penalties, making an
appropriation. House Bill 10.
Is Bill 10 have been read twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House commerce
and Economic Development
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Memorial One, introduced
by Representative Ferrari.
Memorial proclaiming January 29,
2025 as New Mexico food and
Farms Day in the House of
Representatives in celebration
of community food and farm
initiatives toward ending hunger
and strengthening the statewide
food system, House Memorial one.
How's Marty One have been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
House Memorial 2 introduced by
representatives Garrett and
Baca.
A memorial requesting the
legislative education Study
Committee to assemble an
education data governance and
artificial intelligence working
group to study and recommend a
structure for improved statewide
education data governance and
policies to address artificial
intelligence. House Memorial 2.
Uh,
how's Memorial 2. Haven't been
twice by title.
This is a very controversial
one, so I had to like, take my
time and figure out exactly
where this is gonna go.
I was gonna do 5 committees, but
I'm only gonna do 1. How's
education committee?
House Joint Resolution 1,
introduced by Representative
McQueen, a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
Article 4, Section 5 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
provide that each regular
session of the legislature shall
not exceed 45 days. Remove the
restrictions on bills that may
be considered in even-numbered
years and provide for
consideration of veto overrides
for bills of a regular special
or extraordinary legislative
session within the same
biennium.
He joint resolution one.
How's your resolution one?
Haven't been there twice by
Tidal or printed and referred to
the House government election
and Indian Affairs Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Joint Resolution 2
introduced by Representative
McQueen. A joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
Article 4, Section 22 of the
Constitution of the New Mexico
to provide that all bills passed
by the legislature and not acted
on by the governor will become
law and to require veto messages
on all bills vetoed in whole or
in part by the governor. House
joint resolution 2 joint
resolution 2 have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House.
Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 3
introduced by Representative
Ferrari. A joint resolution
proposing to amend the
Constitution of New Mexico by
adding a new section of Article
2 that provides the people of
the state with environmental
rights, including the right to
clean and healthy air, water,
soil, and environments, healthy
native flora, fauna, and
ecosystems, a safe climate and
the preservation of the natural,
cultural scenic and healthful
qualities of the environment and
direct
8 counties and municipalities to
serve as trustees of the natural
resources of New Mexico for the
benefit of all the people. House
Joint Resolution 3.
How's your resolution 3? Have
you been there twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee, the
House Energy, Environment and
Natural Resources Committee and
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 4
introduced by Representative
Alan Martinez, a joint
resolution proposing to amend
Article 12 of the Constitution
of New Mexico by repealing
Section 6 and adding a new
section 6 to replace the current
public education commission with
the state board of education
that appoints a superintendent
of public instruction to carry
out the policies of the board
and to provide by law for an
independent state chartering
authority for state chartered
charter schools.
House Joint Resolution 4.
How's joint resolution 4 have
been there twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the House government election
Indian Affairs Committee, the
House Education Committee and
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 5
introduced by Representative
Eleanor Chavez, a joint
resolution proposing to amend
the constitution of New Mexico
by adding a new section to
provide for the creation of the
children, youth and families
department, a children, youth
and families Commission and an
executive director to assume the
management and operations of the
children, Youth and Families
Department and enforce the laws
under the department's
jurisdiction.
How joint resolution 5. How's
joint resolution 5 have been
written by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee, the
House Health and Human Services
Committee in the House Judiciary
Committee.
Uh, members, House Bill 52,
which we read in a little bit
earlier, um, I messed up on the
first committee. I, I announced
that he would go to the House
Rural Development Land grants
Cultural Affairs Committee, the
the House Taxation Revenue
Committee, it should go to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee, thence the House
Taxation and Revenue Committee.
This is the bill around rural
health care, um, tax credits,
so, uh, if there's an objection
to that, I will make that change
at this time.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
No,
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business so ordered.
Are there announcements?
OK.
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Your
house transportation, public
works and capital improvements
Committee will meet tomorrow at
9 o'clock. It's an organizing
meeting on room 309.
Thank you. Numbers take note,
gentlemen from Santa Fe.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker of the
House Energy and Environment and
Natural Resources Committee will
have an organizational meeting
tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock in
room 315, uh, assuming we don't
have a floor session scheduled
for that time 9 o'clock, 3:17.
Young lady from Berlio.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The
House Health and Human Services
Committee will be meeting in
room 307, 10 minutes after we uh
leave the floor
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, rural
development land grants and
cultural Affairs Committee will
be meeting at 9 a.m. tomorrow
morning and 3:09, uh, for an
organizational meeting and for
some presentations from some of
our, um, agencies. Thank you.
note gentle lady from Aila San
Juan. Thank you Speaker.
state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee will
have an organizational meeting
10 minutes after floor this
morning.
Number signal generated from
Donana.
Room 305. Generally from Donana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your
consumer and public affairs
Committee will have an
organizational meeting tomorrow,
10 minutes after we're off the
floor in the afternoon at one
and we're not sure about the
room, our usual um committee
room.
Members take note, gentle lady
from Taos.
I thank you, Mr. Speaker, your
house agriculture as sekias and
Water Resources Committee will
be having an organizational
meeting tomorrow morning at 9
a.m. in room 315.
Members take note gentle lady
from Los Alamos. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Speaker, uh, just a reminder
for the body that we, the House
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting today at 1:30 in room
309. It's an organizational
meeting, Mr. Speaker, thank you
gentlemen from Donana. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. Your House
appropriations and Finance
Committee will be meeting at
1:30 p.m. today in room 307.
Members take notes. Any other
announcements.
OK
With that, that'll conclude our
floor session for the day. Uh, I
hope you have a good committee
meetings and other standing.
Commitments you may have this
afternoon.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:00 a.m. tomorrow morning.
Thank you, members. Great day
today, great morning. The House
will send in recess until 10
a.m. tomorrow morning.
