But we've got a lot to do today
so thanks to the members that
are you're here today at eight
thirty bridge it can take.
Representative brown
representative day like cruise.
Representative harper
representative johns
representative latter.
Representative lines
representative madrid.
Representative peter group
representative romaro.
Mrperiod vice chair.
Madam chair
thank you i'm we're actually
going to begin this morning with
the district six presentation
miss vega.
All right.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee rick video
again department transportation
and we're here this morning to
present district six first and
then we'll go on to district
five a little later if we have
some more time mister bresh will
be here shortly so madam chair
with that said all at least a
tiger from here she as you know
she is our district engineer and
a letter introduced yourself
thinking manager.
Committee members my name is
lisa became the district six
engineer thank you this morning
for the opportunity to present
district six is located in the
and western new mexico and I
think everybody has a hand out
so on page one
we have a a map that shows are
boundaries we have two hundred
and fifty positions and a
currency vacancy rate.
On this page there's also a
breakdown of our budget
responsibility so I just wanted
to point out that with inflation
and aging facilities the
operating budget that shown here
is is really no longer
sufficient to address all of our
needs that the district so after
reviewing our operating budget
yesterday I
saw that were projecting
actually a shortfall about.
The.
Just for example we have raymond
kim all the patrols that are
having issues with both their
water and sewage systems are
various other patrols and crues
are having prob.
And unfortunately we're just
not.
On this page we also kind of
show our construction contract
me.
And then moving on to.
And so for the sake of time i've
only included health bill to
section nine fun star.
Here you can see that we do have
a contraction funds for allison
quarter however due to inflation
we are actually not fully funded
we need an.
The second project there is a
local lea.
Ah the third project there is
complete and that last project
is new mexico to sixty four and
it's it's shown here at twenty
million dollars so we did do a
study a quarter stay for that.
And those saw the remaining
funds after the study was
complete we used to actually
put.
And that was recently
advertising honestly that
project.
So we were able to make it hold.
So moving on to the laws of
twenty twenty two we have all of
those.
Twenty twenty three we've done a
really good job of about already
expending an income bringing a
lot of those funds we do have
those project.
Starting in the spring and being
complete at the spring as well
and that last project is local
lead with the city of album i'm
sorry grants.
I'm page three these are the
districts ongoing construction
projects and are completed con.
Yeah.
We have last year's contract
maintenance.
And what shown in the l.
And then we have this year's
fiscal your twenty twent.
Completed.
You know six we do get sno.
I moving on.
Projects that are currently
listed in our stip for the
fiscally constrained years.
You can see I included also the
phase which either c o n is
construction
right away and cons.
There's and these are some of
the p.
Page number seven i've listed
additio.
I forty quarter study.
On the bottom there we ha.
On page numb.
So what we're trying to do.
The bottom of the page we have
are.
Items of a.
Stand up and now.
Chip engineer.
The.
Good morning general mera.
I now go back to the committee.
How much they are.
You know that the food
madam chair and vice chair if I
could please on the equipment so
right now snow trucks and it's
not just the dump truck manager
and and vice share it's actually
comes with the spreader in the
plow so it's fully a.
So there's a lot of add ons that
that we that we put on the ten
yarder to make it hole
yeah right now with the prices
still were probably heavy iron
we're probably talking three
hundred and thirty thousand but
tell me all the electronics on
it.
The.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Thank you represented grecial
next week the representative
brown.
I s.
Is the number of bridges in.
So they're all reaching their
maximu.
Matter in misvegas so.
Yeah.
Are the designs so.
Sometimes there is a.
However the the br.
To standard as well.
Representative.
Yeah.
I like to ask.
Representative.
I apologize but i'm sure
representative we talk about the
study the I forty study or yeah
the I forty study when you all
presented that in front of the
interim transportation.
Madame chair rips in blunt from
thank you for that question
right now we're in the process
of are moving to basically what
we call fees be of that study
i'm identifying projects to
prioritize I believe the
consultants that presented for
you all in november identified
several on geometric
efficiencies some areas that
could be addressed at the
interchange locations with
extending on an off rounds that
would help with a lot of the
conflicting issues and problem
reduce some of those accidents
that require that incident
management where we have
significant delays on the design
side we're working in during
that we can keep two lanes of
traffic open during construction
at all times and we're trying to
do our best during operations
with maintenance activities as
well so we should be seeing a
list of priorities the
priorities projects around
midsummer and the summer time
frame will be ready to start
then developing those projects
and that are identified on the
other identified as top
priorities so what you're
telling.
Some matter representative lunch
from what what really is going
to identify the need is that
we're it's that it's a data
based study right it's going to
be when we do not have to
address incidences or we don't
reduce our capacity because of a
maintenance or construction
activities the data shows that
the capacity is there the
proposal for the consultants
allows us to
move to a three lane very
quickly with the hand enhanced
to enhanced to lane excuse me
that's being proposed so as I
forty corridor those three lanes
are needed we can quickly
develop those projects and scab
on that extra at that extra lane
as the data as you know is the
volumes require let me ask you.
The.
Yeah madam chair representative
lunchtime the study is going to
guidance with the best
alternatives to present really I
mean we're going to develop our
our projects based on the data
and the alternatives that we
identify armed through the study
processes are very regimented
processors location studies
procedures follow with one very
restrictive guidelines as far as
the need per process goes and we
are developed or alternatives to
ensure that the purpose of need
for the project regardless of
what it is or met in this case
it's it's ensuring that we can
keep our capacity words needed
for the current volumes that are
out there and.
Does the staff make that
decision.
But one of the points are just
been.
But I just.
Offers from that prob.
Want to do that.
I know that trying through.
They've asked about.
But i.
That came out of.
My question is as i'm going
through all of the.
There are.
When we do a official crossing
it involves.
Yeah.
And lunch so we went through an
exhaustive process to identify
the ten topped in basic
locations where we have my
migration of large animals where
we've had the most accidents i'm
so it's based on accident data
migration patterns we worked
with game and fish and to
identify those those areas that
needed um game crossings are
fight used by fifteen cuba was
number one and that's why that
project was developed and we are
just recently when it after some
grant applications it was highly
received unfortunately.
So.
The state of new m.
Madame chair and representative
I don't think we've really had a
much more madam since that
discussion I know representative
allison is pushing the bill or
moving to build forward to this
legislature this regard to
cattle crossings in the cleaning
of those categories and I think
he's asking for five million
dollars for the general fund to
do that I haven't read the bill
and some time better if there's
some if it's gonna come through
us or through the counties but I
think there's a couple of things
what you talk about one of them
is currently an enemy c
the applicant whoever is going
to tie into a state facility or
That stop out and also provide
anything that that comes with it
meaning coverts cattle guards
fencing those types of things
that the responsibility of the
owner so we'd have to really
talk about how we're going to
get around in a message and we
do have some agreements with
some locals that we do clean him
clean out their call not only
their covers but their calibers
as well but it's not something
we try to do because once we too
was or twice then we all know
right and that we have to go
back every year so we highly
rely on the counties in the
private owners and the cities
when the support is to make sure
that they take care of those
themselves on there are times
when we do step in just because
a safety
you know with cattle and other
things that will get in there
will do it but it's just not.
Really not in our wheel house.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And i'm sure you have less than
twelve two.
President of you do you see that
you're getting a second crack at
district three today as well.
Thank you for the presentation
and.
Madam chair
this question.
As the questions were comi.
The
where the s.
What I didn't hear.
Yeah.
Madam chair and and presenters
that may be part of
representative less from and
garcia's.
Manager representative
appreciate that so as you're
where we are we follow our
location studies procedures when
we develop our projects and we
identify a host of alternatives
little just the stated purpose
in need of that particular
project as part of that we use
contact sensitive design
solutions.
I'll bring in the public and
stake holders get their
Right non recommendations per se
but we incorporate their
comments with they see on a day
to day base as the communities
and everyday users of those
facilities and incorporate in
identify alternatives that will
address some of those concerns
as well typically our projects
are going to be addressing
safety issues or added capacity
issues for instance like I forty
but we do enter into a robust
public engagement public
involvement that we do we had a
couple during we've already had
a couple of public and involved
in meetings and we're having
we're gonna have another public
involvement meeting to engage
all the stakeholders along that
core door and garner more
comments and try to help
identify some of the solutions
that they're looking for as well
but that in a not showers is
kind of how we try to get
engage the public and
stakeholders through our
development process.
Yeah.
The.
Manager to do yes i'm we had
identified with the total cost
is for the right now the
recommended alternative which is
an enhanced tooling versus what
a fourth relaying
alternative would cost to do
those costs where were provided
one thing or or twist to that is
you know the federal
participation will only go so
far as what is needed per the
with the datas providing or
giving us dumb so anything
beyond that would really go
beyond with the federal would
our ethics will be a division
office would participate in i'm
something I think it's about I
wonder if I remember correctly
we're talking about three
quarters of a billion dollar
difference between the full
three lane versus the enhanced
two maybe a billion but right
around that ballpark.
Madame chair and david with
respect to that.
Process.
The.
A medicare and preparable so
just to make sure i'm
understanding a quick correct
Necessary identifiable return on
investment for them
you know typically in other
states that are allowed to
holding for instance that's
where you'll see those types of
projects
we've entered in the cause I p
three projects I think the most
recent example would be harless
would be in sf
um and probably our best example
would be the jag war five ninety
nine interchange here in sanify
that was completely privately
funded but dot had oversight
but again I think you know that
was developed driven there there
was definitely some some
interest in getting access to
those parcels for him so
without that type of
identifiable return on
investment for for a private
equity to come in on a forty I
don't know how he would leverage
peop.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you.
My colleague.
Could probably provide you some
economic.
Madame charge a four more
question h a.
Equipment needs we ha.
The.
Manager and representative
pedigree that's a good question
i'm currently we're looking to
electrify probably are
sedantly sore engineers in our
technicians can use a electric
vehicle to go out to the project
for example for the day but as
far as the bigger trucks
anything from half ten and
afternoon up a walk in continue
remained with the gas for now
i'm as you know the heavy iron
yellow wire that's always gonna
be there for some time but um
notifications and interesting
one I think will start with our
sit out of fleet and they will
work out as we as we can I think
availability electric trucks is
going to be an issue as well.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you very much for that
might I suggest an add on for
your tr.
We don't have anybody next to
the list just have a couple of
comments for you one question of
comments or i'm sorry by.
Thank you madame chair
that study with the united
states.
Where are these people from the
did the sta.
Madam chair representing the
search parameter to the local
engineering firm they're based
out of albuquerque.
Okay good you know I want to
commissioner meeting in us
you're a while back and me madam
chair they didn't include laguna
rackma none of these people that
are.
What was that do you know
madame chair representative let
me look into that that doesn't
sound right to me I think when
we
are advertised any public
involvement public meetings we
do our best to make sure we can
list the area and ensure that
all that notifications provided
to all stakeholders so that
comes that I am not saying that
that didn't have bleming
checking to that and see if that
was in fact the case arm and how
that those public meetings were
advertised because we could
probably learn from that and do
a better job of advertising for
those communities beyond what we
normally do.
And I think that madame cherkaza
you not optimal governors of
accommodate and they were not in
the conversation and that what
they're telling you know but
anyway.
Did you know but i'm cheer from
the one fourteen to the one
forty there is no furnish road.
That from
a way to put it I mean not to
but go to a one twenty six.
No i'm sorry all with the one
forty.
And then if you look back from
the eighty nine to the ninety
six.
And then if you look here
further back from the thirty
three to the forty nine
and you know you guys are well
well that action we just had a
couple weeks.
And you don't wanna went to the
commission
you know there was a lot of we
don't know.
Cause you know we we really need
to look at this and not only our
part of the steve lot of.
But we really would I heard that
media.
The.
Like well reviewed long trunks
at the one of four three days in
one place to wider shoulders or
whatever to fix it and we're not
fixing anything.
You know we'll be here.
Or five years from now we won't
be here maybe I will but
but wouldn't other people going
to be having the same
conversation and we really need
to address these issues and I
know that.
The.
You are looking at that we
with that madam character one.
Hello the city a grata I had a
conversation with the secretary
it has a city a grand come up
and done that they're part of
what you need to do to.
Egg I know that I know the
district is doing but is the
city actually handing in the
paperwork and they need to do it
because general there's two
point seven million dollars
city.
Of course yeah I just have one
question for you misfake a page
two.
I think I believe you said on
the two sixty four project that
the study was completed and then
some additional money was put
toward the construction of that
project does that correct or is
that another project on that
list matte.
On that same project it.
Million dollars.
I'm thinking mistake can you
confirm can you confirm why or
was there one particular factor
that really.
Added to that additional.
The.
Okay thank you and just up a
quick comment i'm very much
appreciate you the inclusion of
design and projects in this
report.
On having more projects
designed.
Us in knowing where we are in
the appropriations process for
these types of.
Do the same so thank you very
much the report and I think that
concludes for this district can
we have
mister brassour b.
All right but i'm sure
we have mister paul brusher this
morning he's going to present to
you the district five.
Presentation that he was going
to he was going to provide you
all last week so we're gonna go
heading with the district five
year questions for district
three or district five we can
fill those at the end of the
other presentation so with that
manager and members I will turn
over to mister paul breasts
thank you
very much and paul bressure from
the district five engineer.
I had last.
We love to throw away paper once
we're done with it so my
apologies but we could have
another copy
recycling it's all involved.
Apparently members there in your
binders actually.
Matter of chair weather hending
these out let me tell you what
they are is
january eleventh made a
presentation to the
department transportation
transportation commission in
this.
So I thought what I would do.
Didn't have the pages number.
Easy to follow.
Let me launch in it on the front
page you will see
we're district five years
geographically how it's carved
out of the state and the shape
that it takes of what it
includes
we have a transportation
commissioner mister tom taylor
who is in farmington but who.
Overseas for us this district
five I am the disregard engineer
on the next sheet this is just a
synopsis of district five
district five incumbents is
as within its boundaries the
counties of san want reariba
taus los alamos and a fair and
torrents counties.
There are also seventeen local
governments there eleven tribal
governments there are eighteen
state representative districts
who
a piece of which is all her part
of a district five a twelve
state senate districts that to.
The.
We have the five thousand three
hundred seventy five lane miles
of a road over
and there over an area of about
nineteen thousand square miles.
The inspect five hundred six
bridges with three rest areas
twenty three maintenance patrols
and we do the satisfied
construction officers there's a
summary in the same sheet of our
budget are operating budget of
twenty seven and half million
dollars I will read you all the
numbers.
But let me highlight that we
have it because we have under
construction two hundred and
seventy one million dollars.
In construction right now.
We have a contract maintenance a
a bigger eight million dollars
feels fly ten million dollars we
have money for striping signing
we do restaurant area
improvements and
then a routine
rest area maintenance and feel
supplies to do this.
We have a staff of support staff
for forty seven positions who
work in the office and
headquarters in santa fe here
and we make a step hundred and
ninety five positions and
construction their sixty six.
The engineering side nineteen
positions for a total.
And really quickly if you turn
the page you will see these the
photographs into which I said
you had good people and we're
fortunate to have these good
people we have a have you had
martinez who is the assistant
discussion for engineering with
salary reversal engineer the
assistant discuss your
construction james me here who
is the assistant distinct issue
for maintenance then we have
julian casadashour business
manager.
And those are the four areas
there's the insuring support the
design to construction and a
maintenance and the jimmury is
our.
Let me launch in if I may have
secretary in a couple of the
projects you're the next
the following pages are
photographs of.
Projects that I highlighted to
the commission
this is right now the sys.
Ship project here the
reconstruction of it twenty five
through on the labor hotel I had
a construction and going quite
well actually but a mile of
construction and you can see
it's around forty plus forty one
million dollars.
The
construction has started right
now for winter but it'll resume
as soon as you get a reliable
temperate weather
but we've managed to keep two
lanes each way open for traffic
the following page
i've got a bridge and to make
sure ninety six now this is east
of gainer this is west of abeque
and I just give you a feel for
the size of the.
Took a shot of the beam there to
give you a
feel for the the magazine the
construction of placing a large
beam over a flowing stream we
are if we turn the page
following pages are in the mixed
sixty eight project now this
runs in the vicinity of our sale
call day now this is north of
spinella and it's the south of
malaria on the road that takes
you to task.
And it is a reconstruction of
about all the probably eight
miles a little re.
The active construction right
and the following page and I
apologize for having to pay the
numbers but the falling pages
couple shots were project in the
house.
Does the especially difficult
project because it has a lot of
utilities dating back to the
nineteen thirties very very
narrow rights of way with.
Fronting on the road needing
access the the unfortunate
circumstances that there are a
lot of
utilities who's location
alignment placement and even
purpose sometimes it's unknown
but the same time we lost this
project while the
the nation was
undergoing the ravages of this
virus and a lot of the
businesses had to close once we
start the construction here they
go they open up for business and
there we are under construction
we're doing the best we can to.
Finish this project.
Out of work right now for winter
will resume when the temperate
weather reliable to.
The next sheet is a is a shows
that bridge preservation project
and you sixty four this is.
We are pretty approached to
bridge was settling we had to go
coming to rebuild it
another project on the sheet is
never for three forty four this
is north of edgewood.
And just take a piece of bridge
a road rate reconstruction we
had to do together with the
brace replacement or box covered
the next sheet it's a project
that is currently at a
construction and it is the
it's the road in front of the
courthouse in tier maria right
now we pulled off for winter we
will come back to construction.
Are a huge project forces on us
sixty four right now we just
launched in.
The reconstruction of US sixty
four between the arizona state
line and ship rock as twenty two
miles and we're taking this down
in five phases of the design was
somewhere difficult and the
funding was especially
complicated to compile but we
have got it and we started with
the construction.
Bridge now this is about eight
miles inside.
We also not shown on this
because it just launched was the
the eight mile stress seven
point eight miles from arizona
to this br.
To start in and so we're going
to take this road out twenty two
miles or so we're going to take
it down in probably five phases
and will be added through.
Rough to after a good start it's
a pretty heavily traveled road
too lanes narrow of front with
the potholes in
you know distress failure.
At the bottom of the page at
same page of the robbery
reconstruction we're doing we're
working on five fifty this is
north of ad.
First bit there will be more to
come we pulled out for winter
but will come back.
Moving out of the next major
construction projects we have
to eighty five.
This project is north of
the address.
You're on the road it takes you
to to eighty five takes you to
colorado we have reconstruction
of individual forty one this is
north of galisdale it is between
us twenty five.
And it is it's a widening to add
shoulders and total
reconstruction of the root again
suspended for whether this is
the thing about district five
with northern latitude and so
forth we suffer the ravages
winter more on that later but we
have to pull off for
construction so we don't have a
we don't have a
particularly lo.
So this is what we have in
the next sheet is this table
that I prepared in these are the
projects that are under.
That is how I arrive if you look
at the sum of the bottom of her
river two hundred seventy one
billion.
Only showed highlighted a few of
them with photographs but
this is these are the projects
we have we have going on right
now and they are distributed
geographically pretty much
throughout the entire district
now this is what we're working
on if you go to the next sheet
which is a title it's projects
that we have in development
right now and so what I have is
by letting you.
That we're working on right now
and if you look at the bottom
there you'll see that that will
be working right now told us
three hundred thirty million
dollars over with up that blast.
Through the last letting period
of twenty twenty eight and here
again.
Throughout the state those that
are letting in in which shown is
living at twenty twenty four
that you are sixty.
Showing their use.
Coming along in will be the next
will be the next phase of the
sixty four project.
We have more US sixty four that
you'll see coming up in twenty
twenty five.
Usa probably so you're noticed a
US root so we do have we do have
new mexico rates while read it
there more in the twenty twenty
six year you'll see the couple
of fa.
These are projects that were
working on right now if you turn
the page i.
Took the photographs of some of
our maintenance projects uh.
Spive twenty two is the road it
takes you from
to the colorado state line and
so we.
How do please recycling on that
new mexico one seventy three is
the router.
Never done.
The next page
if you were following along this
is US sixty four
in the best vicinity of charmer.
Yes a lot of traffic on these
roads in.
We're we managed to g.
Respecting the best we can do
the need for.
People to get.
It is that as.
The next other next.
Project this is getting close to
the co.
The.
A new mexico three forty one
project.
This is.
The.
This is it's very many
pretty mile miles markers right.
The north central
area of three forty one serving
largely.
And for residents along the way
but erode it
touched.
We went back in.
Stripe it so that people are not
a stay in our lane now another
mainless project so we got a
piece of US 64 and.
Santa fe up to the santa fe ski
area but there are four g here
on some of these maintenance
projects right here well I
mentioned about the weather ago
everybody talks about the
weather but only do your t does
something about the weather and.
The magnitude of the problem
here we not only have a short
construction season we have a we
have about his like the winter
season as you can get in in new
mexico and so you'll see that if
I twenty three we ploud
four hundred and seventy four
thousand.
Four hundred thirty five past
miles at his tracing back and
forth plowing four hundred
seventy four thousand mouses one
of the significances of that is
that.
First ball we're taking care of
business are keeping the roads
open for people best we can
secondly it's a lot of wear tear
on that equipment so that
equipment in one season gets
four.
Certain amount of overtime
there's risk to the employees.
Because at night in the dark
unlit as you can see and if you
look at that that photograph the
lower left hand corners give you
feel for how the snow can pack
up on you that she was sixty
four between three spielders and
your maria and that road right
now unfortunately today as we
speak is closed for this kind of
snowfall that we that's that's
what we deal with you see a
blower tossing that's that's not
after the side and this gives
you feel for the bag to the
effort it so we do is when it
when it event like this happens
we have as many two hundred
people out of here.
A hundred percent for twelve
hours shift they go from
midnight to new.
You can imagine what the problem
is you're driving down the road
and it's not.
And
you know we have almost a
hundred miles of interstate in
this district here and and so.
What that means is we traced
back and forth and there's two
lanes in three lanes in each
direction through most of it so
you can imagine the effort that
it takes in
staffing and mechanical.
Get from one into the district
to the.
Have a hard time keep it up to
snow so I have says the this
because this is where
maintenance
people are doing when they're
not chip.
Bending fences and pla- patching
poths if you go to the next
sheet it's it's a table that are
prepared and it shows our
maintenance projects.
Been working on
this is where they are here
again geographically distributed
pretty thoroughly throughout the
state are upcoming projects this
is at the bottom this is what we
tend to be working on when
temperate whether returns to us
wheel of here again will be we
will.
Be glad to talk about talk about
them then we have we help out
with local government funding
and this is where the local
government money goes on.
There you go to coops the
minutes will coops the school
district co op's charity
arterial program school bus
route program and me to sport
program and so we take what
money we have and distributed
that the following sheet by the
way or on a on a s.
If you go to the next page we
have also the transportati.
Where the money is.
City a bloomfield santa fe sam
one county towards county
question so forth.
The ninety five percent station.
Contributing it about a half a
million dollars.
Now the following sheet
is just a map of the
sketch I put together for the
local government road fund and
where the money is spent in you
know geographically throughout
the district
it's it's distributed pretty
emailly the following sheet is.
The corresponding map for the
transportation.
Pages
the tabulation is graphically
represented here on this map to
where those.
Now
I don't know that we will get
into.
But
that is a pretty quick run
through of district.
Thank you very much mister
brasson thank you for doing the
double du.
Developing members with
questions representative
pedigram looking at you no qu.
I am shar.
I don't even know what to do
about that
looks like representative brown
yes thank you
I I just want to thank mister
brash.
Yeah.
Vice.
Sixty four that the rob.
Sixty four.
Madame
tell you thank you on behalf of
that to be also
crying to get her eater old
fixed if that the road thank you
very much.
I read that concludes our
engineer presentations for the
morning thank you very much for
being here we appreciate that
this information is really
valuable to the committee and I
very much appreciate you willing
to common cont.
Thank you madame chair members
appreciate it next we're going
to go to house build to eighty
six representative armstrong.
Thank you madame chair and and
committee for allowing us to
present our bill this morning
with me I have kevin eds and
greg martin greg is the village
of administrator in law soonest
today we're bringing to you
house bill to eighty six
this is a bill asking for eighty
five million dollars as per your
request madam chair we
introduced a bill for projects
and this is at the top of our
list last lunas madam chair and
committee is the second fastest
growing in the area of the new
mexico and we have.
Facebook we have amazon we have
a lot of things and what's
happening madame chair in the in
the area is there's no way to
widen the accent that's there
now so we're we're wanting to
put in a new exit right now
madam chair and representative
committee we have secured
several different chunks of
money to begin this project
in twenty nineteen five million
and twenty twenty one fifteen
and twenty twenty three forty
three and then twenty five in
federal matching grounds.
What it's a phased in project
and what we would really like to
do as per some of the comments
earlier is instead of just doing
phase one we'd actually like to
do at all at once face one and
fees too and with that madam
chair i'd like to.
Experts make a few comments if
you don't mind.
Thank you represented i'm strong
and member madame chair and
members of this committee
appreciate the opportunity to.
And provide a little more
information about.
As as was mentioned.
And so we have taken the lead on
this project as of course is not
just for the military was.
In order to better move traffic
throughout the area
we have been diligently working
on this project some of you may
know for decades really
I came involved about twelve
years ago and I took position
here.
Has been with us probably over
40 years.
We've had partners including the
department of transportation all
of the other.
Very excited to
you know report.
So far we have still a little
bot longer way to go but but the
milestones that were excit.
At this time we are.
I begin construction later.
We have things.
Put together by a different
sources.
Including your.
But that again is for the first
phase of the project and really
the first phase of the project
gets us you know the majority of
it but certainly not the full
impact.
A second interchange in those
lines it gets is another bridge
that we.
Only one bridge to get across
the.
And in.
And then finally the other mount
milestone.
Right make sure that.
That essentially describes phase
one with this bill does is to I
was to take the america
remainder of th.
The.
To move immediately or
simultaneously and two phase two
of the project because what they
didn't say was the
corridor that runs east and
western and by the wa.
Is just would funding we have
now would be the two lanes one
in each direction of course.
To handle four lanes and that.
The.
So really just appreciate the
opportunity to possibly get a
additional amount of funding
another eighty five million
dollars to.
Status of the project.
I appreciate the opportunity to.
History and.
I do also.
Thank you madame chair and and
you're going to be really
excited because we have a
picture of the project.
Madam chair.
Absolutely pictures like this
are al.
Just explain.
Then we do a little bit of.
Thank you mister chairman will
end with that we would stand
for.
Anybody know.
You get about a minute.
All described this thing when
this project is done i'm gonna.
Because you I was going to make
it but there are moments you
just worry work on
we're pretty.
Invested in this project
you know they're work with each
way to get the white people.
We m.
Was all buttoned.
This project.
Money needed it's really good.
Expressed here university
associated contractors
representing the community
because.
A lot of things I know that I
don't need to be.
A lot of traffic I know the mid
reason.
The.
Hello yeah that's because just I
stand for court of this project
I also was a big part of helping
you know wanting to be this
project moving forward as my
career with the deal so I would
like to see this project
continued to be forward and make
the little just a lot more
efficient again the vehicle
moving around that area.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
I think this is a great proje.
You know la sluness and the list
in this area has become a bit of
a economic engine.
This particular project will
expand and support what's
already happening there.
Do you know can you providing
information I know that that we
have facebook.
There was work being done for an
inland rail port do you have any
information about that where
that's at the status of that
because it seems to me that this
project would also s.
Mexico
the real park is how about three
fi.
Thank you given and thank you
for that question of.
The.
The status of the what we
referred to is the central new
mexico rail park is is still in
process it's definitely moving
forward in terms of its actual
preparation for development and
the
accommodation of the businesses
that will eventually locate
there
to give you a an idea first of
all it is within the village
limits we did and acts property
and it's about fifteen hundred
total acres of land that is
available for future development
you know and of course one of
the biggest advantages it has as
it's access to the rail as well
as highway very good highway
access so it's a very prime
piece.
That you know when when the
opportunity is right for the
right business or company.
Status is is that the village is
working very hard to
extend our utilities and water
sewer
services to the area within the
net.
For sure
available and that's really kind
of the infrastructure th.
Land some.
And jobs thank you for that
mister chairman are you aware if
they've built any spirit.
Yes sir mister chair and
representative of the spur that
it feeds the entire property at
least to the edge of it well is
belt I believe it was completed
to three years ago and
cooperation with.
Thank you
thank you mister chairman.
Will that fully complete this
pro.
Thank you for the question is
your chair and representative
the answer today is yes
we have because of the length of
time it's taken for us to get to
this point as you've heard from
previous presenters and i'm sure
we ought well before today
due to cost increases in the
time it takes to.
Twelve years ago when I started
on this in this position and
continued with this project I
think we were talking about the
high it is to ninety million
dollars for the entire project
and.
Which is not fortunate but to
answer your question we we
believe according to today's
estimates two hundred and twenty
five in that mall park.
Of the bridge.
The.
Mister chair representative I
believe or write it about.
Is there a possibility of.
Mister chair representative yes
there are applications and now I
believe we just recently found
out we were not successful on
the mega money as well as the
information but the village
every cycle is resubmitting
those I believe.
Yeah.
I have one
or not on the physical impact
this is that that even by
million reverted twenty twenty
seven will that money b.
Yes it will the current where
just submitted hundred percent
plans.
To review those
as its scheduled currently we
would begin construction this
fall in about september I would
be finished in the summer of
twenty twenty seve.
To give it you know it's hard to
do that and you know we all look
at the timelines he not only
twenty seven at the far away
before you know we're here and
concerned about that part of it
not for the questions I was
going to make a motion.
I have a
problem motion.
Round
okay in any way anybody know
position this morni.
Yeah.
Thank you mister chairman of
members of the committee.
If we go to house bill.
Good morning
mister chair
I was just asked by
representative lot if I had
pictures I didn't know I was
required to do that so we're
gonna have to close our eyes and
imagine that we pass a rural
track and then we're gonna go
for fourteen miles and you're
just gonna see mosquitoes on the
size and a couple cows and
that's about it and so this is
what we're doing today thank you
for having us here mister
committee
this is house build three
hundred which appropriates fifty
four million from the general
fund to the department of
transportation they must go dot
for the inhancement of capacity
on you was highway one eighty
and grand county so basically a
little background for all you.
Grand county is is in a in a
place where we only have two
ways.
Really to exit especially with
commercial trucking and stuff
like that we do have other ways
to exit but it's difficult if
you're going to south to itan
are you generally take one
eighty out of silver city some
of you have been there for a
committee and as you as you go
through
bared and hurly that they're
currently working on face one
was a small delay on face one
because for some paperwork
issues so they delayed it by two
months it's it was withdrawn and
can be back on on track in in
march.
But are in that to widen this
highway from a two lane to a
fourleen.
The reason that we're wanting to
do this is
several reasons one of them is
as a funeral director i've had
people pass away on that tool in
highway it's about forty two
miles long and you don't passion
can be a difficulty people are
trying to pass multiple cars
we we have a restaurant in the
middle of right about half at
the halfway point we have
industrial businesses like such.
Report.
And when we've got you know
that's the only real way of
trucking the only other way is
to come in out of large brick
and it's just out of the way
everything comes from a lot of
it and I shouldn't say all of it
but the majority of supplies etc
come in from el paso in that
order and then go up one eighty
so in the past we have seen I
remember when the particular
time we had a
head on collision.
Where it literally your bottled
act you're stuck there.
And I was leaving to go to my
other office in damning new
mexico for one year home to the
other and I couldn't I could.
Spot it was between beard and
early.
Shut down all the all the all
the traffic.
We if you wanted to get anywhere
you had to literally go through
the members.
Which is a back road and then
come up in in by
an involved both remembers and
then cut over the the mountain
to hillsborough cut all the way
down to not if you know those
areas and then go back up to one
eighty which is about a two two
two hour two and a half hour
drive.
And so there's no real way of
getting out but so I think of
what yam a funeral director so
you know mine was in an
emergency situation but what
happens when our ambulance
services need to cross and go
through there those are what
we're worried about and so out
of the respect to safety and
being that we have a lot of
traffic with with the same wise
coming through there it is just
something that are community has
wanted just like your
communities I I was sitting here
listening to the first time it
sa.
And i'm hearing all the rule
issues that we have throughout
new mexico it's not just my my
little area it's it's all around
the state.
And this is just one of those
projects that were over thirty
plus years has been funded then
not funded has been promised
over and over a year after a
year to our community and so
just like some of the people
some of the representatives in
this room you understand by me
just listening to your stories.
And so this is my attempt in
trying to.
Try to get the second phase of
this project done so face one
like I said it should begin in
march is going to go out to bed
on march fees too has already
been thirty percent designed and
is planning on being completed
in ten months that the entire
design and so i'm just trying to
kinda get the ball rolling
we do have the figure of fifty
four million dollars here that
was a figure that was given to
to me and probably since
december now the because of
inflation and I don't know new
beds and stuff they're seeing
that it's costing more money to
make this from a tuling of four
lane
that means said I will
see anybody who wants to make a
an amendment of a hundred
million dollars as friendly and
then so
I know this is there's something
that is important to our
community and I do have two
expert witnesses I got ricky by
the rick by the excuse me and
they've keen data and voting.
The.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee
just to emphasize how long it
takes for us to get these
projects done sometimes
long before I consider it even
running for us.
This particular project
linked into some of the zoom
conversations for publi.
Project it's it's so important
it is in our area in the
southwest it is silver city's
lifeline to the rest of new
mexico truly
it's hard to even imagine what
representative trusses
described the the route he had
to take is through the mountains
it is switched back.
It's difficult to navigate it's
beautiful but it is not a a good
route to when you're trying to
get
make life happen and and and get
things done so it is the
lifeline to the rest of new
mexico for silver city but it's
also really important my
district district 32 residents
many of my constituents work at
the mind.
We use that for access to
outdoor recreation to the health
wilderness.
That area between diming in
silver city is being.
Populated subdivided.
Constituents can raise concerns
about having to turn in.
The routes that would take them
to their home.
Folks say that the kind of
things we hear often if we don't
do something
there's going to be
someone.
We actually do have higher crash
rates than than the majority of
new mexico than the average new
mexico crash rates on this route
with lost a lot of friends and
fa.
On this road and to add a bit of
personal experience my my
grandfather who was a new mexico
state educated civil engineer
invested his life in this area
which makes me really proud to
represent it but he was involved
in creating infrastructure
across the district and every
time we would get on highway
when eighty headed to silver
city he would say.
That this is the longest stretch
of perfectly straight road in
new mexico he was very proud of
that and i'll never forget it
but that was many many years ago
and I know that with the
increase in traffic that that
that perfectly stretch of s.
The airport I don't know how
many miles twenty some miles
surveilly straight road as part
of the difficulty with the the
increased traffic the inability
to see a round traffic and
create such a need a greater
need for passing lanes at
turning lanes and so it's been
long needed and i'm i'm just
pleased to be here to add the.
Thank you very much unless the
manager that i'd like to express
is that you know this although
that was the preliminary numbers
that they gave us a fifty four
million dollars it could be
phased out into phase two a.
If it needed to the argument
eleven money to get some federal
funding a hopefully a grant that
will
then be certain place or that w.
Appreciate it with that.
Thank you very much
representatives and i'm sure
we'd have no problem giving you
the hundred million it's just
appropriations you'd have to
reckon with that
the first we have up what we
have anybody here in standing in
support of the bill.
Alright we'll start.
Place in southwest.
On their way finally to the
design.
Next week
university society contractors
of mexico
currently the trip of most
recent trip for identified was
one of the most dangerous states
for highways so time to get
a passing lanes on a significant
highway that's great we stand in
favor of this thank you.
Are you manager again this is.
A project that three years ago
we could afford it to do for
half the costs of I was there
for the ground breaking on this
road i've been on that road
several times it's a much needed
project and we're supported
getting this done sooner right.
Is there anyone here in
opposition to the bill.
I'm sorry we're also on.
Yet better chair committee
members of suggestions I would
total support the stone
this bill am I being raised in
that area in civil city area my
family still live in that area
i've traveled this world many
times and this road isn't much
need of being widened so I think
the the funding that what we put
to this be the good use of i'm
until the support thank you
thank you mister rees okay I
think that finishes all public
comments now we're ready to go
to the committee representative
daily cruise.
I'm just curious of.
Absolute matter of chair
representative
try to put this in perspective
with other US routes it's a
little difficult but I think if
we could look at just average
daily traffic alone us three
idiots prior ride around thirty
two to thirty eight thousand
eighty t a day
it's a us one eighty is probably
right around the thirty thousand
mark for a two lane facility but
I think the biggest piece of us
one eighty is that seventy
percent of that or three
thousand vehicles a day is heavy
trust truck traffic so three
thousand you know some wise
loaded I was really what really
what the issue is and in what it
brings to operation of a two
lane facility out in ruin to
mexico
thank you for that answer
manager is there a lot of heavy
traffic because of the minds or.
Madame she representative it's a
combination of both but I would
say probably the minds is
private the biggest of uh.
Thank you madame chair
think the importance.
What we've been doing in in some
of these bills.
What we already know.
The lack of.
Desire to to from an
appropriations.
Other committees within the
state l.
Without.
The.
I would propose a committee.
And seventeen.
To change the appropriation.
And then numerically online
seventeen fifty.
Need is.
Made very publi.
Five and beyond we have that
ability and so I would make I
would like to make that the
moment to this bill.
The.
Okay representative
representative so are you
proposing just a hand written
amendment to this bill and is
that a friendly amendment to the
sponsor that is a friendly
okay so i'm let's get a copy of
the bill make sure staff.
The.
We have a second on the.
The opposition to the amendment.
Madame committee
of.
I'm sorry can you repeat I said
I think you madam chair
committee and for any other
questions that there are
next on the now amended bill we
have representative brown
thank you matter chairman
I agree with the statement that.
In some quarters of our state
government there is this desire
to be first.
I do believe that members that
we need to make a big push it
needs to.
You can state government that we
would like to be known in the
nation is having th.
Two years it's almost seven
billion dollars worth and i.
So I would and I would think.
And so I just I would just like
to send that messag.
And costs or.
Not one fiscal year but.
Some add i'm sure that would be
my desire
thank you representative brown
to have anyone else
okay think already to vote on
the bill
representative okay.
The.
Any opposition.
Seeing then you have yourself a
amended bill
document to us and then as many
they come out of here thank you
committee.
That includes our meeting for
today I want to think everybody
for coming early I really
appreciate it it it keeps us
from having to be laid on the
