Roll calls close. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
Offered by the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Well you all bow your heads,
Dear Heavenly Father.
And creator as we gather here
today in this esteemed chamber
of governance. We are reminded
of the imminent responsibility.
That we hold
Each decision, each law, each
action taken within these
hollowed walls has the power to
shape the lives of countless
individuals across our state.
Today, we began our proceedings.
Let us take a moment to reflect
upon and honor the legacy of
those who have come before us,
particularly during this
significant period of Black
History Month.
And this legislative session,
let us commit to policies that
promote equality and justice,
help guide our thoughts, deeds
and actions to ensure that all
individuals regardless of race.
Our financial status, have the
opportunity to thrive and
succeed. Help us to remember
that this commitment to equality
is not just a moral imperative
but a reflection of our shared
human humanity. And finally,
dear heavenly Creator, as we
also reflect upon the beauty of
celebrating this month. We also
ask for your guidance and wisdom
as we undertake the important
work before us today.
our decisions be just, our
actions be compassionate and our
hearts be open to the needs of
all. We pray for the strength
and courage as we strive to
build a better, more inclusive
world for all and together we
say amen.
Gentlemen from Colfax Scurry
Harding Qu San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield with
the Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
And the gentle lady from uh
Bernalillo Representative Serana
with the pledge to the New
Mexico flag.
lady from Santa Fe.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Happy
Valentine's Day. Good morning.
Happy Valentine's Day, and happy
birthday.
To
Somebody
we'll get to that in a minute.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business is ordered.
Good morning members.
Happy
Joint session, African American
Day.
Yeah
Happy Valentine's Day.
And before we begin, happy
birthday to our esteemed Madam
Chief clerk.
The gentleman from Donana to
sing.
Representative as well.
He can't sing. He's got a
horrible voice, gentlemen from.
I'm, I'm not gonna do
myganitassa. We'll just say
happy birthday.
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday to you.
Happy birthday, dear Lisa, happy
birthday to you.
E.
All
Cha
Chaboni.
All my Mexicanos, uh, down on
the floor I mm, I was
disappointed. I was the only one
singing, that's cool.
Gentle lady from Berlio.
point of personal privilege real
quick, Mr. Speaker.
I think this body can all agree.
You can sing.
Your bills will come straight to
the floor.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business,
introduction of legislation.
Our new reader to read. Speaker,
does she have to sing since this
is her first reading?
That's a good idea. Maybe we
should.
I mean, I am in choir, but I
think we should save that for
later on.
That might be hazing. I think
she's only in high school. You,
you don't have to sing, but you
do have to read. Thank you.
House Memorial 25, introduced by
Herndon, a memorial declaring
February 14, 2025, African
American Day in the House of
Representatives, whereas African
Memorial.
House Memorial 25
Memorial 25 have been read to us
by title is order, not printed
and placed on the speaker's
table.
The lady from Santa Fe. Mr.
Speaker, I we go to that order
of business. 3rd reading of
legislation.
See an objection and its
ordered.
We're doing it the old fashioned
way.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo,
Representative Brendon, are you
ready on How's Memorial 25.
I am Mr. Speaker, let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
memorial 25 on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution. The gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Mr. Speaker, we have a memorial
honoring today, which is African
American Day in the legislature
and not only are we honoring the
day, Mr. Speaker, but this is
the 25th anniversary of
celebrating this day in this
house.
Mr. Speaker, would you please
have the chief clerk read the
memorial.
Reader to read.
House Memorial 25, introduced by
Herndon, a memorial declaring
February 14, 2025, African
American Day in the House of
Representatives, whereas African
American Day is a celebration of
the achievements and
contributions of African
Americans to history of both New
Mexico and the United States.
And whereas New Mexico
recognizes the importance of
honoring African Americans,
having enacted Section 12-5-12
NMSA 1978, which states the 2nd
Friday of February of 8 years.
shall be set apart and known as
African American Day, and
whereas African American Day is
a day to reflect on the many
sacrifices that African
Americans have made towards the
democracy everyone enjoys today.
And whereas African American Day
shall be observed by the people
of New Mexico in recognition of
those efforts and whereas
African American Day is
celebrated in tandem with Black
History Month, and whereas the
celebration of African American
Day is also a time for people to
reflect upon the need for
diversity in thinking and
strategic planning as laws.
And policies are developed to
ensure that all voices are heard
in decisions that affect New
Mexico and New Mexicans and
whereas African American Day
provides an opportunity to honor
the often forgotten
accomplishments of black
Americans to every important
outcome that makes up the
history of New Mexico and the
country. And whereas black
American History Month should
not be treated as though it is
separate from the collective
American history as the Black
History Month is merely a
completion of greatest hits
ranging from the badges and
indents of slavery. Some of the
most
Important Supreme Court cases
that have created precedents
inspired by African American
expertise, but rather as a month
that is focused on the shared
experience of African Americans,
blended into a recipe that
creates a unique flavor of
diversity with a multicultural
experience that everyone can
appreciate and whereas the
African American community in
New Mexico has a compelling
legacy that dates back to 1539
when Esteban, a Spanish Moor
from North America traveled to
New Mexico seeking gold.
And whereas after the American
Civil War, thousands of African
American soldiers also known as
the Buffalo soldiers were
garrisoned at 11 different forts
through the territories of New
Mexico, and whereas today in New
Mexico is a vibrant African
American community with a
growing population that is still
not fully embraced as evidence
by disproportionate health
outcomes, housing disparities,
and high unemployment, and
whereas efforts to advance
racial equality and civil
engagements continue to be
urgent priorities. And whereas
the great contributions that
African Americans have made.
To both the history of New
Mexico and the history of the
United States should be
celebrated and acknowledged,
while also recognizing the fight
for racial justice and equality
continues every day. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
February 14, 2025 be declared
African American Day in the
House of Representatives and be
it further resolved that copies
of this memorial be transmitted
to the governor, the executive
director of Office of African
American Affairs, the president
of the University of New Mexico,
the president
of New Mexico Black Caucus and
the president of the New Mexico
State Conference of the National
Association for Advancement of
Colored People.
Is there a debate on how
memorial 25.
Seeing none, the gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. As we
acknowledge the past, we must
also look to the present and
future. Black History Month is
not only a time for reflection,
but also a call to action. It is
a reminder that the work of
those who came before us is not
yet complete. We must continue
to strive for justice, equality,
and opportunity for all.
Mr. Speaker, I move that House
Memorial 25 do now pass.
And the ask unanimous consent to
the House that the record show
that the role has been called
and all members present have
voted in the affirmative.
Yes, I do, Mr. Speaker. There's
been a motion to all members of
the House present and voting in
the affirmative, see no
objection. It is so ordered. We
are on final passage of How
Memorial 25, the vote.
is now
Open
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 69 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How Memorial 25
Haulli Paz's house.
Congratulations. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
General lady from Ber uh from
Santa Fe. Speaker, I mean we go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members, there are some um guest
in the gallery and I'm gonna try
to get through this.
As best as I can.
We have
Uh, guest of Representative on
Arnus students with justice code
robotics club, these folks are
the winners of the excellence
Award at the National Society of
Black Engineers and competitors
at the world robotics
competition with 44 other
countries. Welcome to the house.
And I believe representative
Ononornu.
These are their names. Kingsley
Walker.
Giordani Gillette.
Shanerioor.
Chibuki over.
Praise
Agent Kanye.
In Kaa Brown.
We're proud of you guys. Good
work.
Members also in the gallery
guests of.
Representative Gonzalez in the
gallery we have Donovan Estrada,
Naomi Brundage Alexander Joseph,
Juvia Ruiz Duncan, Jaden
Gallegos, Jason Gallegos,
Sebastian Jacobis, Camille
Jacobis, Lancelin Walker, and
Ariana Bauman. Welcome to the
house.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo, do
you have guests on the rostrum
you'd like to introduce? Yes,
Mr. Speaker, and thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker, on the
rostom we have guests from the
Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority, one
of the oldest Greek letter
organizations in the country,
formed in 1908, and today, Mr.
Speaker, we have with us the
esteemed madam Regional director
of the Southwest Region. Her
name is Doctor Shawn E. Simmons.
Let's welcome her.
Welcome to the house.
We also have with us the South
Central Regional Representative
to the International Connection
and Social Action Committee with
us. She is also a fellow um
graduate of the University of
Texas School of Law with me. She
is Demetrius Sampson. Welcome to
the house.
Other members that are with us
today, we have the, we have the
president of the Albuquerque
chapter of the Alpha Kappa Alpha
sorority. We have with us none
other than the one and the only.
Ray had a baby.
Welcome to the house.
Other members that are with us,
please stand when your name is
called. We have Taylor Miller,
who is the president of the top
5 chapter of the undergraduate
West Texas, New Mexico cluster
coordinator with us. Welcome to
the house, Serita Washington,
New Mexico protocol chair to the
South Central Region.
We to the house. Doctor
Stephanie Mack, South Central
Texas cluster coordinator.
Welcome to the house. Deidra
Gordon, the West Texas, New
Mexico cluster coordinator.
Welcome to the house.
We also have with us uh
Beverly
MacMillan, who is the former
treasurer of the Iota Omega
chapter. Welcome to the house.
We have with us also, Mr.
Speaker, Judge Shamara
Henderson, who is a member of
this esteemed group.
Welcome to the house.
And Mr. Mr. Speaker also sitting
here with us, we have uh
Alexandria Taylor, who is with
us today. She's sitting on the
side. Would you please stand?
Welcome to the house.
And 23 other esteemed guests,
Mr. Speaker, if I may introduce
them, Marjorie Jermaine is here.
Would you please stand?
Doctor Emmanuel Assoni is here.
Would you please stand?
And we have judge Soneda Estrada
is who's with us.
Welcome to the house and thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I think I saw
somebody walk in Albuquerque
City councilor Nicole Rogers.
Welcome to the house.
Members in the gallery, guests
of representative Chavez. I'm
not sure which one, Nicole
Chavez, uh, today's dental
hygienist day.
Today in the gallery we have
dental hygienists from all over
the state and dental hygiene
students from the University of
New Mexico, Pima, and Donana
Community College visiting the
Capitol for New Mexico dental
hygienist day dental hygienists
are licensed professionals who
provide preventive and
therapeutic care to the public
contributing to the overall
health and well-being of the
citizens of New Mexico.
Dental hygienists, volunteer
many hours to serve the
underserved and special needs
population in community projects
statewide. The association's
volunteers participate in the
mission of missions of mercy
held throughout the state New
Mexico dental hygienists support
access to quality oral health
care for all citizens. Welcome
to the house.
Felt like I was selling some
sore No More there for a minute.
Gentle lady from Ber Leo
Representative Chavez. Mr.
Speaker, thank you so much, and
you took all of my wonderful
talking points, but I just
wanted to thank them again and
remind everyone that there's a
nice little bag, a white bag
with purple paper of goodies to
keep our oral dental care,
smiles beautiful today and
throughout the rest of the
session, so thank you so much
for that.
Members say no, thank you,
dental hygienist.
Gentle lady from Catria and
Sierra Socorro Valencia,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn't
sure if any this was brought to
anyone's attention, but we got
these lovely magazines. Some of
us did in our offices and um I,
I was such a pretty magazine. I
didn't really know what to do
with it. I thought, well, I'll
take it home. Well then, our the
representative from
All those counties.
Uh, back there, uh, I can't see
it this.
Uh,
Anyway, everyone knows who I'm
talking about Guadalupe
Roosevelt San Miguel.
is in the magazine.
And I wanted to bring it to
everyone's attention.
He remembers this photograph
taken.
But the black hat on with the
ribbon around it. And, uh, he
said it was many pounds and many
years ago, but I wanted to bring
it to everyone's attention that
he we're, he's famous and that,
uh, I just wanted to make sure
you guys saw this. This is a
great magazine. Thank you so
much for the delivery to our
offices and, uh, and I also have
a constituent in there, uh, Mr.
Louis Sanders is on the other
page. He worked with, uh,
representative from all those
counties, uh, on the Bell Ranch
back in the day and so I got a
copy for him and I'm taking it.
To Dale New Mexico, where he
lives now, uh, to make sure he,
uh, gets his magazine and his
wife will be very appreciative
of that. So thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Very cool. Thank you,
gentle lady.
lady from San Miguel and Torres
from Santa Gonzalez. Um, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Um, first off,
I wanna thank you for
recognizing my guests in the
gallery today. Uh, my guests are
here with me today. Uh, they are
part of Jack and Jill American
Incorporated um for those of you
that may not be familiar, um,
Jack and Jill of America
Incorporated is a national
organization for the purpose of
empowering future American
leaders through leadership
development, volunteer service,
philanthropic giving, and civic
duty, um, in 20
4 the Albuquerque Santa Fe metro
area chapter of Jack and Jill
was founded here in New Mexico,
um, and so they are a brand new
chapter with lots of students
here today enjoying the
Roundhouse as part of
celebration of African American
Day at the state Capitol, and I
would also like to introduce two
of my shadows that I have here
with me, um, so first off, I'm
gonna introduce Ms. Salome
Oregon or Oberon, um, she has a
5th grader at Coral Community
Charter School. She enjoys art,
dance, and singing. When she
grows up, she wants to be an.
And then my next shadow I have
is in Jordan Gallegos, and as a
matter of personal privilege,
she is also my niece. She's also
a 5th grader at Coral Coral
Community Charter School. She
enjoys singing and dancing. When
I asked her what she wanted to
be when she grew up, she wasn't
sure. She said a singer of some
sort, but maybe I can convince
her to be a future state
legislator. So if you can please
welcome them to the to the
house.
And just for the record you
could both be a state legislator
and sing.
Just saying announcements,
gentle lady from Berlio and
Sandoval. I thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh, and thank you. I'd
like to bring to your attention
that on your desk there is a
small button, but there is also
some Amy's donuts in the uh
lounge from uh the United Health
professionals of New Mexico, AFT
and local 189. These are our
front line nurses, you know,
when nursing, Mr. Speaker, we
talk a lot about our needs.
For healthcare and there are a
lot of options for nurses. These
are our front line nurses
they're in our hospitals in our
clinics, sacrificing for us
being there and doing a very
difficult job for themselves and
they have provided us a little
sweet today on Valentine's Day,
so make sure that you let your
nurses know how much, uh, you
mean they, they mean to us.
Thank you. Thank you, gentle
lady.
Let's go next to the gentle lady
from Sandoval Representative
Collin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
today I wanted to make sure that
we recognize that it is national
Donor Day as a living kidney
donor to my mother in 2001. I
understand the importance of
organ donation and what it means
to so many lives.
It's a great life saving gift
that we can give.
New Mexico, uh New Mexico donor
service provided a bag with
information on how to sign up
for organ donation and uh some
little goodies in there as well.
I also want to recognize the
need for blood and bone marrow
donation.
And um we do have some guests on
the restroom, uh, represented a
gentle lady from Berna Leo, uh,
representative Chavez and I have
some if you wanted to.
The lady from Berlin.
Thank you so much, gentle lady,
will you yield? Yes.
I guess I don't know or Mr.
Speaker are we which way are we
going? I'll yield to you because
we're just on announcements, um,
you would only apply if like
we're doing a memorial or when
we're doing 3rd reading, but in
this situation you just come
back to me. I could go back to
you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I
would like to welcome my, our
very special guests in the
rostrum, uh, Selena Espinoza and
Luis Hernandez, if you guys
could stand up from New Mexico
donor donor services Donate
Life.
Welcome to the house they are
our wonderful team that are
running the local nonprofit that
saves life as Representative
Collin said through organ eye
and tissue donation in our state
and beyond, um, and together we
honor all of those who give the
gift of life and save lives
throughout the year, but in my
personal experience, I just want
to add to these two very special
individuals, um, Mr. Luis
Hernandez is the first person
that invited me to
To advocate for change for
victims of violent crime and he
introduced me to my fellow
robbed members and some local
leaders and administrators, and
he said, you know, you can
advocate and do this, and we
came in to uh legislative
session 10 years ago, this
session, and so I just want to
give a special shout out to him
and then my dear friend Selena
Espinosa. We were partners in
I'm at the Albuquerque Police
Department running
communications and community
outreach under Chief Eden and
how to share an office and let
me just tell you, on a day like
today for Valentine's, I love
lilies and roses, and she hates
the smell of lilies, and I would
make her sick for about a week
out of the year. So just wanted
to welcome them today and give a
special shout out. Thank you so
much for being here.
Welcome to the house. Did you
say you were partners in crime
working at APD's exactly what I
said.
Too soon, too soon. OK, just
kidding, joke, bad joke. Uh,
let's go back to the gentle lady
from Sandoval Representative
Cullen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
and I know um that we have some
guests on the, in the gallery,
if you would be able to
introduce them. Absolutely guest
sort of calling for national
donor Day we've got Victoria
Yoakam, who is a liver
recipient, Darrell Armstrong,
who is a heart recipient,
Crystal Griego, a 3 year old
heart recipient and Deborah.
Greggo Crystal's mother.
Welcome to the house.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and if I
can ask if the chief clerk could
read the certificate for
National Donor Day. Reader to
read. The House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico fifty-seventh
legislator, first session 2025
recognizes February 14, 2025,
National Donor Day, whereas one
organ donor can save the lives
of as many as 8 people and
improve the lives of as many as
75 with eye and tissue donations
and whereas more than 100,000.
patients across the United
States are currently waiting for
life saving organ transplants,
including more than 500 patients
in New Mexico, 1 in 5 of whom
are Native Americans and whereas
there were 90, 90 organ donors
in New Mexico in 2024, who'd
saved 207 lives. And whereas 3
New Mexico hospitals, Loveless
Women's Hospital in Albuquerque,
Three Crosses Regional Hospital
in Las Cruces, and Roosevelt
General Hospital in Portelis had
their first ever organ donors in
2024 and where
3 New Mexican hospitals, San
Juan Regional Medical Center in
Farmington, Presbyterian Rest
Medical Center in Rio Rancho and
Memorial Medical Center in Las
Cruces had record numbers of
organ donors in 2024. And
whereas anyone can register to
be an organ donor regardless of
age or medical history. And
whereas organ donors are true
heroes who give the
extraordinary gift of life
through donations of organs,
eyes, tissue, blood pellets, and
bone marrow. And whereas all New
Mexican residents are encouraged
to talk with their families
about their decision to be
donors.
and to register as donors on
their driver's license or state
identification card by visiting
the motor vehicle division or by
registering online. Uh, Donate
Life New Mexico.org. And whereas
national Donor Day is an
occasion to recognize those who
have given or received life the
gift of life through organs,
eye, or tissue donations are
currently waiting for a life
saving transplant or have died
while waiting for a transplant
because of an organ was not
donated in time. Now, therefore,
be it resolved by the House of
Representatives of the
of New Mexico, the recognition
be extended to the need for life
saving eye tissue, blood pellet,
or bone marrow donors in New
Mexico by proclaiming February
14, 2025 has National Donor Day
in the House of Representatives,
and be it further resolved that
all New Mexican residents be
encouraged to register to become
organ, eye, tissue, blood
pellet, or bone marrow donors.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you for being here to all
of you recipients and donors,
these are truly live saving acts
and selfless acts. Thank you and
welcome to your House of
Representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the speaker appoint
a committee to invite the
honorable lieutenant Governor
Howie Morales and honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the house in
this chamber for the purpose of
being addressed by dignitaries
of the African American
community. If there is no
objection, the chair will
appoint.
Representative Rubio,
Representative onornu and
representative Samoa to invite
the honorable Lieutenant
Governor and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet
and join session with the House
with the House for the purpose
of hearing from our
distinguished guests.
Mr. Speaker,
The chair recognizes
Representative Suppanski. I ask
unanimous consent that the House
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair and that the
rules be suspended to allow the
seating of guests in the chamber
during the joint session, the
House will send in recess
subject to the call of the
chair.
And
That's pick it up and bring it
up.
Here we go.
The arms.
The Honorable lieutenant
Governor Howie Morales.
And the honorable members of the
Senate.
Escorted by the ROTC cadets from
Albuquerque High School.
Welcome to the house.
We'd like to welcome everyone to
today's celebration and in
recognition of African American
Day here in the New Mexico State
legislature, the speaker and I.
Have the honor
Of recognizing Representative
Pamela Hernon to preside over
today's joint session.
He's the score Representative
Herndon.
The joint session of the House
and Senate will come to order.
What is the pleasure of the
joint session, Madam President.
The chair recognizes
representative Sabanski.
I ask unanimous consent that we
resolve ourselves into a
committee of the whole House and
Senate for the purpose of
hearing speakers and
presentations in honor of
African American Day.
If there's no objection, it is
so ordered.
The committee of the whole House
and Senate will come to order.
Madam Chair,
the representative Sapansy.
I ask unanimous consent that the
chair appoint a committee of 6
to escort Doctor Carrissa
Calreath to the House chambers.
If there's no objection, the
chair will appoint.
Senator Ma Estes.
Senator Pope
Senators attorney.
Jarnicky.
Representative Garova.
Representative Silva.
And Representative Jones to
escort Doctor Culbert. Would you
please go and do that now?
Madam Chair,
The speaker recognizes the
sergeant at arms.
Doctor Carissa Cobra, assistant
professor of pathology at the
University of New Mexico School
of Medicine.
Please escort her in.
this representative Janelle. The
chair recognizes
Representative Janelle Ayannariu
for welcoming remarks.
You may be seated.
Hello.
And welcome and thank you so
much for joining us on this
African American Day.
It is an absolute privilege to
stand before you today in the
Santa Fe Roundhouse as we
celebrate African American Day.
A day dedicated to honoring the
incredible contributions,
resilience, and legacy of black
Americans in New Mexico.
I'm honored to address you as a
representative of Albuquerque's
International district and the
daughter of a Nigerian
immigrant.
Thank you.
And with a sincere reverence for
the rich history of African
Americans here and across our
nation. A few years ago, the
Santa Fe, New Mexican ran an
article highlighting the fact
that the person, the first
person of African descent to
arrive in New Mexico within
1539. So to be clear, we have
been here from the very
beginning.
In fact,
New Mexico's history has been
continuously enriched by the
courageous efforts and
achievements of African
Americans who have long called
this land home. From the work of
local leaders who helped
transform our communities in the
face of adversity in the 1940s
and 1950s, fighting tirelessly
to break down barriers in our
schools and churches to the many
unsung heroes, teachers,
community organizers, and
everyday citizens who laid the
groundwork for the civil rights
achievements we often take for
granted today.
African Americans have played a
critical role in the progression
of our state. Leaders like Clara
Bell Drisdale Williams, George
Long, Lenton Maury, and Doctor
Harold Bailey, to name a very
few.
The work of those who came
before us, not only improved
education and social services,
but also built the foundation
for a political culture grounded
in equality and opportunity.
We have mobilized neighborhoods,
organized voter registration
drives and held public forums to
confront an inequality.
Yet even as we celebrate these
values, New Mexico must
acknowledge that the challenges
faced by our African communities
today are still very real
economically, too many families
still encounter significant
hurdles, disparities, and
wealth, limited access to
quality education and fewer
housing and job opportunities.
In addressing these challenges,
we must remember that in New
Mexico, democracy is alive and
thriving, but it will only stay
that way if each of us takes an
active role in shaping the
future of our great state. The
grit of New Mexico is built on
the fundamental idea that change
does not come from distant
offices or abstract
institutions. It comes from the
voices and actions of its
citizens.
And you're very presence here
today is proof positive of that.
When you vote, when you
participate in community
meetings, when you speak out for
justice, you become part of a
vibrant movement that carries
forward the legacy of those who
came before us. Your
participation is especially
critical today as we confront
systemic inequality and a
federal government determined to
undo every gain we have made.
Remember that every vote cast in
every community discussion
sparked as a step toward a
society where opportunity
is not dictated by circumstance
or race, but is a right afforded
to all.
This is the essence of American
democracy and evolving
experiment that thrives on the
engagement and passion of its
people. And that is why I want
to take a moment to express my
heartfelt gratitude for your
presence here at the Roundhouse
today. By gathering in this
historic venue, you are not only
honoring our past but actively
contributing to the promise of
our future. Your commitment to
civic engagement, whether
through voting, activism, or
community service is what
Transforms policies and inspires
progress. It is through your
energy and determination that we
continue to honor the legacy of
those who fought to pave the way
for change. As we face a future
that at best feels uncertain, we
must remember that the work of
justice and equality is never
complete. It's a journey that we
must all undertake together,
fueled by the lessons of our
history and the spirit of
community that is always defined
New Mexico. Your voices, your
experience.
and your passions are the
driving forces that will help
create a more equitable society
for everyone.
I hope you carry the spirit of
active participation in your
daily lives. Engage with your
neighbors, support local
initiatives and continue to push
for reforms that strengthen our
democracy. Together, we can
build on the legacies of those
who came before us and forge a
future where every citizen has a
welcome opportunity to thrive.
So welcome again, guests and
visitors. Thank you and let's
use our actions and voices to
keep democracy alive.
Would you please
Would you please remain
standing.
As we have our invocation today
given by Reverend Langer
Abuasumo.
After the revocation,
For the black national anthem
sung by Rayetta Beatty.
And then the purpose of the day
delivered by Reverend ND Smith.
Please bow with me.
As we acknowledge our
God
My Father, we
Come before you as humbly as we
know how.
Hm
Do not have been besieged.
By Luciferian.
Activities
They have tried, O Father.
To deter us
to derail us.
To do those things that would
prevent us from accomplishing.
Indeed, where I show God to be
with us.
Stand with us, for you have
said.
Even if I close heaven.
And send Lucas to devour the
land. If my people who are
called by my name.
themselves and pray and seek my
face.
Then
I will hear.
From heaven
They give you your sin and heal
your land.
We, O God, need you now.
Yeah
For those things that.
Would be for the least of us.
Those things that would.
Empower us to continue.
In the face of demonic attack.
Those attacks.
Come from associates, come from
friends, come from family.
Yeah.
They are not only the
Enemy
Of all of us
But they, oh God.
A worse than I am.
Where now to be with us.
Guide our thoughts, control our
lives, bright or ah.
The corn.
And we, oh God, would be able to
do what is in that divine.
Well
And not all will.
This we ask in the match the
name of Jesus who our Lord is
our Lord and our Savior, our
Christ.
And our redeemer.
Amen.
Lift every voice.
They
ing
till.
And
ring with the heart.
need
lovely
Bertie.
Let
see.
right
high
the
me.
sky
Let
reason.
loud as the road.
see.
full of the faith that the dark
past has taught
us.
song
full of the hope that
the Perez has brought.
facing the
Um
Our new day
be
March
till.
Victory.
is one.
They had a baby.
You may be seated.
Yeah
Madam President, I wish I could
sing like that.
Madam President, to you, my, my
friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a
pleasure and an honor for us to
be here today and to celebrate
this 25th anniversary of African
American day at the legislators.
As we meet today and as we
celebrate this very special day.
It's a day of recognition.
It's a day of setting aside
recognizing those outstanding
contributions that African
Americans have made to this
great state. We come with great
honor. We come with great pride
because we too are New Mexicans.
We come to celebrate and to
share our rich heritage. We come
that our children and our youth
will
Be interested involved and
participate in those things that
make our state a greater state.
25 years ago, Governor Gary
Karenas signed legislation
recognizing this day as African
American day at the legislators.
It was signed by the, by those
that have gone
that stood there as they
struggled as we celebrate today.
I share with you that it is a
day of celebration is a day of
recognition, but I also share
with you today that it is a day
of remembrance, a day
ofmembrance the struggle that
Alice Fay Hoppus that Freddie
Ward that others struggle
through.
That we might celebrate this day
25 years later, the many a
trips, the many meetings, the
media shut doors. The many of
many oppositions that spoke
against such a celebration, but
they refused to give up. They
refuses to take no as an answer.
They refuse to go back to their
communities as a defeated case.
They stood, they fought, they
endured the hardships they
endured the burdens, they
endured the opposition just that
we might stand 25 years later
and celebrate their
accomplishments we.
I say to you with great
sincerity that we can see much
clearer because we're sending on
the shoulders of those that
refuse to give up. We can see
much clearer because they
instructed us they inspired us.
They encouraged us. They told us
about our worth and we were
worth, we were worth it. They
told us.
About hard work to stay with it,
no matter how difficult it may
be, no matter how much the
opposition was, they taught us
that hard work brings positive
results and so today 25 years
later because of those that
struggled for this day. We can
proudly say that 25 years later,
not only are we celebrating
Brady this day in the
legislators, but 25 years later,
we're celebrating the office of
the African American affairs
here in the state of New Mexico
20.
25 years later, we're
celebrating the development and
the organizing of the Doctor
Martin Luther King Junior
commission for the state of New
Mexico. 25 years later, we, the
citizens of this great state are
able to take part in the African
American performing arts center
located on New Mexico State
Fairgrounds, 25 years.
Later, we're able to celebrate
the long suffering and the hard
work that others put in to
making this day a very special
day as we close, we thank you,
the senators, the legislators,
the the representatives and all
those that have endured and
stood with us and abled us to
make the message of success that
our children would be able to
look back.
and see that we were successful,
just as in the Bible as they
crossed over the Jordan. They
stacked up 12 stones and someone
asked why those 12 stones, and
they indicated that when our
children and our grandchildren
cross over that Jordan, we will
be able to tell them that they
crossed the Jordan, the stones
are stacked up 25.
Years ago and now we stand on
this glorious day to tell the
state of New Mexico to tell its
citizens and to tell our
children that yes, we crossed
over that Jordan. We've come a
long ways, but we have a long
ways to go as I close, as we
celebrate this day, we ask you
today to in this legislative
body, we have much work.
To do. We have much, much to
accomplish, but we asked you
that we join hands and then we
walk together for one great day
that when this life is over,
we'll all be together in the
late words, uh, in the words of
the late Doctor Martin Luther
King that one day our children
and our grandchildren will be
able to go to jail together.
We'll be able to fight together.
We'll be able to stand up for
freedom together.
Knowing that one great day we
will be free 25 years later, God
bless you and God bless this
state.
Thank you, Reverend Smith. It is
always inspiring to hear you
speak.
You know, we have some special
guests with us today. I'd like
to recognize them.
The people who have worked
exceptionally hard to make today
occur. The African American
legislative Day Council. I'd
like for you to meet the
members. Latia Miles, the
president from Albuquerque.
Maxine Jones, vice president.
Kim Johnson.
Patrick Barrett.
Evelyn rising.
Sula Michael.
Reverend Ny Smith.
Brennan Bowman, Doctor Lassiter
Speller.
Michael Hunt.
Harold Binau.
Lena Celestine.
Doctor Linnell Walton Selma's
Price.
Joel Richardson.
Joseph Cotton, president of the
state NAACP.
Beverly Gaines.
Crissawa Nichols.
And Charles Rido, who is also
the acting executive director of
the Office of African American
Affairs and in memory of Jesse
OD Waddle Senior. We also have
some additional guests I'd like
to recognize we have with us.
Court of Appeals court judge
Shamara Henderson.
And we have metropolitan court
judge Shaneda Estrada.
We probably have with us the
NAACP State Youth and College
coordinator Deirdre Gordon.
And a special honored guest we
have with us, the former dean of
the UNM School of Law, Alfred
Matthewson.
You know, we are really proud of
the students who've come to join
us today.
And some of the students that we
have with us are the Basque
students there are 23 of them,
they're adult sponsors are
Leslie O'Hanlon and Roscoe
Floyd, would you please stand so
we can recognize you.
We also have with us Albuquerque
Academy students and we would
ask you that you please stand
and we have Mr. Peter Lloyd, the
director of diversity, Culture
and belonging and a mathematics
teacher joining us along with
Ms. Kosha Miller, the AA, the
Albuquerque Academy track and
field coach, Miss Christie
Brundage.
Mr. uh Chris Lopez, Mr. Brendan
Bowman, and Mr. Alvin Busan, who
all brought these 19 students
with them. Would you all please
stand now?
We have with us also from the
Central New Mexico Community
College, we have 18 students and
staff with us. Today we have the
VP of enrollment, Doctor Naretta
Seals, Martin O'lia, the
government relations officer.
Kristen Stevenson, the chair of
Women of Black History Month
Committee, La Monica Whittaker,
the director of Project and
Project Manager.
We have Chay Thai Avila
Richardson, and Miguel Agua all
here. Will you stand so that we
can recognize you.
We have with us the 16 students
from the New Mexico Academy for
the Media Arts and they in these
are students who recently
produced a documentary on mental
health for students. Let's have
all of them stand along with
Anthony Conforti, Doctor Tanya
Mueller, Maria Ja Jacquez and
Megan Reyes, students and and
adult sponsors, will you please
stand?
And we have students from the
Omica cultural group and we have
1818 students with us today and
along with their chaperone,
Doctor Emmanuel Assoni.
Inzani Ima Osoni, Christian
Awaki and Ifawani Nwagawalgu.
If I mispronounce those names,
forgive me, but would you please
stand so that we can recognize
you.
So a historical figure within
our, within our state, uh, Mr.
Joe Parell and his wife are
here. Rita Padrell, will you
both please stand?
And of course we want to
represent uh we would like for
you to recognize our uh senator
who's with us, a member of the
African-American Day Council,
Senator Harold Pope Junior.
Would you please stand?
And Representative Janelle Onya
Nonu.
And Senator Anthony Thornton,
would you please stand?
So thank you all and I would
like to recognize Imani Cole
Robinson, the first place as a
contest winner winner for the
African American day, um,
program.
Amani, where are you?
Oh
I'm sorry she had to leave, she
had to return to school, but we
give her a big hand in a round
adventure.
Next, the chair recognizes Lena
Celestine, the secretary of the
African American Day uh
Legislative Day Council to
introduce today's keynote
speaker, Doctor Karissa Colbert.
Good afternoon.
Doctor Carrissa Core is a
dynamic leader with a broad
impact across local, national
and international spheres.
She is committed to ensuring
that individuals, families, and
communities have access to
equitable opportunities that
promote optimal physical,
spiritual, emotional, and
financial well-being.
A native of Albuquerque, New
Mexico, Doctor Core earned her
bachelor of Science in biology
from the prestigious Fisk
University and her PhD in
microbiology
and in immunology
from Vanderbilt University.
She currently serves as the
division chief and medical
director of infectious disease
at Trico Reference Laboratories.
In addition to her professional
achievements, Doctor Carro is
deeply engaged in her community.
She serves as the city councilor
for Rio Rancho District 5,
making history as the first
African American woman to hold
this position in the city's 40th
year history.
She is also an associate pastor
at New Covenant Worship Center
where she supports ministry and
community outreach efforts.
Doctor Colbrough is an active
member of the Iota.
Thy Omega chapter of Alpha Kappa
Alpha sorority Incorporated and
a charter member of the
Albuquerque Santa Fe metro area
chapter of Jack and Jill
Incorporated.
Doctor Colbrough's exceptional
leadership and dedication to
community service have earned
her numerous accolades,
including the Jewish Community
Center of New Mexico,
Humanitarian Award.
Albuquerque Business 1st 40
under 40, the 5th university
woman of prominence award in the
New Mexico Black Chamber of
Commerce unsung heroes Award.
She is a
Highly sought after speaker,
both locally and nationally
known for her inspiring messages
and commitment to positive
change. Above all,
Above all, Doctor Cobra.
Consids her greatest achievement
to be her family. She is
grateful.
To share her life with her
husband, daughter, and son.
I now introduce to you.
Doctor
Clarissa Cobra.
Thank you all so much.
Thank you for the invitation and
just as a point of personal
privilege. I'd love to say happy
Valentine's Day to my husband
who is here today.
I too sing America.
I am the darker brother.
They sent me to eat in the
kitchen when company comes, but
I laugh.
And eat well and grow strong.
Tomorrow.
I'll be at the table when
company comes, nobody will dare
say to me, eat in the kitchen
then.
Besides, they'll see how
beautiful I am and be ashamed.
I too am America.
This poem by Langston Hughes was
written in 1926.
And it tells the hope and the
determination of the black
experience and the recognition
that the American experience
isn't just one experience. I too
have a story of America.
And similarly, the story of New
Mexico is not just the
tri-cultural story that some
would say.
The story of New Mexico is a
multicultural tapestry.
Governor Tony Anaya in 1984,
issued an executive order that
declared that New Mexico has a
multicultural heritage, which
blends the finest contributions
of our Native American,
Hispanic, Anglo, black, Asian,
and other cultures.
He aptly stated that this
multicultural experience creates
the space for economic and
cultural growth.
The story of New Mexico has
always been a multicultural
story.
And in that story, the
contributions of the black black
community have always been
present. We too sing New Mexico.
As early as the 1500s, Esteban
the Moor, born Mustafa Zemoi in
Morocco. He stepped foot.
In New Mexico he was enslaved by
the Spanish and he was a guide
to Frey Marco Deniza as they
passed through the Mesa Valley
in search of the seven cities of
gold.
Esteban made the first contact
between Zuni and Spanish people
in the region.
His rel relationship with the
communities is filled with
myths, intrigue, and fantastic
storytelling.
Some say that he was killed
because of his encroachment on
Zuni land. Others who I like to
believe, say that Esteban and
the Zuni conspired to fake his
death as a means to ensure his
freedom and welcome him into
their community.
Well, we don't know which one of
these truly happened. What we do
know is that Esteban, an African
man was the likely the first non
Native to step foot on the lands
currently known as New Mexico
and Arizona, but we also know
that he most certainly wasn't
the last.
Later, as New Mexico was in the
tumultuous space between
territory and statehood in the
early 1900s, the black soldiers
later called the Buffalo
soldiers of the 9th and 10th
Cavalry. Those of the 24th and
25th Infantry, spent 24 years in
the Southwest as they paved
their way for the American
expansion.
These men largely former slaves
themselves were sent into a
harsh environment to see if they
could create a life in this New
Mexico desert.
New Mexico though for them
offered hope.
From the deep racism and Jim
Crow tyranny they experience in
other parts of the country.
The song and our song of New
Mexico was one of hope.
And of anticipation of a new
future.
Many of these hopes were
compiled in a beautiful document
entitled Bridges, New Mexico
Black women from 1900 to 1950.
This document was commissioned
in 1985 by the New Mexico
Commission on the Status of
Women, and it was my great aunt,
Charlotte Mok.
Who compiled these stories of
black women and families before
statehood and in the state's
early days.
She tells of women who created
beauty out of discards.
Women who envisioned greatness
for their families and who
worked to achieve it.
And this continues to be our
song of New Mexico.
My song of New Mexico begins
with my 4 times great
grandmother, Henrietta, who
moved with her husband and
daughter, Lula from Oklahoma to
Alameda, Mexico.
They lived on a homestead during
a time of unrest in Mexico when
Henrietta's husband was said to
have been killed by soldiers.
Henrietta then tried to get
justice for her husband, and she
went on a train never to be
heard of again.
So then her daughter, Lula
Click.
Eventually moved to New Mexico
and began the legacy of my
family in this state.
This legacy is one that has
spanned 7 generations.
Who called this land home.
We are 7 generations of people
with a uniquely black New
Mexican history.
We are people who have biscuits
and tortillas. We have collard
greens and pozole. We have Pinto
beans and black-eyed peas.
We too sing.
New Mexico.
It is not just the song of my
family that makes up this story.
The song of the African American
experience in New Mexico is as
varied as the jazz music our
people created. It is complex
and beautiful.
The song of New Mexico is in the
stories of entrepreneurs like
John Hutchison from Grants who
made and sold adobe bricks in
the 1920s and then later created
a full construction company.
It is in the life of Pearl A.
Hicks Foster, who in 1920 was
thought to be the first black
real estate broker in the state.
And Fred and Maggie Houston, who
owned a shoe shine and leather
treatment store in the 1940s in
Gallup.
These families sing the song of
black entrepreneurship. And this
song continues to rise. The
number of black owned businesses
in the US grew 56% from 2017 to
2022.
Black women accounted for 42% of
all women who opened up new
businesses during that time, and
are the fastest growing business
owning demographic.
Nationally, black businesses
gross 2012 billion with a B,
$212 billion in 2022.
This is why it is impairing.
to ensure that small businesses
have the resources and
opportunities to build and
sustain that growth. Small
businesses have been and
continue to be the lifeblood of
our economic growth in the black
community and here in New
Mexico.
Whether it's in the 1920s,
1930s, 40s, or today when strong
when we are the strength of
black entrepreneurship in the in
New Mexico and we can continue
that growth when there is a
need, we respond with ingenuity,
creativity, business acumen, we
too sing New Mexico.
The song of New Mexico can be
found in the life of Mary
Parsons.
She was a nurse during the
Battle of Glorieta Pass.
In 1862.
Later, when Mary and her family
settled in Las Vegas, New
Mexico. She continued to work
alongside local doctors.
As a French Creole woman of
black, French and Indian
ancestry. It likely made it
easier for her to enter the
homes of the families that she
was caring for, who may not have
always been so welcoming if they
realized that she was black.
But nonetheless, Mary with no
formal medical training.
She was called upon because
there were so few nurses, and
she worked in the hospitals and
she made house calls.
But we can still hear this song
today, can't we?
The number of primary care
physicians in this state dropped
by 30% from 2017 to 2021.
Further, the state faces
shortages of all healthcare
providers, including nurses like
Mary, but also physical
therapists, pharmacists,
physician's assistants, and
nurse practitioners. We have all
faced the challenge of trying to
get an appointment with the
primary care provider, much less
trying to get an appointment
with a specialist.
The challenges New Mexico faced
in 1862 of a lack of medical
professionals.
It shouldn't be the case today.
There must be solutions to the
healthcare crisis we face
because the lack of health
access only exacerbates the
disparities that we see today
all across racial and ethnic
demographics.
The infant mortality rate for
African Americans in New Mexico
is the highest among all ethnic
groups, and there is a crisis of
chronic disease including
diabetes, heart disease, kidney
disease among all ethnic groups
in this state, Native Americans,
Hispanic Americans and African
Americans. Health is woven into
everything that we do, and we
must ensure that there are
structures to support the long
term health and well-being of
our community.
dy
If we are to do anything.
We must address the deep health
disparities that we experience
in our community. We must be
equipped with medical
professionals in all corners of
the state to ensure that we can
be healthy for generations to
come. This is still the song of
New Mexico. Our song of New
Mexico is in creating community.
Blackdom was established near
Roswell in 1901 by the Boyers.
There was Pettiford Village, a
gathering of family.
is in Albuquerque's South
Valley, which was the homestead
for my family in the 1930s. The
women's club movement in the
1920s united women in
neighborhoods and cities,
churches like Grant Chapel AME
Church, and God's House Church
were founded. Our song has never
been a solo.
Our song is an orchestra that is
richer and more vibrant when
each instrument plays its chord.
Today we see representation of
so many community organizations,
schools, churches, sororities,
fraternities and groups. This my
community is our strength. This
has always been our strength,
our song rises when we all rise
together. But truly,
But truly our song of New Mexico
is seen in the eyes of the young
people who have been here today.
It was educators like Mary
McIntosh, who was a librarian in
Santa Fe in 1892, and those who
paved the way when school
systems were being integrated
like uh Seola Holland's Ray and
Tucum Cary, Naomi Laver Laverna
Smith in Carlsbad and Myrtle
Farqua and Hobbs and Ida O.
Jackson in Clovis, who have been
ensuring that our young people
are prepared for the future that
awaits them.
We have benefited from educators
in our community and we must
still prioritize the education
of all of our students.
The best song of our black
community has been pouring into
the lives of our students in all
corners of the state. I am a
product of this song. I am the
daughter of two educators in
Albuquerque Albuquerque public
schools. I'm a graduate of APS
who took my amazing public
school education to the
prestigious Fisk University,
Vanderbilt University,
University of North Carolina and
across the globe. We
continue to elevate the hard
work of educators and celebrate
the amazing accomplishment of
our students. We must also make
it so.
We must also make it so that
when students like me have gone
off to gain this education that
the best jobs are waiting for
them, right here in this state.
our greatest export can no
longer be our brightest minds.
They are our best song.
We must invest in our young
people because theirs is the
song of tomorrow.
Young people, you should look
around and say, as Langston
Hughes said in his poem,
tomorrow I'll be at the table.
Young people today, you are
guests in the people's house.
Tomorrow you will be the ones
doing the business of this
house.
Today you are visiting offices.
And you're leaving your hopes
for a better future for New
Mexico, but tomorrow, tomorrow
those offices will be yours and
you will be the ones creating a
better tomorrow. Today people
may say to you, you're just a
kid.
But tomorrow, no one will dare
say that to you.
Our song of New Mexico has
always been a song of hope.
Our song is gospel. It's full of
redemption. It's rap that speaks
truth to power. It's the
storytelling of a good country
song, and it's the love that
flows from R&B. Our song of New
Mexico is the resistance and
anger of rock and roll, and it
is the complexity of jazz. It is
that song that is full of better
tomorrows. Tomorrows that were
only dreamed of by Esteban.
Tomorrow's dreamed of by the
buffalo soldiers by my ancestors
and by your ancestors, we have
become their wildest dream and
the fulfillment of their song.
We too sing New Mexico, and if
you can't hear that song.
You should be ashamed because
how beautiful it is. I too sing
New Mexico. I too am New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Doctor Karissa
Colbert for those wonderful and
inspiring words.
Next
We, we have a musical selection
and it's a special musical
selection. It's from Kendra
Crawford, a 4th grader at coach
of the Elementary School and
Tasha Crawford, a 3rd grader at
Coach of the Elementary School.
Let's welcome them now.
Um
I love you.
Mhm
For your
He never
me.
And
My
is
I've been
From the moment that I wake.
up.
Until I
my
Oh
ing
Of the good
I've got
Right.
And all
So
And
And all
You
So
With
will sing
of
I love
your.
is
You have
Yeah
Yeah
And darkest night.
You
are close.
like no
I've known you as a father.
I've known you
F
Oh
And
And
Good
of
Yeah
And
for
Yeah
And
So
With
table
Oh
will say
of the good.
of God
You
This is running
It's
You
This is
He's
With my
I
day
Good
is running
Me
You're goodness is running.
is running
To me
You're
is
He's
But my life
I
Yeah
This is
And
R
And
You
for
And
You
so
With
table
Oh
I will say
Of the
The
And
And
You had
Where
Oh
will say
of the good.
of God
Oh
will say
Uh
of
Oh
Of the
of God
Kendra and Tasha Crawford, thank
you for sharing your talent with
us today.
OK.
Now as we close this great day
and celebration, we've learned
many things, but most of all
that inclusivity must be at the
forefront of all our work, and
people like Terrence Johnson and
Demetrius Sampson, who came all
the way from Dallas, Texas to
join us today. Thank you, and we
must create an environment where
diverse voices are heard and
valued. Let us honor the legacy
of those who have fought for
freedom and justice and let us
be inspired to continue.
their work. May we strive to
create a future where all
individuals can live with
dignity and opportunity. Let us
all sing New Mexico.
At this point I would like to
return the chair to lieutenant
Governor Howie Morales for the
purpose of dissolving the
committee of the whole House and
Senate.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
legislature, please help me in
welcoming and thanking
Representative Pamela Hernan for
presiding officer of today's
special events.
We may be seated.
Mr. Chair recognizes House
majority floor leader Spansky.
I ask unanimous consent that the
whole House and Senate rise and
report progress. There ain't no
objection. It is so ordered.
Mr. Chair recognizes House
Majority floor leader Sapansky.
Ask unanimous consent that the
joint session of the House and
Senate now be dissolved. If
there is no objection.
It is so ordered the joint
session of the House and Senate
has now been dissolved.
Congratulations once again, such
a beautiful ceremony.
And
Thank you again for joining us
for this celebration of African
American Day 25 years strong.
To our esteemed guest.
And our esteemed senators, thank
you for joining us, enjoying
session.
As you make your way out of the
chamber, members of the House
stay nearby. We will continue
with floor session.
Shortly after our guests depart.
I was
Thank you once again for joining
us for this 25th celebration of
African American Day at the New
Mexico Legislature.
Thank you to our host,
Representative Para Herndon, uh,
for presiding over today's
celebrations and thank you to
all of our esteemed guests for
having joined us today.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports objection. It is so
ordered.
lurk to read.
Mr. Speaker.
Your transportation public works
and capital improvements
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 3 has had it under
consideration reports and with
the recommendation that it do
pass as amended.
And thence referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
art de la Cruze's chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption,
please favorable report in House
Bill 3. All those in favor
signify by saying a.
All the suppose nay, the Iabic
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, rural development
land grants and cultural Affairs
Committee to him has been
referred House Bill 161 has had
it under consideration report
and recommendation that it do
pass respectfully submitted
Linda Serato, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move it option.
We are an adoption of a
favorable community reporting
House Bill 161. All those in
favor and if I say I.
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 239
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Linda
Surato chair.
Mr. Speaker, of adoption. We are
adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
23 9 all those in favor and I
say 9.
Bona, the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, rural development
land grants and cultural affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 273 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the energy,
environment and natural
Resources Committee respectfully
submitted Linda Sorato, chair.
Mr. Speaker, a good option. We
adoption of a favorable
community report in House Bill
273. All those in favor signify
by saying aye.
I suppose the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rules about
land grants and cultural affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 288 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted Linda Sarato chair.
Mr. Speaker, adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 288. All those in
favor signified by say 90
I suppose, the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
asseass and water resources
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 240 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Christina Ortez
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption.
We are an adoption of a
favorable committee report in
Housevie 240. All those in favor
signified by saying no.
Proposing AAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
asseass and waters Resources
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 284 has had it under
consideration report, same with
the recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Cristina Ortez chair
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report in the House Bill 284.
All those in favors and if I say
no.
Oh, suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
Public Affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 197
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass and it's
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair.
Mr. Speaker, moved adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
197. All those in favor saying
589.
I don't suppose na. Yes, I have
a committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
to him has been referred House
Bill 71 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee, respectfully
submitted G Andres from our
chair Speaker, I move adoption
of the committee report. We are
adoption of a favorable
committee report on House Bill
71. All those in favor send 5 by
saying 9.
A,
although supposed nay.
The SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor veterans
and military affairs Committee 2
has been referred House Bill 246
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
this referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted, Patricia Roel
Caballero, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report a favorable
community report in House Bill
246. All those in favor, say if
I say 90 snake.
The IAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and Military Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 264 has had it under
consideration report and with
recommendation that it do pass
and it referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Roel
Caballero chair. Mr. Speaker, I
move adoption of the committee
report of a favorable committee
report in House Bill 264. All
those in favor unified by say
90. I supposed ne.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 282 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
education committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Roel
Caraucer.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report of a
favorable report in House Bill
282. All those in favor 5 by
saying 9.
I suppose name.
The report adopted.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
It's an objection, it is
ordered.
cle r k to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senate
As amended and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 47.
Senate Bill 75 as amended.
Senate Bill 161 and request the
concurrence of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
The message will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business so ordered.
Members, we will.
be having
Members, we will be having floor
session tomorrow.
Mm
And not tonight.
Thank you.
Um
We will plan on coming to the
floor tomorrow at 2, I believe
there will be some morning
committees that will convene and
some late morning committees
that will convene, but we'll
plan on coming to the floor.
Add roughly 2 p.m.
And the announcements, gentlemen
from Oter or and Black.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, pointing
a personal privilege.
Did your point.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. As you've
probably seen in the last couple
of days and the news and in our
consumer and public affairs
Committee.
We have continued to have the
chair of that committee.
Not use the rules equally with
members.
So, I will give you one example
from yesterday, Mr. Speaker.
There was a member from the
Democratic side of the aisle who
was able to speak for 5 or 6
minutes and read a script off of
an iPad.
Or maybe it was a MacBook. I'm
not sure. But our member on our
side of the aisle, Mr. Speaker.
They were only allowed to phrase
whatever they said as a
question.
Which goes against what the
rules of this house say, every
member is equal.
As well in the guide for chairs
of committees, Mr. Speaker. It
says that chairs must be
scrupulously fair.
That was something that was
absolutely unfair, Mr. Speaker,
and I find it to be very
Unhelpful to the committee
process when some rules are
applied to some members.
And some rules are applied to
others who just so happen to be
in the minority.
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will just
continue to direct.
The committee and the bodies's
attention to the House rules, I
encourage me, people who are
chairs of committees to read
them. I know most of our chairs
are very, very good, Mr.
Speaker. I have great, great
respect for most of our chairs.
There are just a couple of folks
who do not look at the rules, do
not use the rules correctly and
it's a shame because this is
such a great honored and storied
institution and me as a person
in the minority.
We came to this legislature to
help our people and to help the
people that we were elected to
represent.
It is very hard to represent
your people when you're not
allowed to say or speak for your
people on the floor. Well, we
are on the floor, thankfully
because Mr. Speaker is very
fair, but in, in committees, it
is not that way, especially in
consumer and public affairs. So,
Mr. Speaker, I would just
request that maybe someone have
a conversation with those
particular chairs. Most of the
problems are in health and human
Services Committee and in
consumer and public affairs
Committee to see about fairness
for chairs regarding the
minority. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. I appreciate it. No
gentlemen from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, the House
Democratic Caucus will be having
a meeting immediately after the
floor in room 317, uh, please
refer to the message that you
got. Thank you.
gentlemen from Donana. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet in room 307,
15 minutes following the
Democratic caucus meeting. no
gentle lady from Berlin
representative on Neonoro.
Mr. Speaker, consumer.
wait, no, not consumer, commerce
and economic Development
Committee will meet in room 317
following caucus.
Members signal a gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan,
Representative Johnson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow 10 a.m., room 305.
Thank you. No, gentle lady from
Los Alamos, Santa Fe and
Sandoval, Representative
Chandler. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
Your House Judiciary Committee
will meet 15 minutes after the
Democratic caucus. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker
any other announcements?
Right, gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until 2
p.m. tomorrow.
Members say no, 2 p.m. tomorrow.
Happy Saint Valentine's Day.
The House of Senate recess till
2 p.m. tomorrow.
And as those
Yeah,
yeah.
I think so. I have some joint
muscle.
So I've been just laying in the
car.
I
There was something that they
said.
uh
I'm gonna ask
Well it kind of matters if you
are a committee chair.
Like, uh, I'm
supposed to meet at 1:30.
OK.
17.
