It will.
Yes.
This is my head down here.
They present house bill one
fifty three industry leading to
crime.
Rating that each animal stolen
by a person constitutes a
separate offence of livestock
Clark's.
I have looked up the definition
of livestock.
And it is seventy seven dash one
hundred dash two hundred
definitions K..
Livestock all domestic
domesticated animals that are
used or raised on a farm or
ranch and exotic animals in
captivity and includes horses
**** mules cattle sheep goats.
One bison whole tree also
features in use right is
kabbalists and for and I'm not
sure how to say this word I
don't even know what it is to be
quite honest with you service
day.
But does not include canine or
feline and so that is the
definition of.
The department of public safety
of said that they would create a
cumulative penalty for stealing
and this comes at the small.
Create this bill house bill one
fifty three would create a
cumulative penalty for stealing
a barnyard farm animals whether
it's a flock of sheep herd of
horses a murder of crows a
rafter of turkeys or gaggle of
geese I did not know that
Turkey's for called a raft a
group of the more.
Madam chair are antiquated
livestock bills do need to be
updated.
Of.
Try this of your.
Where we are change in this
particular bill is on page two
of the bill that you have before
you.
And it states under page two
line fourteen.
To ever commits Larson is a
property of values.
Livestock.
As Mrs whoever commits largely
when the property value so let's
live stuff is guilty of a third
degree felony regardless of its
value.
This material provided the.
Multiple of structural
constitute a separate offense
which in animals.
Madam chair.
The reason I am bringing this
bill forward is we still have
one stop this in the state of
New Mexico.
And I know that there has been
lots of problems of with.
Whatever the specially working
with the livestock board
whenever these people have been
found.
And they do be go go before and
judge it is one of finance
whether they steal one hand.
Our hundred.
That it's always considered one
of fits what we have found in
doing research this is the court
talk clarity.
On what the intent of the
legislature's to wants to do and
I think that this does cleared
up.
Madam chair members of the
committee that by our is here
we've had responses from.
All of these of offices like to
support district attorney the
public defender's office
returning general sentencing
commission corrections for the
department of public safety.
And they.
The FIR also states that house
bill one fifty three will amend
the crime larceny to change you
know the prosecution for
livestock this.
Right now the third group
building I potential both
punishable up to three years in
prison maybe this will make
every still an animal a separate
loss.
Currently a single episode of
this.
Can still constitutes one prime
even if multiple animals or so.
Here I'm sorry my has been well
let me.
Madam chair.
We have.
In my own case.
I have had heard several stolen.
We had the last stop of the
inspectors out there.
At one money pastors which did
does have public road going
through it.
You can tell where they had back
to trailer up using a big of how
they had.
Both these animals in in that
bill was still never be found to
be.
Our us and our neighbors around
my area and there's one range
that goes from my website.
Years passed.
To.
Same thing is happening.
And it's gotten to the point now
we're.
There have been forces down and
that is.
A big big deal right there madam
chair I think what we're trying
to do here and I and I do have
the backing of the district
attorney's on this to.
Because they want to clear to
they wanted to go after these
people that work committee the
suspense madam chair it is in
every analysis that you read
there it does show what we're
trying to do.
And.
Maybe this will.
So the point that we are in tune
to what they're asking us to do
and that is to clarify the
situation madam chair members of
the committee joining me today
is Elisabeth Johnson and if you
will state your credentials to
the committee thank you madam
chair I move the Johnson on the
general counsel for the house
Republicans but I was actually
are and listen to this committee
last year so it's nice to come
before you again on behalf of
Representative Ezzell I'm just
going to quickly regained on
why this is important to
understand why this came to our
attention on October sixth of
last year the New Mexico Supreme
Court issued opinion that said
under our general larceny
statute that we charge people
for any type of legislative
including livestock that when
the theft is a livestock that
now needs it's Kirk incident so
if a fat guy comes and steals
twenty cattle sharks at one time
for larceny even though
the victim has lost the value of
twenty have.
I actually have
a quote from their opinion that
says
just pulling it up I had money
my email as well but the Supreme
Court said that far general
larceny statute under which
livestock is covered does not
express an intent to prosecute
defendants for each animal
they've allegedly stolen and set
the statute expresses an intent
to prosecute defendants for each
episode of that we believe this
is wrong for a couple of reasons
one is that doesn't fit
harmoniously with the rest of
the larceny statute if you still
ten TV's it's based on the value
of what you stole
And we believe that this will
that harmoniously and in with
our statute and it's our belief
that livestock theft is set out
specifically in the larceny
statute because of our unique
environment
agriculture's unique role and
value in our way of life and it
sent out that way because we
value with these people bring to
our community and we understand
How.
How bad it is on and with
something like this happens so
with that that's all I I have to
add from the technical side.
Thank you very much for that
madam chair we do stand for
questions thank you
Representative Ezzell and I a
first we'll go to the audience
and see how many members would
like to speak in support of this
bill.
Thank you and how many members
who at how many members of the
audience would like to speak up
against this bill.
Okay will we will recognize you
wanted time for a two minute of
COVID of please come forward and
state your name for the record.
I yes thank you good morning
madam chair members of the
committee probably have a
register of this field from
last.
Representative twenty thousand
member families the state and on
behalf of our members we do
support house bill one fifty
three which strengthens the
penalties for livestock that are
separating the the future
payments for every animal stolen
was system to train individuals
from participating in that of
livestock which is quite
literally the livelihood of many
of our party's.
Unlike other stolen property how
can be sold at full value
analyst talk option for anywhere
between seven hundred fifty
dollars per head to fourteen out
fourteen hundred dollars per
head and that can quite
literally cost or producers
thousands of dollars.
Hello are high value assets they
can easily be stolen in a very
rural states such as New Mexico
I want it however it currently
contracting due to the prolonged
drought we are concerned that
cattle prices have continued to
rise and therefore needs maybe
seeing this as an opportunity to
have a quick ways to make it pay
off and for these reasons we ask
that you support hospital
funding right thank you thank
you of the the gentleman in the
back.
Thank you.
Your madam chair members of the
committee I was in New Mexico
last awkward the two cases with
before the supreme court one of
them was my case January first
St hello store for state and in
both of those cases when the
Supreme Court rendered that only
they were they were charged with
several counts twenty three
thousand one case and thirty
thousand another case the
Supreme Court rendered those are
the one count because they were
still on Monday.
You can imagine that almost
immediately their defense
attorneys were playing deals out
they were very good deals still
a number of cattle and they all
the the status of those faces
planned to of one count and both
of them got a five year sentence
suspended probation no jail
time.
And that's the next slide is the
level of support thank you
Representative Ezzell for for
presenting and we appreciate you
very much thank thank you.
So what we're doing this one
expand on that a little bit.
Hi this is ankita directors
thank you Representative
yourself Representative ask you
want to make a certification we
did respond with the for for
some reason it's not showing up
in we do have support this bill
for the new there are numerous
reasons this is especially in my
opinion affects the small
producers more than the larger
producers because sometimes
small produce relies on two or
three at what are their family
is foods water or not so
producers sometimes can have
more assets out there in order
to come out of the the staff and
depending on the courts have
large or small but just so you
know some of you do grant some
of you do not but how is she
still at the age of two you're
taking away another eight years
of cap property from the staff
so it's not just the cost of
their in particular County it's
also the gases you bring in
future so that is a huge lost
any producer not to mention the
loss of the NA and also just the
time it takes to bring factors
lost so we're we're going to
experience that now just because
of the draft but in the fires of
course to but I did want to
bring that to your attention
thank you thank you thank you of
of please come forward.
Yes yes ma'am Madam chair of a
different Condit and register of
this program protection voters
and upon a rare occasion and I'm
the ones of fifteen years or so
Representative.
We stand strong support of this
piece of legislation
unfortunately in New Mexico law
animals are considered property
property are filing cabinets
property so animals are not
property their station being
sent for each crime against each
animal should be treated
individual itself need to
support this bill thank you
thank you.
Gentleman that is.
Chairman members appreciate your
time on and off the court.
Representative here for Mexico
we're standing in instruction
four thousand three.
The with the should be wiped out
markets and extremely low
margins that come with the
livestock production any any
that we've heard this and so
this is going to give.
Strong backbone to stand behind
and forces through may be
deterring.
Not only is it to protect our
livestock but it's part of our
lives.
We stand in terms for the one
fifty three and and we think a
candy for bringing this for to
help.
Act thank you.
I think if.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is to right.
You might want to step a little
closer to the money yeah okay
good madam chair members of the
committee my name is to look New
Mexico will workers and we
samples were of this piece of
legislation you know as
producers in our state we're
awfully families were often
family businesses and we spent
years and many times generations
working on our genetics our herd
size and perfecting our business
on our craft to produce the best
product that we possibly can and
introduce losses just
devastated.
presentable support thank you
for your consideration.
Are there any other O. K.
comfort.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Joe cover
some of our friends our family
that it would pop.
This.
And the for the only business
that can really range.
And the.
Six hundred fifty years with
anyway we sent a strong
supporter of this bill and I
really like to see the court the
teachers a little bit more than
let people back to but this bill
will help that cause the value.
Thank you thank you.
Are there any other members of
the audience all right then
we'll we'll turn to the
committee representative
Armstrong thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Ezzell for bringing this
legislation forward Senator
supported in the audience I did
take a picture to sign up.
Which here yesterday when we're
talking about the caliphate shut
me up but anyway the question
that I have for you Madam chair
representative is.
a lot of people don't understand
the fast communities that these
cattle are in.
Can you explain just a little
bit about
Affirmation vaccination.
growing your heard and how long
that might take and how
devastating it would be for
something like this to happen
Madam chair representative
Armstrong thank you very much
for that question
As Mr Culbertson was talk with
only six hundred fifty people in
that one particular account and
how many thousands of thousands
of dead cattle that are there it
is devastating to those people.
Not only up there that
throughout our state whether
it's one head of cattle or
whether it's a hundred or the
whole herd or that she provided
the case may be because these
ranchers and farmers that do
livestock they take the time to.
Take care of their animals
vaccinations starts whatever
these babies or young just to
protect them from the different
disease and everything that go
on.
In light of.
Not only feed and water for
these animals not just grouping
everything and get not just
strictly category it but if.
Whatever they do that they're
also helping defeat the state as
well.
Will if they are put out of
business due to livestock this.
That means goes late goes away
for the state's wildlife.
Whenever my particular herd sire
was stolen.
And he was a young when he was
three year old registered full.
That happened eight miles from
my house.
And I'm not able to get all over
my ranch every single day
there's lots of branches that
are in the same same situation.
Course that is a really big deal
if there's an event going on
there have been instances for
forces have been stop and and
counter for.
Some of those horses can range
all the way up will.
Good growth force my brain fifty
thousand dollars.
But whenever there is a trying
to that's the Dawn to.
That's loaded up with horses and
tack and everything else that's
a sizeable investment that just
rolled out of there that nobody
will see ever again.
The court did want clarification
and I think that this is one way
of getting it done it makes
sense it's easy to divest as far
as putting a value on those
particular at as you heard from
the audience for the value of
cattle is right now with the
stress situation that's going on
that price is going to continue
to rise as far as price for
animal.
If it's a young heifers that is
stolen as was stated earlier by
audience members.
That have for going into being
the first time and turning her
into the calf through the.
Here is for probably the next
eight to ten years.
That person that has been.
Had that happened to them look
at the income the potential
income that they have lost.
If we don't step up until the
courts what needs to happen this
will continue and these people
that do want to do more to these
livestock producers.
They're going to keep after it
no matter what.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
that explanation of of a lot of
people don't know the
terminology and something like
that and so I just wanted you to
expand on that so I appreciate
it I just want to know I stand
full support thank you madam
chair thank you representative
Representative somehow thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative these of bringing
this bill forward it hasn't
been.
A month ago I don't believe that
there was a.
Fund page article on the
livestock weekly for somebody
drove a semi truck up to the
Senate pans and loaded a camera
tell it was it is thirty forty
and.
And this bill.
This bill.
Hello.
Prosecute that type of a
criminal.
For they don't just get a slap
on the hand.
Mr poses at.
You're exactly right
representatives more and it's
getting more and more prevalent
because of.
With the courts are able to do
we had a during down there in my
area is that the same thing
happened for us catapult rolled
up there is in the middle of the
night dark of the night if you
want to call it that and half of
the half big pieces.
They loaded up on the truck and
rolled.
In the night watchman was under
the assumption that the scandal
had been solved that was
definitely not the case.
That.
Pueblo of their cattle that
rolled out of there with the
potential of the milk ability of
that plus the camps and
everything else that was huge to
those rate there were no leaks
on.
So it is out there led to some
gentleman it's not only happens
in the rural areas that also
happens support in areas as
well.
Flocks of sheep.
Goes happens the same thing
we're now contracting with go to
hers to move them into state
forced to help with the the
brush problem that we have there
the salt cedar and everything
else there have been instances
where those of certain species
have been stolen as well so it
is still open madam chair.
Madam chair representative I
agree with you completely that
there is a problem with that in
the livestock industry and and
when you look at a ranch.
What they have to sell those are
caps their calves of coming up
and if they don't have that they
don't have money to pay the bank
and it affects everybody and and
I thank you for bringing this
bill forward I will strongly
supported that's all I have
madam chair thank you.
I realized I and when we take
the public speaker size for got
to go to our people online we
have some people online so I'm
going to recognize and now I'd
like to recognize a lowered
Patterson.
To.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name for better
sense I am the current president
of New Mexico cattle growers
association and I'll let Bronson
corns comments Representative R.
says the ation so my comments
come from a producer standpoint.
I am a current producer in five
counties in this state.
I formerly served their
governors on the New Mexico
livestock board and that I have
first hand knowledge of what
that.
Staff can date to a cattle
operations bottom line.
We I strongly support this bill
and support staff Representative
Ezzell and her bringing it
forward
the livestock board has to do
goals one is to protect staff
and I think this bill at brings
a stronger hammer to come down
on on that issue but they also
have a nother issue and that's
animal health and the no
traceability and where these
animals go and how they affect
them the food supply is just as
important and this bill will
reduce animal fast across all
our livestock species and not
only that it protects the the
bottom line in the investments
are producers make in every
single county in this state
thank you madam chair and thank
you candy Ezzell for bringing
this forward.
Thank you Mr Paterson the
channel that recognized Carla.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members Carlos not
able to join us my name is Leri
Sonntag speaking on behalf of
the New Mexico business
coalition represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans the focus of New Mexico
business coalition is to find a
better place to live and work
but we have an abundance of good
paying jobs to provide for our
families that includes our
agricultural community and
ranchers that deal with cattle
we fully support house bill one
fifty three this appears to be
an oversight and the the laws
that deal with Larson and have
for many reasons other than well
articulated by those in the room
which I won't repeat we
encourage you to support house
bill one to.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir and then Gerald
recognize
Jason.
There's
your system.
After all it is okay thank you.
All right now we will go back to
questions from the members and I
think our next a Representative
west Representative Marian
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the.
members of the audience and they
coming off and dissipating of
this
Representative is out
I can I can appreciate the the
the frustration you feel the way
this loss written because it's
different than the way Larson he
works for other kinds of drugs
but the way that largely works
for other kinds of drugs not to
allow a charge for each item
stolen.
For each for example if you're
going to rob a bank he is and
you take five thousand dollars
you don't have five thousand
charges the instead the way it's
done is you look at the value of
the item taken.
And then the glory of crime is
based on that and so in this
situation wondering and I know
that historically because I've
looked it up last night this
concept of livestock being sort
of you it's it's a it's any
animal is just our livestock
date I understand that and that
goes back in I think the
earliest I found the statute was
in eighteen forty four.
So it's kind it's obviously a
historical way that this is been
done in your industry but I'm
wondering if I better for
alternative way to.
Do this would be to not treat
every animal as a single as as a
whole and
Have a long track the way
largely is done in other
situations and that is we look
at the value of the animal and
if the value the aggregate value
of the animals taken is of the
twenty five thousand dollars or
whatever is going to be a second
degree felony is going to be a
much higher crime I and I and
I'm with first I just kind of
like your response to that
because.
That would avoid constitutional
issues of that chronic usual
punishment where you had and and
animals with that very small
value state chickens or chickens
with the caller checks checks
things.
Six.
you have a box of twenty six and
and somebody could be sentenced
to prison for seven years I mean
I don't think that any judge is
really going to do that so
I wonder if you given any
thought to that and and what's
your reaction to looking at that
kind of a change would be.
Madam chair representative
Matthews thank you very much for
your question I did some
research two years went back a
little bit farther than mine did
you sit your sweat back to
eighteen forty four and in that
particular scenario.
That hunger.
It was really see they have
these.
People.
We don't do that anymore but the
chief of the Courts need
clarification and that's what
this bill is trying to do if you
look at your house committee
analyst report and assistant to
do issues.
Of.
Last this right now the
difference in in the other large
the case and state.
And it has never if you will
right right there and it's a
loss a teammate for chapter
forty seven fifteen and this is
New Mexico has consistently
traded the larceny of livestock
differently from the LAR state
better things in that punishment
for the lower state livestock
has never depended upon the
value that the particular animal
stuff okay so when we go back to
work current time there's
there's two cases in particular
in two thousand seventeen in two
thousand nineteen
let's see there was a multiple
charges the District Court
identified each episode of that
as the you know the prosecution
rather than that the general
take one defended that it taking
eighteen head of capital in two
episodes the court reduced his
charges from eighteen individual
counts of larceny to to
counselors.
Two separate instances that's
all it was charged with the
other defendant who had worked
together with this other person
to still twenty five cattle at
one time had their twenty five
counts of larceny drop to one
cap locks.
The court is making
clarification and that's what
we're trying to do to change
this particular loss where
livestock is not treated
differently than any other of
our state case in our state.
Have had chair representative is
out I've had it I understand it
and when I'm off when they're
suggesting is that perhaps the
better solution I appreciate
your problem but I'm thinking
that maybe the better solution
is to treat the staff of animals
the same way that we treat this
at all other items your your
whatever and that we look at the
values assuming one instance of
staff that may not you know
that's not going to seven
different farms is a different
situation but from one.
Place.
One time and that is we we look
at the value of the individual
items taken.
And that the payment and then
that becomes the basis for what
the charges.
And the more valuable the items
taken the higher the level of
crime.
and it.
It's certainly a in in in the
non livestock world that's not
always
a perfect solution but it is a
proportionate solution and with
the courts would look at this
for instruction they're going to
look to see if the punishment is
proportionate to the crime.
And if you're going to take a
of a long staff is.
Very low in value I want to
charge somebody and have them
sent to prison for seventy five
years for taking.
Several items that are very
small value.
I would I would think and I'm
not the judge but I would think
that it's very very likely that.
Would not do that they would
find that cool.
So I'm thinking come back to the
larceny in using larceny in the
same way we use it for other
products and other items would
avoid that problem and give you
a much for proportionate
response to the to the actual
impact of the crime on the
victim.
Madam chair representative
Matthews thank you very much for
your comments there.
Like I said earlier we are
making clarification for the
courts the courts would have the
ability I think to make an
assessment of the value of
cattle by doing their own
research obviously a registered
animal is worth more than and
not that of non registered.
Of heifer is going to be worth
more than a ten year old house
stuff worth herd sire is going
to be a lot more than your
standard full so I think that
there's some.
And that.
Twenty five baby chicks
obviously is going to be.
At the very decreased value but
still it's that I want.
Madam chair okay it is Mr also
would like to my response to
that I would appreciate yes
thank you madam chair
Representative Matthews and
thank you for giving us an open
discussion on this that was one
of the options we considered but
in in the end we didn't go with
that option because we the court
has interpreted our legislative
intent on this larceny statute
and if it is now our
responsibility to either affirm
or deny helping interpreted it
so basically.
We looked at the statute we
looked at various interpretation
economic we look at the way
extracted and we noticed one
thing.
It's not clearly included in the
rest of the larceny statutes so
obviously there's a piece of
that intent that says something
different about lives and I
think this goes to the point
that was made by the animal
protection voters percent is
that in our.
Lives in our everyday lives have
more than just a value they have
an imputed value.
In our ecosystems and the way
that we run our businesses and
our
For those of us are in
agriculture so we believe that
in order to Parker reason that's
why we drafted a bill the way we
did Representative the same
time.
I really appreciate your
discussion on this and I think
that that that would you offer
is also probably a fair
assessment yes because in the
long run for specific reason I
do think it's reasonable so all
of us all to sleep.
Thank you Representative Kate's.
Thank you madam chair
and thank you for this
presentation Representative
Ezzell I was also going to ask
permission to talk expert
witness
I I to share Representative
Matthews concerns
I I I appreciate
the devastation of this crime
and that it is not just the
simple fact that it is you know
ancestral assets it is it is an
investment and I can absolutely
see that the individual title
and and so first I have a six
point do not reserves the value
of what is stolen that is not
the the.
Words to the.
Courts do not.
They they are they have
established of the value will be
either retail or fair market
value for the and I see
definitely where cattle
especially livestock animals in
general are definitely under
undervalued because they're not
just a fair market price their
investment as you said in DNA
and statue from eighteen forty
four is not our modern day
ranchers with the enormous
amount of investments that they
put into this and it's a long
term investment and so I will
say that that is my concern with
the way this bill is right right
now it's not that I don't see
that there is an issue and I
want to support this issue seems
contrary to the current larceny
laws such as if you you brought
up the metaphor of TV's so if
the TV's are were you know a
dollar it it's a ten dollar
crying to TV's are worth ten
thousand dollars each sentence
more eight and that that's how
are larceny crimes are about the
value and I would just I
especially since we have in
ancient and I also appreciate
Representative is also a comment
about our our livestock
definitions in many of our
ranching laws are antiquated
when you're cleaning crows I I I
don't know I don't know what's
going to be litigated
that you just said the crows
were in that definition
I I I would I misunderstand the
that's what that's what I have
but I can see that were I
believe the cattle's under
valued and we can change the
definition of how cattle as an
investment is my mic metaphor is
that you're not stealing
something from the store you're
stealing the store.
And so when when there is this
cattle fish so I appreciate your
presentation I will say that
just the way the bills written
currently I will not be
supporting it but but I look
forward to something that I can
support because they do see this
is a real problem thank you
madam chair I might get
clarification.
Crows was not under the list of
livestock okay pros was spelled
out by the.
This is from.
House committee analyst report
where they did.
Put in there.
For Mendel's barnyard farm
animals flock of sheep herder
forces and murder of credits
right but that is not the death
is press do not fall under the
definition of life.
It was just what was rafter of
turkeys again these are the ones
that clear thank you thank you
for that yeah and madam chair on
that point again I really am so
thankful that were actually just
talking about this if we're
having an open conversation I
will say.
The staff came from
constitutional appears so I'm
looking at the statute I'm
looking at an interpretation
cannons and I'm saying.
There's something about the
original draft of this law that
made livestock different and
from my perspective it is my
duty to preserve that an extract
however I I totally respect the
value argument and you know if
Representative Ezzell is open
to.
To to.
Discussing that
I will.
Everybody's looking at me right.
Can I make a call.
Hi the chair will recognize that
Representative arms thank you
madam chair I just want to bring
it to everyone's attention that
this goes to to sharing acts
so I think that they the the
everything will be hammered out
there I know that they are
willing to you know make some
sacrifices because they at least
look at it but I think the the
proper place to talk about if
it's.
Judiciary compliant
Representative whatever you want
to say would be in that
committee I think the problem is
a real problem.
And and it and it needs to be
addressed but I I really think
that they will it'll be
evaluated in Judiciary to the
fullest extent and.
I just like to say a few words I
to appreciate.
I want to start Representative.
Representative Allison is.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to just share my fault so
the topic of discussion.
There is no federal haven for
the wrestlers the Navajo Nation.
There is high wrestling on the
Navajo Nation.
Four people continue to do it is
because of sovereignty issues
the state laws that you're
trying to manage do not apply
sovereign nations so people
continue to do that.
I would like to see somebody
take a strong headed say on this
case we're going to follow the
New Mexico Law and prosecute to
the full extent.
And in that manner I would
appreciate or I would support
your house bill us
Representative Ezzell on the
other hand.
I agree with of the COVID that
Representative Matthews may that
in reading through the the house
of malice is report it seems
that expresses the situation
where there is doubled double
jeopardy and some census so
right now I am sitting on the
fence because of I see both
sides I want to see.
The wrestlers that are stealing.
Arkells in the nation they
prosecuted to the full extent of
the law at the same time I do
not want to fill the jails with
wrestlers when there's more
serious crime being committed
that.
The people that are committing
does for serious crimes are of
still on the street so at this
time hi I'm certain objects
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and in
closing and then I'll call for
motion idea.
I think this is an egregious
problem I really do I I think
this solution is I I don't think
this is the right solution to a
huge problem so
and and I I fully sympathize
with the intent of this
legislation I really do I I'm
just not sure it's the right
solution and and I think I think
maybe it's a new definition of
livestock maybe it's time into
Larson I don't there are a lot
of things we could do that we're
not doing in this legislation I
think it ought to be considered
but
I think everybody has spoken
here and I'm gonna go ahead
we're getting to the floor
pretty soon and I'm gonna.
Uh suggested I'm gonna call for
someone to make a motion on
Madam I make a motion for the
past the secretary okay we have
a motion for two passed in a
second I.
Armstrong in the second by
A representative of Marvel the
clerk called madam chair yes I
was called to the site excuse me
ma'am Representative.
Chair members committee thank
you very much I do appreciate
the robust right those comp
comments that were made during
here
if we don't do something this
problem is going to continue the
courts are asking for
clarification I would be open
for eighteen passed with no
record he is the time to
research a little bit further to
come up with some solutions for
that according to what Mr
Representative Matthews is a
talk about seeing if we might be
able to dress the concerns that
vice chair LESC has brought
forward I don't know if that's
going to be possible or not that
we go forward we're going to
see.
Tenniel this half not just out
on on the ranches or anything
else the other fees such as
ready as shape at racetrack see
option Mr spears that's the
problem that we're trying to K.
right here in with that I'm
going to leave it in the hands
of the committee thank you very
much meant to madam chair with
that can I make a motion to past
with direct.
All right.
just a second off okay we now
have a motion to pass with no
Representative with the clerk to
call the case manager question
first is that the.
I've never had that happen it
remains were through.
It I explained yes I'll turn
over to the committee this thank
you.
The motion you have to result
for small.
Right yes motion passes yes I'm
sorry we have
excuse me so the government
madam chair there was a question
on the new on the no REC and
what that means is.
That it can go on to the next
committee.
And we're not really saying it's
right or wrong and my direct
line yes yes thank you thank you
so I mean do I need to withdraw
money yes madam chair was from
my motion for two minutes thank
you all right now we are new
motion of for a do pass with no
rack is that correct with the
quick caller.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative it's.
Representative Ezzell yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Zamora yes
Representative Matthews.
No with an explanation.
Representative
there's more of a price if you
let.
The.
Representative battles.
Yes.
Representative Herrera of the
snow and I would like to explain
to.
so this motion passes and you
are on to a new committee but I
would like to members to explain
about Representative Matthews
yes thank you very much and
again I really appreciate the
problem
we obviously need to make some
changes in the criminal law in
this area and this I think was.
Was really helpful in laying the
the question on the table but it
the reason I'm voting no on the
no where is because I think this
is better committee.
To.
Take this for staff and clarify.
Come back with a committee
substitute of or a I'm sorry
the point extent of
Bill where we could make some
progress this first issue with
the idea of them of looking down
the road and and looking at the
higher question livestock and
where these laws are very I I
just think that we're a better
community.
To discuss and make those
decisions that and saying to
judiciary okay are you lawyers
just figured you know work.
I think we did our job and I
think this is where we I would
like to give a bill to do sherry
that is.
Madam chair and I do appreciate
that Representative Matthews
yesterday I'm sitting on a
committee and we passed a bill
for the Sanchez said this is not
a perfect and when vested that
I'm state money to our I do
guarantee to each and everyone
of you that I will go to once we
do try to make these changes
thank you your blessings before
we do pre seventy four Judiciary
with with an amendment.
And that my comments I would
like to say did
to help with this I I I totally
understand the intent I think we
need a stronger bill like to see
you Representative I think you
would have a stronger down to
take some of these things into
consideration and I would like
to see something passed in this
legislature that address this
problem and with that the
committee will ensure
regulations thank you madam
chair.
Members.
