Representative break up.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
Here
share Sarinana.
Chairman claim.
Your.
Support.
Thank you
is House Bill three to generate
the money yes Representative
also.
It also.
Okay.
Thank you good morning.
Mr chair.
Representative McQueen and good
morning to the rest of the panel
my fellow representatives my
federal colleagues.
I am Anthony Allison and I am
the democratic representative
from San Juan districts for.
The reason I introduce myself
although we all know one
another.
Because recently I was reminded.
Of some of the statements that I
made my first of.
Political campaign.
I had to where everybody.
My name is Anthony Allison and
nobody knows anything else it
is.
What give me a few months.
In New Mexico well no into the
house.
Everything that I do in the
state legislature I put my heart
into it.
That is the reason why I'm sure
in my words from my campaign
with the.
This generating station and the
San Juan money recently closed
after over fifty years of
operation.
I had the distinct honor of
listening to painful stories.
From my people and constituents
about the effects of uranium
mine discharges that have
polluted waterways and led to
the death of livestock sheep and
goats and have cause cancer and
other harmful diseases for the
Navajo and the pueblo people.
These are heart wrenching
stories to listen to.
I was in the coal mining
industry for the past thirty
seven and a half years it is now
my duty as a legislator to
prevent widespread groundwater
contamination that threatens the
San Juan river for drinking
water supplies are agriculture
our recreation and aquatic life.
I am reading this legislation to
require an independent
comprehensive assessment and
cleanup of the San Juan
generating station and its
affiliated mine sites.
Some of the provision important
provisions of this bill are it
applies only to those plants
credit abandonment Authority
after the twenty eighteen and
the abandoned by twenty twenty
three and formerly operated by
investor owned utilities.
It also does not preclude.
Civil suits by individuals
entities and the office of the
Attorney General.
It also applies allows pursuit
of criminal charges I Office of
the Attorney General.
It also directs the San Juan
generating station owners to
prioritize hiring previous
employees and New Mexico
residents for the cleanup
activities.
Before I turn this over to my
experts I need you to think
about the purpose of this bill.
The purpose of this bill is
prevention.
Prevention.
The analyst of the Canadian
clean up plant required in this
bill will ensure that toxic.
Metal contaminants don't leach
into the ground and leak into
waterways or otherwise harm the
public public animals for
agriculture and because negative
public health consequences for
the people of San Juan County
and beyond.
If we fail to act very serious
injury to the health land and
water is foreseeable.
I do not want someone to fifteen
or thirty years down the line to
state that we have the means to
protect to protect the public
population or the pollution from
harming people and did nothing.
I do not want people to say
Anthony Allison failed us.
We failed our communities with
the legacy pollution from the
uranium mines let's not make the
same mistake again.
At this time I would like to
introduce my experts.
My experts are Mr sterling
Grogan.
We used to be in the three coal
coal mines in the four corners
area so we are workmates.
Mr stern Grogan has been
involved in environmental
management and coal and nuclear
remediation for the better part
of thirty years.
He was the senior environmental
money manager at San Juan County
for the Plata Navajo in San Juan
mines and has provided expert
testimony in a variety of cases
involving mining land
reclamation and environmental
monitoring is that approximately
half a dozen cases.
Other.
Wait this is miss burial nasi
see is a lead counsel for new
energy economy and has worked on
many regulatory and
environmental cases involving
the San Juan four corners power
plants and coal plants.
My third witness will be Mr
Chile Garcia.
In our Navajo culture we greet
one another by Ben and ships are
developed at this time I would
like to introduce my grandson by
clan Mr Chile Ozzie.
It is in our culture it has more
meaning to us to introduce and
greet one another by plan that
it is to refer to one another by
name so instead of call in.
Chilly chilly I want to call him
my grades and Chile Aussie.
Chiles was a past president this
your property after for many
years and now he is an
indigenous farmer who farms
downstream of the San Juan
generating station in mind and
as an active community leader.
before I turn it over to Mr
Grogan.
In our Navajo culture where we
offer our daily prayers we
always end with let us walk in
beauty.
Whenever we do a project we pray
for peace and harmony.
We say was honestly that is what
I'm striving for with this with
this legislation question under
claim that their P. peace and
harmony so with was honestly I
refer to Mr sterling Grogan.
Good morning gentleman queen and
representatives.
I'm an ecologist and are told to
graduate degrees one in order to
activation one any college a
letter from you anymore I work
for ten years teaching ecology
and mine reclamation.
My land reclamation when coal is
burned to produce electricity
toxic chemicals become
concentrated in the waste
product which is called coal
ash.
That includes fly edge which
goes up the staff.
And also a lot of marriage which
falls to the bottom of the
third.
Polish typically contains
including this this list is not
comprehensive but it but it
certainly give you an idea of
what collections all about it
typically contains heavy metals
including arsenic lead mercury
cadmium chromium sulfate sodium
chloride in I forgot to add
uranium.
If.
Drug or inhaled these toxicants
can cause cancer and nervous
system impacts including
cognitive deficits developmental
additional delays and behavioral
problems they can also cause
heart damage lung disease
respiratory distress kidney
disease reproductive problems
gastrointestinal illnesses birth
defects and impaired bone growth
in children might add that all
of this information is readily
available on the on the internet
it is supported by a substantial
number of years of
powerful scientific research the
EPA the environmental protection
agency has found that living
next to a coal ash disposal site
such as San Juan money can
increase your risk of cancer or
other diseases when college
comes into contact with water
it's toxic constituents can lead
to orders all under the age and
percolate through the water for
many tens of years public
service company of New Mexico
and the other co owners of the
San Juan generating station have
deposited coal ash into online
money kids at San Juan money.
And unlined waste ponds where
the lack of a barrier between
the coal ash and groundwater
left them vulnerable to leaks
and contamination of groundwater
I have personal knowledge of
coal sludge.
At least one complete one full
dump truck loaded sledge that
was the deposited in an online
money pit I was working for Ph.D
at the time you should be having
inherited San Juan money from
you donations.
And we agreed to clean it up for
public services New Mexico the
slides was deposited into mine
it online.
At the service money and covered
with the geologic material
Shale and sandstone primarily
this is not only not the only
coal ash discharge that occurred
at or around that time or since
I understand from PNM documents
that there have been others
bills some of which were
reported to the regulatory
agencies and some that were not.
I assume the damage already has
occurred from the very spills
and discharges and that is
precisely why I'm calling for
what this bill calls for which
is an independent comprehensive
evaluation.
I understand that PNM and the
other San Juan generating
station co owners have a
demolition plan of their own
what this bill asks for is that
there be an independent
assessment designed to mitigate
the disturbance of affected
areas to make sure the
remediated to protect air and
water resources.
My understanding is that an
effective closure of coal ash
storage sites requires that the
coal ash waste be securely and
permanently isolated from water
including precipitation surface
water and groundwater failure to
isolate cold ash waste from
water will result in leaching of
contaminants if.
Yeah.
To the groundwater or surface
water coal ash waste in pairs
and degrades water quality and
the environment in twenty
nineteen.
NM testified that fifty nine
million tons of coal ash waste
have been produced in the life
of that power plant to
fraudulently fifty years I'm
sorry I have to repeat that
number again because it struck
me fifty nine million tons of
coal ash have been produced and
deposited in San Juan money.
Investigating and remediating
current contaminant releases on
the San Juan generation San Juan
generating station site is
readily achievable if the will
is there to do so evaluating and
controlling the predictable
future impacts from coal ash
deposited in the San Juan money
will require those involved to
identify ways to technically and
financially mitigate impacts to
future generations I encourage
the bill's passage and stand for
questions thank you.
Good morning.
Thank you good morning chairman
McLean and representatives my
name is Merriam the nasty.
The purpose of this bill as
Representative Allison has said
it is to prevent foreseeable
harm we know that there have
been twenty two major just
charges since twenty fourteen
some of these contaminated waste
water spills have been ten
thousand gallons others two
hundred and eighty three
thousand gallons and as recently
as twenty twenty one a million
gallons sometimes PNM is been on
able to quantify the amount of
substance spilled sometimes the
just charters were quick to
claim remediated.
And sometimes it remains seeping
into the earth for over three
months before it was too.
The three areas of concern that
I have that I'd like to share
with you.
One that Mr Grogan touched on
coal combustion residue also
known as coal ash from the San
Juan.
Plans and money is being
disposed in surface mine pits at
the need for that money the
money is permitted to place.
This coal ash in years up to
sixty feet that sixty feet thank
think about.
That are then covered with a
minimum of ten to fifteen feet
of mine spoils under a thin
layer of topsoil the money pits
contain many many millions of
tons of coal ash.
Coal ash as you heard contains
aluminum arsenic boron barium
calcium selenium silicon.
And the list goes on.
The coal ash is disposed has
been disposed in unlined pits
making the likelihood of
leaching into the
the the waste contaminants into
the ground water for stable in
fact PNM witnesses have
testified that the money pits
would be infiltrated by both
rainwater and groundwater over
time.
Failure to isolate coleus from
water will result in leaching of
contaminants which will degrade
water quality and that it
negatively affect the
environment and public health
consistent with public reports
of health impacts these
chemicals cause health impacts
like cancer respiratory
illnesses and birth defects.
This is another thing that was
not reported to NMED there is
since.
Twenty fourteen I'm an existing
nineteen ninety right plume.
This came from San Juan north of
aberration pond and as I said it
was not reported to NMED the
north evaporation pond just
charged because the plume of
nitrate contaminants and
impacted local grand groundwater
at San Juan PNM has relied on
what they called monitored
natural attenuation which means
the companies will just watch as
the pollution continues to seep
into the ground water and flow
offsite water samples from this
night treat plume have contained
elevated nitrates sulfates
chlorides and dissolved
dissolved solids these toxins
are carcinogenic.
Is something else that both PNM
and non PNM witnesses have
testified to it's called the
golden pond it was an online
pods of tactics to San Juan
chemical filled wastewater from
all sources was dumped four
years into a repository an acre
or more in surface area that
workers referred to as golden
pond because of the dark yellow
color of the liquid waste that
workers put into it the waste
water just charge was a
combination of sodium sulfate
and sodium thiosulfate.
This waste discharge was about
thirty three percent salt
solution of sodium sulfur
wastes.
This would be the system was in
operation for sixteen years this
would be about forty million
gallons of waste dumped into the
money for seventy five thousand
tons of sodium sulfur salt
disposed it.
On or near the money PNM had
trucks going down on a daily
basis to transport and dispose
of the chemical waste discharged
into the pit when workers could
not process the waste water fast
enough PNM employees open the
pond drain valve to release
excess waste water into the
subway Arroyo the over flow
waste was just charged regular
regularly in the showing Arroyo
for years.
Shumway Arroyo empties into the
San Juan river.
The pressing problem of how to
clean up these contaminated
contaminated sites is a high
stakes question for communities
living near the coal plant and
downstream recent industry data
demonstrates that ninety one
percent of coal ash ponds are
polluting the underlying
groundwater to levels that
exceeded federal drinking water
standards are we to trust that
PNM and the other San Juan
generating station owners have
behave differently than the
overwhelming majority of coal
plant owners in the nation as
you have heard if coal ash
contaminates groundwater it
could migrate to the San Juan
river and plays it with
personagens not euro toxins
developmental toxins and other
dangerous chemicals essentially
this bill is about proactive
community protection especially
for those communities living
downstream for legacy pollution
we have a choice we could either
just.
Trust them.
For.
Or change and have this bill and
act a comprehensive independent
assessment so that we can
adequately address the problem.
This is an environmental justice
issue because people living
downstream of the San Juan
facility are largely Navajo have
already been subjected to harm
from this plant and multiple
toxic threats from industrial
pollution and impacts.
Of poverty that accentuate
health risks this is an
extremely time sensitive issue
complete and effective
cholesterol years and cleanup
depends on strong regulations
rigorous enforcement and
oversight from regulatory
agencies and partnership with
fully funded funded community
engagement programs.
This bill is less about creating
new standards but enforcing
applicables federal and state
standards that already exist
I have learned over many years
that PNM trust us policy have
failed New Mexicans PNM in the
other San Juan co owners have
one plan we need an independent
comprehensive investigation if
NMED Edie and EMNRD art LA
quipped or don't have enough
staff to Merck the money
requests for in this bill is
more than enough to hire outside
consultants environmental
engineers hydrologists
geochemist and economists who
can produce another plan well
within the time limit set in
this bill outside engineering
firms chan and have conducted
analyses and there are after
with an informed community co
developed clean closure plans
that have resulted in the
removal of contaminated
materials and safe remediation
what I'm here to tell you is
this is possible another way is
possible we cannot leave it up
to the polluters we have to have
an independent assessment and
then the cleanup plan and then
oversight oversight and report
back to you that's what we need
that's what we need for the
protection of our people for the
protection of our land for the
protection of our water and
future generations thank you.
When of course those are.
Hi Mr thank you.
My name is.
I'm from two broke renewable
nation New Mexico.
I am a ground ball former First
the fund.
I agree to my sisters and
brothers.
After all we are all originally
born openers.
And we all live with the breadth
of the great spirit degree
created.
This is the reality that we all
live by moment to moment
indigenous people.
For those who.
Prescribe to the the book.
I remind you of the Fundacion
words phone the genesis three
nineteen.
You shall eat until you return
to the ground.
Four out of the you would take
it.
For you are dust and to dust you
shall return.
I come to you before before you
today on behalf of our families
who live along the San Juan
river.
My home form is about seventeen
miles down river.
From the former San Juan
generating station.
A former I am greatly concerned
to compound the nation luck by
San Juan plant well you
mentioned the reach our
watershed and so trade into our
Representative.
All of our water comes from.
We grow delicious produce non
squashes tomatoes children's
court.
Would participate in the New
Mexico farm to school program
and other similar programs so
our produce and our added value
products reaches the lunch
tables the senior citizen
centers pantries across the
state of New Mexico.
In in transit and integral part
of our phone Dacian of life as
indigenous people every part is
used with great care to mutual
rules physically and
spiritually.
Apollo we harvest.
Absolutely session two in our
prayers and ceremonies
Rumple.
I am concerned with the
condition of the planet that we
leave our gradual
and generations to come.
Industrial energy development
has and continues to provide
revenue jobs.
Energy development agency also
showed you mount.
Because they are and have.
G. or health in our first month.
Energy development must
recognize the negative impact it
has on our health is here with
and the health of the mother of
four of you be good ancestors.
It is necessary that we as good
leaders get most valued
consideration to the condition
of our planet home for the sake
of all we're going to pick.
It.
Percent also using the light at
this point.
just we're coming.
When we talk about downstream.
Of the San Juan generating
station is located where it's
research.
maybe thirty miles from the
Arizona border but folks through
of it affects like four miles of
non native land and from there
it's Navajo reservation that
extends in two years on the
Santa Ana river is the
northernmost boundary of the
Navajo Nation so the San Juan
river Effects all the northern
edge of the Navajo Nation all
the way down into page Arizona
and then running down so along
the.
The Grand Canyon.
Thank you also read it right
into the audience can I just
have.
Okay and to the point of this
bill.
So we hands and we have
eight fifty two people of all
ages some of the major ones.
So we're going to support first.
Though the opposition.
in that would be doing is to
everyone in the audience first
and then do the same on support.
I'm just very brief it was like
to time people.
So yeah to this.
I don't have to take.
if you can be richer
I appreciate that.
What bills were on the side.
so.
The speed in support.
So I'm gonna start on one side
and work my way.
Rules.
Yeah we're.
This
Nation.
Us off use.
On
that.
Our system.
She.
I.
One part of our training.
Zero.
For additional.
Hello.
It is the solution
what is your view.
The.
It should be on.
we'll get off.
Thank you Sir others support.
Hi is this
this is Office of the house you
were.
I'm on the phone.
What will be the location we
look AT and deserves related
taxes we have.
At four times and now.
And
we just have so the.
Yes.
Now.
We are.
Our.
Our.
Water.
We.
Our future.
Hi there.
Thank you for.
Good morning Mr chair and the
committee the news we.
Revenue Mexico but the
government.
Eighty one forty two provides
our state agencies the tools and
resources needed to do a
thorough study of what risk
remain and must be read mediated
at the plant.
it required from the impacted by
my information provides
monitoring enforcement necessary
new protests planned in mind.
One of the community leaders
Representative Allison and other
sponsors with issues legislation
that we are the committee just
today thank.
Alright.
I want to receive.
I just want to say this bill is
such an opportunity for our.
Right.
The really good steward for the
people who
have lived here this call this
call.
And then also for the for all of
us it's an opportunity to get in
front of.
Very serious calls problem just
leading up into the millions of
tons of call us to do it right
instead of and and the way the
bill has been without.
Thanks to the sponsors we will
wait.
Way that the loss of use the
continued community
participation.
As the state works to.
That we're protecting those
communities.
And that.
Your for.
So I just see this is.
Really.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members of the speaker
Jonathan registered lobbyists
for conservation voters New
Mexico conservation voters urges
you to support so what do all of
the reasons that have been so
eloquently expressed by other
speakers.
With the this is an appropriate
approach to cleaning up this
very serious pollution we are to
support thank you.
Thank you others and work.
US.
And working for this either.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Sharon of Arjun Reddy
I and there are some other.
We appreciate that we demand for
economic development collection
we did up north Representative
twice and the pervasive
noncompliance.
We collect on.
We're we're not these call for
plans which came.
It goes got what happened to the
rules do no harm no trace.
Coalesce combustion residuals.
What violated the clean up
tools.
We want to close loopholes the
cleanup regulations we demand
real monitoring the groundwater
in real establishment
Representative order.
And I just need you to please
yes the one forty two to are you
plant your in water changed the
quality thank you.
Thank you others in support.
Good morning.
We have.
Transaction declined.
And that will have a
representative what will more
organization point of this bill
we are to the state.
Administrative per tax the
environment but also right.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is nine seven.
Many of us were ninety about the
environmental impact is trying.
And what is also true is across
the state we benefited
financially.
What is true is that this point
the cost will be will be paid by
a much smaller percentage.
Regulation.
It is time for us to step up and
share the responsibilities to
minimize impacts of this you're
for would be a good place to
point this.
Thank you anyone else it's for
the the thing on.
Hi.
my family's been farm here's a
Spanish colony.
And I am supported because
I cause arguments probably that
I would be alive for.
Sixty more years The New Mexico
so
This plan is very weird and
water is not easy to clean I'm
also water conservation student
of the community college.
And that about.
Yeah but.
Thank you for that.
You will see audience and
support.
I don't.
Our tax.
Why are.
Every one.
One thing.
A review session.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name storage
review Richard this for a
Freeport leveraging the
government on the selfless of
New Mexico I'm also aware of
Representative Mexico mining
of change with all due respect
to the great Sanchez I wish that
opposed to this and I and I tell
you it's a state of all due
respect because you know I think
they do mining guys and the
great sponsor here myself
company might in the district of
the Representative Montoya so
it's tough testimony to go
posted another by person here
this type of stuff.
The reason for the opposition is
that the bill is duplicating
already exists the federal and
some state laws the the
cover lighting I believe all of
you were provided a copy of the
questions and so forth of the
industries that regarding this
bill and then if we didn't get
up the let me know and I'll make
sure you get I'm not gonna go
through the details of the three
page document but I will tell
you no we can do that I
understand exactly appreciate
what the great sponsors trying
to do here however when you go
to the my recommendation might
pull your.
I am the mediation it's already
covered so that point seven
opposition thank you.
Others in opposition.
Well the yes good morning that's
right what was chair members of
the committee General Motors
reserves lobbies.
This is taking that no support
or opposition.
sure possible.
Since its introduction we have
reached out to the Sanchez thank
you.
service.
no San Juan generating station
that's been under groundwater
mediation that.
We also sell the state
insurances.
By any at any rate what is the.
Just outside the area around I.
PNM has been following the San
Juan county required demolition
plus I think you want to play in
the federal agency partners
yeah live D. A. V. and there
that.
Do you have a look forward to
working with a sponsor to
address.
Online disability these Google
is people whose voice concern
yes I the technology is still.
Sort of.
so first we're going to those in
support of the bill
so if you are online did want to
speak in opposition please put
your hand out.
Of regents of hers there's a to
limit I wanted.
The state don't have to take
the whole team is asking us to
be repetitive.
Just I just never want to be
respectful.
our first speaker is needed look
at.
Are you there.
Hello my name is and in the
Lopez and I'm here today to try
and urge all of you to vote yes
on house bill one forty two
having grown up in the
international district in
Albuquerque the San Juan coal
generating station house out of
the neighborhood I grew up in
for longer than I have been
alive yet I learned about the
immense amount of pollution that
generates station has left off
with conducting research as a
New Mexico fellow at the
institute for Policy Studies a
progressive think tank based in
Washington DC.
In our report New Mexico to
cross roads well solutions are
just transition it became clear
that the San Juan generating
station and mine has contributed
to a series of environmental
injustices over the years.
Grassroots organizations
indigenous peoples and other
concerns San Juan County
residents have been in
opposition of this plant since
the since its opening due to the
valid reasons of why we stand
here today pollution and water
and land contamination.
The lead the electricity of
entire settings cities like my
own Albuquerque and many other
communities throughout the state
of New Mexico was generated at
the sacrifice of the health and
well being of indigenous peoples
and frontline communities.
In the end PNM has read much of
the economic benefits of this
powerful.
I urge you to vote yes on house
bill one forty two so we can
avoid the health and economic
risk of continued contamination
of open waste water budget.
House bill one forty two sets
forth an opportunity to
remediate remediate this decades
long environmental injustice and
present opportunity to act on
giving future generations the
chance of a healthy and viable
future thank you.
Thank you for that is that we
have for the.
Or at.
My name is Gloria lemur.
Can you hear me yes.
I have lived in San Juan County
all of my life moving back
Farmington after graduate school
at UNM I was a medical hospital
speech language pathologist for
twenty four years I've seen
first hand the health impacts
thankfully the clouds of smoke
from the San Juan generating
station are no longer visible
through the windows of our home
as we have the use of the plant
to the west how much more should
our area and people be made to
indoor with the history of your
right uranium mining affects the
gold king mine spill impacts of
tens of thousands of San Juan
basin oil and gas wells with
their use of fresh water
Mister prince of the land and
resultant toxic emissions
bacteria and other contaminants
dump or leached into the San
Juan watershed and the beautiful
life giving San Juan river add
to that the recent battle over
carbon capture and sequestration
in the push for blue hydrogen
the closure of the polluting
plant and mine was a step in the
right direction toward cleaner
air land and water in this area
for communities who have been
living in its shadow now it is
time to do more to ensure proper
independent and comprehensive
assessment of the status of the
dangerous contaminants present
including coal ash pits and open
online wastewater pits.
Require plan owners to devise
and implement a plan for full
decommissioning and clean up
with public and stakeholder
input and provide oversight
force state agencies and the
legislature this remediation
members restoration could be
enhanced by the creation of well
paying jobs prioritizing the
hiring of those were previously
employed at the plant and money
I believe this bill will do that
and I am in support of it I
believe that if enacted and
enforced in a timely manner it
can only result in a cleaner
Environment improved economy
better health and economic
process.
Affected by the generating
station and the money thank you
for this opportunity and thank
you to the committee and the
drafters of this bill.
This that we might.
Good morning my name is Mike
Tyson felt I live and work in
Farmington I work on behalf of
the San Juan citizens alliance.
As the energy and climate
program manager we have a
thousand members in the four
corners area we stand in support
of house bill one forty two I
want to thank.
Representative Allison the other
sponsors for their leadership in
addressing the importance of
remediation reclamation
decommissioning the
responsibilities that
Mexico facility owners have in
abandoning.
Facility after fifty years I
would note that although.
This.
About to kind of the.
Need for facility in minor
mediation for facilities across
the board that our focus in the
four corners certainly is on the
closure of San Juan generating
station where there are nine
historic coal plant owners and
one minor that have
responsibility and we are aware
that there are other state and
federal.
We're sorry but that is often
been minimized and the
independent nature of the study
to look at what is Kurt up here
is absolutely necessary
thank you very much and again
San Juan citizens alliance
support house bill one thirty
two.
Thank you Mexico is a good job.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer Johnson and I'm here
from yes thank you for calling
the crisis action yes yes I can
complain with thousands of
members across New Mexico and
I'm here to speak on behalf of
our members located into a
territory in north in New Mexico
we're very grateful that the San
Juan generating station and mine
were from last year but now we
must ensure that cleanup is sick
and comprehensive the San Juan
plant and mine are contaminated
with open with but it picks and
fifty nine million tons of coal
ash Olympic committee team
coming to the contaminants into
groundwater highly likely this
is one of our priority bills we
have several yet to leaders who
are from the impacted area and
know first hand with the health
and environmental impact the
plant and mine has been and the
threat the further contamination
in an area that had been deemed
a fact I found many of our
members of the Albuquerque
attended a like myself in our
communities here have been
powered by the full plant in
mine for fifty years at the and
of the house of our relatives in
the four corners so we all have
a very strong obligation to make
sure that the plant and mine is
cleaned up properly and that
will continue to harm I think
community detection thank you
for putting it on H. B. one
forty two thank you.
Thank you there is that we have
for our meal.
Morning chairman the cleanup
members of the committee my name
is up for how to me when I come
from the pueblos of dissidents
Act repeat I'm also a member
leader and organizer with yucca
and I'm here today to speak on
behalf of members into a
territories in the Bernalillo
county area so we stand in
strong support of house bill one
forty two and thank the sponsor
for bringing this part after
fifty years of pollution from
the sap one coal plant in my
community deserves justice the
importance of accountability
cannot be overstated because our
communities need insurance for
civil contamination does not
occur there are numerous risks
of action is not taken out but
one that I want to talk about
today briefly its coal ash
because it is so incredibly
dangerous even short term
exposure can bring your
attention to the nose and throat
dizziness nausea vomiting among
many other symptoms long term
exposure Committee to life
threatening chronic illnesses
including liver damage cardiac
ripping and ride you decrease
taxes as spoken before sh okay
Mister contamination and
disregard for local health and
environmental justice we cannot
leave the health of San Juan
watershed and the people and
communities who depend on it in
the hands of the same
corporations because of
pollution in the first place we
needed independently verifiable
transparent and comprehensive
cleanup in order to protect the
community from further harm sort
urge you to please vote yes on
hospital forty two thank you.
Thank you that we have so if you
take into.
Live in Albuquerque and I'm the
environmental justice organizer
for here in New Mexico.
A I urge you to vote yes on H.
B. one forty two and I can't put
it any better than those with
already spoken the bottom line
is you need to listen to the
people most affected by the
damage this cop this plant has
cost and not the company to
benefit economically the cleanup
that is required by this bill is
the bare minimum New Mexico
communities deserve
accountability they deserve
clean air and water and they
don't deserve health problems as
a sacrifice report generation
and power in our cities.
The New Mexico legislature has a
responsibility to represent the
interests of the people who live
here and clean up the messes
that have been costs we have a
responsibility to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you there's that with just
a few minutes.
Mr Chairman can you hear me.
Yes.
Mr chair chairman written with
the queen of sure any Joseph
Hernandez you mentioned a
greeting of of House Energy
not research committee I am the
registered lobbyists for NM
nativo I am also a community
member in a resident of Shiprock
in I I are standing in strong
support of house bill one forty
two for the following reason.
I'm not right after high school
the first job I got was working
on one station.
For that my father was a truck
driver for high country totaling
hi country trucking and he would
trust in and out of fly out out
of the apartment my late mother
worked at San Juan judging
Station.
So I have I had
many family members who worked
over there.
And and and and as well as
family members who have who who
who suffered health concerns and
health issues working over there
and so there is there is a lot
of of needed and the the the the
need to study and understand the
impact the environmental impact
but the power point have had in
our community is needed.
And.
As well as the other owners of
the power plant need to do more
to ensure that they do clean up.
that the power plant it that's
why we we we stand strong
support and I urge the committee
to please the.
do a do pass because we can and
we should do more yes thank you.
Thank you this.
We're saying that you needed on
your end.
So sorry to hear me now.
Okay good morning chairman
between and members of the
committee my name is Marissa
wrestle I am a member of the up
to you United declined crisis
action and I like several other
leaders of yucca and the net
from the four corners region we
have experienced the devastating
impacts of coal pollution on our
bodies in our families and
throughout our communities we
have seen the devastating
impacts on our water and our
land we have been harmed by this
pollution and other extractions
the health and lives of those we
have loved have been sacrifice
now we face the threat of more
chemicals leaching into our
water and hurting our shields
are and and our bodies we need
you to support this bill so we
can finally be protected so our
homeland can be restored so the
companies who are responsible
are held accountable and so that
there is oversight and constant
consultation with
with our with our communities
thank you to the sponsor and to
the committee committee so I
urge you to please support house
bill one forty two thank you.
Thank you next that we have the
your.
Hello.
Can you hear me yes.
Good morning everyone what is
the US German German the queen
and members of the body.
My name is exhibit about us with
most of the news institute are
real legacy and Justice
organization that's been working
on social environmental and
economic justice issue since
the civil rights era and leaning
into the to the history before
that and I'm gonna reiterate or
just touch on some pieces that
other folks elaborated on which
is first we're barely beginning
to understand the impacts and
ramifications especially
economically let alone
ecologically as to what we've
done from the generation of our
energy and so most recent study
from university of Chicago for
instance hundred thousand
dollars per metric ton to put
into simple and average
generating station a small one
state like the one in
Albuquerque that means that you
have an annual cost to the
environment of over two billion
dollars that's just one little
tiny station so what we know is
we're not we don't know the full
extent of our costs we know we
need to repair and restore harm
responsibility we encourage we
support this resolution because
it's just the beginning and
being able to establish the
additional precautionary
measures to ensure that this is
done because we know that that
hasn't been done with the with
the current laws in the current
infrastructure we have so
absolute support for this this
is just the beginning before New
Mexico becomes a Dalmatian of of
spots Richard just like this so
we need to get ahead of it and
start working on it and
addressing it so absolute
support thank you everyone.
That is also.
Thank you that's that's we have
Christopher.
Good morning and a a pin and say
yeah Crystal curly and checking
on initially committee
membership machine the card in
addition J. I don't want to get
me dition LA my name again is
crystal currently I'm the
executive director of a
nonprofit called indigenous
lifeways we are.
A nonprofit organization working
in McKinley county and
throughout New Mexico we focus a
lot of our work on exposing
environmental racism in our
communities and we know the link
that violence against our Mother
Earth is violence against our
mothers and children we kindly
urge you to support H. B. one
forty two as that it is because
it is a real solution to hold
our fossil fuel industry
accountable for the catastrophe
they have because and our
communities and she brought.
And I just want to thank you for
your time yeah.
Thank you thanks that we got
the.
My name is Vicky got played I
live in Santa Fe County I move
to the LFC by county in nineteen
seventy and from that time
forward.
I have been waiting for this
bill
we were considering having the
young family at that time and
Even then we were aware of the
places where you bring in have
been mind and also of the
pollution created by the San
Juan generating plant and the
I'm in full support of this bill
it is long overdue.
And I thank you for your time
and urge your support thank you
chairman McQueen.
Thank you is that we.
Yes hello yet my name is Wendy
at city and I live in Farmington
New Mexico and work as a
lobbyist for New Mexico native
of I would like to thank the
committee chair Matthew McQueen
for the opportunity to provide
comment.
My father worked for the
neighboring coal plant by San
Juan generating station and when
returning home I would see flash
on him.
I would worry about what I would
see on is closed and hearing
cough sneeze and have nose
bleeds such images would stay in
my mind for is health.
And as an adult I learned about
the western education of
environmental science and
chemistry.
I support house bill one forty
two to clean up and remediate
San Juan generating stations
toxic chemical contaminants into
second water land that touches
upon the lives of our people.
We need to restore the
responsibility of San Juan
generating station to begin
healing for the health justice
for tribal community members
thank you.
That's that we have rose
rushing.
The morning the second one hear
me.
okay good morning chairman the
queen and members of the
committee and thank you for the
opportunity to speak on H. B.
one forty two.
My name is rose rushing and I'm
an attorney and registered
lobbyists with the western
environmental law center I live
in Farmington New Mexico
approximately twenty miles as I
stand right now from San Juan
generating station the western
environmental law center wants
to voice their support for H. B.
one forty two which would allow
for oversight and cleanup of the
San Juan generating station
money as an organization we
encourage everyone here to truly
listen to the indigenous
community members here today and
to hear fully the perspectives
and experiences of those
downstream of the generating
station and the money.
It is past time to stop this
ongoing environmental injustice
and devote the resources
necessary to clean up the
generating station.
We are grateful to
representative Allison and the
drafters of this bill and urged
the committee to vote yes twenty
two and forty two thank you.
Thank you except.
When you're needed on your and.
I am sorry can you hear me yes.
Okay good morning committee
members my name is Lauren
Haaland and I come from the
nineties the chapter of the
Navajo Nation I'm also the crime
action strategist with global
action alliance organization I
am here today to urge you to
vote yes on H. B. one forty two
as a committee member who grew
up on the Navajo Nation and also
the border towns of Farmington
and Bloomfield New Mexico I have
generations of coal miners in
generating station workers in my
number the family many of my
family members who work these
positions are no longer live due
to health issues related to
mining and facility planning
this is only one reason to
consider this bill in regards to
the environment around the area
of the money and generating
station the groundwater is
extremely crucial source of New
Mexicos drinking water this bill
will help protect what we
consider sacred and life giving
which is the water the land
remediation is and always has
been the co owners
responsibility and the oversight
is the responsibility of EMNRD
and NMED to make sure that
happens both of these offices I
mentioned and US elected
decision makers have a
responsibility to the
constituents who elected you and
who you Sir protect us the
comments about this bill
reiterating mining laws that
have been passes partially true
but what the committee fell to
also bring up is the complete
and utter failure of
implementing these existing laws
expressly when it comes to the
oversight and accomplishment of
remediation responsibility on
behalf of the co owners of the
plant and learning this bill
puts in a system of
accountability for remediation
and also gives us a chance to
have an unbiased and
comprehensive study and
investigation of the current
contamination and future risk
from contamination this bill
also helps economically with job
creation for local impacted
communities which is crucial
right now especially during the
pandemic I'd like to thank the
sponsors of the bill and urge
you to please vote yes on H. B.
one forty two thank you.
Thank you next up we have a
hundred.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is under the
alliance I am the coalition
coordinator for New Mexico no
fall solutions
and we are six number Climent
environmental justice coalition
working across the state of New
Mexico we've been working really
closely with new energy
economies to support this bill
and we hope that all members of
the committee support thank you
representative Allison for
bringing this forward I think a
lot of the members of the
coalition have said it clear I
think court did a great job of
laying out the reason why PNM
has a responsibility not only to
the members of San Juan County
but also the rest of the state
I reside currently in Bernalillo
county and then much of our
water is supplied to the San
Juan river San Juan Chama river
allocation and so I just want to
paint the importance of why we
need to make sure that our water
is clean for future generations
not only for those in San Juan
but all across the state but
especially those who are in San
Juan so just wanted to yield the
rest of my time but said that we
really support this bill and
thank you all for your
dedication to our clean water
for our communities.
Thank you that's that we Oscars
and.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Oscar Simpson living in
Albuquerque representing Rio
Grande indivisible social when
conservation organization here
in Albuquerque.
I got about thirty years of
experience dealing with
groundwater contamination in
surface water contamination
contamination related to all
kinds of industries.
Specially all and gas I look at
numerous coal mines throughout
the US and all our degradation
due to call lash and pollution
spills and their effects on
surface water.
Our surface water supplies are
declining due to climate change.
I have increasing contamination.
And salinity increases in the
San Juan river if we don't make
if we don't make sure that
these.
Tailings ponds and discharges.
In other words we need to
prevent him from reaching the
river so we need independent
monitoring and this bill will
she will give New Mexicans an
independent review and making
sure that thing out eight Health
Association the help of health
and social and environmental.
Concerns thank you very much.
Thank you that's that we have
study wise for.
Good morning Mr Chairman McQueen
and committee members there hi
Representative three fifty New
Mexico rural and for all the
reasons that have been brought
up please pass.
All and I'm not going to say
anymore because it's all been
said so eloquently thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Anyone else online support.
The thing that is there anyone
online we would like to speak in
opposition.
and.
The more efficient.
so the couple things first off I
have been told a difficult to
hear online
Is that right now
Representative also spoke in
Yes.
this is obviously an important
issue.
There were serious concerns
about the flag in the agency
analyses.
Of the.
These at this rate in the
financially possible.
No one
on in total.
I would like you to reach out to
them and see if you can come to
an understanding.
As You Like discussed there's
also there's an issue with the
definition of money we have a.
Very specific definition of
generating facility
and then money started mention I
think we need to be clear.
What we're talking about this is
all.
We also need to be careful that
we're not.
their constitutional limitations
on writing a bill that apply to
simply one turns.
finally I want to fight for you
I'd concerns about the liability
language in section.
which says that the new
ownership also wall liability.
It's common practice the that
that Senator is routine
liability as well.
I don't want to see that the
possibility to sell the and wash
your hands.
so I just need to.
Check in with our state agencies
to work on those issues and to
come back with either amendment
workpieces.
Thank you for your public
testimony thank you for your
input
we will likely revisit bill at a
later date will of course at
this point.
Thank you.
Positive just a moment is.
People switch out next bill is
house bill one seventy four.
Transaction.
Well.
Right.
So.
This bill is for.
Jackson on the terraces.
It's terrible with this.
with whenever you're ready.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee as in
making here is okay.
I'm thank you for allowing us to
present house bill one seventy
four I'd like to acknowledge my
co sponsor Representative needs
and small the two of us will be
discussing house bill one
seventy four.
So this bill is about funding
EMNRD The New Mexico energy
minerals and natural resources
department to be able to apply
for classics primacy.
From the EPA in order to permit
carbon capture utilization and
storage projects moving forward
I'm gonna simplify that term and
either say carbon capture or C.
C. U. S..
I just to make my comments a
little pre for.
So first off I'm here to reasons
why I believe we need this bill
the first is it's an important
component in addressing global
warming and second.
It signals New Mexico's support
for the growing advanced energy
and cleantech industry.
Carbon capture is not new that's
the first thing I want to say.
Carbon capture has been in
existence for nearly a hundred
years and we've been
successfully sequestering carbon
since the early nineteen
seventies.
Additionally.
Current CO two capture equipment
captures ninety to ninety eight
percent of total CO two.
Current carbon capture projects
capture about twenty five
million metric tons of CO two
annually in the United States.
Globally carbon capture captures
forty two million tons per year.
First scale comparisons.
The international energy agency
IAEA and the international
governmental panel on climate
change IPCC estimate that two
thousand disabilities capturing
two point eight billion metric
tons per year would be needed to
limit global warming to two
degrees Celsius.
If we want to limit it to one
point five degrees Celsius which
is the goal we we need to be
capturing ten billion metric
tons annually.
And why do we even need to
capture carbon.
Because in order to reach net
zero every international.
Report showing a pathway to net
zero includes at least five
percent.
Carbon capture use and storage.
To mitigate climate change.
There are currently twenty nine
operating facilities with a
cumulative capture capacity of
nearly forty million tons per
year that's the equivalent of
taking nearly eight million cars
off the road.
In addition there are another
thirty commercial projects under
development.
The primary obstacle for carbon
capture in the past has been
scale and cost.
But that's changing with rapid
technology development as well
as massive federal and global
economic investments.
For example the bipartisan
infrastructure walk into the
recent inflation reduction act
have several carbon capture
grant programs as well as a
three point five billion dollar
program for the establishment of
four regional direct air capture
hops.
Director capture hubs.
Plain and simple suck carbon
dioxide out of the air and
stored underground we have there
is a very successful project
already launched in Iceland
folks can read about it in the
handouts that I've provided.
But in order to have director
capture you need to store the
carpet.
the inflation reduction act also
increases the forty five Q. tax
credit which makes carbon
capture cost competitive.
So both of those issues are
being addressed.
Once again house bill one
seventy four is an
appropriation to EMNRD to hire
staff to facilitate an
application to the EPA for state
primacy over class six well
injections.
I receiving classics primacy New
Mexico will be able to directly
issue permits for carbon capture
sequestration as opposed to
waiting on the federal
government any Piet.
Two states have already received
classics primacy North Dakota
and Wyoming other states are
applying for classics primacy
and it is a labor intensive
multi year process.
It's critical to New Mexico to
begin this process now so that
we can capitalize on this
opportunity and to signal to the
advanced energy manufacturers
and companies that New Mexico is
a great location to demonstrate
deploy and commercialize their
technology.
with that I would like to go
ahead and pass it to my co
sponsor representative small
that's okay.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Representative this into my
colleague I'm very pleased to be
here today before you Mr chair
representatives this is a strong
step in a low and zero carbon
growth economy for the state of
New Mexico Mr chair committee
members this step is in line
with our state's commitment to
setting our own New Mexico based
strong standards for our
environment this follows
legislation that the state is
passes we give our state the
resources and the ability to do
that in this important area Mr
chair committee members you
heard from Representative Dixon
that this is a global
effort perhaps no where
supported as strongly now is in
the United States that's because
Mr chair committee members with
passage of recent legislation we
have seen a.
Incredible growth in the tax
credits associated with the
storage in the use of carbon
both from industrial
applications as well as director
capture particularly Mr chair
committee members in the
director capture area it's
almost a for access growth in
the tax credit these the the
start of these projects to
qualify for tax credits has to
start by the year twenty thirty
three.
So here we are Mr chair
committee members was sort of a
ten year window
At the very far this tend to
draw investment to New Mexico to
support local as well as outside
investment in innovation that is
squarely aimed at reducing
carbon at the same time
increasing economic opportunity
So Mr chair committee members I
think that.
Investment we're proposing
within the energy minerals and
natural resources department
is sized appropriately it's
squarely aimed at this ten year
period where there will be an
incredible amount of investment
worldwide aimed at something
that is vital to everyone's
future which is growing our
economy while at the same time
rapidly decarbonizing the
economy no where better than New
Mexico for that investment to
come.
Very clearly Mr chair committee
members this bill gives us the
ability the resources to begin
setting out New Mexico standards
it does not commit us to
projects it does not commit us
to any support state or
otherwise of these projects that
really gives us those tools so
I'm very proud to be here today
thank you very much Mr chairman.
All thank you thank you will
four kids usually committee we
will go to the audience is sure
three one would like to speak on
this bill.
We have several
we'll do you to support first.
Support.
Is there anyone you like
speaking to.
Saying that opposition.
Chairman we had committee
members.
This bill will fast track
plastics wills amenities
privacy.
Over the regulatory process so
we can improve well meaning.
Work hardening capture and
sequestration the hydrogen
process given other lack of
regulatory enforcement already
for state penalties for water
discharges which are an average
of four per day every single day
that's twelve hundred water
discharges per year from the oil
and gas industry and there's
been one one penalty violation
in four years.
How would we ever why would we
ever moved up right there
primary oversight of such a life
threatening activity a spill of
this store the contaminated into
fire I will for this bill is a
big and over broad range of
million dollars without any
guardrails experience for
details if you look at that and
if you look at the environmental
protection agency and you see
their list of all the
regulations that have to be
followed before well of of these
fine can be granted.
It's it's it's.
There's all these protections
and here there are not
and this is this is a whole new
classification of responsibility
without standards for safety
regulations this is an end run
around fifty which is the
purpose of this bill to expedite
permitting from three to six
years just six months it's
premature and they'll describe
these reject each building one
seventy four.
Thank you others in opposition
yes ma'am.
Yes thank you get.
I believe the Department
agreement where
This this operation is premature
on the legislature still has yet
to discuss easier for the right
if you.
Representative this
appropriation would streamline
the permitting process for
classes wells what is needed for
oil hydrogen see the FCC US
have tracking permitting
processes for extractive
industries already I think the
rate of the environment of the
more important to get half of
that currently the OCD does not
have any rules that probably
covered this type of the
projections wealth
Division may argue that you know
you can't.
but this type of wealth have
and could have the potential to
county on higher ground water
office for.
this well permit
is you know also allowing for
fifty million metric tons of CO
two to be injected through
geologic sequestration that's
disrupting them on geologic
programs for students that we
want
you know have to research behind
and we just heard this last bill
on hearing the closure for
several full fat
CBS is actually largely the coal
fired plant operations and these
types will objections are have
the friends of the fire plan the
state is already struggling with
well inspection for oil and gas
there was only about twenty
filled inspectors for oil and
gas wells you checked in person
leaks and compliance issues and
in twenty twenty one hundred
twenty six of total incidents
were reported that year so I
urge the committee to not
support this appropriation on we
need to do appropriate more
funding to actually address the
oil and gas leaks that we the
state of New Mexico and I need
to make sure we follow strict
guidelines.
with this.
thank you I haven't impose a
time limit on his few people but
if you keep your comments brief
opposition.
Thank you share this Gail Evans
again with the center for
biological diversity we also
propose this well you're all
about reducing carbon but not in
the manner.
Your.
Procreation.
New Mexico guard ratings round
hi the legislative process we
already have.
Thousands of wells processes it
continues
we have to choose we have very
few inspectors.
Point it at home.
And there are you don't have.
The issue is coming contact with
the end of.
For civil protections I.
Section twenty one to protect
our air our course your and our
natural resources from one
moment and simply passing
legislation for millions of
dollars to to do something that
has such a heavy impact on the
environment without first
putting in place the
environmental guardrails hi it's
just it's a violation of your
constitutionally to the it's
just not safe good stewardship
we oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you for that so to the
committee that the funds are
trying to turn our minds.
Thing that might cause some of
the.
That that's.
but just keep in mind that your
macs are on your website
conversations.
Paper.
Others in opposition.
Yes Representative.
Mr Chairman representative chair
of our.
my grandmother.
Numbers for many years can you
tell me the impact right.
The.
With this legislation is it
possible of the productivity
rejections for the use of
private technology travel.
G.
part of the.
Assumptions made a.
The impact that you act to
active technology more
knowledge.
what it will be technology and
the kids will diminish budget of
four part of oxide emissions.
Benefits will depend on how much
CO two and methane emissions of
our board of.
There is a need for further
understanding that staff yes
ma'am before I.
Station we might I potentially
more effective decarbonisation
pathway to use renewable
electricity directly to offset
for.
We just the choice to provide
production and use applications
are simple.
For examinations the proposition
that way with robust at the end
data thank you chairman.
Thank you anyone else in the.
good morning committee members
my name is going to have hi I'm
an extension.
Information I'm giving you
twenty one or four back.
The office is yes you see with.
Thousand nine has this advice
believe this is very strange
projects twenty twenty one
infrastructure investment and
job act authorizes the created
billions of dollars.
CCS Education project that this
equipment one point one billion
dollars yes accentuation
projects resulted in very.
Largely due to external factors
that affected their economic
viability apple CCS projects
were generally generally less
accessible taxis projects at the
the center.
You provided nearly six hundred
eighty four million dollars to
eight projects resulting in only
one operation.
The projects will withdraw to
prior to receiving funding one
was the operation altered
appropriations twenty one you
changing economic conditions if
we terminated funding agreements
with the other projects
structure.
Project documentation indicated
and delete visuals project
representatives told the GAO
that economic factors including
decreased natural gas prices and
uncertainty regarding our
markets negatively affected the
economic.
I did in technology also is it
and has it involved in this was
the staff for New Mexico.
This one will be one of the big.
Objects of its kind in the
station and even if the glove
don't sacrifice.
Thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience and offices.
Yeah we're gonna we're gonna go
online.
In those we did in the room
we're gonna do those and support
for.
If you would like to speak in
opposition three of them.
For the first first up we have
Michael the into the.
A good morning
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Mike d'antonio with.
Xcel energy we serve the eastern
part of the state under
southwestern public service
company we want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill
it's very forward thinking we
think it will help set the stage
for diversifying new Mexico's
economy and help leverage
federal dollars into the state
so we're in strong support of
the bill of the bill thank you.
Thank you anyone else in support
online.
The state opposition three zero.
Yeah this all.
Thank you chairman McQueen let
me confirm that you can hear me.
Yes.
Thank you.
Chairman of queen members of the
committee my name is Tom Solomon
co coordinator with the I'm
focused environmental
organization three fifty New
Mexico and on behalf of our
nearly seven thousand members
three fifty New Mexico strongly
opposes SB one seventy for the
ground injection fund.
The classics wells that are
discussed and planned to be
funded with the two point four
four million dollars of state
monies are used to inject carbon
dioxide underground.
They are regulated by the EPA at
the federal level with the
expertise and resources to do
that regulation properly resides
the clear purpose of a state
level injection funded program
is to fast track the approval
plans.
To inject carbon dioxide
underground and thus to enable
projects to convert fossil
methane to blue hydrogen such as
at the former Escalante cool
point.
The published peer reviewed
science from Cornell and
Stanford clearly establishes the
producing hydrogen from methane
creates quote a greenhouse gas
footprint of blue hydrogen more
than twenty percent greater than
just burning natural gas or coal
for heat and quote.
To be clear producing hydrogen
from fossil methane accelerates
global warming it is not the
climate solution.
It does create a new market to
extract even more methane a
powerful greenhouse gases
emitted in league throughout the
production and distribution
chain in which is causing a full
twenty five percent climate
warming the IPCC.
Yes our environmental agencies
absolutely need and deserve more
funding which should go to
increasing their fourth with
capacity but SB seventy one
seventy four does not do that
instead it creates another
agency administrative per SB one
seventy four does nothing to
improve the quality of New
Mexicos air and water nothing to
cap the king orphaned wells
nothing to prevent unabated
methane releases from the
fracking feels what SB one
seventy four would do is to
accelerate the climate Crisis
and we ask you to oppose it
thank you.
Thank you that we just might as
well you do the right.
Chair McQueen and committee
members my name is Mike Eisen
told I I work for San Juan
citizens alliance is energy and
climate program manager in
Farmington San Juan citizens
alliance has approximately a
thousand members in the four
corners area and we're greatly
concerned about this this bill.
The underground injection
control program is a very
expensive program is
availability ferocity primacy of
underground injection
in a San Juan basin we've had a
bunch of carbon capture carbon
sequestration projects that have
consistently failed it would
have.
That would have sequestered as
much as six million tons of
carbon dioxide associated with
fossil fuels.
Any.
Carbon capture carbon
sequestration project associate
of coal fired power or blue
hydrogen is unacceptable.
In two thousand and twenty
three.
Miss classics permitting.
It's not evident to us that New
Mexico is equipped at this point
to regulate that entire process
the EPA has a responsibility
should not be shifted in terms
of liability.
When community is set up already
entered years and years of
fossil fuel impacts and respect
for the Sanchez I believe this
bill needs to be clarified to
defined types of underground
injection you are supporting and
also to take a real hard look at
the veracity and primacy we've
posed house bill one seventy
four thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you that is that we are
the.
Thank you again chairman the
queen and members of the
committee for the opportunity to
speak as I said earlier my name
is that for how to me on I'm a
leader of young use United for
climate crisis action as we
shared earlier our organization
has thousands of members and
supporters throughout central
and northern New Mexico our
organization is focused on
pushing for the rapid and just
transition from fossil fossil
fuels in order to address the
climate crisis and to try to
ensure that we keep global
warming below one point five
degrees Celsius so that we have
a shot at having the future of
the presenters of this bill have
acknowledged that this is an
unproven technology that will
scale and cost issues have made
this an unviable technology in
the competitive market we cannot
invest public dollars that need
to be funding the transition off
of fossil fuels and toward
proven technologies that pose
serious health risks of the
reason why monitoring wells are
necessary is because of the very
serious threats that this kind
of extraction poses to aquifer's
so we need climate solutions not
Exploratorium's recently
designed pursuits thank you.
Thank you that we have all
Andrea lines.
Thank.
The committee in my hello
Hundley alliance and I'm the
collision coordinator of New
Mexico renewable solutions so I
think very shortly one of the
biggest oppositions other than
the fact that the house gas
emissions cannot be monitored
from rising again to the surface
but this is public funds for
private gain direct
direct air carbon capture does
not do anything to keep fossil
fuels in the ground DAC
justifies more extraction and
combustion based on the idea
that capturing endless amounts
of CO two will be good for the
planet I think the public is
very misinformed about carbon
capture yes it has been around
for a long time but the lobbying
efforts of these public funds
come from major conglomerates
such as chevron Exxon B. P. B.
H. P. Audie and that's just to
name a few another thing to
point out as far as the economy
these jobs are very short lived
they're very temporary they're
not unionized wind and solar
prevent future greenhouse gas
emissions and would better the
safer protect permanent jobs for
both people and the environment
I want folks to just take a look
at this because we're literally
talking about pumping stuff into
the ground we cannot insure that
this is going to be safe for
future water use nor the
environment so I hope we can
take a greater look at this bill
and then as mentioned again we
can not allow for the classics
Wells we already see that.
Having trouble as well as the
state health department in
keeping up with the current
wells from fracking I can
imagine what it would be like
and I know that the purpose of
this bill is to allocate funding
but it's also allows for those
classics wells which we just
absolutely as a state cannot
allow thank you.
Thank you others that we have is
the rules rush.
Good morning again chairman the
queen and members of the
committee and thank you for the
opportunity to provide comments
on H. B. one seventy four.
My name is rose rushing and I'm
an attorney and registered
lobbyist with the western
environmental law center.
The western environmental law
center as opposed to H. B. one
seventy four which would provide
state money for New Mexico to
seek primacy over class six
injection wells for three
reasons.
First we do not believe that
state funds are needed for
carbon capture and sequestration
this is especially true because
the bipartisan infrastructure
law established a fifty million
dollar federal program to assist
states with classics primacy
with no required state match
carbon capture and sequestration
has a troubling track record of
failure a state allocation to
support carbon capture and
sequestration as opposed to
renewables transmission and
storage with proven track
records is not the best
investment that New Mexico
should be making at this time if
we want to reduce carbon
pollution for this reason we do
not believe that this is an
investment that should be made
by the state of New Mexico.
Second although we fully believe
that environmental agencies need
more funding state agency
resources are already strained
agency should be directed
towards ensuring the existing
rules like methane rules are
fully and properly enforced if
New Mexico had primacy over
class six wells we are concerned
that the already overburdened
state agencies tasked with
enforcing the oil and gas rules
would be unable to meet the
existing demands placed on
agencies.
Finally we're concerned this
bill risks locking New Mexico
into fossil fuel dependency we
are working with partners
throughout the state on economic
diversification initiatives to
help replenish the tax base of
New Mexico we do not endorse
technologies that bolster
continued oil and gas
development because we believe
that the state should pursue
economic diversification other
sectors.
For the western environmental
law center for strictly does not
support each B. one seven point
thank you.
Thank you this that we adjusted
for and.
I got a check chairman maclean
members of the of the committee
My name is Joseph Fernandes and
I'm speaking on my own behalf
also as a community member from
Shiprock.
I I respectfully CENIC and in
opposition to this bill for the
following reasons
A shirt and a lot more in
eastern agency of the Navajo
Nation with my family that's
within the that's less than ten
miles from chuckle canyon.
When I was traveling back from
Santa Fe to super up there was a
bunch of
emergency firefighters that were
rushing to not easy and I turned
on my scanner and I heard them a
communicate to each other
they're trying to find the
source of a wheel of a only a
complaint that was called in of
an oil and gas leak in they you
were driving around trying to
find it they weren't able to
find it it it's it's it's for
those reasons Mr chairman this
is this a legislation will be a
catalyst to fossil fuel hydrogen
projects.
It's specifically in the San
Juan basin which will mean that
there will be a lot more oil and
gas production is near in it in
Navajo communities
are enclosed proximity all right
there is no
Orphaned and abandoned wells
existing wells that continue to
met.
The missions.
And and the would with the
recent increase of product
productivity there was a lot of
industrial traffic.
in these areas where there's
basically of bus stops in it and
there's just the investments
that go into.
These classics wells into these
projects we can better spend
money investing it into carbon
sequestration projects that are
natural you know let's put more
money with the in and the Navajo
farmers this let's put more
money in communities to
diversify the economy away from
fossil fuel what are the reasons
again I I I I respectfully stand
in opposition thank you very
much for allowing me to speak.
Thank you notes that we have
sent to.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee again my name is
Jennifer Johnson also with yucca
I wanted to share that recently
we met with the oil conservation
commission about our concerns
that we are still seeing average
of four produced water spills
every day in the state and snow
Enforcement we're constantly
hearing about the extent to
which state agencies are
struggling to enforce existing
regulations pertaining to oil
and gas extraction including
produced water spills methane
checks and other contamination
but concerned about the lease in
which this bill expands the
risks of dangers contamination
is public funding to subsidize
and giving carbon capture
technology and will further
burden our state agencies that
are are struggling overall
expands our dependence on fossil
fuels at a time that we
absolutely must transition and
address the climate crisis as
soon as possible.
Yes that our public funds be
invested in the proven renewable
technologies that we already
have industries to deploy
you know you really need to be
investing in public funds and
solar rising all schools and
homes and businesses in New
Mexico in mass transit in the
electrification of our
transportation sector in funding
state agencies to enforce the
laws that you all passed to
protect us these are the
solution but we need and not the
false solutions as proposed New
Mexico thank you for your time
thank you.
Thank you that's that we have is
you to.
hello again I'm so fugitives yet
though and I member mail justice
organizer for Care I'm in
opposition to this bill and I
urge you to vote now as we've
already heard from previous
commenters CCS is not a proven
technology to address climate
change and after doing a quick
calculation just now after
hearing the first speaker of the
forty two million metric tons
mentioned previously is only
point zero one percent of the
global carbon county which is
not enough to counteract the
excess of carbon in the
atmosphere so that I just
mentioned my confusion as to why
we're hearing a number presented
as if it's really significant
and as mentioned previously
there's too much risk for
contaminating land and water if
contamination is a risk at all
why would we invest in it this
technology only continues our
reliance on fossil fuels why
would we put millions of dollars
of New Mexico money into these
on proven inadequate and
dangerous technologies instead
of investing in real time
solutions if we're talking about
decarbonization before talking
about diversifying our economy
what New Mexico needs to be a
leader in real renewable energy
wind and solar which we have
extremely high potential for in
the state miss everyone else's
already stated we need the bare
minimum safeguards to protect
land water if that is not stated
don't support this bill thank
you.
Thank you that we have officers.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Oscar Simpson
representing Rio Grande
indivisible for the reasons
stated from three fifty well in
the and not last speaker.
This.
Efforts to get state primacy to
regulate class six injection
wells as I'm feasible they don't
have the existing regulatory
staff for funding to handle the
environmental consequences
related only gas development or
climate change as it is so
please vote against.
This bill thank you.
Thank you that we have here is.
Hello my name is Wendy at city
and I live in Farmington New
Mexico and a tribal member of
her for now I like to think
committee chair Matthew McQueen
committee members for the
opportunity to provide comments
against house bill one seventy
four.
CCS is risky and still needs to
be proven and capturing and
storing carbon dioxide is not a
climate solution as recent years
have shown this technology is
not working and is greenwashing
our way as a climate solution.
I live in the four corners
region and saw the energy sector
impact waters land and frontline
communities being sacrificed for
over fifty years let's not far
more what's beneath us S.
classics wells open the door for
geologic carbon sequestration
the land blows a sacred
everywhere around this is sacred
and we need to not disturb.
How much more do we need to
offer the energy secretary
Energy just transition to
renewable energy.
We can't let our state be a
primary and quit publication
process permitting authority on
classics Wells I oppose house
bill one seventy four thank you.
Thank you is that we have the.
The interest.
Hello my name is Christine pin
alley I'm calling in from the
south of Shiprock New Mexico and
I oppose this bill for all the
reasons the previous speakers
have mentioned and also I L.
live in the San Juan area with.
energy exploitation over several
years and that this is an area
where our our ground water is
contaminated with a huge loan so
we don't need the communities to
face the same consequences thank
you.
It's for the opportunity to
comment by.
Thank you thanks that we
currently.
Good morning everyone my name is
crystal curly in the executive
director of a nonprofit called
indigenous life place and we
focus a lot on exposing
environmental racism in our
communities as specifically
McKinley County we have a.
Over a hundred and forty years
of extraction in our community
we have been ground zero to a
lot of different firsttime
technologies and not just
McKinley but all of New Mexico
we have suffered.
Are to long to beginning pain
for industries that continue to
sacrifice our water and land
when will it stop.
How long will this continue to
have of bills that are
present in ways that are that
are not effective so I kindly
urge you to oppose house bill
one seventy four here at.
Thank you.
It was the end of our local
decide.
Representative is that anything
for this.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee just a couple
of responses they may pretend to
questions that are likely to
come up with committee members
as well but carbon capture and
storage is a proven technologies
we we discussed that and it
plays an important role
alongside other solutions like
renewable energy reforestation
and energy efficiency.
The distinction about carbon
capture is that it helps
mitigate climate change by
capturing carbon dioxide
emissions before they either
reach the atmosphere for by
removing historical emissions
from the atmosphere
Folks brought up hydrogen and I
want to.
Highlight some of the other
applications
for carbon capture so industrial
processes such as cement steel
pulp and paper chemicals and
natural gas processing or
significant emitters of carbon
dioxide accounting for around
twenty five percent.
Global energy related CO two
emissions.
Carbon capture can be can be
applied in these industries to
makes a difference significant
reductions in global CO two
emissions.
carbon capture is the only
technological option that can
help secured deep emissions
reductions now.
I'm Furthermore with regard to
safety.
CO two pipelines and other
transportation methods are safe
and closely managed under
international standards and I
believe my co sponsor has few
other remarks thank you Mr and I
want to very much thank all who
commented as we do we're taking
detailed notes and deeply
appreciate much of the all of
the fees that Mr chair Committee
members I think the most salient
points to mention R. one Mr
chair committee members this
legislation does not give an
artificial deadline it does not
mention are predetermined nor is
it intended to focus on any one
sort of technology yeah Mr chair
committee members it's meant to
give the state of New Mexico the
ability through investment in
our environmental agencies to do
the rigorous research to have
the proper staffing levels in to
do this sort of state specific
work that I think I and so many
others feel more comfortable
with instead of Mr chair
committee members outsourcing
decisions to the federal
government which may change at
various points this gives the
state in a way where I am
confident we will have a
fiscally sustainable way to
invest in overtime.
the ability to make the decision
it does not predetermine the
decision and Mr chair committee
members I think this legislative
body has a strong history over
the last several years of
investing in our environmental
agencies there is clear and
needed an additional work to be
done I think as we look at the
budgets that have come out of
this legislative body they have
invested they have prioritized
the sort of the BAFTA piece
reducing emissions that are
going out that is the water
coming into the bath of for the
first time now Mr chair
committee members looking at
pulling the plug out reducing
the water the emissions that are
already in the past which is why
this is a core part.
Of every
Both state national and
international approach to
combat in the effects of the
global climate crisis thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you representatives first
on the committee years and
never.
The thank you Mr chair just a
couple questions
I noted a couple people were
concerned with the increased
administrative burden
that's usually a concern of mine
but up.
It seems to me that other than
the appropriation you're not
really
us the.
Yes the.
Would be the OCD here some are
some other agency within in
there that's already existing to
Do what they're already doing I
might look into that correctly.
Mr chair and representative
Nibert.
Right the
funding in this bill alap
provides EMNRD with the staffing
support that they need to go
through with the application
process and as I mentioned the
process is a multi year process
it's very intensive and so
this is the funding to start
that process it is you know.
Purge
Future decisions would be within
EMNRD as well minutes it is all
there.
So so the Mr Chairman
representative the the
additional money for staffing is
to basically go through the
process of the PA would require
to give New Mexico the
certification.
It's not for staffing based
program.
Exactly.
That is correct.
And then yes ultimately where
you see this having Mr Chairman
representative would with them
within the department.
What do you see this
responsibility of being placed
within that department or have
those discussions not been
hacked the state thank you Mr
chair thank you representative
Nibert Mr chair representative I
think the oil conservation
division given their scope seems
like a very appropriate place
for as we would starting with
the funding to go through the
application process Mr chair
representative I think it is a
good policy for us to invest in
our agencies to support their
expertise to follow their
guidance the expectation my
expectation would be within the
oil conservation division but
this doesn't pre judge in fact I
would welcome I think we all
would welcome feedback from the
agency after the process is they
go down the road of of looking
at applications to then
determine where in fact to house
the different structures and so
short answer Mr chair
representative we should invest
in our.
Regulatory agencies we should
rely upon their expertise we
should support their judgment.
Mr Chairman representative
You know I I was listening to
some of the criticism and it was
talking about the you know we
don't have.
It sideboards will every
protections and drilling wells
and things and as I read the
bill.
All that is number one way down
the line.
That number two if that's where
this is headed
I'm very familiar with the
extensive.
Regulatory scheme that that has
been developed over the years to
require wells drilled through
offers to be
see managed.
Based on that and appropriate
manner to deal with.
All substances that may be
encountered downhole from having
contact with share our articles
for so I just like to express
Looks like all that's down the
road a significant piece but
that number to that particular
agency does have.
A hundred years of expertise so
thank you for addressing my
questions was Representative.
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative
So I
probably don't know how I'm I'm
a little concerned about this
legislation
I agree with the funding of
agencies I feel that they are
very much under under
under funded and it's been a
long time coming that the should
we just particularly when it
comes to environmental issues I
agree that we do need to be
thinking about reducing reducing
carbon my concern is is that
this issue continues to focus so
much on extraction and
And I think one of the of the
couple questions that I have is
how does this.
Allow for.
US pursuing that our our schools
not only just in relations to
private plate for transition
for me at and I've mentioned
this to folks in this committee
before and and many folks know I
grew up in the southeast part of
the state all my family is
either directly or indirectly
still I'm heavily reliant on
this industry and part of my
effort has been to look at
diversification of our economy
but also to move away from
exploitative industry it because
I I want to be looking at a
multi generational plan on how
we how we do that and I guess my
question is is and and I know
that this is just an
appropriation for
For what we're what you are
trying to
But.
When it comes to this multi
generational plan how does all
of this fits into that
particularly when it comes to
local communities who I mean our
previous let previous bill we're
talking about families who not
only were impacted by the
closing of the of the Oct
generating station the general
generate.
Station generating station but
also the the issues that have
been faced with public health
and these other things so I know
that's a that's a that's a lot
there that I'm I'm sharing but I
guess that's kind of what I want
you all to be able to touch on.
Mr chair representative Rubio
thank you very much for the
incredibly important question
and an overall perspective that
you asked and share their chair
representative
In my mind I think one of the
key parts is.
That this is squarely focused on
decarbonisation whether it's
reducing the current emissions
associated with some of these
industrial processes Mr chair I
want to touch on briefly or with
farther out things but things
that we have to be considering
now like direct air capture
understanding that we're part of
an entire glow we can we don't
control what others do we have
to be searching innovating and
vetting ways to take that bath
plug out to reduce emissions Mr
chair representative
specifically on the industry
think it's a really there's a
clear line between the sorts of
raw materials the C. meant
needed the goes and for
transmission lines or for wind
turbines the the steel and other
manufacturing that's a very high
intensity high energy intensity
long energy duration that's very
hard to decarbonise that's
needed to help build all of the
components that go into
producing enough energy for
people in a carbon free in a low
carbon way so both the reduction
the director capture.
And the production of the
materials that are fundamental
to this energy revolution it
goes to a suit I see real carbon
net zero energy
Paradigm that is the shift is
underway now it is extremely
complicated and difficult and
it's happening in different ways
around the country.
This bill the ability to what
decarbonise those have the
intensity industries that are
not extracted that are.
manufacturing base I think it's
very clear line aside for me the
court answer to your question Mr
chair representative one thing I
just at.
There are other efforts an
important efforts that are
ongoing to increase community
the leadership in the sorts of
of industries that are there in
those communities that is part
of this bill insofar as this
bill is only supporting our
energy and minerals department
to go through a proper sort of
vetting process but I think
those other efforts are equally
important in that this paradigm
evolution.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
And it's been brought up within
public comment and and I know
that you mentioned briefly that
it's not meant for a particular
Energy however I think that's
the fear that I think folks are
our feeling is is one because of
the legacy that we have with
energy in many of the regions
around the state that people
have been impacted for so long
and well a lot of what you're
saying is very short term
there's I mean I think people
are also thinking about the
consequences one long term and
And I think what my fear is
particularly is that way and
that wild this idea is is is
providing the funding to EMNRD
now in I guess in a friendly
situation where we find
ourselves wanting to meet
climate goals what happens when.
That that that maybe that leads
ships later on is I think what
what I think is bringing sort of
some trepidation on my end and I
think for folks were also on in
the audience and and but.
Mr chair representative it's
true and fair Mr chair
representative I think the the
potential for sort of federal
changes sort of how we set the
a floor that continually
protects our environment
this Mr chair representative I
think this gives us the
opportunity to set a stronger
floor to invest in the expertise
in New Mexico tech that would be
necessary to safely guide
investments if those investments
come
And allows us really to set.
To to.
insure that we're not subject to
our to help us avoid being
subject completely to drastic
federal changes that may occur
and honestly we have examples of
both the state and the federal
level a sort of the back and
forth that's happened I think Mr
chair representative what this
really allows us to do like
we're doing today is that a very
open conversation to a line very
clearly with a growing economy
that is based upon
decarbonisation which is
fundamentally different from the
sort of the conversations that
we've had in the past and
that's what sort of convinces me
that this is the right path.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Representative and and just.
I think part of what's also and
you can see this is I think a
lot of times we do focus a lot
on the economic
and I guess I'm curious in terms
of from economics aside what
does this mean for communities
themselves when it comes to
Issues related to public health
the environment
I I think that historically we
are the legislature have
we we have moved in certain
directions particularly within
issues related to energy because
of this mentality of scarcity
that we need to essentially.
Find more jobs but at the
expense of people and land and
in water and
and so in terms of of this.
This particular issue I think
that's one of the things that
optional serve very interested
in an understanding is like how
is this going to
not only be an economic value
for the state but.
Long term how is this actually
going to
Really expand.
Opportunities for people in
other areas outside of just
economic.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Rubio I think
that's a wonderful question
What I would highlight is as we
talk about the.
Transition and then movement to
decarbonise there are a lot of
opportunities that are currently
developing one of the things
about carbon capture that we
know we have an application for
currently is the point source
capture from some of our
existing industries for instance
paper cement and those
facilities so there's an
opportunity for communities that
have those industries existing
so that they don't have to close
but they can decarbonise and be
a positive
As part of the solution I guess
so that's one thing the other
thing is
you know when we talk about
carbon capture director captures
a huge component to this
technology and I'd go back to
the fact that there's three
point five billion dollars in
federal funding for for regional
director capture hubs and.
Director capture you know a
typical director capture
facility that will employ up
between two hundred and fifty
and three hundred employees on a
continual basis and those are
great jobs is very high paying
jobs those are opportunities for
New Mexico community so this is
an evolving tech you know the
entire industry and sort of
ecosystem around carbon capture
continues to involve given all
and I think we'll offer a lot of
opportunities not just
in the economic sense but also
for folks who want to make a
positive contribution to
decarbonisation and Mr chair
representative I would I would
only add to it
this will this invest in our
agencies to provide to build the
knowledge to support the
regulatory framework and to
sensually provide the tools and
clarity that which is important
without that would it is very
hard to sort of navigate forward
however Mr chair representative
thank the community choices that
have thank you no and I would
agree have often historically
been lacking and and having
grown up some in requests with
the history of the uranium mine
that's there thank.
This is going to give us better
knowledge clear expertise
stronger investment within our
agencies there are additional
efforts to provide the clear
guidelines and increased
community ability to make
proactive choices that this bill
because it on it invests in the
the expertise and the regulatory
side it does not address the
choice side but that is a
necessary part of a thing other
efforts in the body.
thank you Representative thank
you Mr.
Thank you Representative with.
The.
You Mr chairman The presentation
So.
Yes.
In New Mexico standards
determines the speed with
injection right Mr chair
representative yes and to pursue
an application process that
those components part of west so
if it went through an
application process FY worries
injection wells is.
The more you read that in fact
Representative that Mr Chairman
This is what we're also finding
that there's a lot of fractures
and wells that are are not
working.
A lot of failures that the tax
rolls Mister chairman how.
Because right now.
Expected and we think this.
The duties of.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative
we have the gun additional
investment in oversight and
accountability.
I would be the last to claim
that it's where it needs to be
but I think Mr chair
representative we can no both in
terms of inspections in terms of
regulatory actions including
fines that there has been an
increase in oversight.
Mr chair representative.
Having more understanding of the
the regulation is needed is the
first step and then we have to
step up to the plate as it were
to support the oversight and
accountability if we don't know
sort of the the basics then it's
very hard to find that oversight
and this is Mr chair
representative allows us at a
time where we can physically do
this to set stronger more at
least clear.
New Mexico standards to invest
in our agencies in a way that
will be hard to undo because if
successful this will be directly
tied to cleaner economic
opportunities in communities
across the state that
so that is that is how.
Getting that the the understand
the important understanding the
clear technical knowledge
investing in the technical
capacity in the agency is the
first step to that really strong
appropriate clear oversight.
Would you still.
This past to our.
Mr chair representative yes.
Thank you representative
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And representatives of.
A small index and I actually
part of that conversation
answered some of my questions it
doesn't appear as if by doing
this any of the current
regulations that are in place
would be done away with this
would just be.
Taking primacy.
In the state for some of this
decision making so Mr chairman
and Representative a small
Currently and and in the last
several years as I've sat on
this committee we have increased
oversight and we have.
Continue to
to even given the department
More direct oversight
this this will not change any of
that
is that correct.
Mr chair representative by
pursuing the primacy it was
take over those rules from the
federal government it would
investing giving us I think a
stronger ability to
look at and enforce the
standards but it doesn't by
itself technically and any new
regulations.
Thank you Mr chairman
to be honest that would be a
concern of mine is that privacy
itself would that give us the
ability to regulate even beyond.
what's currently.
within the federal standard.
Mr chair representative
I don't know the technique the
the full technical answer to
that question but Mr chair
representative thank I do fall
to sort more of a belief in
New Mexico expertise stronger
New Mexico expertise and
capacity being able to provide
for
Safety and security here in New
Mexico thank you Mr chair I'll
listen to the rest of the debate
to.
Following back on.
Thank you Representative Montoya
percent ratio.
Thank you Mr chairman
so looking at the
The FY are
and I appreciate I have to say I
appreciate you all both of you
stepping up and looking at
alternative ideas for energy
Mr chair but my question is
regarding the FTEs that
it appears from
The.
report that I received that
you're asking for a million
dollars for FY twenty four and
four four hundred thousand
dollars for FY twenty five which
Mr chair in my estimation
these would be about ten FTEs
the first year.
In twenty four and about four
additional FTE ease and twenty
five is that approximately
correct.
They have each one of them made
a hundred thousand dollars well
eighty seventy five thousand
plus P. E. R. A. and accept or
whatever the
their budget is that about
right.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative but I go the the
breakdown of the the ten
employees is what's mentioned in
our FY are
Mr chair representative the sort
of the Michelle seed up one
point four million is meant to
support the department as they
take on the this pursuit of
classic runs thank you Mr.
And I guess my question really
is if you're looking to.
Kind of research and the white
wire ten FTEs needed.
I'm Mr chair and Representative
Bredow the figures and FTEs
referenced in the bill and in
the FIR directly from
communications with the
department itself.
So I would say that I'm these
figures are figures that the
department help out were what
was needed.
Mr chair
Representative it seems to me
like if you're initiating a
program
and or just for research
purposes at at the initial onset
of the program ten FTEs seems
like a of a lot of employees it
seems like a whole new division
and you know.
I don't know that we are at the
point where we know that this is
something that the state is
going to move forward with
potentially so it just seemed
I'm I'm calm I'm cautiously
asking the question is is this
really kind of an over reach a
little bit when we know that
there are programs that Mr chair
require additional funding so
that is one of the concerns that
I have
but I do appreciate your intent
of wanting to look into the
future
so I just want to raise that
issue.
Thank you the.
I have a few questions there is
a yes.
Thank you
Representative you.
I have read this bill.
Early on.
Although I am a strong
proponent.
The state level with your tier
you will this bill help the.
I find myself in a movie here
possibly voting perceptive my
friend was gone and the county
is percent.
Because I do see.
Whether we like it or not across
the.
Spectrum's believes that.
Restoration of CO two.
Is paramount then that will
occur.
Someplace.
Quite frankly it must.
So.
With your.
With the understanding that this
provision state.
In the.
Department.
It has expertise of seat the.
I think your comment about
supporting those departments
that have the technology is
imperative.
We're not trying to create a new
department.
British path right the
jurisdiction and the oversight
the local area.
It's probably something the
states that I can work but I I
think there are some holes in it
that we need to work.
The.
We're working with you to get it
to where.
Recommendation that we can
support later on thank you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend
Your questions.
At prime.
With that.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members
the EPA does the regulation and
typically it takes longer.
And use the.
The regulation of that thing or
is it just the.
I just.
Mr chair I would say that
There may be other
considerations as well but the
time is a critical factor
particularly now as we are
racing to achieve fifty percent
of greenhouse gas emission
reduction by twenty thirty and
next year economy by twenty
fifty.
And it makes it
it works better for
technologies that may utilize
that if the state has primacy.
Mr chair I would only and that
the ability to invest in our
agencies in a way that's going
to.
Connect into.
Public health and economic
opportunity into the future is a
good opportunity for fiscal able
to pursue it which we are at
this point.
And are there.
Communities state funds for
those or other there's a lot
through.
Mr good Mr Chairman if we invest
the state funds there are
additionally federal funds that
are available in fact the M. U.
S. government is allocated
seventy five million dollars to
assist in this permitting and
the primacy process.
Is that contingent on the state
appropriation.
Mr chair I do not know the
answer to that I can look into
it.
And I would only add Mr chair.
When we're physically able to
invest in the public health and
safety and.
Department that has expertise
oil conservation division in
this case
It it behooves us to to I think
to make that investment and that
we we are physically able to do
this Mr chairman this if
anything this is the scariest
federal funds you know of
million and change per state
that seventy five million dollar
overall level this will get us
more bang for the Buck and do
that building our capacity.
So do a few more questions that
I would say I agree that we
should invest our agencies
especially when it comes to
public health.
I don't know that we that the
subject line.
This seems to be like a whole
area of one.
The court under investing in
other areas so I'm concerned
about taking on
in the area.
With this with these wells he
for building or full.
Or all.
Mr Chairman carbon capture.
storage can be used for any
number of technologies as we
we've discussed I mean it can be
The production of steel cement
paper aluminum and heavy
industry in particular a great
example of where carbon capture
is particularly important
because unfortunately between
now and twenty fifty the global
economy is not going to stop
making steel and cement impact
those productions are going to
grow so certainly coal into
hydrogen will be a component
globally of carbon capture.
I'd be lying to say otherwise
but they're far more
applications than just those two
Mr chair I would only and
economic diversification into a
low and zero carbon economy that
is connected to those
manufacturing industries that
are creating the core components
necessary for low and zero
carbon energy steel cement
except are a is a is an
incredible growth opportunity
it's a long term diversification
opportunity for our state Mr
chairman
and then the director capture
which received an incredible
increase in investment from the
federal tax credit that over
three three almost four X.
growth is sort of a safety net
that the entire world is
looking increasing that with
importance and to be able to
draw that here is also an
economic diversification
opportunities.
so I I see the first
opportunities Mr chair
personally as
the greater opportunities for
the state.
Is.
On the industry the projection
in the industry.
and capture necessary because of
the process involved in
producing those things for
because of the energy required
to.
Thank you Mr chair so taking the
production of cement and
concrete the carbon dioxide you
have
you're releasing carbon dioxide
through the feedstock through
the heat which is required to
produce cement in the clinker
that is in industries where
batteries and renewable energy
I'm are actually a challenge so
you do need high heat which is
why frequently they use color
natural gas and talk about
hydrogen but you're releasing
carbon dioxide on the front end
with the the heat source and
then you are also producing
carbon dioxide in the back and
when you're making that the
cement and from the Lundstrom so
in that case you can reduce the
carbon
with your feed stock but you can
also do a point source capture
which is one of the technologies
that's currently is.
Okay I guess my question is.
Is the current release by those
industries a result of the
materials they're using.
And you need.
Thank you Mr chairman book.
I don't think calling the stress
the.
Tribal nations that support
again this wasn't physician all
relation.
but condition the.
Something like this to the are
you.
By the.
The agency enforces.
They're also.
Thank you Mr chair well the
agency is here to answer those
technical questions Mr Chairman
the pursuit of privacy.
What.
In all likelihood require.
Would require will require very
close coordination with the
environmental protection agency
and.
I don't know the ins and outs of
that.
Mr Chairman I do see and really
support the expansion of
expertise and capacity at the
state agency level that this
would entail.
I appreciate the news I guess.
Additional concern relating to
the.
to a.
Mr chair totally agree get while
the agency isn't here I have my
strong presumption is that is
part of the process the detail
process and multi year process
that they will go through with
the environmental protection
agency.
Representative you thank you Mr
chairman I agree with my
colleague is a multi year
process through which the rules
and regulations can be
determined.
Thank you for your answers.
Getting closing statements but.
Mr chair I deeply appreciate the
discussion in the conversation
New Mexico has more at risk from
the rising global temperatures
at the same time Mr chairman we
have it diversification
opportunity based around the low
and zero carbon economy that
we're presenting to you here
today it requires investing more
in our state health and safety
agencies with we're proposing
and working in closer
coordination federally based
upon the recent federal
legislation that's passes the.
Well we perhaps the largest
expansion of testament in clean
energy and zero carbon
technology estimated to reduce
emissions forty plus percent by
the year twenty thirty this six
to put us in an important place
where we're drawing investment
jobs.
Without work to do to expand
community choice in how those
are put in locally but this is a
part of how we ensure these
unique financial opportunities
we enjoy as a state grow and
clean up our state.
and I chairman and members of
the committee I would simply
like to add that I appreciate
your your time and consideration
and research into this issue and
the public comment is very much
appreciated and really value
citizen engagement in this
process thank you.
Thank you with pleasure and.
Can I move the device.
Mr.
These two branch.
Thank.
We.
If we have a motion
Representative got the best
suited for small
to take a look at the.
Representative very good no.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio no.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
I share Sarinana.
Chairman queen the.
The six of for you the best.
Thank you the committee.
What was.
Thank.
Because I think.
Right next it is each B. one
eighty three transfer came and
pushed Department thank you.
Every.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
This bill addresses in HSD
that's been struck.
In.
It's an agency that I think
should be a.
Technical and scientific agency.
I think it's been struggling
because it's governed by a board
of political appointees who are
not necessarily technical
percent of.
In.
Throughout the session this bill
and and the next bill it's not
my intention to.
Criticize any specific
commissioner.
For staff members of the
department.
But the agency as a whole has
been struggling for at least a
decade.
And I think it's because of the
structure.
This bill would move the
department game and fish to be a
division of the Energy minerals
natural resources for.
Along with their other divisions
which include energy
conservation management.
Forestry money minerals oil
conservation and state parks.
In my experience in working with
these various divisions in
different capacities over
just ten or twenty years.
I've been really impressed with
the directors of the user's
Division.
including notably presently.
Forestry.
until recently oil conservation
they just a staff member Lee.
In state parks.
They've been just really high
quality professions.
That is not a criticism
structure Sloan this invite.
director Sloan has a lot the
characteristics that I would
like to see in the division
director.
She is in New Mexico.
He came up through the ranks of
the agency that he's directing.
I think I think that's a good
thing for us as a state I would
much rather have New Mexicans
running our agencies then.
Hiring out of state people I I
remember when
a local school district hired a
new superintendent
he was.
Very sore flashing other but I
think Boston.
It came here to run the school
district and.
You know it's just the it takes
a while to get to know New
Mexico and to do a good job here
in New Mexico.
So I appreciate the the of
directors long but director
Sloan is tasked not with just
doing his job he's tasked with
keeping.
Seven unelected commissioners
have.
And that is a challenge.
In I would say there's.
No better their dissolution and
director Sloan's COVID in the
HSD analysis we received from
the department of fish so I I
assume this is coming from him
he was at least listed as the
author.
He said.
This thing all thirty with the
with the division director.
Could result in large shifts in
policy or administrations.
Compared to the decision making
of a diverse seven member
commission.
Personally that's completely
wishful thinking.
So to begin with we don't have a
diversified member commission.
We have a four member
commission.
Because we had frequent turnover
in the commission.
And it's it's a difficult
process to appoint new people I
I will note that.
One of the commissioners we lost
with potentially center schools
as brother.
Who we lost quite literally he
died
unexpectedly so that was.
Source of Turner I think eight
years ago.
The other point that purchase
loans
statement Mrs is the idea that.
A division director would result
in a large turnovers large.
Holes large shifts in policy
over nutrition.
When the reality is every time
we get a new governor we get a
new commission.
I mean this one the first things
that the governor will do is ask
the current commission to
resign.
And the resigned because they
can be fired if there if they
don't.
And so we get a brand new
commission.
And what's a bigger policy shift
and getting a brand new
commissioned every time we
change governor's.
So I'm hopeful that if we took.
The department in the amendment
of the vision.
We would insulate them.
From the political pressure.
And we would have a department
that was focused on doing their
job.
Following their regulations.
implementing their programs.
And not.
Pleasing locally appointees who
have the power to hire and fire
the director.
Yeah with the LESC proportions.
Thank you for your presentation
with the audience like to raise
your hand if you're.
For the bill would like to
speak.
this licensure.
Because of the committee my name
is Brian for the southwest
program.
I live K. as in kilo without the
thousand members of the
representative here in New
Mexico and this time.
Education.
The politicization of the
departments commissions.
Is a lot of if you
and so we are supporting this
We prefer we would that the name
change for game
two well.
We rather see it Representative
tire section what.
There anyone else who is in
support.
The gains first session.
The study.
Representative made by one
direction once or parking issue
to stand in opposition.
Primarily because of the state
game commission as a policy
rulemaking body right September
commission.
Chair representative out of
course the representative all
parts of the state or seven
positions with I districts and
then two of our positions.
I this bill would be passed by
to regroup.
Yes all of that rulemaking and
policy authority in a single
individual the the director of
the division would be a simple
solution would be subject to the
the secretary was awesome
exemptions issues.
So I think you have the loss of
transparency loss.
Representation.
and potentially some
inconsistency ask that positions
within ministrations change.
Secondly there are agency is
very unique in that we have.
What is being that relies solely
on licensees as well as.
Federal funds and fish lobsters
those funds come very clear
requirements that the.
From license fees and only be
used for wildlife center.
If you don't use the risk losing
twenty million dollars a year in
federal funds.
In New.
So this actually isn't
complicated accounts.
I'm not sure that energy out
resources for population I don't
see any streamlining of
government or anything like that
that could occur with the
combination the reason is that
rose thank you.
And also the state.
Madam chair committee when they
are writing.
It.
Should we have members of our
right to choose.
Mexico.
This year.
This is.
Commission resolver to.
As.
Nation.
Anyone else on this site go to
the site.
Yeah.
Of the representative madam
officers association.
or.
Our.
This over over over two years
yes I need your three lines.
The.
Yes they do that's where the
department of
As You longer.
Thank.
is is is proving successful and
Jackie all of whether it's
economic ties Wells the talk a
lot of issues.
As it is in your funded
Representative Ezzell is a.
License.
It also means tourism reminders
of our neighbors for waters.
The next one is over the age.
In this agency is one of all the
that are outlined.
Well since we all
right here reservation.
It was.
With one person this is absolute
power.
Out these.
Well.
This mission do cater to.
That.
This is an.
What are you this is is that all
these years I mentioned working
under diverse commission
assessed for an exam.
Your first sables which was
commissioned his daughter's
neighbors well there's just one
all works
structures designed for while I
first of all.
This call for this.
All decisions.
One person so your boss will be
able
to.
Mexico members are stationed
what what is this person could
have just waited long out of
the.
This call.
The power of the.
Or just for you.
Okay so this.
And your date of how the people
what you will do this.
Legislation that would change
the basic needs of the state is.
You are the legislative body.
If you will yes sure all of our
we.
Reserve.
Thank you next.
We're gonna try to keep it to
two minutes right okay.
There's.
All.
Our things though
Representative.
The the reason why.
The sensation Department.
You are to to
to.
Your.
The objective.
The person access all for you
thank
are
you included recreational.
For the record amounts of dust
in that is what we have.
Ranchers largest.
Sure well much of the work.
Are in.
For that
transients.
Thank you would you please what
was your name drugs of the war
okay.
Can.
Sure Representative
communication from.
The state to oppose the deal
with it
morning is that in the field as
we need to be strong she.
We don't know what that is that
you do this for fourteen.
Thirteen it.
Hi I agree.
We have
Contagious diseases appears I
would be pleased to the finally
the grocery Education or eight
forty one that has no authority
over it is what it would cost as
we stopped in the state needs to
be able to go to that commission
to get to the directors to be
able to do that we need.
Option is that at the stated
about half of one percent versus
what is their contract is
appointed by.
Change so that teachers
any time.
Those reserves.
Thank you.
Your.
Members
of the.
Mexico observation.
Of a.
And in the form of adoration for
my twelve year.
We're all.
Over to one of our state mission
right I just.
Administration
chair.
I see that.
A lot of the.
The current system is not
working the way it should
this organization ten years ago
I started doing all the normal
will be here.
To
change.
The state commission and our
prime minister and one to four
but coming up is a protections
for the commissioners to
against arbitrating retaliatory
from.
And that is very key point.
One eight three go.
I believe that the directors
loan numbers amount of correctly
pointed out that in taking the
way that rate with them which
occurs all too well we change
the registrations.
If I could swing Water State
Farm fast.
Because you have except the
session another exit the session
and that is a very short change
yeah and their wives along.
To the board that.
We will support very strongly
this bill one eighty four we
believe that it has all the
elements.
Make a big difference in the
commission performance project
that PO.
And it retains a lot of the best
given the current system Amanda
is very similar to a bill that
we supported and other broad
spectrum remembers we just few
years ago Representative we got
to.
It would mean to Representative
This one.
Just.
Yeah the.
Our main is not technical so the
response was.
There's a lot of things that are
driven by all entries.
That you have to be
working resolved
For pricing person it's a lot of
too much responsibility to much
property investing one person
examples of the kinds of things
that are I understand I do this.
There are a lot of social
decisions are made to and it's
best made by good board with
robust debate the public with a
lot of input.
That's what we would like to
keep.
Thank you very much thank you
there anyone else again.
Right we're gonna go to them
soon.
I just basically people can
really go for first to put your
hands down unless you're for the
bills.
Takes a lack of oversight from
and accountability to the
legislature and therefore that
New Mexico voters and I think
that a move to EMNRD would help
to alleviate that lack of
oversight and accountability and
I'd urge you to support this
bill thank you thank you next we
Deborah content.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Deborah Condit
registered lobbyists for animal
protection of New Mexico we are
we stand in support with their
hands halfway up on this hello
as right now at this time mostly
because we don't have a full
understanding of the complete
ramifications of it but we do
support thoroughly exploring the
transfer of gamefish to EMNRD
considering the whole
considering the potential
benefits better legislative
oversight of a combined
executive agency that would
manage wildlife alongside other
natural resource use the cost of
savings to taxpayers that is
outlined in your FIR and knowing
that seventeen other states have
already taken this approach
advancing this bill out of this
committee would allow this idea
to get more consideration by the
legislators and help that this
bill passes out to date thank
you.
Thank you Mr president next with
the genco in.
That that are.
Yes can you hear me yes we can.
Great thank you good morning
everybody my name is John
calling I'm speaking as a
private citizen and a New Mexico
educator I did work in New
Mexico for nearly fifty years
all of our wildlife belongs to
everyone in our state.
The New Mexico department of
game and fish is operated on the
presumption that wildlife
belongs only to hunters I've
witnessed again and again have
federal mandates are stored by
this department to the benefit
of hunters and other consumptive
industries for example this year
I learned that a federally
listed and protected species
groups Turkey was allowed to be
hunted for years to generate
money for the department hello
Regis a trophy hunt for
endangered species and native
this year groups Turkey was
completely devastated after very
limited research and more
licenses issued.
Climate change and drought are
here while the species are in
decline our wildlife these
better protection now in
conclusion New Mexico department
of game and fish should be
managed by an agency with a lot
more scientific oversight and
muscle to implement federal
mandates perhaps New Mexico
department of game and fish
should be divided into two
separate divisions one for the
tree preservation of all species
without any goal of hunting and
the other division for like for
issuing hunting and angling
licenses with oversight.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak and thank you
Representative McQueen co
sponsoring this bill.
And I hope reorganization
happens to this department.
Thank you Mr chairman Mexico and
base your hand the right hand if
you are against the bill.
All right Mr Bender Bender.
Yes my name is mark Pettinger
independent wildlife activist in
Santa Fe County in German the
queens district.
What what are you see is needed
is an agency that would actually
protect wildlife.
This bill unfortunately doesn't
really change the mission of
either the game commission which
would now be an advisory
commission or of or the game or.
It remains primarily in
existence to protect game which
is why they're still called the
game Department in game board.
It still represents primarily
hunters some representation
ranchers and only a token
representation of people who
want to protect one of the.
There are fewer people now
hunting the never before there's
no reason to have the department
which primary has responsibility
of protecting honey.
So I I would oppose this bill
and would like to see in its
place a bill that would protect
wildlife as a primary position
of the agents.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak thank you Mr better all
right that's all we have.
Go back to sports pretty.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple points of clarification
the to the the game officer
present
I think it's important recognize
those jobs don't go away that
Raul doesn't go away that need
doesn't go away it just gets
shifted to a different
department.
And I think it's
not accurate to suggest that the
division director in the state
of New Mexico is a dictator.
We might have hundred division
directors and state in New
Mexico
it's there is a chain of command
even for division director
regarding the comment on the
The notification regarding
diseases on page fourteen I
actually think that's
but the useful comment I think
the change on page fourteen is
an error I think what it's what
what we're only trying to do is
change the name from the
department game and fish to the
division and I think the drafter
into changing the name to the
division change that to the
table by report.
Yes a lot of this bill is just
name changes I think that one is
incorrect.
and finally there were several
comments about
this is the wrong approach or
Sam.
It doesn't go far enough in you
know I I I think we are in need
of the evolution of the role of
the department
I would I would hope that this
would be a first step in that
direction but I recognize that
it doesn't it doesn't change the
the name or the stated mission
of the department to be a
broader wildlife agency
that seem to need to be too much
to put in this bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Change we're off to the
committee questions.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you Representative I just have a
quick question
related to there's been a few
comments about the transfer that
the agency right now is is fully
funded on its own first is I'm
going to EMNRD and that maybe
becoming a bit of a an issue can
you share more about and having
general fund depending heavily
on general fund verses again at
this right now ing and how that
might impact or not.
Madam chair representative
Sarinana that is an accounting
issue that would have to be
addressed sure I think it could
be addressed
It's it's not something that we
don't see in other areas right
we have appropriations for
specific purposes we have funds
for specific purposes we have
restricted money that can you do
is for one thing and on the
other and that's that would be I
think similar it would be an
adjustment for the department
issue Meryl's Nash resource
department I certainly think
it's doable
I would also note that.
You know part of the idea of.
Following the agency's mission
will also to be to expand the
top the there's long been
argument that the reason the
department focuses on hunting
and fishing is because that's
where the that's who pays for
their services.
And I I that's the important
point you know so if we want to
have a wildlife agency that you
know addresses non game species
and other as other activities
like that they need a separate
source of funding to cover those
activities so I would expect in
the future whether or not the
the HSD moves there funding will
likely diversely.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam.
With this representatives.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman for presentation I
just have a couple of questions
that I understand kind of the
background and what's going into
the bill
Do you have a sense of
what other states.
Maybe in the southwestern in the
Rocky Mount area organize.
There came inflation no is it
distinct or within a Department
waters.
Some of the other models Madam
chair Representative Dixon there
is a wide variety
somehow independent agencies
summer part of larger agencies
some have commissions some have
commissions that are advisory
you know it's it's this kind of
department is common especially
in western states and there's no
there's certainly no uniformity
it's really a each state makes
makes up it's all.
Thank you madam chair chairman
can you talk to me about the
stakeholder engagement that went
into crafting this bill should
have who was involved in the
discussions just so that I
understand.
Ten of the background
motivations.
Sure the.
Representative Dixon so there I
was part of the the stakeholder
group that was discussing the.
The expansion of the mission.
and I thought that we need to
revise the commission.
And they didn't.
So what so I had this bill
drafted.
I want to have this discussion
thank you thank you madam chair
and gentleman I I.
This is my so I just started my
second term definitely an area
that I'm also concerned about
having heard concerns from
constituents and sort of
followed
Controversies in the news so
I'll be honest that I don't know
that this is necessarily that
the right approach to the best
approach but I do think
something needs to be done
The.
Does the game and fish
department oversee the counting
permitting.
The madam chair is in the
Representative Dixon please.
that is a very large concern
my constituents and feeds into
my larger concerns
I don't think I have any other
questions but I very much
appreciate this discussion and
and having that the bill brought
forward thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
expenses.
Chair Mister.
Since.
K. Parker.
Was.
Issue.
For how should.
Is.
It's too.
Madam chair representative got
the.
I don't think it's inaccurate
although I do think
we're starting to see change and
we will expect to see more
change so
I would not disagree with.
Chair Mister questions should
change.
Issue.
What the.
What.
On.
Conservation.
I these hunters fishers.
For version change.
Because.
Madam chair representative Scott
I certainly don't think that's a
necessary part of the evolution
I think hunting and fishing are
The the deep rooted in very
important cultural aspect in New
Mexico in a very significant
economic impact to New Mexico
and this is not about curtailing
either of those and that's why
I've always felt that if we do
in fact expand the mission of
the department.
We we can't we legally can't do
it without in fishing money and
we morally can't do it with
hunting fishing.
We need another source of
funding whether it's general
fund or whether we find a
dedicated income stream for the
other activities date you know
if we if we ask the department
to do
other things we need to provide
them with funding to do so.
Sure question actor Mr.
Each.
Insurance and.
Their activities.
I think are predicated on
funding streams store.
Session two agency within our
state comes.
So to HB to.
Does not.
chair representative Scott.
These P. to funding I think
would be to the extent it
impacted the hunting and fishing
activities of the agency it can
only be supplemental.
They couldn't take away from the
funding for those activities it
could provide funding for other
wildlife management activities
beyond the scope of what they're
currently conducting.
So we can't managers of Skutt
we.
The federal funds are
restricted.
And we need to respect that and
you might remember.
You know if you see him out time
I believe in that the really
You know wouldn't.
Was down our budget was down we
were cutting money and sweeping
funds and on the initial list of
funds to sweep there are some of
these programs and then came
director was here in a heartbeat
saying if you sweep these funds
you won't switch them you lose
them we have to protect these
funds.
And in all the continues and
it's it's a matter of accounting
it might be.
you know the the the somewhat
complicated but certainly doable
thinking department has its own
building they have their own
vehicles.
All the could remain.
Mr chair thank you the answer.
One more.
I suppose part.
Issues in New Mexico.
Branch.
To purchase to.
There is.
I would shake the media.
Political ability.
For.
Policies that do.
Direction contrary.
To watch who are the primary
issue that regulation.
Hello yes.
This legislation perhaps reduce.
That we need to.
Political account.
Madam chair representative
Scott.
I think the accountability is
still there.
the the the.
There is a comment from the
public the if this was a
division director.
The answer to a cabinet
secretary who answer to the
governor that would be short
chain Kenya.
Yeah if we have an agency that
is.
Run by a director who answers to
seven political appointees who
can be removed at will by the
governor.
Yeah that that's that's
optically launching.
In terms of using so
my hope is that.
The if you put the director of
the department or division under
the cabinet secretary it would
be the cabinet secretary who
absorbs the political pressure.
And not the division director.
Currently the department
director which would be the same
person.
Answers to abort.
Who all have their own agenda
who can be removed by the
governor.
And we have seen activities.
Their activities in the in the
current commission that they
have been the carry forward from
the last commission.
There were highly political.
we had a commission directing
the director to do things that
they lacked authority to do.
And I think we're still seeing
the fallout from that and it's
in fort.
Okay thank you madam chair
Mister chairman.
Which is the first thank you
just got Representative Rican.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair for the bill that you
brought forward
I think it sends a strong
message to the game and fish
department
and I think that and I just want
to have a Capulet that I have
worked with the game and fish
department in Albuquerque
regarding wolves and I had a
very good experience with them
so I haven't seen the bad
experience but listening to you
Mr chair and madam chair
you know I'm hearing things that
I think sends a strong message
My concern actually is similar
to Representative Scott madam
chair and Mr chair
is regarding co mingling of
funds
and I happen to know that you
cannot call coming will
enterprise funds with
General Fund and that is one of
the big concerns that I have
Representative McQueen Mr chair
and madam chair is how if this
was.
How these funds would be I mean
we need to be happy.
I am This Klay conservative so I
just need to bring this issue up
because we need to be very
careful about how if this passes
Mr chair and and and madam chair
how this would be at how this
transfer would occur especially
when it comes to
Obtaining revenue into the state
to an enterprise fund and coming
only now with another department
so I just want to raise that as
As a caution because I have been
involved in madam chair and and
Mr chair
in administering
you know division funds for the
City of Albuquerque New I think
it's it's something that we need
to be very clear about.
Especially if this bill passes
thank you for that
Representative traded need to be
protected talk to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative bye.
I agree with some of the
principles of bills we talked
yesterday in the elevator
I.
I have seen the good and the bad
and the ugly.
And and.
Yeah my constituents in the back
of the room Representative
categories and will growers.
That said differently I'd
probably vote differently on
this bill just they will on.
I I've got a under my saddle for
game and fish department and
they know about.
I think the people of
Then the ranching communities
have been mistreated and abused.
And I think they profit from.
And and they don't.
Take care of.
Those people go out in the water
and the deep those animals they
put mineral block out the order
blocked out for fix the damn
dances at the LFC pair up and
they don't do.
Hardly anything.
Michael.
And in one instance we have had
cattle herds that had been
reduced by seventy five percent
in.
But because the impact the LFC
for.
And the families are are
absolutely.
Devastated.
And more will happen at the at
the if they don't think the
process more will.
I don't know if your bill is the
right meal.
But when the bill comes up that
will correct that problem you
can bet although for.
Because if you don't clean up
your act.
Those people that are preparing
verge of elk and deer for the
hatters to come in New Mexico
and the to prosper from.
that will let.
That's not good for New
Mexicans.
I I don't know what the right
six years.
At I'm looking for a fix.
I look at this and I I don't
know that put them under M.
recommend I think about having
one person madam chair and
Representative because of.
Just the.
Since our game the age.
That make me feel any better I
mean but.
Then I look at the funds that
that are held in reserve.
I came vision that significant.
I look at how they distribute
so.
L. permits as mine.
Santa Fe referred to it's a
problem every one of us come to
hat and concerns.
I think the.
I think I hope I hope that you'd
listen to the concerns on both
sides of the aisle today it's
not a Republican or Democrat
issue it's a it's a Mexican
nation.
And we rely upon the game fish
and I my friend Representative.
Madam chair representative.
And Santa Fe is trying to
address that.
And I bought the issues of
transgressive but.
If they believe.
I mean you make my support today
of.
Director but it stands on for
curious requests if you don't
fix the issues I will work with
my friend from Santa Fe to
correct the issues and I'm not
done that way in the future I'm
talking about pretty damn quick.
So.
Madam chair and representative
of the rest of the night
appreciate that thanks for the
committee but we have problems
in New Mexico and.
Right now you're you're on the
plane the speaker.
The difference in this is
representative small.
Thank you very much sure thank
you chairman claim
madam chair.
Chairman queen do we have
federal funds for a number of
agencies that currently within
the state of New Mexico sort of
a mix of general on federal
funds madam chair.
Do the.
certainly the we are Senator
educational funds federal
hi we funds
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Madam chair
representative are their
enterprise funds and some of our
departments I recall the twenty
nineteen some permitting changes
and increased permitting fees
within the oil conservation
division specifically meant for
the oil conservation division to
do better work
does that exist across state
agencies as well Madam chair
representative Representative
small yes.
Great Madam chair representative
that's my understanding as well
on I think we've seen it from
from
all parts of the legislature
including from the finance
committees so madam chair
representative.
Do you have as much of a fear as
we and with the proposal to move
into instead of just sort of
administratively attached to
move into the energy minerals
and natural resources department
where while conservation
division has an enterprise and
federal connections do you have
as much fear as as some concerns
today have sort of focused on
chair representative
Representative small and
recognize it needs to be
addressed I don't have any fear
that it would not.
Thank thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and I
just a brief last year we have
the department of homeland
security that has actually.
Really probably more federal
funding than even the department
of game and fish with some
unique structures madam chair Mr
chair I think there are some
probably some strong structures
is deeply important to make sure
that the accounting would work
in that we don't forego federal
funds while at the same time
entering into perhaps expanded
local opportunities there's some
great examples that I think we
can look at they give me the
same.
Care but also confidence that
you display on that madam chair
Mr chair I guess
The you talked about that this
really the there are some
mission conversations that.
What this allow the department
to engage and management of non
game wildlife species.
Madam chair of the small this
this bill doesn't do anything to
alter their current mission okay
thank thank you madam chair
representative and I think and
many now
I'm deeply fortunate to have
grown up hunting and fishing in
New Mexico I can sort of go back
very clearly the first time that
I went Turkey hunting where I
wasn't able to carry a gun the
first time when I was eight
years old but I was able to
carry a gun and harvested Turkey
with my now deceased grandfather
and chair Mister chair those are
guys stones for me and I think
so many across the state are
deeply fortunate to have those I
also recognize madam chair
Mister chair that those same
sorts of formative experiences
can take place in the number of
different ways and that it might
be seeing wildlife for the first
time and not hunting that sort
of occupies that same place and
I see both being very able to co
exist
Madam chair and Mr chairman
You I know we will have another
piece of legislation sort after
this is one of your main focus
is to sort of really try to
expand interest and show that
there is a lot of space for
engagement and perhaps
improvement and how we engage
with wildlife in our state then.
The Madam chair is a small
absolutely you know I I had
these two bills which are
related but not
Not designed to fit together the
person and I think there are
still other efforts on going to
address the mission so there are
a lot different efforts in
hopefully they will eventually
you know dove tail and coolest
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman
The
I I think that sort of that
clarity and madam chair Mister
chair is it your understanding
The New Mexico is in the top
five when it comes to biological
diversity in the in the.
The country in the United States
madam chair of the small is the
same with me Madam chair Mister
chair in fact we're at the you
know ninety plus percentile of
our natural heritage and so
madam chair Mister chair do I
think I tend to agree that an
expanded focus perhaps expended
investment holding on to court
tenants and traditions but
expanding opportunity given the
incredible gift and blessing
that natural heritages in the
state
Really.
Same kind of I tend to agree
that there's more that we can do
there and madam chair just a
brief sort of I will vote for
this piece of legislation hi
knowledge and it's as you do Mr
chair that there are other sorts
of conversations that are
ongoing and I think
to me they come back to how were
it can we expand our ability to
engage in a mission with support
that meets the incredible
natural heritage that we have in
the state of New Mexico to the
extent we're moving down the
road by
Looking at this Avenue I'm open
I'll supported today although I
think they'll be a number of
other conversations that are
ongoing to the session that will
sort of feed in thank you very
much and chair.
Thank you madam chairman for the
task.
Thank you.
Representative break up.
Representative Dixon.
Yes the projects.
Representative Garcia
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative small yes.
Representative Thomson.
What's up man to pass.
The.
Nope.
Shares I know it's.
Chairman claim yes.
I.
So that tonight is a.
With the motion fails.
Thank thank you Mr.
In chair it's it's teacher call
but we can we try another motion
or we could move on to New
Mexico.
The contract sorry we could try
to someone could offer another
motion or could simply move on
to the next.
We have not I would suggest we
move on to the next okay thank
you Mr chair.
Once the next bill.
So.
Madam chair members of the
committee
if you liked house bill one
eighty three you're gonna love
house bill one a four and he
didn't like house bill one
eighty three you're gonna love
hospital in the fact.
So house bill one the forward
doesn't move the department to
energy minerals natural
resources which for the record I
think is the right thing but.
what house bill one eighty four
does is change the process that
we picked the commission.
It's it is a seven member
commission there are three at
large members one from each
congressional district but no to
from the same county that was a
concern that was expressed last
summer done this bill I I think
the time we currently have
County might have hit all three
congressional districts it was
pointed out that if you did by
congressional district you could
still get three people from
Bernalillo county and that
wasn't our intention so we fix
that.
it is the those are the sort of
large members there will be
selected by the governor.
Is this the authority to select
of the remaining commissioners
in the
Legislative Council in part of
that is.
To diversify you know the input
on this commission and we talked
about the short chain that the
governor has on the current
commission and and we also have
on the the cabinet secretary or
division director but this
broadens that and and makes it
so not one person is is in
charge of the.
The the for certain conditions.
Appointments include
A richer farmer the current
conservationist under enclosure
the scientists and in the past.
People have said well.
There's only we we mean there's
only one Lujan on the
commission.
And I would point out that it's
a minimum of one hunter thank
you all the hunters it's just
that there's one position that's
designated to make sure that
there's a Lujan.
and that's I believe more than
we have in current law.
So the so we're just trying to
broaden the representation on
the commission and then we the
additional protections so the.
The protections are modeled on
the protections are given to the
your is in New Mexico board of
trustees that once you're on the
commission.
You're on the commission for
your term unless there's really
something egregious and you
there's affirmative action taken
to return we remove you
I don't believe under other
appointed bodies that have
that's our production those
actions have been taken because
it wouldn't be easy.
And that's the point.
That we want to point people to
the commission and have them
exercise their
Their judgment and expertise
from
Geographically diverse group and
experience really diverse group.
And that with that we will.
Improve the functioning of our
commission I would but at one
more thing the the terms are
staggered so we would have the
situation under the structured
because the secretaries in the
diversity of the appointing
bodies we're a new governor we
could would or could simply
replace the commission.
With that also proportions.
The audience needs if you are
for the bill the resilient.
Start here.
Again committee chair
Representative we were what
began
Saturday eight thousand members
for the state.
Your day to support this bill I
think again we need to modernize
our wall and then the state need
to depoliticize it so these
types of reforms due we
appreciate Representative
Stephens
and just once again note that my
County others that I would like
to see here we like to see the
term came in this bill
substitute while.
Thank you thank you anyone else
on the side but with this.
Thank.
You madam chair.
Mr chair
In
I guess I made it pretty plain
which bill Rivage or
we think this is far superior my
experience with the the store if
we in commission absolutely sure
many fluctuations that.
Right.
Representative means as well.
That given a lot of talk a lot
of generation market research
I just made concluded the
commission says I am
opportunities that is.
This.
Representative elements
thank we change the need for
safety.
We are obligated to based off
the novel one individual I
certainly give some protection
from arbitrary term into her
property
we change the status
of a.
When they're if you will which
we don't have a passport
Committee and twenty one process
work instructions.
To recognize the need for.
The.
And if the.
Missioners are free to really do
the job but the vegetation and
best judgment we're going to
fill out in terms.
Then.
Institutional knowledge is also
protected and as there is over
there is consistency.
and this has a lot of good
elements must keep repeating
that means that we've supported
will very much affect us in the
past it's a very good password
and we certainly agree.
Representative point that the
changes needed upward particular
crisis mode more thank thank
thank you.
Given that.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
members of the committee
repeaters operate exposure to
state supportive of possible
eighty four.
this bill would be able to
provide additional functionality
and support up to the state game
commission and bring a operator
sense of equity diversity and
wildlife and sent to be
expertise to the commission for
these reasons the ones already
stated purchase product yes on
this thank you the chairman for
bring this one.
Anyone else in support is that
right against this.
One of the New Mexico party game
fish again we stand opposed to
the bill we recognize that
professional districts are an
interesting idea but they're
about reserves are not static
they change that could lead to a
future issues where you do not
have the kind of different
states representation you might
like also that the difference
between Sandoval county
Bernalillo county at this point
is is not very great so you
could end up with.
Less representation and you
currently have in statute I'm
concerned that there's a lot of
rural representation that could
be lost under this where we're
not representing that that
Harding's of Robert Lee counties
of the world
So those are the other
significant.
While lives of the town in those
areas.
That was you know it thank you
no position.
And.
Madam chair members.
Each in their respective.
Four years.
Stay with.
Are you relations of these one
year prior to the appointment.
I research a strict party
affiliation criteria and.
Scientists also noted.
Thank you.
Every chairman members of the
committee which across major we
have New Mexico our reserve that
that stated we oppose the bill
we are.
Program posed with that question
districts stated that
metropolitan areas have all the
new communities in FY my can
straight from there and I have
to move community representation
on the board also we are
concerns on page six eight
eleven it has been very positive
reports to be given that
exclusive original jurisdiction
over the commissioners are
proceedings if we will we have
the right to seek conservation
this declined on page three line
nineteen in onstage.
One six defined what compare old
while I feel for you for these
reasons is yes thank you.
Well as opposed to this bill.
Do you like the removing of that
will we have some of the issues
that are bigger issues.
Constitutionality to use
taxation without representation
is really kind of what this
comes after.
Is also into missionaries from
the house all we're down the
walls.
Or or if you have no
representation from extreme east
and west which.
Members of the committee.
There's
no representation once or.
Also the representation.
Of that composition of of what's
proposed here is concerned
As we look at.
This commission has
Representative bills well it's
always.
The one the need for housing
issues.
One average professional
district is not.
Constitute the whole.
Chairman of harvest statewide
so.
All my representatives will
community.
I wanted to say is I wish you
for this bill.
I.
For representation our streams.
Thank you.
Anyone else
go to online if you are for the
bill keep your hands up.
Start with Kerry faster then.
Thank you madam chair
representative McLean and
committee members carry Romero
executive director registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
council of outfitters and guides
we stand in support of this
legislation our organization
attends every commission meeting
and works closely with the
department of game and fish in
policy development.
Over my eleven years with the
council I have watched the
commission become increasingly
less efficient I believe the
reason for this is that the
current statute does not require
commissioners to have any
familiarity with game and fish
law or wildlife policy currently
there is not one commissioner on
the commission with a background
in game and fish department
biology or conservation this can
create a lot of disruption in
the meeting because
commissioners don't understand
the importance of timing in the
rulemaking process and they
frequently unintentionally
violate the open meetings act
because they simply do not
understand the industry
additionally it has been over
four years since we've had a
full commission of seven
members.
Commission of four members is
just barely enough to meet
quorum requirements and does not
allow for flexibility in
discussing highly complicated
issues.
And this is because with only
four commissioners it takes a
unanimous vote to pass any
action item we feel that this
bill would go a long ways
towards fixing this situation
and we appreciate your support
thank you.
Thank you next is WildEarth
guardians.
Good afternoon vice chair
setting a hundred members of the
committee my name is Chris Smith
again I'm here on behalf of
WildEarth guardians and our
thousands of members and
supporters across the state of
New Mexico I'm also speaking in
part.
For myself as a consistent
license holder since growing up
in northern New Mexico we
strongly support this bill under
both Democrat and Republican
governors the commission has
been unresponsive to the public
at times it's essentially
dysfunctional and at its worst
it's become a haven for
political favors.
this bill would insulate the
commission from political whims
and add stability to the
commission hopefully
functionality as well it would
also add needed perspectives and
expertise as New Mexico's
wildlife values change as we
confront the climate crisis and
as we confront a global
extinction event I also find
myself in the acutely our
position of agreeing with my
friends from the cattle growers
and having some consternation
about the political affiliation
time limit so actually my
opinion that should probably be
two or three years rather than
four although I do think one is
too short
Unless I think you all should
support this bill I think it's a
great bill and I think the
diversity of support shows that
thanks thank you next is Oscar
Simpson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Oscar Simpson
former game commissioner.
I've all I have followed the
gate and the sportsmen and
conservation I fall I apologize
again commission for forty
years.
There's been ups and downs a lot
and mainly a lot of political
shenanigans that doesn't match
the science in good wildlife
management so I highly support I
highly recommend that you
support this bill it's a bill
that needs to happen thank you
thank you I'm listening because
I believe.
Yes thank you madam vice chair
and the committee
I support this bill with
some
it's suggestions of that we've
heard
not necessarily all of them just
ask that they be included in the
consideration and perhaps the
draft
but
I stand in full support and just
want to add that to my daughter.
got her hunter safety license
when she was eight and her
brother when he was ten.
Thank you.
Thank you next is different
content.
You madam chair members of the
committee Deborah Condit with
animal protection voters and we
strongly support house bill one
eighty four well they came
commissions history is rooted in
promoting hunting and fishing
there are many New Mexicans who
enjoy wildlife through non
consumptive enjoyment like
wildlife watching and
photography at this bill
includes important provisions
that would provide more diverse
resent representation on the
commission it also ensures that
the commission will include
scientific expertise and we'd
we'd like to see that the
scientist position would be
required to have a peer reviewed
publications as well so as thank
you madam chair and thank you
madam chair McQueen for bringing
this bill forward.
Thank you next is the phone
number.
One five seven five five three
seven ten ninety five.
Hello Committee as.
Madam chair committee can you
hear me OK yes we can hear you.
Excellent thank you I merry
Catherine ray wildlife chair for
the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club and also very
strongly in support of H. B. one
eighty for not only myself but
for our chapter and we're so
lucky to have been riding wild
species in the numbers that we
saw in our state the north
American model of conservation
which is so often praised by
wildlife managers proclaims that
wildlife along everyone that is
held in the public trust for all
an eighty one eighty four of
questions representation on the
game commission to better meet
the public trust obligation it
makes the game commission more
diverse more equitable and more
jobs which should result in
decisions that are better
informed.
This is the central for wildlife
I'm in order to meet modern day
challenges like habitat loss
climate instability toxic
pollution and emerging diseases
we urge your support at eighty
one eighty four thank you so
much.
Thank you next is Jan Mexico
went.
Good afternoon again
I am strongly in support of this
bill I also want to gain
Commission over many years flip
flopping and being politically
over politically influenced and
I'm glad that this will divide
up how how the commissioners are
commission and also as an
educator I'm very happy this is
going to be a scientist from the
university on the on the
commission to educate decisions
thank you.
Thank you and our last is steep
ways for.
Afternoon madam chair and the
committee I am representing
three fifty New Mexico rural and
while I do have sympathize with
some of the
Points made by the opposition
about congressional districts
may be leaving out some rural
participants I do want to thank
representative there McQueen for
bringing this bill hi we are in
full support of it we are very
glad to diversify and
professional lives the
commission I think it's very
strongly needed so please pass
it thanks.
Thank you and then if you if you
were against the bill please
raise your hand.
Right we didn't see anybody
against the bill would you like
to.
Make a comment Mr chair.
Madam chair if I could address a
couple points
the couple people mention the
the four year term that you
can't change your political
party and and that goes to what
on the speakers described as
political Shannon shenanigans
we've seen other boards where it
requires members of each party
and someone says oh well I can
register in the party you know
and we we haven't done the
Representative representation
that we order of four years is a
long time it's going to the
governor's term team like that
was a pretty good benchmark to
avoid those kind shenanigans.
And then I I need to address
again now that the concern that
there's only one Lujan.
On your existing law there's no
Lujan require not.
So this is a minimum not a
maximum I went expected to ever
be maximum similarly on the
geographic distribution under
the existing law could have six
of your seven.
Commissioners from Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Los
Alamos six years of.
We don't see that happening
because people making these
appointments recognize the need
for geographic distribution.
And that's what we would expect
and this my bill actually has
more protection because it has a
language that you will be from
the same county.
Yeah so we will have
at least four different counties
or.
Probably more so thank you Mr
thank you thanks committee given
the questions for the committee.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
chairman of I appreciate this
bill and I think that there's
some interesting concerns that
were raised and you know
potentially there are slight
modifications that that could be
addressed in the.
To accommodate some of those but
I simply wanted to say that I
think the current system is
broken I think that is very
apparent to many people and so I
appreciate this bill thank you.
Thank you madam chair the you Mr
chair.
Two points I noticed that now
the Travis county has all three
congressional districts we can't
have all three commissioners
from Travis county so
I guess of prior concern I have
is been addressed now to my
district.
The widespread COVID picks up on
something that was in the
comments and that was on page
six wives eight to eleven.
To my question is madam chair Mr
chair of have you talked to the
Supreme Court about the graft of
the three that you provided to
the.
Madam chair representative I'm
we're no
of the we took this language of
the the the bill the establishes
the board trustees for the
university Mexico.
we thought it was a strong
protection without eliminating
the possibility that there could
be a situation where someone
really need to go.
As I read it madam chair Mr
chair the
Supreme Court would just make
the decision whether that
person.
Is
Or not removed and and there's
no subsequent appeal of that
there's just no one else to
yield to.
The manager Representative
Nibert that's correct it does
provide for a new this in the
opportunity to be heard.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative just
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chair I think.
Generally there are
opportunities for improvement
which is why I've supported
approaches that are similar to
pass Mr chair madam chair Mister
chairman
On the.
The.
To the and I think that yeah not
to go too deep into I do want to
note on page three
The sort of the the specificity
of previous employment in that
time line and madam chair this I
don't have any desire to be a
game commissioner I do want to
point out that I actually
as an employee of a
at in organization I don't know
if there's a prohibition against
be voting on this
I do will pointed out the
specificity is also a little
constricting.
Madam chair Mister chairman I
wonder why sort of the the
timeline is there.
Madam chair representative small
the specificity is there because
we have language in current law.
It was
it's it's all they there's some
overlap but there is at least
one member shall have a
demonstrated history enrollment
and wildlife and habitat
protection issues.
And that's basically been
ignored you know the it's pretty
easy to say on a conservationist
in the the goal here was to to
have a job description if you
will that was General enough
that we can get multiple
candidates and specific enough
that we could potentially fill
the role that we're trying to
fill because in the past.
That hasn't really been met the
way we had hoped.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman.
I I appreciate the the time to
provide to make sure it's right
to disclose and I don't know.
What fifty feet
if there's guidance as to
whether.
I should vote on this we're not
and three it.
Appreciate the guidance but it
seems slightly overly specific
well at the same time hi support
the overall effort to expand
opportunity see that there is a
great opportunity for us to as I
said regarding the previous
legislation live up to the
incredible gifts that were given
has one of the most diverse
states in the nation.
Thank you.
Sure to a two to three weeks Law
School.
Sure what we would need to
check.
The the.
Thanks to termination.
Madam chair representative Scott
this spring.
Your
check mentors as got that does a
good question presumably it
would be the appointing hi.
We don't know that.
Madam chair isn't Scott it's a
good question I can find.
Chair Mister chair of.
Question.
For.
She
would have.
The tour why are.
One.
One of the commissioners.
Thanks to conserve the long
game.
Consultation.
On the game commission.
Commission Andrew for ownership
change.
And this issue would change.
To help launch sure.
That.
Chair representative got
I hear your point.
to my my earlier comments
we're moving in the direction of
broadening the mission this is a
step along the path in that
journey it's it's not the first
up it's not the last.
Chair Mister chair up.
Hello Kitty.
Education
Commission he is.
At two recalls propitiation.
The game contributions.
This also.
The.
A post.
Chair Mister chair.
The geographic location the.
Seems to be.
Will bunch.
Patients should.
Ridge.
Which.
Madam chair representative got
believe we had five regions
to into a large so the a large
could be anywhere.
I regions include groupings of
counties as I was trying to
point out before one region
includes Dona.
One region includes Los Alamos
one region due to Santa Fe.
One region it's probably okay.
Those all those areas include
very urban areas that the one
region that doesn't is hurried
the park a Roseville Chavez
Lincoln of terror it in the.
Those are that's what we
currently have.
Thank.
That.
Just because.
Aggreko.
Still waiting.
Yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Garcia
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative small yes.
Representative Townsend.
Share Sarinana is.
Chairman.
So before you take with the
chair back to Representative
bring.
Representative break up.
Chairman claim yes.
Three.
Chairman of about sixty three.
Twenty.
Thank you for thank you madam
chair.
For we adjourned.
With that that.
That.
