Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum. Well, the gentle lady
from Valencia Representative
Mirabal Moya, lead us in today's
invocation.
Precious Heavenly Father, we
just come to you today with
Thanksgiving that you have
called us to serve your people.
And Father, I ask that you, your
Holy Spirit flood this house.
From every inch of it that Your
Holy Spirit go forth and that
you soften hearts that you open
minds.
And that you that you buy our
hearts together with your heart,
Father.
I asked that what we do here and
the stuff that we say and the
people that we touch, we do it
with your purpose in mind.
And Father, I ask that you
protect each and every person
here.
And, and, and our families,
Father.
I thank you that you are have
kept us safe so far, and we are
almost halfway through. Father,
I ask that you bless and anoint
everything that happens in this
house from the from the 4th
floor to the bottom floor, um,
and, and have it come. We are
here for your will and your will
only.
And I asked this in Jesus' name.
The lady from Ber Leo
Representative Serana with the.
pledge allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the
Gentlemen from Lincoln and Otero
with the Pledge to New Mexico
flag.
Gentle lady from Bern Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I when we go to the
next order of business,
announcements in miscellaneous
business.
Good morning members.
Let's go first to the generator
from Berlierana.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, Mr.
Speaker Mbari today is military
and Veterans Day in the
Roundhouse. We
Yeah.
We gather to honor the bravery,
sacrifice, and unwavering
dedication to our military
personnel and veterans. It is
with profound gratitude that we
we recognize those who have
served our nation often in the
face of imaginable challenges to
our active duty service members
and veterans, thank you for your
courage and commitment.
You stood guard over our
freedoms protecting the values
we hold dear and your sacrifices
are not overlooked.
Each one of you embodies the
spirit of resilience and
selflessness qualities that
inspire us.
As we reflect on our on your
contribution, let us remember
that our freedom is a gift that
comes at a great cost. We owe
our deepest appreciation to you
and your families who have
shared in the burden of sac of
service today and every day we
honor you. Thank you for your
service, your sacrifice, and
your dedication to our country.
You have our utmost respect and
gratitude. Thank you.
Mhm
Mr. Speaker, we had 5 people,
um, the commanders of Kirtland,
2 of the commanders, one from
White Sands, General Herrera and
General Aguilar, and I believe
all but, um, they've all been
sent to, I believe, Washington,
and um, so General Aguilar,
General Herrera is somewhere
here, but I would just, um, I'd
like to just say, you know.
As a military veteran, um,
yesterday the DOD was.
I notified about the firings of
their probationary people.
The, the, um, the federal
government.
Employs about 3, 1/3 of the
employee people in federal
government are former military
veteran, former military,
they're veterans and many of
them are being fired today if
they work for DOD.
Um, that, that's scary because
that is the, these are the
people who keep us safe and
personally my son works for a
department in DOD and he's
finding out today is whether he
will be fired, so.
Anyway, today we're honoring our
veterans. Thank you for
everything you do. Um, we don't
have many here because many are
out already upstairs in the in
the ceremony, but Mr. Speaker,
if you could, um, at least
recognize the people in the in
the gallery.
Absolutely gentle lady in the
gallery we have, excuse me.
In the gallery we have guests
that Serana.
Representing the army, navy,
Marine Corps, Coast Guard, Space
Force, Air Force, Veterans and
military families caucus and the
veterans integration Center,
please rise to be recognized.
Thank you for your service.
Thank you for the recognition,
Mr. Speaker.
Do you have a certificate,
gentle lady?
We do
Oh, could you read it? Thank
you.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature first
session, 2025, recognizes
February 19, 2025 as military
and Veterans Day in the House of
Representatives.
Whereas the foundation of the
United States rests upon the
principles of freedom,
democracy, and justice, which
are guaranteed to all Americans
as inalienable rights. And
whereas these essential freedoms
are safeguarded through the
dedicated service and sacrifice
of military service members who
protect the nation from threats
both foreign and domestic.
And whereas New Mexico proudly
boasts a rich and storied
history of military service,
with residents who have
continuously answered the call
to defend the country, beginning
with the indigenous peoples who
served with exceptional
distinction.
And whereas New Mexico residents
have played a vital role in
significant military engagements
throughout history, including
turning back the Confederacy at
the Battle of Glorieta Pass in
1862.
And serving valiantly and Teddy
Roosevelt's Rough Riders during
the Spanish-American War.
And whereas throughout the 20th
and 21st centuries, New Mexico
residents have answered the call
with honor, including 14,100 in
World War I, 49,500 in World War
II, 25,000 in the Korean
conflict, 57,000 in the Vietnam
conflict and more than 50,000
since the Gulf War. And whereas
with 4 military installations, a
strong presence of approximately
120,700 active duty personnel,
4000 National Guard.
and National Guard reserve
members and 141,000 veterans
residing in New Mexico. Military
service continues to be a
significant aspect of New
Mexico's identity.
And whereas the economic impact
of military bases in New Mexico
is profound, contributing
billions of dollars to the local
economy, providing thousands of
jobs and supporting numerous
local businesses, and whereas it
is vital to recognize the impact
and the importance of supporting
military families by ensuring
that they have the quality of
life they deserve, as they
contribute to the national
security and community strength.
Now, therefore, be it resolved
by the House of Representatives
of the state of New Mexico that
February 19, 2025 be proclaimed
military and Veterans Day in the
House of Representatives,
honoring the theme of enduring
legacy.
And be it further resolved that
current and former military
personnel along with their
families, be recognized and
thanks, thanked for their
unwavering commitment to the
sacrifices of the country,
signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe.
Gentle lady from.
Leoibula McKinley San Juan
Socorto Valencia. You have some
guests to introduce as well for
this celebration.
Thank you, Speaker, yes, I do. I
rise to honor and introduce one
of my guests, Mr. Young Jeff
Tom, who's sitting on the
rostrum there.
Mr. Tom is a United States
Marine veteran and served in the
Vietnam War, and he is currently
the chapter president for the
Mariano Lake chapter and my
special guest today and um I'd
also like to introduce two other
guests who've not quite made it
here yet, but Miss Shirlene Wa,
a United States Army veteran
from the Navajo Veterans
Advisory Council. She serves as
the vice chairwoman, and Mr.
Hasy Key, a United States Army
veteran who
is currently serving as the
Eastern Navajo Agency Veterans
commander and a newly elected
chapter president for the Baca
Pruitt chapter, which is in
District 69. Thank you, Speaker.
Thank you.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and
Otero, do you have a guests for
Veterans Day?
No, sir. OK, I'll come back to
you. Hold that thought, gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Representative Lujan
Gorola
Thank you Mr. Speaker, yes, um,
we have some guests from um.
And sitting next to you and I
would love to introduce them.
So there in the rostrum is um
roll steel.
Mhm
draws
is um a decorated Vietnam
veteran.
Reflecting his enduring
commitment to service and
healing, he has accomplished,
uh, and dedicated his his
service to mental health and
holistic well-being for over 4
decades. He had served as a
consultant for various various
organizations and as a president
and director of life transition
therapy for nearly 20 years.
Ralph led a private clinic
focusing on grief, stress, pain
management, and holistic
therapies.
He has held numerous roles as a
grief counselor, psychotherapist
and academic counselor and has
contributed significantly to the
development of programs for the
terminal ill individuals dealing
with substance abuse and various
marginalized communities, Ralph
achievements include founding
the Veterans Meditation retreat
project.
Leading cultural diversity
initiatives at the Spirit Rock
Meditation Center and
participating in international
conference on Agent Orange and
conflicts resolutions.
Also sitting next to him is his
wife Sabine shot still?
And Lorraine Ann's lover who is
a veteran of the US Navy and a
volunteer.
For the veteran meditation
retreat project uh Loreen holds
an MSN in nursing education and
is retired from the New Mexico
veterans hospital after 36 years
in nursing. Thank you.
It's um Debra Hutchison.
It's also a veteran of the US
Army.
And she has used her degree in
psychology to help persons with
disabilities in New Mexico for
over 20 years. She currently
serves as a volunteer in uh in
the uh with a team for veterans
and meditation retreat.
Thank you. Uh, Ruben Royal.
Thank you.
He's a veteran of the US Marine
Corp who pro previously owned
and operate a commercial
landscape business for over 25
years in the veteran community
room has been a positive and
steady presence for the last 15
years and it is involved in the
veterans.
Fishing programs since 2023
Remain has volunteered as a
program manager and outreach
specialist for the veterans
meditation retreat project.
It is an honor for me and for
everybody to welcome them here
for the service that they
provide to the veterans
community and we have a
certificate for this project.
If that clerk could read it.
Let's go ahead and read that
certificate.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
5-seventh legislature, first
session, 2025, recognizes Ralph
Steele and the Veteran's
Meditation retreat project.
Whereas Ralph Steele is a
licensed marriage, family, and
therapy counselor and the
founder and guiding teacher of
the life transition meditation
Center in Santa Fe, a nonprofit
organization that teaches
somatic meditation and other
intensive meditation practices.
And whereas Ralph is a veteran
of the Vietnam conflict, who has
found peace from practicing
somatic meditation for more than
40 years in support of his
post-traumatic stress disorder
management.
And whereas Ralph works
internationally as a consultant
in stress management, and he
uses his professional training
and extensive background in
trauma-based studies, academics,
and spirituality to bring trauma
alleviating projects to life.
And whereas after retiring from
a career in psychotherapy and
mental health counseling and
concerned by the suicide rate
among the military veterans,
particularly in New Mexico,
where the suicide rate among
veterans is 50% higher than the
national average. Ralph founded
the Veteran's meditation retreat
project in 2023 to help his
fellow veterans raise awareness
of the suicide rate among
veterans and offer practical
solutions to those who are
suffering.
And whereas the veteran's
meditation retreat project aims
to reduce mental health crisis,
suicides, incarcerations, and
anger-related issues, and
meditation has been
scientifically proven to be one
of the most effective ways to
naturally reduce stress and
improve quality of life, often
as a compliment to traditional
therapeutic practices. And
whereas veteran's meditation
retreat project is offered
through the life Transition
Meditation Center targets
at-risk veterans and teachers
stress.
management, basic meditation,
and life transforming skills to
access deeper self-awareness and
insight at an annual retreat and
an and in online and in-person
classes, in-person classes
throughout the year.
And whereas
More than 20 veterans attended
the attended the 2023 retreat,
most of whom were new to
meditation practices, but
reported significant improvement
of their post-traumatic stress
disorder symptoms after
attending the retreat.
And whereas in 2024, 40 veterans
attended the retreat with
similar reports of improved
health and well-being, and
whereas the veterans meditation
retreat project offers annual
retreats at the Clyde Hotel in
Albuquerque that are free to
veterans and conducted by staff
and volunteers who are military
veterans. Now, therefore, be it
resolved by the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
extended to Ralph Steele and the
veteran's meditation retreat
project.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe.
Thank you for your tremendous
work and welcome to the house.
To celebrate our veterans, to
the gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to
rise and just say thank you to
our veterans. I have 2 veterans,
uh, that are particularly close
to me. My brother who served and
my 91 year old father.
Served in he's still alive with
us today and how grateful I am
to our veterans and what they do
for us today and yesterday and
tomorrow. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you.
In the gallery we have guests of
Representative Doo.
To celebrate Veterans Day here
in the roundhouse. We have Don
Bates with the 5th Army Division
General court martial trial
unit. Welcome to the house.
We also have LJ Baker. He's a
retired lieutenant colonel with
the US Army Infantry. He served
23 years on active duty combat
veteran served in the 101st
Airborne Division Aer assault
first entered infantry
divisions. Welcome to the house.
Gent lady from Katrin Socorro.
Sierra and Valencia
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. I just want to
stand, uh, a stand up for our
veterans. I also wanna stand up
for the New Mexico State
Veterans Home located in TC, New
Mexico, um, it is a beautiful,
beautiful, uh, facility now
we've done lots of investment in
that. We now have 109 residents
in the veteran's home and we
just thank you all for your
service, uh, protecting America
and standing proud side by side.
with us. God bless America. God
bless our veterans. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentle lady, gentle
lady from Donana and Otero to
celebrate our veterans,
Representative Silva.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and uh
thank you colleagues. I just
want to stand in recognition of
our veterans in this country,
including my own grandfather,
Baldoro Silva, um, who, uh, may
he rest in peace and um my aunt
Sandra Jimenez Adams, who
retired from the Air Force, um,
really, uh, proud to have them
both in my family and call my
grandfather an ancestor. Um, I
also want to honor our
undocumented veterans.
Um, where there have been 94,000
undocumented veter veterans that
have been deported since 1996
and since the founding of the US
immigrants have served in our US
military and um just want to say
they deserve a fair shake as
they have fought and died and um
and committed their lives in
service to our country. So thank
you, Mr. Speaker and thank you
to all the veterans. Um, God
bless them, uh, wherever they
may be. God bless our veterans.
Thank you.
young lady.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
Representative Martinez.
Mr. Speaker, today I stand in
honor of the 143,000 veterans in
the state of New Mexico.
Um, I had one of the greatest
careers that anybody could ask
for.
Serving the veterans of the
state for 25.5 years with the
Department of Veteran Services.
A great crew to work with.
Because we all knew that we
weren't there for ourselves. We
were part of a team much greater
than the individual and serving
the veterans of the state of New
Mexico is one of the greatest
things that anybody could do.
Uh, but today I stand in honor
of a former
House member, Representative Bob
Woolley, who is, I believe, in
the rotunda right now, a great
inspiration to all of us, so.
Uh, if, if Representative
Woolley is out there hearing us,
I honor you today.
Representative Woolley, if you
hear us, welcome back to the
house.
I think I've spotted him in the
gallery the last couple of days,
um, and I wasn't sure if it was
him, but I think it was him. I
think he's a hustling a little
capital outlay, so help him out.
He's doing good work.
Gentle lady from Bernilo Richard
Borego to celebrate our
veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my
honor and my privilege
representatives to honor our
veterans to honor um
representatives hereana
and her uh certificate and her
service to our country to honor
representativeurrola,
uh, and her certificate as well.
I wanted to recognize, uh, Mr.
Speaker.
And representatives, um, my
father and uh 4 of his brothers
who also served in the military
at the same time, uh, my father
was Ross Borego, World War 2. My
uncle Ernesto Borego, Uncle
Henry Borego, my uncle Rumaldo
Borego and they are they are all
these individuals are all
deceased. My uncle Placido
Borego, who just turned 100 and
just received the.
Purple Heart this past year, um,
He still lives here in Santa Fe.
And I also want to honor my late
husband Benjamin Archuleta.
Who served in the US Navy.
Gentlemen from Oteroa to
celebrate our veterans. Thank
you so much, Mr. Speaker. I also
rise in support of our veterans.
Uh, I have a military town where
I live in Alamogordo and we're
blessed and honored to have
homeman Air Force Base there and
all the great people that serve
our country there, Mr. Speaker,
I have so many relatives who
have also been veterans, both my
granddad's on my mom's and my
dad's side as well as my uncle
Jerome, if he's listening, uh,
thank you for your service.
Thank you for supporting our
veterans and every day on the
house floor, I have my F-117.
Nighthawk to remember the great
men and women in my district who
fight hard for our freedoms.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise
in support.
Of our veterans.
Today, Mr. Speaker, um,
This year is the first year in
61 years that I haven't been
able to
Celebrate a new year with my
father.
A World War II and Korea that.
Um, we've gone 7 years, Mr.
Speaker, without my
father-in-law.
Um, from in Vietnam with the
navy.
Mr. Speaker, we have
I have a brother
That would still lives in New
Mexico, served.
In several different conflicts
across the world and 4 times,
Mr. Speaker was the only person
in his unit to return.
Mr. Speaker, the, the life, the,
the, the sacrifice that our
veterans.
Give whether they go overseas or
not. What's their name, Mr.
Speaker, is on that piece of
paper.
They say if I'm called to go to
conflict, I'll go.
And that's something that so
many people today, Mr. Speaker,
take for advantage and, and take
for granted and don't understand
the potential, uh, sacrifice
that can be made there and, and
Mr. Speaker, I, I appreciate
what our Department of Veteran
Services do in New Mexico. I
will speak up that we still have
so much work to do.
If you live on the eastern side
of the state, you don't get
served.
By a hospital in New Mexico, Mr.
Speaker, you get served by a
hospital in Texas, and we need
to fix that, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you very much for the
opportunity.
Thank you, gentlemen.
And lady from Sierra Donana and
Socorro Representative Doo.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was
really good.
Um, Mr. Speaker, I just stand in
honor of my grandpa, Raymond
Monte Skidmore, who served in
World War II. He was in the
101st Airborne Ranger, but he
did demolitions. It was called
the Frogman then and I've been
told that that's become a
special forces. So that's what
my great my grandpa did in World
War II. Uh, my uncle also served
and he was a gunnerman and my
father-in-law served in the
army, my brother, 2 tours in
Afghanistan, Daniel Foster, and
currently my
you Joa Wright is serving in the
US Navy and he just finished 2
years in the ceremonial guard,
where he was stationed in DC
and, and did a lot of ceremonies
at Arlington Cemetery. So I
think it's really important for
us to acknowledge so many of our
veterans who served in active
duty, uh, the number is growing,
but those, um, from the Vietnam
era and, and older, um, my dad
would take me to the Vietnam
Memorial Wall in Truth or
Consequences right next.
to the New Mexico Veterans Home
and point out the name of his
high school friends and cousins
and that did not come home. And
so, you know, our, our freedoms
come with a price and uh we have
this right to come here and have
dialogue and disagree, and it's
for folks who, who sacrifice so
much. Some gave all um to make
that possible for us and in my
own county, I'm in District 38
throughout District 38. I'm so
impressed with the veterans who
come back and continue to serve,
um, whether
the Oregon Mountain Coffee group
that meets every morning at 8
o'clock in the little community
center in the in the village of
Oregon, and they have coffee.
There's about 20 of them and
they raise money, they do little
fundraisers, and they use the
funds to buy bicycles for the
neighborhood kids to, to help
folks with ADA accessibility for
their homes. They put on little
mintanzas and activities in the
community, like they really are
the community. They even
volunteer their time to main
this, to maintain the um the
little
Cemetery, that's in Oregon that
it's outside the city limits,
and they maintain that and
provide all the ceremonies for
the veterans and provide them
with the, the correct ceremony
as they're laid to rest and in
Sierra County at Elephant Butte,
uh, we have the friends of the
Heroes on the water of elephant
Butte, and they provide weekend
trips and camping for veterans,
so many of our veterans consider
their time in New Mexico state
parks and our federal parks as
their, um, behavioral health
treatment. So it's really hard
to see that lack of access for
them during COVID and, and why
so many of us are so supportive
of the state parks and
maintaining those, but the, the
Friends of Elephant Butte and
Heroes on the Water, they do so
much for our veterans.
kayaking trips, fishing trips,
boating trips. So if any
veterans and their families
would like to come out, get a
hold of me, and I'll make sure
that that happens. And then a
big shout out to um the Forgive
me Not Veterans Park in Socorro
County, that's working with, uh,
they're one of the new
recipients of New Mexico, I
guess we're calling it Mexico
housing now, formerly MFA, uh,
to build tiny homes for veterans
in the beautiful Armendari land
grant. It's between Sierra, it's
between tier C and Socorro, um.
In the, at the same, it's the
San Andreas exit?
Santa Casia exit, this beautiful
veteran's Park, and it's
completely free. So to see
veterans going there who are
homeless and providing those
services and now they've gotten
a VSO and it's great. So, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle.
to celebrate our veterans,
gentle lady from Representative
Chavez. Thank you Mr. Speaker,
um, I have many ancestors who
served in the Civil War, the
Spanish-American War, but today
I wanted to celebrate my dad,
uh, who is in heaven.
He was a, he was in the navy and
a veteran of World War II and
the Korean War. I also want to
share some good news. My
grandson called me last night to
let me know that he had received
he has received an appointment
to the Air Force Academy.
Congratulations gentle lady.
Continuing that long tradition
of service.
Very cool.
Uh, let's go to the other gentle
lady from Bern Leo, the other
representative Chavez and
Chavez. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I didn't know which one you were
calling on, so I had to look at
where you were looking.
In honoring our veterans, um, I
just wanna call out both of my
grandfathers, both Horace Scopio
Chavez and Johnny Chavez, who
served in the Korean War, um, as
veterans. I wanna thank them and
my great uncles as well who
served um as well as my ex
father-in-law Richard Silver,
who served in the Air Force and
completed his tours in Vietnam
as well as his brother Jim
Silver, who served in the Air
Force, um, and with that.
Um, my, my son Jayden uh learned
how to be a pilot from his
grandfather at the early age of
4.
Because thankfully my ex
father-in-law had his own plane,
um, but I also, I'm just very
thankful for for all of our
veterans and um
have to throw in that my son
Jayden was accepted to the Air
Force Academy shortly before he
passed away, um, so I just, I'm
very thankful for our veterans
that have served our wonderful
country.
Thank you gentle lady.
lady from Achilles San Juan,
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also
would like to honor our veterans
today. I come from a long line
of veterans, especially our
Navajo Nation code talkers, and
I'm thankful for my language.
I see.
So that is uh our Navajo
language that baffled the
opposing warship.
And uh I also would like to say
that I'm proud to come from
McKinley County where we are
recognized as the most patriotic
small town in America according
to the McNally Guinness World
Record who, um,
Who, where we have Native
Americans who served the most in
each military category per
capita.
So with that I was also uh
raised to respect our veterans
every day, so with that, um, I'm
honored to congratulate and
continue to pray for our our
veterans. Thank you.
To celebrate our veterans, the
gentle lady from Sandoval,
Representative.
Pollen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise
to support our military and
veterans. I come from a long
line of um members of my family
that have served in the
military, both my grandfather
served during World War II.
My brother served in the Navy
during the Gulf War, but I
really want to recognize my
husband for almost 34 years we
met when he was stationed at
Fort Carson. We married when I
was 19 years old and he was only
in E3, so talk about being poor,
young, military family.
But uh he served in the uh Gulf
War and with the US Army and
then he also served with in New
Mexico Army National Guard, so I
want to thank all of our
veterans for their service.
And lady from McKinley,
Representative Lindstrom, to
celebrate our veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
would like to rise in support of
veterans. I also have family
members that are veterans. My,
my father served in the Korean
War and my brother, uh, was uh
also a veteran and he served as
a Marine for a long time, but,
uh, Mr. Speaker, we do, uh,
Representative Johnson and I do,
uh, come from the community
that's considered the most
patriotic small town in the
United States and I just for
those of you who get to travel
out.
Gallup, uh, during the interim
I'd like to invite you to visit
our veterans Memorial, uh, of
all the capital outlay projects
that I've ever worked on, that
is the one that I most, I'm
most, uh, proud of over the
years it's one that actually has
uh uh glass pillars that light
up at night, and every conflict
that our uh county has ever been
involved with members of our,
our county and city is etched
into a glass pillar.
Uh, took, took a long time to
get that done, but it was done
through uh state capital outlay,
and I'm certainly proud of it
and want to invite all of you to
come and take a peek at it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
gentlemen from Valencia to
celebrate our veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
rise in support of our veterans.
Um
You know, I, my grandfather's
Henry Warman and Gay Baca served
in, uh, France and actually in
World War II.
My father served in Vietnam, so.
Very we come from a very
patriotic military family. I
also want to thank
Representative Sarignana. I
think there may be other
veterans here, but she's my
elbow buddy and snack partner.
So thank you. We're upsideing
data for your service.
We should never forget the
sacrifice that.
Was made in the, in the name of
freedom. And Mr. Speaker, and
all body here, we also have a
responsibility that as these
brave men and women come back
from their service that we
provide them the support and the
care that is many times comes
with the, with the horrors and
tragedies of combat. So, Mr.
Speaker, I'm honored to, to rise
in support of these and uh I
thank you, representative for
bringing this forward.
And lady from Santa Fe, Senator
Lujan celebrate our veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
today, um, I do stand in, in.
Support of all of our veterans
and military, and I have a
special constituent, um.
Here today that I'd like to
recognize is uh Carmela
Quintana, uh, Carmela.
Serves with uh as a field
representative with Senator Ben
Ray Luan and she is a retired
combat veteran for District one.
Um, commander for the American
Legion and is a lifetime member
of the VFW.
And I'd also like to stand and
respect a memorial for her
father, uh, who served, um, Mr.
Peter B. Quintana.
He served 43 years in in the
army and was a Korean veteran
who died on Veterans Day in
2021. So,
In honor of him and all of our,
our veterans who have passed and
all, especially um.
Those are who are here with us
today. I stand in with respect
and um in full support of all
that you do for our country.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen from Katherine Grant
Hidalgo Representative Terazas
to celebrate our veterans. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. You know what,
I'm, I'm honored to serve.
As a ranking member on veterans
and Military Affairs Committee.
And have traveled the state to
meet veterans all the way all
across the state and and I'm
also, you know, very blessed to
through my work as a funeral
director.
To serve and honor all those
families and their and uh.
And our veterans who have passed
and give them a tribute of
respect, so it's, it's, it's a
beautiful honor to do that.
I also, you know, I obviously
stand in support of veterans. My
grandfather was a Purple Heart
in World War 2.
And my father
Who was an immigrant from uh
Rancho and
In Mexico in Chihuahua came
across as a 12 year old boy.
Served his country, uh, 3 tours
in Vietnam and then later on was
naturalized.
So I understand what's, you
know, that, but uh had a lot of
uncles and his other brothers
that that served my my uncles
and my uh on my mother's side
even my mother-in-law is a
veteran.
Uh, my daughter is the, the, the
real neat thing about this is my
daughter who serve serving right
now in Japan in Okinawa. We got
news about a couple of months
ago that she's gonna be
transferred to Phoenix. It's a
lot easier to see my grandson,
so that's a beautiful thing, but
you know we're up here, Mr.
Speaker, for 2 months and it's a
long 2 months to be away from
our family and our children and
home and so we honored all the
veterans that well that left
their families and we're blessed
because.
We're able to
FaceTime
They weren't able to do that and
sometimes um letters that they
sent back home when would arrive
and some of these.
Individuals had passed and so
you know we they've given a lot
for us and um.
I, I really think that uh we
sometimes take for granted all
the, all the bloodshed and the
the sacrifices that they gave as
far as that uh Veterans Park
that, uh, Representative Dow was
talking about it's a beautiful
old park in in in Tier C. I, uh,
I did all the black granite
about 20 years ago for that to,
to help that. It's a beautiful
park if you ever get a chance to
see a, a rendering of that wall.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Gentlemen from Brett Ali, your
Presentative Garcia.
Thank you, as the speaker.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
house, uh, it truly is a
An enlightening time when we get
to honor our veterans.
And I, I wanted to mention.
Some veterans that were
instrumental.
In a project that I initiated
here in the legislature.
And uh
These are, uh
Claudio Chavez
From Matrisco they're in my
community.
3 time Purple Heart.
Bobby Griegoba Chavez was World
War 2.
Bobbyriego from Matrisco also
World War 2.
Jose Lopez from Matrisco,
Vietnam, Purple Heart recipient.
Loch Ness's brother from
Matrisco Vietnam.
Andrew Dominguez, Purple Heart
from Barrela, Vietnam.
Francisco Turrieta from Barrela.
You know.
Willie Brown, South Broadway,
the Vietnam.
And Tomaso South Broadway,
Vietnam.
Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen are
all deceased.
And these gentlemen set foot in
these
Capital
5 years.
In pursuing the passage.
Of a major reform piece of
legislation.
It was a 100% service related
disabled.
Um
veterans exemption property tax
exemption.
And these gentlemen came and
lobbied on behalf of that
legislation.
And for the most part we're a
core group.
Of veterans that came up to
lobby for that piece of
legislation.
And a big inspiration is about.
Speaker
In terms of
Pursuing this legislation was my
deceased father.
Jose Petronio Garcia.
World War II vet fought on the
front lines in France, in
Germany against the fascist.
So, um
Help me, uh
Recognize the memory and
accomplishments of these.
Gentlemen
Thank you. Thank you gentlemen.
Gentlemen from Chavez, Eddie and
Lee representative Mason to
recognize our veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I to
Be an honor today to rise in
respect for our, for our
veterans. My dad was also a
World War II veteran, my
mother's dad was a World War II
veteran.
I have numerous aunts and uncles
and lots of friends from school
that served in the Vietnam War.
You know, I would,
I would dare say there's not a
soul in this.
House today that has not been
touched by a veteran.
In one way or another, and most
of us.
Several times by veterans.
Main reason I stood out, I have
a quote that I
have written down that I try to
remember.
And it says only 2 defining
forces have ever offered to die
for us.
Jesus Christ in American
soldier. One died for our soul,
one died for our freedom.
Let us today thank them all for
their service and their
commitment and
The gift to us of freedom. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen.
leader from Berlio and Sandoval,
Representative Keats to
recognize our veterans. Thank
you Speaker. Yes, I rise today
as well. I'm so glad that we
were able to take this moment to
um make sure that we're
acknowledging and thanking our
veterans out there. Um, I come
from a large family, so I too
will not remember uh mention
every single mirror of mine
who've been in military service,
but I do want to take a moment
to thank uh one of my brothers
who've served in Iraq and
Honduras.
Uh, my uncle in Vietnam, my
cousin in Vietnam and it, uh,
and many of my uncles, my father
was in the navy, um, uh, we have
a lot of Marines in my family,
and it began with my grandfather
Patrick Joseph Cleary, who was
first generation American who's
a gunner at Iwo Jima, and I do
want to say thank you very much
to my, to the representatives
here in this chamber and their
kind words.
about taking care of our
veterans when they get home. I
want to make sure that we don't
forget their families for their
families are sacrificing as well
and so thank you very much for
this opportunity. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you.
To generate from Valencia
representative Mirabal Moya to
celebrate our veterans.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
too want to rise. I come from a
long line of, of veterans I
think uh between my uncles,
cousins, and, and everyone we've
covered every branch except for
space space space Force, that's
probably the only one because
that's the brand new ones, but
yet, yet to come, um, but I
also, um, wanted to make sure
that I recognized, um, I lost my
favorite uh veteran last year
during last year's session, and,
um, and so definitely I'm proud
of.
Of, of, um, US Army Airborne
Corporal Sebastian Mirabal, who
served in the Korean War, so I
just stand for all of them,
including his all of his
brothers served along with him,
um, they, the, the fact that you
can, can, can go and, and give
basically and and sacrifice your
time, your time with your
family, your time, and sometimes
your lives for a perfect
strangers and so that we are
able to do what we do here. I
just, I salute you and.
And I, and, and I honor you.
Thank you. Thank you gentle
lady.
Gentle lady from Ria Riva
Sandoval Sane Toss
representative Herrera to
celebrate our veterans. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, I too rise,
uh, in honor of our veterans,
and I think uh Representative
Sarignana for making this day
possible. It's important that we
take this time and it's
important that we recognize
people who have done so much for
the freedom of our country.
And I would like to, I come from
a big family, and 4 of my
brothers were veterans, Jerry
Dickinson, Denny Dickinson, my
brother Bill Hereta and and Jim.
Herrera and I.
My brother Bill, who is my Irish
twin, we were born 10 months
apart. We're always very close.
Went to Vietnam. He was a Green
Beret.
And when he came back.
He, you know, he really never
wanted to talk very much about
what had happened and I never
asked him because I figured he
didn't want to talk about it,
but
It was about 5 years ago and we
were on a, we were on a cruise
and we got up early and we
would, we spent the time up on
the, the deck and he started
telling me the stories about
Vietnam.
And
It made the hair on the back of
my neck go up. He was in covert
He told me one night, uh, well
they had posters of him and his
colonel up there and, and they
would get on the loudspeakers
and they would say we know
you're here and we're gonna get
you.
And then they would say, and
this is what we're gonna do to
you, and I won't repeat that for
this body.
And he said one night.
One night
All of a sudden they realized
they were just surrounded and
he, he said he laid down next to
a log and he, he covered himself
with branches, and he, he tried
not to sneeze, not to breathe
hard, not to do anything because
they were like only there was a
trail and they were coming.
Endlessly hundreds and hundreds
and they're coming right around
the trail about 10 ft in front
of him, and he had said he had
to say silent for that whole
night.
And um.
And they got a lot of
information thank God.
Uh, they were both safe the next
morning and we went back and
they took a lot of information,
uh, and they were highly, you
know.
Not highly recognized because
obviously it was a covert
operation at the time, so.
These are the kind of things.
That veterans do have done these
are the kind of contributions
they've made to our country, so
I would just like to take this
moment to recognize my brother
Bill and to thank every veteran,
every veteran in this country
who has served. Thank you.
Thank you gentle lady.
The gentleman from Chavez Eri
Otero, Representative Henry to
celebrate our veterans. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to
rise in support of our veterans.
As we've heard so often, I mean,
we hear all these stories, and I
don't think we can ever thank
them enough, um, or do enough to
thank them for what they've done
for us, uh, but I think
representative Dow really stuck
in my head. I was sitting here
thinking, um, not only have
these veterans served us
overseas and in so many ways,
but they come home and continue
to serve.
Uh, I look around my community,
uh, it's a small town of Artesia
and so many folks that are out
front you know have so many
projects helping us in so many
different ways are veterans, so
their service never stopped.
Their service continues, um,
their love for our country, our
state, our towns, um, I don't
think it ever goes away, uh,
what they've done, um, and I
just, I can never thank them
enough for all the things
they've taught me, uh, for all
the, all the.
A wonderful gifts they've given
us, uh, so I just want to rise
and support and say thank you is
not enough, but thank you so
much.
Thank you, gentlemen.
That lady from Ber
representative Thompson. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I, I rise in
support of this bill, um.
Both of my grandparents,
grandfathers were, were in the
military. One fought in the
Spanish-American War in New
Mexico out of South Dakota and
um my 9 uncles were also, uh,
veterans and my mom and dad and
brother are all veterans.
Buried in Santa Fe and my
brother served, um, well, I will
tell you that my parents
actually met at a what they used
to call an insane asylum which
was a behavioral health
institute for people with shell
shock, so I'd love to say my
parents met at a at a um.
Behavioral health institute. My
mom was a nurse and my dad was,
was uh an orderly and my brother
served in both Iraq wars, lost
totally lost his hearing in one
ear, died of PTSD at age 49 from
a heart attack and he he didn't
talk about it much either, but
he did once say he used to drive
a fuel truck and when he was in
Iraq, he was going from one
place to another when he got to
the base where he was going,
they found a rocket missile.
Lodged between the tank and the
holding of his of his um truck,
so he narrowly escaped with his
life and um so I just wanna
appreciate all of the veterans
and all that they do for us.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady.
To celebrate our veterans. Let's
go next to the gen lady from Lee
Representative Senna Cortez.
Thank you so much Mr. Speaker,
and I just want to thank
Representative Sa Inana for
bringing this to the House
floor. It's so important to
honor our veterans. Mr. Speaker,
my father was a sergeant in the
Vietnam War, and he served in
the first cavalry division and
it was such an unpopular war,
every chance I get, I want to
honor my father for his service.
Um, it's really interesting, Mr.
Speaker.
My father is also a pastor.
And so it's a really interesting
dynamic, having a pastor
military dad. So for those of
you in here wondering, I have
learned to walk the line and Mr.
Speaker, growing up when my
father would give us a task to
do in the house, he'd come up
behind us and say, move, and
we'd perk up and start walking
faster. And so for those of you
that have asked why I walk so
fast in the hallway, it's
because I got that military job.
So thank you all for, for those
of you that
Served in our, in our military.
Thank you for what you have done
for our country, Mr. Speaker,
that concludes my remarks. Thank
you gentle lady.
lady from Bernali Presentative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
And I rise today and thank uh
Representative Sainana.
And thank her for her service.
In honor, I'd first like to say
that I um I'm deeply honored to
fill the position of chair of
labor veterans and Military
Fairs.
And in this moment I'd like to
invoke the name of our chair.
Chair Elio Alcon.
Because I have a tough.
Job to follow.
In terms of his
incredible service as chair of
this committee.
And, and
His service
As a Vietnam veteran.
I also rise, Mr. Speaker, and
thank the representative.
For giving me the opportunity to
once again.
Honor and invoke the name of my
father, Felipe Trujillo Roybal.
Who enlisted
As a young 17 year old went on.
Became a combat veteran in World
War II. He was in the 82nd
Airborne Normandy drop.
He went on to Korea.
Prisoner of war in Korea.
Then he went on to serve 2 tours
of duty volunteered in Vietnam
as a Green Beret special forces.
It was a 2 time recipient of the
Purple Heart, the bronze, the
silver.
And commendations that are too
long to list.
But today Mr. Speaker.
I rise also to honor my
father-in-law, which I have not
done on the floor.
Because as an immigrant.
He enlisted
In World War II with the
understanding and the promise
that by enlisting as an
immigrant.
That he would
Be in line for his citizenship.
That didn't happen, Mr. Speaker,
as promised.
He spent um many years
struggling.
Um, to gain an education.
Um, to earn a living.
Until finally.
He was able to use that status.
Late in life in order to bring
his family over.
He became a US citizen.
Finally, I think it was.
30 something years after he had
enlisted.
And so I bring that story
forward because we also honor
all those immigrants.
That enlisted not just in World
War II but in Korea and in
Vietnam.
With the promise
Of being able to receive their
citizenship, gain an education
and earn a gainful employment in
these United States and that
continue.
The League of United Latin
American citizens continues to
fight.
For those immigrants that served
this country in order that they.
Be able to receive their
citizenship. There's a long
list, too long to list, but they
do exist.
And we have to face the reality
of this contradiction in this
country.
Where willing to.
Criticize
Our immigrant community without
recognizing the main
contributions that they have
given.
And giving their lives for this
country in service of the armed
services of this United States
of America.
So Mr. Speaker.
This was the moment.
And a moment for us to recognize
what we're facing.
In order to keep those names
alive.
And recognize that every one of
these immigrant veterans live in
every one of our districts
around the state so when we have
the opportunity we need to thank
them as well.
And finally Mr. Speaker, I'd
like to call your attention to
the Veterans Memorial in Las
Cruces if ever.
You're able to visit it's a
beautiful memorial.
I have the honor of knowing that
my father is listed on all three
walls of that memorial.
And he's also listed in the
Washington Memorial now.
And his story.
I wish you all would reference
it at one point or another
because it's the story of many
Latino Americans and Native
Americans who serve this country
is archived in the University of
Texas at Austin.
Uh, veterans archives, so it's
these are important stories our
veterans are leaving us.
Faster than we anticipate so
that we expect due to all of the
illnesses.
post traumatic
Disabilities, I wouldn't call
them disabilities, but that they
face daily because of their
service. So thank you Mr.
Speaker, thank you
Representative very much for
your service and for allowing us
to honor our veterans, um, and
military today. Thank you, our
veterans. Thank you gentle lady.
Let's go next to the gentle lady
from Eddie and Lee,
Representative Brown, to honor
our veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I do
stand up to honor our veterans
and tell them how deeply I
appreciate their service to our
country and to the cause of
freedom.
We've heard other people here
speak, Mr. Speaker, about, um,
the effects on their families
and that they had members who
served and I'll just briefly
mention that my dad was in the
United States Army in World War
2.
He was in the first wave on
Omaha Beach.
He had 3 brothers who were
serving in this in World War II
at the same time and I don't
think they allow that to happen
anymore.
But all 4 came back alive by the
grace of God.
My father-in-law was in.
The navy, he was a PBY pilot in
the Pacific Theater.
My dad never talked about his
work experience. He just
wouldn't do that
My father-in-law, on the other
hand, would tell us some stories
about crash landings he had.
And that sometimes the rivets on
the airplanes would pop out.
And so the crew would get
pencils.
Sharpen them quickly and stick
them through the holes where the
rivets were supposed to be, and
sometimes that's how they got
back to base.
The tradition of military
service, Mr. Speaker, continues
with our youngest son who's in
the army.
He was known from a young age to
be a warrior and a defender, and
God made him to be a soldier.
We're very proud of him.
Mr. Speaker, it's been said that
sometimes the next wave of
leaders for our states and our
nation come from the military.
They have been seasoned with
real life experience they
understand leadership, they
understand service.
And uh I am very pleased to hear
Mr. Speaker, that recruitment
is.
Much higher than it was just a
few months ago, even.
We have a new wave of leaders in
the making.
So I just want to say again
thank you to all those who've
served.
Uh, God bless. Thank you. Thank
you, gentle lady.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and I too
rise in appreciation for our
military veterans and thank you,
um.
Uh, general lady for, uh,
making, uh, this, um,
Recognition as Mr. Speaker, um,
as, as many of our communities
Veterans Day is every day.
And uh Mr. Speaker, before I
came up here the last
constituents that I met with,
Mr. Speaker, was a shiprock
veterans organization.
And um and I'm I'm I'm, I'm so
proud of what Mr. Speaker, of
how um
The the the organizing that
these veterans are doing in the
community to, to step up and to
get more of, of, of their
members to to get involved in,
in, in the community and so um I
um I, I have a few people to
recognize, but, but I also want
to um
acknowledge, uh,
Something that that Mr. Speaker,
that was really impactful for
me.
Um, I, I, uh, I got to meet the,
the Blue Star mothers.
Um, and, and I want to recognize
our Blue Star mothers.
And when I, when I met with the
Blue Star mothers in Farmington
at a dedication of a memorial,
Mr. Speaker, in Farmington.
I also got to meet our gold star
mothers.
And I also want to acknowledge
our gold star mothers.
Mr. Speaker,
Um
I, I do have a gold star mother
in in my district.
And um I've uh gone closer to to
uh to check on her and uh and I,
and, and so it's just something,
Mr. Speaker, that, um, you know,
Uh, we, we, we remember our
veterans and we also remember
the families that, that also go
go through it, um, I, um, Mr.
Speaker, as you know, my abuelo,
um, you know, my, my, my father
was a hot tar roofer, so I was
raised up by, by my alo in
Colorado and he's a Korean War
veteran.
Who, who shared a lot of uh the
um stories, um, when I lived
with my, um,
Grandparents in New Mexico when
I, when I moved to New Mexico,
Mr. Speaker, I was raised while
my mother was truck driving my
grandparents are in Shiprock
raised me, me and my, my
siblings, and uh Mr. Speaker,
I, I want to acknowledge, I
guess, uh, uh, why I have my
middle initial here. It's not
just because Mr. Speaker, I have
a common name, but my middle
initial, my middle name is
Franklin, and I got that name
after my grandfather, um,
Franklin Johnson, who served as
a Marine in World War 2 and
every night, Mr. Speaker, he
would tell me the battles of
Saipan, the battles of Kenyan
Island, the battles of Marshall
Island.
Uh, and
Mr. Speaker, I wish I had a
voice recorder.
So I, I, but I have, I have them
in here.
That
the, the battle of Okinawa.
And, and Mr. Speaker, it's, it's
that history that
I'm wanting to help make sure
our, our general, our next
generation understands the
ultimate sacrifice of the
greatest generation that we've
had.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker, I, I wanna
acknowledge to
Um
We were, uh, uh, members, um,
Mr. Michael.
Mike
Now
US Navy
I want to acknowledge him for
his service.
And Mr. Chito Sanchez, US Navy.
And these two are, are sergeant
of arms. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you to our sergeant at
Arms who are veterans.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and the
Representative Vincent. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I also stand
and rise for veterans today.
And Mr. Speaker,
Some of the old timers tell you
about, you know, when, when
they, they didn't get a
graduation party, they got to go
to war and just thinking that we
sent kiddos over there to war
and how tough they were back
then and how scared they must
have been. And Mr. Speaker, I, I
appreciate everybody that enlist
and, um, you know, we.
We get to enjoy all the freedoms
that they have to offer.
And I hope that we never forget.
That all the men and women that
are overseas.
Fighting and their families that
are left here not knowing.
What's going to happen and not
getting to talk to him for weeks
on end that I just hope that God
blesses them and protects them.
And they, they keep fighting for
our freedoms, and I hope that,
you know, just being here in the
legislature, I know that things
get a little divisive from time
to time and we, we, we have
things that we agree and we
disagree on.
But one thing that I, I feel
good today is that 100% of us
believe in America.
In the USA and we all love our
veterans. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Generated from Berley or
representative Anaya to
celebrate our veterans. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Thank you body,
um, little known fact here, um,
I grew up in the American Legion
post 13, and um I I also come
from a long line of veterans in
my family. My uncle was the
president of post 13 and my
grandmother, who was my best
friend, um, she, uh, was the
president of the Ladies
Auxiliary. So I grew up selling
poppies and selling.
Frito pie, um, to make sure that
we had money for the post 13,
um, but one of the things that I
wanna bring up today, Mr.
Speaker, and the body, um, in
particular those who are often
forgotten when we are talking
about, uh, veterans and military
service. I'm so glad that we are
honoring those who are um who go
into the service because of a
long line, a long tradition, but
I also wanna acknowledge those
who are also going into service
because it is a way to.
further their education as well.
Um, the other thing I wanted to
recognize today Mr. Speaker and
body are our trans veterans.
They serve beside all of our
veterans side by side and right
now they're actively being
denied their healthcare and um
that's the health care they
fought for, um, in their
service, Mr. Speaker, and body.
Um, I also want to invoke the
names of a couple of our
veterans that have become a part
of our family here at the
Roundhouse as well.
Marcia Garcia and Barbara
Jordan, um, these are two
incredible women of emerged New
Mexico who are veterans and they
are so proud in standing beside
us, um, as we fight for
reproductive justice as we make
sure that people know that Black
Lives Matter. They are so proud
of the freedoms that they fought
for and they're fighting side by
side with us here locally as
well to make sure that we can
protect those freedoms, Mr.
Speaker, and body, and so today
I just wanted to rise and honor
both my family and my blood
family, and my chosen family who
have served this country and
serve our state. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, young lady.
Gentlemen from Colfaxcur Harding
Qua San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield, to
celebrate our veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do
rise to honor our veterans. We
have one son that's in the
military right now. What I would
like us to think about today is
what they were fighting for.
They were fighting for our
freedom and our right to
self-determination. So each time
that we reach up there and push
that button and vote.
That right was won for us by a
veteran. I, I pray that we don't
take it lightly.
If you agree with me or you
totally disagree with everything
that I believe in. Before you
push that button, just realize
that you're voting right was
Probably
Paid for by someone giving their
life.
So just a thought. Thank you to
our veterans.
gentle lady from San Miguel in
Torrance to celebrate our
veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, you
know, just some closing
comments. I too, like everyone
else here in this chamber, do
have a long line of military
family, um, I think echoing some
of the sentiments that besides
Space Force, every other
military branch, um, every major
occupation I've had a family
member that has served, um, I
just wanna recognize that, you
know, in my area where my family
comes from at the ranch, this
was an opportunity, you know,
many of our relatives, they went
in because there just wasn't a
lot of options for.
people in these communities and
so it led to this long history
of military lineage. Um, I do
want to, in particular,
Recognize um two very special
veterans in my life. Um, one is
my deceased grandfather, Arturo
Gallegos. He is a navy veteran,
Purple Heart veteran, um, that
is now at our national cemetery
here in Santa Fe. Um, he is
actually who brought me back
here to New Mexico and I went
away to college to help take
care for him until his very
valuable VA benefits kicked in,
um, I really wanna thank all of
those benefits because that's
what really allowed him to
To survive in his last years to
really um live out his final
years in dignity was due to his
benefits from the VA, um, I also
wanna recognize, uh, my brother
who is currently actively
serving, um, with the Army
National Guard. He has been on
Multiple deployments, he is now
an E8 and I think if he is
listening, I should probably
know his all of his ranks and
all of his honors, um, by now,
but um he again is my true near
and dear.
One of my 3 siblings, my, my 2
other siblings that I just
really want to space, pay
special recognition to on this
day. So thank you so much. Thank
you, gentle lady.
gentleman from Donana
representative Lara.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also,
uh, stand in supporting and love
to our veterans, uh, especially
my dad, Vietnam veteran.
He was, uh, drafted in 1966
right after high school, Gaston
high school.
And he went as a young man, did
his basic training in El Paso at
Fort Bliss and then was shipped
off to to Vietnam, uh, I
unfortunately he doesn't tell
his stories to me. He doesn't
tell me what happened or what he
experienced, um, he has, uh, he
deals with PTSD to this day was
what happened in Vietnam, but
one of the things that I
appreciate the most is that he
has always been there for me and
he's always supported me and
because of that I believe that
I'm here today.
So I, I stand to support our
veterans in particular my dad.
Who is one hell of a man. He's
still, the guy's so healthy,
he's healthier than I am.
And, and he, he is is important
to me and I wanna acknowledge
that and I wanna acknowledge
that all of our import all of
our veterans are important to us
and they have served not only
their country but they also saw
their families and the people
that they love. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentlemen.
Shele from Berlio.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank
you body for honoring our
military and our veterans, um,
my dad was my hero. He was in
the army, served in Korea.
My son is my hero, served.
You know, um, the Marine Corps.
In Afghan to tourists in
Afghanistan.
And my daughter is Air Force
they're, they're stationed in
Hungary. She's a um a finance
officer for for the F-35s so I'm
very proud of my family. I grew
up hearing from my dad the
greatest thing you could do was
serve your country. That's why I
joined the Air Force. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, bye.
Members, I'll add my my uh my
calls and comments to the
celebration, um, thank you for
sharing so much of your personal
story, your, your story of
service either through your
ancestors through your children,
uh, perhaps through you, um, we
do miss a number of, of, uh,
veteranos, uh, as a Rio Garcia
would call, uh, call himself a
veterano, uh, but folks like
groups have really represented
that representativealcon and so
many others that have gone
through here over the years.
Uh, but I do want to recognize
that I believe and if I'm wrong
please correct me, but I'm I
believe you're the only veteran
in this chamber. We, we've got
to fix that, but as of now you
are the only veteran and so we
stand in gratitude for your
service, um, thank you Soana for
bringing this day forward.
And to all of the staff that
work in this building, many of
you are veterans as well. We
mentioned a couple of folks here
from our, our sergeant at arms
crew, uh, and I know that there
are others out there. Uh, I also
want to give a special shout out
because, uh, members, as you
know for the for for these last
30 days or so, we've had um a
state police uh um security
force stationed in the building
and I learned today that they're
actually gonna swap this crew
out for a, for a new one,
Tomorrow, so if you're listening
to me, state police, uh thank
you for your incredible work
this month. We appreciate you
very much.
Thank you for your service.
To the new crew coming in,
you've got big shoes to fill.
Don't mess it up.
Gentle lady from uh Valencia
Moya, you have a certificate.
Yes, I do, Mr. Speaker. Um,
thank you so much. Um, before I,
uh, have you read the
certificate and we go through
there. I also, there's a lot
going on in the roundhouse
today. Um, I have about 20 of my
uh staters students from Berlin
High School that are shadowing
not only some representatives
here, uh, but also, um, in the
Senate, and so, uh, before we go
on to the certificate, I
definitely want to introduce
mine and then I think uh
representative uh from San.
Well, uh, Representative, uh,
Cullen, she had to, to, to duck
out, so I'm gonna, um, uh,
introduce hers. Mine is Miss
Olivia Montoya. Go ahead and
stand.
So Miss Olivia.
is a dedicated and driven
sophomore at Bolin High School
where she has been in um a
student since preschool and
actually she had to put up with
me and, and I was her PE teacher
in elementary school so poor
thing, um, so throughout her
years at Berlin Public School
System, Olivia is consistently
excelled academically, always
striving to achieve her best.
Her commitment to leadership and
involvement in school activities
is evident in her participation
in multiple clubs,
staters Mesa and student
council, notably, she serves as
the president of the class of
2027.
Um, a role that has helped her
develop a valuable leadership
and organizational skills.
Looking forward to the future,
Olivia has big plans for her
education. She hopes to attend
either New Mexico State
University or Eastern New Mexico
University to study veterinary
science with a specific focus on
equine care.
Her love for horses has inspired
her to pursue her career and
equine veterinary medicine, and
she has determined to make a
meaningful impact in this field.
Outside her academic pursuits,
Olivia is passionate about
rodeo, a sport where she has
recently devoted her time to.
And her hard work is paying off.
She has begun winning money in
rodeo competitions, and she
plans on uh to use to help fund
her college education.
As Olivia continues her high
school journey, she remains
focused on her goals for
furthering um her education and
getting the knowledge she needs
to succeed in her chosen career.
Her dream is to either open her
own equine veterinary practice
or work in established um as an
in in an establishment with
equine vets, um, where she can
combine her academic interests
with her love for animals with
her determination, leadership
skills, and unwavering passion,
her veterinary.
Science for veterinary science,
Olivia Montoya is undoubtedly on
the success or path to success
and her future is filled with
promise, so.
She's an amazing gal.
So I also have Naomi Theodore,
right next to me who was gonna
be uh who shadowed uh
Representative Cullen most of
the morning, and she is a senior
class representative at Berlin
High School. She is passionate
about pursuing a career in early
childhood education, plans to
major in the field. In addition
to our academic pursuits, Naomi
is an avid athlete, which she's
an amazing basketball player,
just going to tell you that much
right now. And and enjoys
playing sports.
She has learned the importance
of discipline and teamwork.
She has a strong passion for
photography and film. She sees
these powerful tools for
capturing important moments and
with her drive to make a
positive impact, Naomi looks
forward to the uh to continue to
grow in both her education and
personal interests.
Now, go ahead.
Just to give a little quick
before everybody else introduces
theirs, they are part of our
status program, which the status
program has been a part of uh
Berlin High School for decades,
um, and, uh, and we also, and we
also have, uh, which I in a
little bit I'll introduce their,
their, their, their sponsor up
here who's been the, the sponsor
for for Mesa, I mean, not Mesa,
um, staters for the past 25
years, which he has graciously
uh talked me into taking it
over. Uh, so I hope I have big
shoes to fill. I'm.
tell you that right now. Um, but
theaters program, one thing that
they're doing right now.
Is uh these kids right now along
because I have, I think I have
38 staters and only 20 of them
came today, um, but they are,
um, from the ground up creating
a free store within Berlin High
School, so this is a completely
student-led uh initiative. They
are doing all of the work, um,
us adults just pretty much get
to uh make sure to monitor and,
and get to do and and uh and and
refocus them sometimes, but
these amazing students, I cannot
believe I can't wait. We just
got the keys.
to the, to the room when I left,
so I can't wait to see what it's
gonna look like when uh when,
when I come back, it's gonna be
amazing to see that the work
that they've done. So, um, so
just to get a little bit uh to
know a little bit about them.
Now let's get to my er
certificate. So we have a
certificate for uh for my guest
who is stand who is sitting up
in the rostrum.
And um, so I would like for Mr.
Stephen Craig Bolivar to stand
up, please.
So, Mr. Bolivar is a 30 year
veteran chemistry teacher at
Berlin High School. He has spent
spent his entire tenure at Blenn
High School. He is, uh, and, and
you'll get to hear a lot more
about him here in a minute, but
I wanted to make sure that he
was honored because he is a
special person, OK? Hopefully I
can get through this.
Um
Um, because everybody knows that
I'm, I'm a, I'm a science
teacher. He
I could not do what I do if I
could not be next to this man.
Um, and he has helped not only
so many faculty.
But the students that he has,
that he is touched in his 30
years of um at at Berlin High
School. I knew it could not go
unrecognized. So I want to read
a couple of remarks from uh not
only some staff that went along,
but a couple of students.
So this comes from Bernardine
Sanchez who is, who is actually
the, our newest member of um of
our science team who was
actually an Ed Fellows teacher,
so those pathways work and we
just newly hired in Berlin High
School, but uh she was one of
our ed fellows. She says thank
you for welcoming me and and
supporting me as I embark on
this new journey.
Uh, from Miss uh Tarla Hill, who
has worked with, uh, probably
the longest, um, other than him
in our science team. He's, she
says, Mr. Bolivar, you have been
so instrumental in so many ways
to my life.
As a mentor, as a colleague and
a friend. I cannot think of
anyone deserving um that's more
deserving of this recognition.
So I also have a couple of
students that wanted to say a
couple of things to them. So
Miss Alicia Montoya, who you'll
meet here in a minute.
Um, she wanted to say, I would
like to say Bolivar has been a
real inspiration to me
throughout the years at Berlin.
He is a teacher that got me
interested in chemistry and
encouraged me to join the
chemistry Olympics.
He has motivated me and
encouraged me not only to thrive
at school but be confident while
I'm doing it.
And then, um, who is really sad
that Mr. Nico could not be here,
but Mr. Nico, if, uh, Nico, uh
Aaga, if you saw him in anywhere
on campus, he is almost always
in Mr. Bolliver's class, um,
and, uh, and then basically his
shadow for the last uh several
years. So, uh, he wanted to say,
I would like to say thank you to
Bolivar for everything. He is
the main reason why I love
chemistry and why I am going to
pursue a career in this field.
He is
inspired and helped many
students like me, and he has
also been a person I look up to
and can and is truly an amazing
person.
So I want to um before we, we,
we celebrate him, can the clerk
please read his certificate.
Clerk to read.
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
fifty-seventh legislature. First
session, recognizes Stephen
Bolivar, whereas Stephen Bolivar
has dedicated his life to
education, serving the students
of Berlin High School for 30
years, and whereas Stephen began
his teaching career at Berlin
High School in 1994, retired in
2022 and returned to teaching in
August 2022.
And whereas Stephen is a proud
graduate of Berlin High School,
class of 1981 and went on to
receive his bachelor's degree in
science education from New
Mexico State University and a
master's degree in education
from the University of New
Mexico.
And whereas throughout his
tenure at Berlin High School,
Stephen has been instrumental in
shaping the academic and
extracurricular experiences of
countless students serving as a
dedicated teacher, mentor, and
leader. And whereas Stephen has
sponsored the Berlin High
Schoolaters program for 25
years, guiding students to
leadership development and civic
engagement. Anneerez.
Stephen has been a passionate
supporter of science,
technology, engineering, and
mathematics education, serving
as Berlin High School's Science
Olympiad coach for 25 years and
as the leader of the NASA
Student Spaceflight experiments
program in 2018, inspiring
students to reach for the stars,
and whereas Stephen has served
in numerous leadership roles,
including chair of the Berlin
High School Science department,
school safety chair, and
activities director contributing
to the school
s development, and student
success. And whereas Stephen has
been an advocate for student
engagement, serving twice as a
class sponsor and as a Mesa USA
sponsor, providing opportunities
for students to excel in
mathematics, engineering, and
science, and we as Steven has
also supported students in the
arts, serving as Berlin High
School's drama technical advisor
and assisting the school band
program, demonstrating his
commitment to fostering a
well-rounded educational.
experience for all students, and
whereas Steven's dedication to
student well-being continues as
the pilots the eagle essentials
free store for the 2024 to 2025
school year, ensuring that
students have access to
essential resources and whereas
Steven's outstanding service and
contributions to Berlin High
School were recognized when he
was named Belin High School
Teacher of the Year. Now,
therefore, be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
State of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to
Stephen Bolivar for his
exceptional service and wavering
commitment to education and
profound impact on the students
and community of Berlinn High
School. Signed and sealed at the
Capitol in the city of Santa Fe.
Congratulations. Thank you for
your incredible work.
lady from Tos send over our
tests. Are you introducing your,
uh, shadows connected to this
certificate.
May I go ahead.
Uh, thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker and body. I'm
Super thrilled to introduce
Michaela Marie Chavez.
Uh, who's a senior at Berlin
High School. She really has it
together. I think a lot of us
had it together when we were in
high school, which is kind of
what paved the way for us to be
here now, but wow, so much more
together than I ever was, uh,
and I'm really, um, I'm really
proud of you and I just met you,
but I want to tell you a little
bit about her. Um, she's, of
course, a national honor society
of course, right? Of course
she's a national art Honor
Society. Of course she's the
vice president of uh Stairs
right where they come every year
and they.
Get to know people in the
capital and see how government
works, um, but she is already
enrolled at uh New Mexico
Institute of Mining and
Technology already right now,
um, and she is starting her
master's degree.
In the fall.
OK. And, uh, in environmental
engineering, which is something
that I really care about and she
is interested in this because
she uh she had her first job at
the Whitfield Wildlife
Conservation Area and she really
got interested in conservation
issues and environmental issues,
and I think it's just a
remarkable that she wants to
spend her life, um, working to
protect and preserve the
environment, um, and she is
starting a master's program in
the fall. She is like what, 18?
Oh my God, I didn't start my
master's until I was.
37. So I'm super, super excited
that um that she gets to be here
and meet, uh, lots of us who
care about uh the environment
and on both sides of the aisle
we do we care about how to, you
know, protecting our land and
water and our culture and our
water resources and I'm hoping
that she goes into hydrology.
You are at the place for it, um,
but this is, this is Michaelayla
and uh we I we love her already,
Mikayla Marie Chavez.
OK, let's go to the general.
lady from Donana Socorro and
Sierra representative Doo to
introduce her guest. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, um, and I, and what
a, what a treat for so many of
your students, Mr. Bolivar, to
be here to see this recognition
for you and to join in the
celebration. And I have uh
Alicia Montoya. She is a senior
at the Lynn High School, and
she's always found herself drawn
to challenges, whether it's
academic leadership or service,
and this is joint has resulted
in her joining many clubs. She's
in starters Mesa.
NHS student council and she's
also a member of the chemistry
Olympic team. She's a lifeguard
at the local pool and president
of the starters and Treasurer
Student Council. She says that
these clubs have helped her gain
experience in community service
and giving back. She gained
experience and leadership roles,
and she is a medalist at the
chemistry Olympics. So she would
like for this body to know that
education is the foundation for
innovation and change. It gives
students the opportunity to find
things they love to do and it's
More than just acquiring
knowledge, it's developing
skills. She believes that we
need to focus more on finding
ways to keep students in school,
attendance at her school is a
problem. The students are not
motivated to come to school and
they don't do their homework. So
she would like to find something
to get New Mexico students to
show up and to do their work.
And I, I just have to brag on
her a little bit because she's
been accepted into New Mexico
Tech and where she will be
studying environmental
engineering. So congratulations.
Congratulations. Welcome to the
house.
Young lady from Ria Riva
Sandoval and
Santa Fe Representative Herrera.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I too
rise to introduce.
Miss Karina Dunes and I'm so
proud of this young woman, all
these, all these uh all these
skaters are kind of skaters are
amazing, uh, young people. She
is a sophomore at Berlin High
School. She is a member of Mesa.
She is an outstanding tennis
player and athlete. She's also a
member of the ROTC, so, um, she,
she comes to this, um, to this
body to learn more about the
legislative process and
To keep involving herself in and
the things that matter and
matter in her life and I, I
wanna say for those of you who
don't know what uh staters are
they're a group of students who
care about the community's
well-being, and I find that very
interesting that they've taken
on such a large purpose to work
at and um uh she is uh deciding
whether as a sophomore whether
she's gonna go to New Mexico
State or New Mexico Tech and
she's gonna major in.
Chemistry. Another person that
we desperately need in this
state. Thank you, Corina.
Welcome to the house, gentlemen
from Valencia representative
Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
have a guest with me, um, my
guest is Cole Rodriguez. Cole is
a junior, um,
He actually wishes to he's very
involved in um the school
activities and his off time he
enjoys photography as a hobby,
and he wants to see the beauty
of the world around him.
He also plays sports and is a
member of the swim team, and I
believe the tennis team.
And it says that sports is
really helped him to.
You know, attain the goals in
life and uh just like just like
life in the sports, you have to
practice to reach your goals.
Uh, he's learned how to respond
in most situations through the
staters.
And uh Mr. um Speaker, he's
actually a very, very bright
young man because he is choosing
to attend the University of New
Mexico where he wants to study
civil engineering, so Mr. Cole
Rodriguez, Mr. Speaker, welcome
to the lobos.
Into the house.
And later from San Miguel T
Torrens with the guests are
introduced.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I would also like to introduce
my shadow from Belen High School
before I do, I also, also want
to give a special shout out to
Mr. Bolivar, wearing my Mesa
hat. He was a mas advisor for
many years and I love hearing
all these students that are part
of the Mesa program because STEM
is at my heart. Um, but my
student here with me today, this
is Ms. Virgen Alejandra Murrieta
Benzo, but she does go by
Alejandra. um, she is a freshman
at Belen High School. Um, this
is her first.
time is part of theaters this is
her first time here as part of
this experience. Um, I do want
to make a note that her first
language is Spanish and then
when she grows up she just wanna
to be a travel nurse, but
because she's a freshman,
there's a whole lot of time to
figure out maybe where to go
with that, uh, but she does play
club softball. She's a
cheerleader, she's powerless.
You guys better watch out.
And she's here hoping to have an
enjoyable time here at the
Roundhouse, but um I also want
to make a note that I do want to
thank her for this patience this
morning when she got here. Um, I
was in a build presentation this
morning in-house Ed and we went
straight to another bill
presentation and straight here
so um she's learning the ropes
pretty quickly. So welcome to
her and to all of her colleagues
and to all the other Masa
students here in the audience.
Thank you to the house.
Gentlemen from Lee
representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
have a guest from Berlin and so
cool what you did.
Thank you for bringing all of
these.
Young men and women up here to
Play along and see how we, how,
how this work is being done.
Luke, if you don't mind, um.
Mr. Luke Harvey is a sophomore
with the, with the Berlin High
Schoolaters Club.
He is also a member of the
finance committee.
plays baseball and is looking
forward to learning more about
what we do up here, Mr. Speaker,
and, and, uh
Body
I asked him, can I have a little
bit more. And he is very silent.
He doesn't brag a whole lot.
And I asked him to talk about
his family, and you could, I
could just
Read with what he has, Mister
Speaker.
Both parents, uh.
are employed, his dad is a
retired police officer.
It is now a detective in
Socorro. His mom is a 5th grade
teacher at Gil Sanchez
Elementary.
Mr. Speaker, embody
He has been around law
enforcement his entire life, and
his grandmother is a retired
lieutenant for Los Lunas Police
Department.
Right
My dad and my grandmother, Luke
writes, also worked for the
prisons for 17 years.
Mr. Speaker, and Bonnie, his
goal is to be successful in
baseball.
mission today is to learn and
listen at the roundhouse.
Mr. Speaker, embody.
Another goal of his is to become
a game warden.
And uh
As we know, we need more of that
in the state and being able to
take care of.
Are
Our animals in the state, Mr.
Speaker, and in body, I ask you
to uh applaud Mr. Harvey for all
of his efforts.
Young lady from Santa Fe,
Romero, do you have a guest to
introduce? Speaker, thank you
for the opportunity with me
today is the fabulous Victoria
Deanda. She's a member of the
UNM Democrats. She's a 3rd
generation Mexican American and
an advocate in her community,
already serving folks in the
civil rights arena, um, and
housing arena.
She's a freshman at UNM studying
journalism and political science
with future aspirations of going
to Harvard Law School and
pursuing a legal profession. If
you have bills that you're
working on, on gun safety,
bodily autonomy, paid family
medical leave, data security and
privacy or sexual education. She
would love to talk to you about
her bills, um, and we're so
excited to have her. She's such
a talent and such an inspiration
to me already for all that she's
doing and she'll be with me
through Friday. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Lincoln and Otero
with a guest.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, today I have Julian Jurado.
How do you like that?
It, I think is, it's pretty
good. Julian probably though,
right? accent over the Ado
perfect.
We good? Sounds good. I want to
just keep saying it.
I don't know why.
Um
Julian showed up this morning,
Mr. Speaker, and he got to go to
Senate uh finance and watch one
of my bills get beat up for
about an hour. So I'm hoping he
still had a you have a bill
incentive finance. He he hasn't
even gone through the house
floor yet. No, but it was over
there and it, it wasn't pretty,
but
Hopefully it did pass. We're
still moving forward. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, Julian is a senior
at Berlin High School. He runs
track, and he plays soccer for
Berlin.
He is also part of the National
Honor Society and Mesa.
He is very excited to be given
this opportunity to shadow the
coolest, one of the coolest
representatives in the House,
Harlan Vincent.
And can't wait to learn more
about the House of
Representatives and um what a
fitting day, Mr. Speaker,
uh, Julian plants joining the
mili the Marine Corps whenever
he's done graduating. So
welcome.
Welcome to the house.
Young lady from Berlin present
of money on Arne who introduced
your shadow. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, members of the body, I
would love to introduce you to
Dulce Batista Castro. She is a
senior at Berlin High. She is
treasurer of theaters Club. She
is also treasurer of the
National Honor Society and the
National Arts Honor Society.
She's an accomplished artist.
She is going to get her
associate's degree before she
has even graduated high school.
I don't know how that's
possible, but she's incredible.
She's already.
been accepted to UNM where she
wants to study biochemistry
because she would like to be a
pediatrician, which is a very
important job. I've just loved
having her with me today. She's
asked so many good questions.
She sat in on government
elections and Indian affairs,
watched how committees work and
has questions about process
which makes my little nerd heart
so happy. So thank you and help
me welcome Dulce. Welcome to the
house.
Gentlemen from Chavez, Curry,
and Roosevelt Representative.
I'm sorry, I was looking at the
wrong nameplate, gentlemen from
Chavez, Representative Murphy.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, I
asked, um, that, uh, everybody
welcome my shadow today. His
name is Isaiah Vargas, um, when
he showed up, I asked him if
he'd been in the in the house
before he said he had.
That made it very, very helpful
to me because he was able to
show me where my office and the
bathrooms are.
Um, we have
We have since also bonded over
our favorite pastimes of
fishing, hunting and camping,
born and raised in Berlin, New
Mexico, a senior at Berlin High
School, member of National Honor
Society, the staters. He's been
accepted to the Mexico State
University where he will, uh,
major in mechanical engineering
and wishes uh to eventually work
for a contractor building
weapons for our military, so
Isaiah Vargas, a very impressive
young man. Thank you. Welcome to
the house.
Gentleman from Otero
Representative block. Thank you
so much, Mr. Speaker. I have a
very special guest here from
Berlinn High. Her name is Jada
Rose Wright. She stands right
next to me here and she's a
senior, so she is gonna be
attending Grand Canyon
University, and she actively
participates in golf during the
fall and spring seasons, as well
as basketball, track, and
soccer. I don't know where she
finds the time, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
beyond athletics, Jitter Rose is
engaged in the national.
honors, society, staters where
she is the secretary. She also
My goodness, she's in Mesa and
she's the treasurer of Mesa. I
mean, Mr. Speaker, I don't know
how she finds the time. It's,
it's very cool to me, and that's
not all, Mr. Speaker. She's also
the student council class of
2025 secretary.
Just add that one to the list,
Mr. Speaker, uh, sports and
extracurricular activities have
always played a significant role
in her life and she values the
teamwork and dedication they
demand. Alongside her athletic
endeavors, Jada Rose is
committed to her academic and
leadership responsibilities
through organizations like NHS
and Mesa. These experiences have
contributed to her personal and
academic growth, Mr. Speaker,
and she looks forward to
continuing to pursue her
passions while making a positive
impact on her community, I also
Mr. Speaker, that she wants to
study finance and maybe
accounting when she goes to
college, and we need a lot more
accountants and folks that look
at the numbers. So I look
forward to seeing what she does
in the future and thank you so
much for welcoming her, Mr.
Speaker, and the body. Welcome
to the house.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Hall.
Mr. Speaker, it's my honor today
to introduce my shadow, Richard
Martinez. He is a varsity
athlete in baseball.
Power lifting
Football
The guy does it all.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, very impressed
him right off the bat, he got up
in the office today and we
started, I said, Do you want to
read the bill? And I, he didn't
roll his eyes.
So, let him read the bill and he
immediately had excellent
questions. We hit it off right
off the bat. He, uh, he is
ranked 2nd in his weight class
for power lifting.
So he's quite the athlete, uh,
unlike the man he's shadowing
and uh loves to hunt and fish,
so Mr. Speaker, when we see this
quality of a young man, these
other young people here, I just
think that speaks highly of our
state, of the school they attend
and their sponsors. So I am, uh,
truly honored and blessed to
have this young man up here with
me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Welcome to the house.
Stillman from Kaine Grant in
Hidalgo representative Terazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also
have with me Richard's little
brother.
The gentleman right in front of
uh Mr. Hall, uh, Representative
Hall just introduced his little
brother El Mero Mero Ramon
Martinez did that sound like he
was going to fight in a deal,
right? El Metro Mero.
I had to tease. I it's his
little brother. I gotta do some
of this for him to kind of make
up some some ground here but Mr.
Speaker, this young man, he's a
sophomore in Berlin High School.
He's also part of the financial
committee.
Um, and he was excited to come
up here. He plays football and
he plays, uh, baseball as a
catcher.
And I asked him who his favorite
team was professionally. He said
the Astros.
I thought somebody would say I
was just listening to see what,
what the.
What does
the floor would say.
I was like,
I just want to see how you
react, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, um
gonna say welcome to the house
when you're done. Oh no.
No, no, no caso he really does
like you here and so Mr.
Speaker, he's a he's a great
guy. We, we were able to
introduce these two brothers to
the famous bacon rolls this
morning so they can have
breakfast so uh if everyone
would please.
Welcome Ramon.
Martinez, welcome to the house.
Mr. Speaker, really quick, those
two gentlemen are also my
cousins, so they come from a
good line, a good bloodline,
just to let you know. OK, bacon
rolls for everybody, courtesy of
the gentle lady from Valencia.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like
to introduce this young lady by
my side. Her name is Elena
Enriquez. She's a 17 year old
senior at Berlin High School.
She's got an older brother and
she is not spoiled being the
only girl in the family, Mr.
Speaker, I want you to know that
she's also on student council in
her sport is cheerleading,
that's a tough one. You know, we
talk about athletes and I'm
gonna, I'm gonna tell my telling
myself, Mr. Speaker.
You know what, if you're my age,
you know, cheerleading, we
probably didn't consider it a
sport.
These young women and young men,
they get injured in their sport
and it is a sport and so I
congratulate them so she is in a
very difficult sport. She's been
a part of Saer's program for the
past 3 years. She has been in
the house and one of these days
she's gonna be sitting, Mr.
Speaker, maybe in that seat down
here to the right, not sure, but
one of these days, um, and she
originally joined because she
said she wanted to do community
service and I cannot think of a
better thing in life to do than
to serve other people.
Um, and to give back after
getting involved, she said she
found herself becoming
increasingly interested in the
government and the state aspect
of staters. It's been an eye
opening experience, she says,
and I've learned so much about
how things work in a larger
scale. I'm really excited about
the roundhouse trip and I hope
to learn even more about the
state government and see
firsthand how decisions are
made. It's a huge opportunity to
grow and expand my understanding
of the world around me, uh,
Elina is gonna go to UNM
Valencia campus and study
radiation therapy.
She's got some great goals, Mr.
Speaker. Please welcome her to
the house. Welcome to the house.
lady from Curry, Roosevelt
Chavez of Ree. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, I'm actually gonna
be introducing Representative
Chavez's Shadows she had to run
over to the Senate for
something. So this right here is
Madison Smith and she's a
dedicated and driven sophomore
at Berlinnn High School, known
for academic excellence, um, as
a class vice president for the
class of 2027, student council
member Madison plays a crucial
role in representing her peers
and helping organize school
events at foster school spirit
and a sense of.
She's also an active member of
the track and cross country
teams demonstrating both
athletic ability and a strong
sense of discipline. Madison's
interest extend beyond sports
and leadership. She's also
deeply involved in Mesa
mathematics engineering and
science achievement and staters
where she pursues her passion
for science and engineering.
Uh, a true enthusiast of
politics, Madison has always
been captivated by how political
systems function and how they
impact society. She enjoys
staying informed on current
events and engaging in
discussions that help shape her
understanding of the world.
This is um kind of nice because
she's here today on Military
Day, but Mattis or Veterans Day,
Madison's career aspirations are
deeply influenced by her
personal connections to the
military. Both of her great
grandparents served during World
War II, inspiring her to pursue
a future where she can support
the brave men and women who
served in the armed forces.
Madison hopes to become a lawyer
for the Marines or the Navy
SEALs combining her interest in
law with her desire to help
service members navigate legal
challenges. Her goal is.
The system and overcoming the
unique problems they face,
ensuring they will have the
support they need as they
continue to protect and serve
the nation. She hopes to attend
Florida State University or New
Mexico State University. So
again, this is Madison Smith.
Welcome.
Welcome to the house.
Gentlemen from Sandoano
Hernandez. one, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
I would like to introduce you to
Kayla Harramilo. Uh, she's a
junior at Berlin High School,
um, she got to see what it's
really like here while we waited
an hour to present a bill this
morning, um, she's taking a full
schedule at UNM Valencia to earn
her associates in 2026. Uh, she
wants to be a physical therapist
and she plays volleyball both on
the school team and a club team.
Welcome
to the house.
lady from Santa Fe
Representative Lu Juan. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker we have on the
rostru some guests for
Representative Joseph Sanchez
and he wasn't able to um be got
called away on, on a
And and something important had
to do, but he wanted to make
sure that we honor and respect
his guests today and I'm gonna
just introduce them, uh, first
we have Augustine Arch
Archuleta. He's a senior at
Simaron High School, plans to
attend University of Portland,
Oregon.
And next we have Alanna Roybal,
a junior at Siarron High School.
plans to attend West Texas A&M.
Yeah, and then next we have Jane
Flores. She's a junior at CIMAO
and high school plans to attend
Cornell University.
Next we have Mark Boutel. He's a
junior at Simaron High School
and he plans to attend Princeton
University, Mister Speaker. Next
we have Maggie Ware. She's a
10th grader at Simaron High
School and plans to attend West
Texas A&M.
And we have Caden Humphreys. She
is a senior at Simoron High
School, and she's planning to
attend NM NMSUreggies.
Next we have Gabriela Estrada.
She's a senior at Simaron High
School and she plans to take,
uh, also to attend New Mexico
State University. Again, go
Aggies. Mr. Speaker, please
welcome our guests. Welcome to
the house.
Thank you.
Mr. Speaker,
I have another investment if I
may.
Thank you. So in front of us
today we have these incredible
salads. If you're enjoying them
like I am now, um, and they are
very tasty, um.
We're feeding bodies and fueling
minds has been the mission of
school nutrition association in
89 school districts, the New
Mexico School Nutrition
Association is a profound
organization for all levels of
school food service employees
and was established to provide
resources that enhance and
promote nonprofit child
nutrition programs for the
benefit of our New Mexico
children.
So,
please enjoy these complimentary
salads in appreciation.
For our collective support and
work in feeding healthy meals to
our students across New Mexico.
And NMSMA is grateful for all of
our support.
That we have for funding for
healthy universal free meals.
Meals are a critical part of
schools' daily operations.
And school nutrition programs
have developed an excellent
working relationship with
farmers and ranchers around the
state to bring local fresh
produce to our students. So all
these students and all of our
shadows here today, they are the
organization they're bringing
fresh fruit, uh, and meals to
our schools and then the MMSNA
is also in support of all
Well, the, the appropriations
and things we're doing in our
budget, especially for uh one of
the things, um, in addition to
our students, uh, meals is a
senior citizen farms market
program since 49% of students
live with older relatives and
grandparents. So thank you to
NMSNM for the salads today and
for all that they do for our
state. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
The lady from Donana.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. On your
desk, you will find a blue gift
bag from the New Mexico Hospital
Association which represents 47
hospitals in communities across
our state in the bag you'll find
a cookie from LBJ Cookies and a
handout illustrating the health
care and economic values of
hospitals statewide.
Uh, please join the Hospital
Association and their members at
the legislative dinner this
evening at La Posada. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business committee
reports objection to disordered.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
team has been, has been referred
House Bill 20.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass, but that
House commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 20 do pass and
he's referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Wa Gallego's chair. Mr.
Speaker, the adoption of the
committee report.or committee
report on House Bill 20, but a
favorable committee report and
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 20. All those in
favors and if I say a.
Oppose ne, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development Committee
to has been referred House Bill
40 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted, Doreen Waga goes
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption report on House Bill
40,
all those in favors I.
Well Bosna,
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
has been referred House Bill 174
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted. Doreen Wa Gallego's
chair.
No good option favorable
committee report and House Bill
174. All those in favors, and if
I would say no.
I'll suppose nay, the SI be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred House Bill
296, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass, but that a house commerce
and Economic Development
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 296 do pass and thence
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Waigallo's chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption
unfavorable committee report in
House Bill 296, but a favorable
committee report on House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 296. All those in
favor, and if I say no.
Popo's name. Yes, I like Quin
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
23 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted art de la Cruz's
chair.
Mr. Speaker, I
move adoption, please. We
adoption of a federal committee
report in House Bill 23. All
those in favor say aye.
I suppose, the community report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee
to has been referred House Bill
99 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and it's referred to
the commerce and economic
Development Committee
respectfully submitted art de la
Cruz chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption,
please
favorable report in House Bill
99. All those in favor and if I
say aye.
I suppose nay, the SAA committee
reported up to.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants, and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 315
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted. Linda
Sorato, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of a favorable
community report on House Bill 1
315315. All those in favor in
59.
the committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development, land grants and
cultural affairs Committee to
has been referred House Bill 326
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
then referred to the taxation of
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted. Linda Serrato chair
option of a favorable committee
report in House Bill 326. All
those in favor C A9.
All this boy's name, the
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, rural development,
land grants, and cultural
affairs Committee to has been
referred House Bill 330 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass as amended and the
referred to the appropriations
and Finance Committee
respectfully submitted Lindarato
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report now is Bill 330. All
those in favor in the public a
9.
I suppose nay, the SAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture
and water resources Committee to
has been referred House Bill 348
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended and
the referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully
submitted. Cristina Ortez chair.
Mr. Speaker, it adoption of a
favorable committee report and
House Bill 348. All those in
favors if I say I.
I suppose name, yes have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your agriculture is
sick, and water resources
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 356, has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, and he referred to
the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted. Cristina
Ortez,
chair
of a favorable committee report
in House Bill 356, all those in
favor 75 by saying I.
All supposed name the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee, to whom it's been
referred House Bill 331 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and thence refer to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Patricia Royal
Caballero, chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report adoption of
a favorable committee report
House Bill 331. All those in
favor, say 9.
I supposed name, the IAA
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your labor,
veterans and military affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 337 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and he referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Patricia Roel Caballero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report are
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
337. All those in favor, Inaya.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 9
has had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass and thence refer
to the judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joan J.
Ferrari chair. Mr. Speaker,
adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
9. All those in favor say 9.
I suppose nay,
yeah it commit report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 281
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the commerce and
Economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrari chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
281. All those in favorse59.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee team
has been referred House Bill 287
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrari, chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption favorable
committee report in House Bill
287. All those in favor and if I
say I.
I suppose, the SAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee team
has been referred House Bill 345
has had it under consideration
report and the recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a favorable report
in House Bill 345. All those in
favor of saying no.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred House Bill 417 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the taxation and
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
417. All those in favor, and if
I was saying I.
I suppose.
The ISIA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred Senate Finance
Committee's substitute for
Senate Bill 3.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair. Move adoption
adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 3. All those in
favor and if I say I.
I suppose.
CIAA committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your education
committee too has been referred
House Bill 69 has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted G Andres
Romero chair.
Mr. Speaker, I move adoption of
the committee report.
We're an adoption of a favorable
committee report in the house
was 69. All those in favor say
ay.
I'll suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, education committee
to has been referred House Bill
297 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended and the referred to
the government, elections, and
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted.andra
Samer chair of the committee
report. a favorable committee
report in House Bill 297. All
those in favor saying I was
saying I.
I suppose nay, the committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Union Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 62 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended.
And thence referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report in House Bill 62. All
those in favor 759.
I suppose,
the SAA committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee team has been
referred. House Bill 192 has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation that it
do pass and then referred to the
appropriations and Finance
Committee respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson
chair?
Move adoption of a favorable
report in House Bill 192. All
those in favor are signified by
saying I.
Or the supposedly.
CAAIC committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee team has been referred
House Bill 199 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
and then referred to the
taxation revenue Committee,
respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson chair?
Do a favorable committee report
in House Bill 208. All those in
favor signified by saying I.
I suppose,
the committee report adopted.
That was not right.
OK, apologies. I, uh, read out
to it, but it's not been read
out, so strike that from the
record we're going to go to 208
in a minute.
For this one we are in a
favorable committee report on
House Bill 199, all those in
favor by saying 9.
I suppose nay.
Yeah Sait committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 208 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Dowana
Johnson, chair
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report and now Bill
208. All those in favor unified
by say 9.
I suppose, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 228 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
wantna Johnson chair? adoption
of a favorable committee report
in House Bill 228. All those in
favor of C5 but say 9.
I suppose, yeah, have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Union Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 238.
Has had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Dowana
Johnson chair?
adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report in House Bill
238. All those in favor of C5A9.
I suppose nay, the SAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Bill 249 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted. Do you
want a Johnson share?
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report in
House Bill 249. All those in
favor and if I say no.
Bosna, committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to has been referred
House Joint Resolution 12 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted. Do you want Johnson,
chair?
Movement. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report in
house joint resolution 12. All
those in favoring up say nay.
I suppose nay.
Yeah, have a committee report
adopted.
Gent lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
we're gonna take up a little bit
of 3rd reading, um, this
afternoon, but before I do that,
I wanna call your attention to
House Bill 3:30,
uh, liter Supansky, Leader
Armstrong, House Bill 3:30 in
consultation with the respective
chairs of the appropriations and
tax committees, we are dropping
the appropriations referral for
House Bill 330, which is where
it's gonna go next.
And instead replace that
referral with house taxation and
revenue Committee that is House
Bill 330. We are dropping the
appropriations referral and
instead, um,
Putting a tax committee referral
on that bill.
See objection that is so
ordered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
An objection is so ordered is a
gentle lady from Bern Leo
Representative Herndon ready on
item number 6.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, please
get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing.
House bill, House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 66 on final passage has
been taken.
And it is now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution.
And we're going to stand by
because we want to make sure the
board reads the right way.
Generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm
bringing a bill before this body
today that I'm particularly
proud of because it is a
bipartisan bill that increases
access to justice for workers.
House Bill 66 is also a bill
that represents a compromise
negotiated with insurance
companies, the workers'
compensation Administration and
workers who have been injured
while at work, Mr. Speaker, I'm
also proud that much of what is
presented in this bill started
with a task force that met over
the past year. I'm told that a
group of attorneys, workers, and
workers' compensation,
individuals and the insurance
companies came to the table to
work together to get this space
today objection, gentle lady to
close.
You know,
debate you Mr.
Speaker, I, um, hold on a
second, do we have?
You got to press your button,
gentle lady, continue with your
introduction.
A house Bill 66 accomplishes two
things, Mr. Speaker. Uh, one, it
increases the statutory fees for
attorneys that uh have not been
adjusted for over 13 years and
it increases the discovery fees
so that doctors are adequately
reimbursed for the professional
expertise they provide in
workers' compensation cases,
just those two items, Mr.
Speaker, I now stand for
questions. There is a gentlemen,
from Catching Granalterrazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for
giving me the opportunity to ask
a couple of questions with the
gentle lady please, uh, yield.
I yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
and I just, this is just wanted
to make sure that, that I
understood this right because in
my committee, um, we had a
robust conversation of the of
the uh.
Disparities uh in agreements
between the committee and the
other side and so can you tell
me real quick what did they
finally come to an agreement
with so that I, so I can
understand this and and and
support your bill.
Thank you, Mr. uh, thank you
gentlemen. The agreement that
we've come to is with respect to
the amount of the attorney's
fees, those attorneys' fees will
be, uh.
$30,000 would be kept at is the
statutory amount and the amount
will be raised in the years of
2027 and 2029, at which time the
advisory council of the Workers'
Compensation Administration will
come together and review the uh
We reviewed the amounts that
have been put forth with respect
to those attorneys' fees. In
addition, they have agreed upon
the amount of the discovery. The
amount is $3500 with a $500
increase in the year 2027 and
2029. And again, the, the
advisory council will come
together to look at those uh
items.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
basically what I was asking is
they came together from our
committee.
Moving into the next committee
there was some negotiations that
brought them to the table to
work and agree to this to the to
the legislation that's before us
right now, is that correct? That
is correct, Mr. uh Mr.
Gentleman. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, gently. So for the
debate to close.
No, I asked, um,
I unanimously ask consent that
the record reflect that.
Just, just, uh.
I
I moved that House Bill 66 uh
substitute.
Yeah
I moved that house judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 66 do now passage of
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill 66. The vote is
now open.
Boat's about to close.
The vote's now closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 22 in
the negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill C6 has duly passed his
house.
lady from Bern Leo, are you
ready on item number 3.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. I am
ready, um, the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 49 on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution generated to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring
the House Bill 49 to you along
with my co-sponsors, uh,
Representative Patricia Real
Caballero representative Tara
Lohan and Senator Bobby
Gonzalez, um.
House Bill 49 is a closed
captioning act, um, this bill
was heard and passed by the
House Commerce and Economic
Development and House Judiciary
Committees. It was amended and
the bill that you see before you
today is that amended version of
the bill with me uh today and
they're on their way down from
uh the galleria is uh Nathan
Gong, Johnny Hooper, Amy Burke,
they are with the hearing
losses.
Association of America and the
National Association for the
Deaf generally to close.
Mr. Speaker, I urge your
support.
I move that HB 49 now be passed
passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
of 49. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of
41 in the affirmative, 19 in the
negative. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 49 has only passed this
house, gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business members, quick reminder
that tomorrow is the deadline to
introduce bills, so if you have
a bill that you wish to
introduce it has to be done
tomorrow before the end of the
floor session.
Deadline to introduce bills is
tomorrow.
By
Hopefully before the end of the
floor session, otherwise the
staff have to stay back and do a
bunch of paperwork. So try to
get him in in the morning.
Announcements, committee
meetings.
lady from Donana representative
Gallegos. Thank you Mr. Speaker,
uh, House Commerce will meet at
1:45 today in room 317. Please
don't be late note, gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.
in room 305.
Members take notes, gentle lady
from Bern Leo. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. How's Labor Veterans
and Military Affairs will meet
tomorrow at 1:30 or 15 minutes
after the session and I just
remind all the members that we
do have our committee dinner
tomorrow evening at 6 p.m.
Thank you. Members take note,
gentlemen from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1:45
today in room 307.
Members take note, gentlemen
from Grea Riva Sandoval, San
Juan Valente. Speaker, good
afternoon. Members regarding
capital outlay, uh, our number
is in uh it'll be $2.5 million
that each member will receive
for your capital LA with for
your district forms our, uh,
Thought to be handed out this
Friday with a deadline on
Monday, but that's a, that's a
moving target, but 2,500,000 per
member from the house.
Members take note.
And the announcements generated
from Taospeaker, agricultural
aseas and Water Resources
Committee will meet tomorrow
morning at 90 a.m. in room 315.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What did
the Pacific Ocean and the
Atlantic Ocean say?
to each other. You have not
cleared that one by me yet, so
I'm really curious what, sir?
Nothing, they just waved.
Members take note.
Any other announcements?
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 a.m. tomorrow.
See you tomorrow morning. The
House will send in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
