Well as close we have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation.
From the gentlelady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker ladies and gentleman
of the house this is an oldie
but goodie.
So let us pray.
So god from petty agency let us
be large in thought in word and
in deed.
Let us be done with fault
finding.
And leave false self seeking may
we put away all pretense and
meet each other face to face
without self pity and without
prejudice.
May we never be hasty in
judgment and always be generous.
Let us take time for all things.
Make is to grow calm serene in
general.
Teachers to put into action our
better impulses straightforward
and unafraid.
Grant that we may realize.
It is the little things that
create differences that in the
big things of life we are at
one.
Dear lord thank you for giving
me a perfect little boy this
morning.
In Jesus name we pray amen.
Thank you Julie.
Generated from Santa Fe versions
of us for the pledge of
allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
Legislative from Chavis creating
reserves and prepare for the
pledge The New Mexico flag.
I salute the flag.
Able.
Good morning members.
Gentlelady.
From Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Good morning Mr speaker I move
we go to that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business to no objection it is
so ordered members today just a
quick run of show we're gonna do
some we have some announcements
we've got a couple memorials and
guest to honor here today will
then deliver housekeeping
including committee report an
introduction before we break for
a joint session with the Senate
to celebrate Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian day here in your state
legislature.
The gentle lady.
From Bernalillo Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker and then I
requested that I be thank you.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house memorial
thirty be removed from the
speakers table and be made the
next order of business you know
junction it is so ordered.
The record reflect that election
is served placing House memorial
thirty on final passage has been
taken and that it is now subject
to debate amendment for
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker today I am
proud to honor Jim Walter
executive director of the
national museum of nuclear
science and history on the
occasion of his retirement this
morning we welcome Jim his wife
Celeste and their guests from
the museum foundation and Sandia
national labs to celebrate Jim's
accomplishments this memorial
recognizes Jim's lifelong work
for the museum and is impact as
an educator in science
technology engineering and
mathematics I would also like to
draw attention to all of the
members we have a lovely
keychain for you all to take
with you and.
Mr speaker
At what point I apologize.
Do the co sponsors speak at this
point gentle lady is there
debate on the memorial.
While we wait for debate the
gentle lady I do have some
guests in the gallery for here
to support this memorial that
I'd like to introduce that is
Tony from the agency CM
foundation trustee
see information members Molly
Burnell making video Bernadette
robin Jennifer heating chair
just in the initial laboratories
heather clad Clark senior
manager at Sandia national
laboratories please rise to be
recognized by the house of
representatives.
Is there debate on house
memorial thirty the gentle lady
from the Rio Arriba Sandoval
Santa Fe Intel's representative
at a thank you Mr speaker will
the gentle lady yelled.
Yes Mr speaker yield.
I rise to send in strong support
of this memorial it really is a
wonderful museum and just has a
fascinating history and
certainly certainly brings the
history of New Mexico and it's
it's important part of in this
nation's history it brings it to
the forefront and really tells
the story of Los Alamos and and
many of our facilities in New
Mexico tells that story well so
thank you Representative for
bringing this bill forward I
stand in strong support.
Thank you ladies are for the
debate on house memorial thirty.
Senate majority leader calls.
The chief clerk please read the
memorial concern the memorial if
you prefer Julie J. Cook to
replace.
House memorial thirty introduced
by representatives Dixon
Sarinana edita and Chandler.
A memorial declaring February
seventh two thousand twenty
three Jim Walter day in the
house of representatives House
memorial thirty introduced by
Representative Dixon Sarinana
edita and jamming the gentle
lady I see that you're co
sponsor is here and I'd like to
give the lady from Bernalillo
Representative Sari√±ana the
opportunity to debate House
memorial thirty in honor of Jim
what today.
Thank you Mr speaker
Get kind lady do you yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield I I too
would like to to say thank you
to Jim walls twelve thirty
the.
The museum is a great place
where we take kids from all of
our schools and I remember one
time I went I was actually part
of the museum because it was for
the internet started so because
I'm super old but it was a great
place to go and and I want to
thank you for all the years is
put into making it a great place
for kids to to go and for
everyone thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlelady.
Mr Walter and Mrs Walter thank
you for joining us and thank you
for your years of selfless
service observing sat at the
museum left when a community has
district eleven way back in the
day but you relocated to to a
neighborhood where I grew up so
in a way it's still in my home
community in my backyard but
very very much grateful for the
work that you do for the work
that you've done for the
opportunities that you extend to
youth across New Mexico for all
these many years thank you for
your service the gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I now move that house
memorial thirty do now pass and
I now ask unanimous consent of
the house that the record show
that the role has been called
and all members present voted in
the affirmative.
Spent motion show all members of
the house present and voting in
the affirmative seeing no
objection it is so ordered to.
We are on final passage of house
memorial thirty the vote is now
open.
The vote is now closed by one of
seven in the affirmative zero
negative house memorial thirty
has duly passed this house.
We are announcements the gentle
lady from Santa Fe
Representative the Penske.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial seventeen be
removed from the speakers table
and be made the next order of
business no objection it is so
ordered.
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial seventeen of
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentlelady to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I am so excited to celebrate
Asian American Pacific Islander
and native Hawaiian day today in
the house with this memorial and
later with our joint session
this is that historic day for
our community and we had we have
a number of people here from all
of our diverse API and H.
communities here with us in the
roundhouse so I hope our members
will take a moment to greet them
as you see them Mr speaker with
them memorial be read please.
Click to read.
House memorial seventeen
introduced the representatives
of some fancy on in our new
chances Chasey and Roybal
Caballero.
A memorial declaring February
seventh two thousand twenty
three Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian day
in the house of representatives.
Whereas there are more than
fifty one thousand people in New
Mexico who identify as Asian
American and Pacific Islander or
native American native Hawaiian
and we're as Asian Americans
Pacific islanders and native
Hawaiians are among the fastest
growing and emerging communities
of color in New Mexico and we're
as Asian Americans Pacific
islanders and native Hawaiians
contribute greatly to the
economy of New Mexico with their
labor industry businesses and
purchasing power and we're as
Asian Americans Pacific
islanders and native Hawaiians
are contributing their unique
culture customs histories
languages and traditions to the
richly diverse culture of New
Mexico.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico February
seventh two thousand twenty
three be declared Asian American
Pacific Islander and native
Hawaiian day in the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that this state
be a celebration of all past
present and future New Mexicans
who are Asian American Pacific
Islander native Hawaiian east
Asian southeast Asian and south
Asian and all other groups who
have migrated from have
historical ties to or identify
themselves as from Asia and be
it further resolved that copies
of this memorial be transmitted
to the New Mexican New Mexico
Asian families the Asian
business collaborative and the
center for civic policy.
House memorial seventeen.
Introduced by representatives of
of us on in our new Chasey and
Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker
we will have a number of
dignitaries with us later today
I do have one special guests
that I'd like to introduce to is
one of my very best friends of
my first friends in New Mexico
miss Vivian high.
and Mr speaker on your desk
members will provide gift bags
to commemorate this memorial
within those gift bags are
snacks and candles for nine nine
nine market a hand printed flour
sack dish towel from Kate Molly
textiles that are really
beautiful
many gifts from the New Mexico
Asian families and information
about the Asian business
collaborative in New Mexico
Asian families and we will also
have food today to celebrate the
state so outside the house
lounge we will have both
Vietnamese and Indian food we
will have brought me which are
Vietnamese sandwiches from Kota
restaurant in Albuquerque and we
will have some says import from
India house restaurant in Santa
Fe and Mister speaker I just
wanted to share a few
statistics about Asian Americans
Pacific islanders and native
Hawaiians in New Mexico the last
census counted over sixty
thousand members of this
community in our state
and this community is one of the
fastest growing so the
population of Asian Americans in
New Mexico has grown by thirty
four point seven percent in the
last ten years and our
population of native Hawaiians
and Pacific islanders has grown
by seventy five percent.
And if you're curious where
members of our communities
reside the top five counties are
Bernalillo Sandoval Dona Ana
Santa Fe and Otero counties so
we have but there are.
Members of these communities in
all thirty three counties
including our tiniest population
wise county Harding County
so with that Mr speaker I I
stand for questions.
Is there debate on house
memorial seventy.
The gentleman from a dental
Representative block thank you
Mr speaker I was with will the
gentle lady yield I will yield
to the gentleman from Montero.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for bringing this
forward I am so blessed Otero
county is the top five County
and I've so many friends and the
folks in our community who are a
member of this great community
that we are honoring today so I
just want to congratulate you
and appreciate all you're doing
to bring a voice to these great
people to our beautiful around
have so thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentleman
from Chavis and in a dental
representative tells.
Thank you miss gentlelady yields
I will yield to the gentleman
thank you gentle lady of.
My in in my home my.
Daughter in law.
Is Malek is Chinese born
Malaysian.
And
When.
These folks in your memorial as
to what they bring.
To our state it's also important
that I thank the heritage that
they bring to our state is
critically important and.
And in my family it's been very.
enjoyable it has been
educational.
And
The one thing that to learn and
it's probably.
It's probably more.
Because of of males Care added
and the way she was brought up.
That.
If
All children in New Mexico.
Had.
Parents and mothers.
That were so involved in their
lives.
In their education.
And in teaching the
Not only the heritage that they
brought in this case from China
but what is so important about
where they are today this state
would be a much better state and
so I I I rise and support.
Your memorial
I think it's really important
that we.
We recognize that every heritage
that we have in our state and
what it brings to our state in
this storm is just one more the
truly cool thank you.
Thank you gentlemen these are
for the debate on house memorial
seventeen digital eighty from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
thank you Mr speaker related
emailed.
I yield to the lady from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
and lady from Santa Fe I just
wanted to thank you profusely
for my came Molly.
Dish towel and I wanted to let
everybody know they actually
manufacture these in my district
and K. lives across the street
for me her husband was a history
teacher at highland high school
and it is hit when he retired
from highland high school I went
to law school and he's a clerk
for Chief Justice Shannon Bacon
and anyway these beautiful
towels and they're so creative
I'm fine them for every occasion
you can find a wedding gift how
all and Chile roasting tall and
They're they're really nice to
wrap a special gift is
to for on and gift giving
occasion and my family's all
they there are big fans and I'm
really excited that we got all
this business in my district
because of the special occasion
so I'm really grateful for this
and I really invite folks to
look online and see all the
wonderful designs you can find a
red or green you can find the
gaze of the bus gay couldn't
find the winter animals and I
have found them for surfing from
my.
A California grandchildren so
look for these titles folks and
really wonderful thank you so
much lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you ladies are for the
debate on house memorial
seventeen the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero thank you Mr speaker
with the gentle lady please
yield I yield to the lady from
Bernalillo thank you very much
thank you so much gentlelady for
introducing this very powerful
and important piece of
legislation it's a long time
coming it's been a long
struggle.
And I would venture to say that
gentle lady Mr speaker that that
census of twenty twenty sixty
thousand over sixty thousand is
probably a lot higher I think
there was a massive under count
on all of our populations but
particularly so in our Asian
communities and so I just wanted
to make that no because I think
it's important and Mr speaker
and gentle lady I stand on the
obviously and very strong
support of this legislation I'd
like to mention to the body that
the Asian American families in
Albuquerque is a thriving
Center.
It actually is the core of the
center of all education of all
organizing of all activities
they've been a strong voice in
ensuring that all the languages
are incorporated into health
systems like the University of
New Mexico health care system
they've been very strong
advocates and helped
pass the legislation to require
our departments increase their
language access so in the
language access bill that was
passable I I'm losing track of
years but I believe that was
passed in twenty twenty two so I
just stand in strong support and
on a final note I always stand
in strong support of this
legislation and these important
recognitions as a indigenous
native insured on a woman myself
and coming from these
populations and our
understanding our history that
at one time on this earth all of
us.
Came.
From the eastern.
Parts of our world.
And I think that's important to
understand and to recognize I
also stand in loving memory of
the founder of the Asian
American families.
And I know most of you will know
her name especially those from
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
daily outgoing data.
In your name Delhi outcome data.
I'll offer my strong support and
sponsorship.
And in your memory may this day
live on as an accomplishment.
Of what you took on and stood
for and fought for in your
community.
The present physically but I
know you were with us today.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
thank you so very much thank you
and I urge to support and part
of the entire body thank you
there's further debate the
gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Martinez.
Mr speaker with the good lady my
friend from Santa Fe you.
I'd love the yield to the
gentleman from Santa.
Should only be I rise in support
of your memorial.
In the name of my stepdaughter
Sony who has brought so much joy
so much laughter to our family
and she came to us by way of
Mumbai India.
I have found.
A different perspective looking
at the world through her eyes
she is a survivor.
She is tall she might be little
but I wouldn't want to mess with
her so in honor of my
stepdaughter Sony I rise in
support of your memorial.
These are for the debate on
house memorial seventeen.
I see none the gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
thank the members for your
generous words for your
reflections on how our Asian
American Pacific Islander and
native Hawaiian community has
touched your lives I encourage
you to look for opportunities to
support our businesses support
your community members to to
hear their needs and to support
those and with that right now
move that house memorial of
seventeen do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent in the house
that the record show that the
role has been called in all
those members present voted in
the affirmative.
Show all members of the house
present and voting in the
affirmative seeing no objection
it is so ordered we are on final
passage of house memorial
seventeen the vote is now open.
Was a close one of seventy in
the affirmative zero in the
negative house memorial
seventeen has duly passed this
house.
Thank you Mr speaker and
members.
We are announcements.
The gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative Lara thank you Mr
speaker in front of you you have
a bag of Southern New Mexico's
delicacy because I want to thank
celebrate farms for the for the
pecans and we're sure levels so
New Mexico with everybody I do
have some extras if you want
some please enter your pecans
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen thank you
for the cause of the given the
extra back up because you
deliver this morning the
gentleman from.
Thank you a better person
Vincent.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The first thing that I want to
say is I know that a lot of
legislators give up a lot of
things.
In order to come up here Sir for
sixty days and a lot of times
they have to give up a lot of
family time they have to leave
their children they have to
leave their husbands and wives
behind and thankfully.
My wife's got to come with me
for the whole sixty days we've
been married for thirty years
and I would be honored if you
would recognize her as this is
her birthday today and we're not
gonna have a whole lot of change
because there's business to get
me conducted but I would be
honored if you would recognize
Rhonda.
This is in the gallery Happy
Birthday.
And Representative.
He's in.
The you have.
Dates you have the birthday do
and the have the you.
Happy birthday.
Are there was a gentleman from
San Juan Representative thank
you Mr speaker Mr speaker I
would like to introduce some
very special guests money there
in the rostrum today Mr speaker
with us is my former coach and
his lovely wife Christensen and
Terry Stinson and they're part
of our celebration this morning
of Asian American Pacific
Islander and and native Hawaiian
day and for those that don't
know coach Stinson let me let me
brag on him a little bit he's
well renowned throughout much of
the southwest in the country so
coach Stinson was raise an asset
graduated in nineteen seventy.
And he was a two time state
place winner in wrestling.
he went on to wrestle at
southern Utah university and
then this is where his career
becomes very meaningful and
impactful for all of New Mexico
he started coaching at Aztec
high school back in nineteen
seventy six during that time
he's led his team to seventeen
team state championships
including a time period of
eleven in row eleven in a row
and I was part of that nineteen
ninety nine and two thousand
team state championships during
that streak he's coached nine
teams admin ranks nationally in
the top twenty five top high
school wrestling teams in the
country he's coached eighty
three individual state champions
his current record is five
hundred fifty ninety seven and I
he's seven times been The New
Mexico wrestling coach of the
year.
He is in the New Mexico coaches
hall of fame our hall of fame
all of honor excuse me he's in
the New Mexico wrestling hall of
fame he's been the national
coach of the year three times in
two thousand sixteen he was
inducted into the national high
school athletic coaches hall of
fame.
In two thousand twenty one he
was named by New Mexico
wrestling the all time best New
Mexico coach and just this fall
Mr speaker of coach Stinson one
of only two wrestling coaches to
ever be inducted coach Stinson
was inducted into the
prestigious New Mexico sports
hall of fame Mr speaker I want
to read a paragraph.
That coach Stinson read during
that induction speech I think it
is really telling of coach since
is background really what we're
trying to celebrate the here
this morning with regard to
are Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian
days so because since a row mom
and dad played a heavy part in
my direction with their attitude
of no fear approach to try
something new or different
because the worst thing that can
happen is failure and failures
the mothers of success my dad
Howard since and dropped out of
Aztec high school his ninth
grade year and went into the
military dad was on the newly
commissioned USS Valley Forge
the last of the wooden top
carriers although he was
primarily involved in the mop up
time period it was his being
stationed in Japan during the
occupation time for that that he
met my mother such echo a young
lady of samurai descent who had
survived the bomb living sixty
miles away from the first bomb
and a hundred twelve miles away
from the second bomb mom was
spoiled and she grew up with
wealth and influence is a pan a
far cry from a farmer's family
in little that stick New Mexico
for dad had for bit her from
seeing a GI but love prevailed
and they married in Japan in
nineteen fifty one he was
conceived because since was
conceived in Japan and then
later born in Farmington.
Their strength is my calling
card later in life after living
in Maryland while dad was
getting out of the navy mom who
was a hundred pounds five foot
tall Japanese girl had to drive
from there to all the way to
asked to Cologne with the two
rolled into once again as an as
the navy would not allow him to
transport his family after two
years of working in an as dad
said starving we went back into
the military this time the army.
And this time the army went to
create a station average panel
relive for over here upon
returning to asked tech mom
would not let any of us talk in
Japanese as we all know the
Japanese were not well received
at this time but chin up and
fast forward my sophomore year
at Aztec high school and after
deciding because of a great man
named coach Jerry Parker I went
out for wrestling.
That season I made the
commitment to become a teacher
and coach in nineteen sixty
seven and that would and that
would with the no for added to
dictate my life to the state Mr
speaker I I know that there's a
handful of people and everyone's
life that make a tremendous
impact in who they become active
tell you that Christensen is on
that very very short list for me
I I I love the man and
appreciate everything he's done
for my community the sport of
wrestling is tremendous and he's
been influential in my life and
and many others so just one
hundred percent since morning
thank you Mr speaker coach
stance and thank you for your
service and welcome to the state
house.
We're announcements the gentle
lady from Dona Ana the legal and
whenever Senator Jones.
Mr speaker I stand for point of
personal privilege state your
point.
I'd like to share some health
care statistics and concerns.
In twenty seventeen from twenty
seventeen to twenty twenty one.
Over four year period that for
years he period seven hundred of
our primary care physicians left
New Mexico.
That was almost a third of the
primary care physicians that we
had here in New Mexico.
With which left a shortage in
almost every county of primary
care.
And that the I don't have the
numbers but I know we have a
shortage across the board of
physicians specialties not only
the primary care.
Another thing the majority of
our physicians that are
practicing for over fifty years
old and they're looking at
retirement.
Another stat medical students
who receive an excellent
education at UNM and fall in
love with the New Mexico when
they finish they leave our state
because this is not a friendly
place to practice we have a
health care crisis.
And it's a crisis of our own
making.
For far too long we fail to
increase Medicaid reimbursements
we have failed to remove taxes
the G. R. T. taxes on medical
services I believe are one of
only two states that actually
tax medical services and if all
of that wasn't enough in twenty
twenty one this legislative body
and our executive.
Past HB seventy five which
skyrocketed the medical
malpractice insurance
requirements of to to for
medical malpractice act up to
four million dollars which.
A makes it almost impossible for
physicians to get malpractice
insurance.
So we created the crisis.
And who suffers the people of
New Mexico the people of New
Mexico sadly.
I'm not getting the health care
they deserve.
We created it by the laws that
we made and the laws that we
fail to make.
But the good news is we can fix
it.
So there's no time to lose
fellow members
we need to make this a positive
place for physicians to practice
and care for the people that we
serve.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John lady we do have some guests
in the gallery from the town of
really you know that I'd like to
recognize you Jack Torrez town
administrator item fee I don't
think councilman bill prove me
welcome to the state house
please rest we recognize.
Other announcements.
Right the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business committee
reports seen objection it is so
ordered Mr speaker.
I'm sorry I was standing and and
I will come back to an as
Notley.
To reduce.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to is been referred house bill
eight has had it under
consideration point so with
recommendation to do passed as
amended and that's referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
during like I guess chair.
Reduction we're in adoption
fable Committee put in house
bill eight all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe just have a couple
different options.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to has
been referred house bill thirty
nine has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended and once referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair food
options reduction of federal
committee report on house bill
thirty nine of those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose maybe yes are committed
for adopted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to is been
referred house bill two twenty
nine has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that a do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Doreen Y. Gallegos
chair Mr speaker move adoption
Brett option of federal
committee report on house bill
two twenty nine of those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Was made the eyes are reported.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee Tennyson
for House Bill to thirty four
has had it under consideration
point it was recommendation of
do pass as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Doreen Y. Gallegos chair for
that option for the doctor to a
federal committee report on
house bill two thirty for all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Both.
The US Senate committee report
is adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is referred house bill fifty
two has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that a do pass as
amended in answer FOR D.
appropriation of finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andr√©s Romero chair.
Mr speaker I move adoption for
that option of a favorable
committee report on house bill
fifty two all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Propose may be as avid commuter
for adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
Mr referred house bill one
thirty seven has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted G. Andr√©s
Romero chair.
Mr Chairman Mr speaker I move
adoption for an adoption of a
favorable committee put in house
bill one thirty seven all those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Propose may.
The I. seven committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one fifty one has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that do pass
sentence refers to labor
veterans and military affairs
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andr√©s Romero chair Mr
speaker I move adoption
reduction of federal community
portal house bill one fifty one
of those in favor signify by
saying aye opposed eight the US
Senate committee report adopted.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill one sixty
eight has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair for production
production of favorable
committee report on house bill
one sixty eight all those in
favor signify by saying aye
opposed make the as had
committee report adopt.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too it's been
referred house bill one seventy
two has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Thompson
chair of adoption production to
a favorable committee report on
house bill one seventy two of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose make the eyes out of the
committee report adopted Mr
speaker health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill one seventy
three has had it under
consideration point inspector
and Asian that it didn't pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee perspectives
Melissa Thompson chair of
adoption branded optional
Federal Committee put in house
bill one seventy three of those
in favor signify by saying aye
opposed make the as had been
reported up to.
Mr speaker you health and Human
Services Committee time is been
referred house bill one seventy
seven has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
and it's referred to the
consumer public affairs
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair
production Burnett optional
Federal could report on house
bill one seventy seven of those
in favor signify by saying aye.
Yes I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house bill one forty eight has
had it under consideration point
I was recommendation that do
pass and it's referred to the
Education Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption for an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one forty eight all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Opposing the S. seven committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill one
sixty five has had it under
consideration would same with
recommendations that it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption run
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one sixty five all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Propose make the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house joint
memorial one has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendations to pass
respectfully submitted D. Wonda
Johnson chair Mr speaker move
adoption for an adoption of
federal committee report on
house joint memorial won all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose new ideas have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee to
miss been referred house joint
resolution two has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
as amended an answer for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted D. Wonda Johnson chair
Mr speaker move adoption
adoption of a federal committee
report on house or solution to
all those in favor signify by
saying aye opposed state the
eyes have it committee report
adopted.
Mr speaker government elections
and in uniforms Committee too is
been referred house joint
resolution eighty has had it
under consideration point I was
recommendation to do pass as
amended immense referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Wonda Johnson chair Mr
speaker move adoption Bernalillo
option of a favorable committee
report on house joint resolution
eight all those in favor signify
by saying aye.
Propose make the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill forty has had it
under consideration the report
say with recommendation to do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair Mr speaker move adoption
we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill forty all those in
favor signify by saying aye.
Proposing the eyes have it
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too has been referred house bill
ninety has had it under
consideration and report same
with recommendation to to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption reduction of a federal
committee report on house bill
ninety all those in favor
signify by saying aye.
Does make the as have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill one oh five has had
it under consideration reports
saying with recommendation that
it do not pass that house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House for one or five to
pass respectfully submitted
Christine check Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are no federal
committee report on house bill
one of five but a favorable
committee report on house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one of five of
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
tenants been referred house bill
one sixty nine provided on the
consideration of point in with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are an adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill one sixty nine all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose maybe the as have a
committee report adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
was been referred house bill two
zero five has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation added ten pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair Mr speaker move
adoption we're adoption of a
favorable committee report on
house bill two zero five all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Propose may.
The eyes have it committee
report adopted.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to it's been
referred house bill two sixty
one has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation added to pass
immense referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
with the doctor or the doctor
federal committee report on
house bill two sixty one all
those in favor signify by saying
aye.
Couples made the as have a
committee report adopted.
The lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that owner
business announcements and
miscellaneous business see no
objection it is so ordered
announcements the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Matthews thank you Mr speaker
members of the house I have the
pleasure today of introducing
James Ortiz is my constituents
he tells me he was too young to
vote for me but he's still my
constituents he was born in
Albuquerque he is a sophomore at
Albuquerque academy he enjoys
track and AP U. S. history and
his interest include school
fitness music and films James
has an older brother three dogs
and one cat he is in the tenth
grade and he is possibly
considering a career in
government
and particularly interested in
the house and I loved his answer
because the members of the house
are closest to the people and he
is from Here we made today thank
you welcome to the house.
It the resentment is going to
put you to work.
Right.
Any other announcements.
The gentle lady from all those
great counties Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker just a
reminder that house Judiciary
Committee will be meeting
tomorrow at one thirty or twenty
minutes or so after the floor
session and thank you Mr speaker
members signaled provided for
you I Representative Ferrary
thank you Mr speaker this
afternoon of commerce commerce.
What is our committee.
The packet is meeting at one
thirty and we will be hearing
just three built this afternoon
and appreciate agility just for
the record what we remember we
meeting in.
Consumer and public affairs is
meeting in room three seventy
thank you delay the members
signaled the generated from
Santa Fe reserve set up the
thank you Mr chairman Mr speaker
in your house commerce and
economic development he will
need twenty minutes after floor
session or one thirty tomorrow
afternoon and the bills we're
hearing are listed on and that
will be in room three seventeen
thank you members take note.
The gentleman for billion a
Representative small thank you
Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at one
thirty or fifteen minutes
following our force us and today
room three zero seven number
take note other announcements
the gentleman from Cibola in
McKinley Representative Alcon
yes Mr speaker in your house
that rents and military affairs
committee movie fifteen minutes
after we get off the floor.
Thank you gentleman and what
will you be needing in.
Seven ten.
One five three fifteen correct
and right next door.
Throws a curveball appreciate
that.
And it also is a gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil thank you very
much Mr speaker do this
morning's technical difficulties
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee will be continuing its
meeting from this morning at two
PM in room three oh five
untested Webber's take note.
The other announcements folks
today's nonprofit bay at the
legislature and we've got some
guest in the gallery to be
recognized we have Americans for
an Indian opportunity we have
the community action agency of
Southern New Mexico we have
cotton wood gold expeditions
with under this dream tree
project first training for
corners food is free Albuquerque
wheels on wheels Albuquerque The
New Mexico Holocaust museum New
Mexico thrives in Mexico out of
school time network rainy
Mexico.
The food project sanctuary at
Albuquerque Valencia community
act.
Thanks for life international
please rise and be recognized
welcome to the house of
representatives.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation.
I see no objection it is so
ordered.
House Bill five introduced by
representatives Kate's Hadham
you little Chavez and
legislation to Penske.
An act relating to government
conduct declaring the public
policy of the state regarding
conduct of current and former
legislators and public officers
and employees at in the exchange
of official acts for sexual
favors to provisions of quid pro
quo corruption clarifying
provisions against references to
a legislators legislative
capacity for the use of
provided stationery email or
other deciem when appearing
representing or assisting
another person and a matter
before a state agency
clarifying New Mexico to provide
provisions of the governmental
conduct act prescribing and
increasing penalties House Bill
I introduce the representatives
Kate's Hermio little Chavez and
his pants the pants again House
Bill I have been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee this House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill three twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Lujan an act relating to workers
compensation increasing the
penalty for violations of the
workers compensation act House
Bill three twenty nine
introduced by Representative
Lujan.
House Bill three twenty nine
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house labor veterans and
military affairs committee then
as the house Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill three thirty
introduced by Representative
Lujan an act relating to workers
compensation removing the
exemption for farm and ranch
labors House Bill three thirty
entities by Representative Lujan
House Bill three thirty have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house agriculture us again
as water resources committee
then so house labor veterans and
military affairs committee.
House Bill three thirty one
introduced by Representative
Lujan an act relating to
cannabis regulation providing
for state criminal history
checks and national criminal
history background checks as a
condition of eligibility for
licensure House Bill three
thirty one introduced by
Representative Lujan House Bill
three thirty one have been read
twice by title is ordered
printer in front of the house
commerce Economic Development
Committee then as the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirty to
introduce by Representative
Alcon an act relating to
magistrate retirement clarifying
that a retired member may file
an exemption from membership
under the magistrate retirement
act House Bill three thirty to
introduce by Representative
Alcon.
As the three three to have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans military
affairs committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirty three
introduced by Representative
Alcon an act relating to civil
rights amending the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act to modify the
statute of limitations and
notice requirements House Bill
three thirty three introduced by
Representative Alcon.
House Bill three thirty three
have admitted twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer public
Affairs Committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirty four
introduced by representative
Nibert and act relating to motor
vehicles allowing a law
enforcement officer or
department of transportation
employee to move a motor vehicle
obstructing traffic House Bill
three thirty four introduced by
representative Nibert.
House Bill three thirty four
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee vans the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirty five
introduced by representative
Sarinana Baca how to meal and at
a.
An act relating to public
education requiring computer
science to be embedded in
elementary and middle school
subjects and offered as a
standalone class in high school
providing for professional
development for teachers
creating a fund making
appropriation House Bill three
thirty five introduced by
Representative Sarinana Baca how
to meal and it at a House Bill
three thirty I have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill three thirty six
entities by Representative
Serrato and Dixon an act
relating to technology creating
the data integration advisory
committee to study report and
provide recommendations on the
maintenance and utilization of
data in state government
requiring reporting making
appropriation House Bill three
thirty six entities
Representative Serrato and Dixon
House Bill three thirty six
seven been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee then so house
appropriations and finance
committee
House Bill three thirty seven
introduced by Representative
Serrato an act relating to the
early childhood education and
care department providing
definitions expanding department
duties on conducting background
checks House Bill three thirty
seven introduced by
Representative Serrato.
House Bill three thirty seven
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee events the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirty eight
introduced by Representative
Rehm and act relating to public
safety requiring certain persons
employed in filmmaking to
complete firearms training
specifying training requirements
providing a penalty House Bill
three thirty eight introduced by
Representative Rehm House Bill
three thirty eight have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house commerce and economic
development committee thence the
house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three thirty nine
introduced by Representative
Lord.
And act relating to motor
vehicles increasing the penalty
for a person who commits
careless driving that results in
death or great bodily harm House
Bill three thirty nine
introduced by Representative
Lord.
House Bill three thirty nine
amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee then to House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three forty.
Introduced by representatives
Castellano Hochman Vigil and
Senator Pirtle an act relating
to liquor control repealing a
section of the liquor control
act limiting the size of
containers of alcohol sold for
consumption off the premises
House Bill three forty
introduced by representatives
Castellano and Hochman Vigil and
Senator Pirtle.
Yes House Bill three forty have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house consumer public firms
Committee then the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three forty one.
Entities for representatives
ream the pants Gainey Armstrong
Thompson and senator Tom and an
act relating to criminal
procedure requiring courts to
order drug alcohol or mental
health treatment in certain
circumstances House Bill three
forty one introduced by
representatives ream to Penske
Armstrong Thompson and senator
Tom and.
House Bill three forty one been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee that is the house
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three forty two
introduced by representatives
lane and senator Wirth an act
relating to education aligning
the uses of education savings
plans provided for in the
education trust act to comply
with federally allowable uses of
the savings House Bill three
forty two introduced by
Representative lane and senator
Wirth.
House Bill three forty two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then the house government
elections and indifference
Committee.
House Bill three forty three
entities are representatives
Andrea Romero Serrato and Herman
this an act relating to alcohol
authorizing the director of the
alcoholic beverage control
division of the regulation and
licensing department to issue
direct beer shipment permits
providing for interstate beer
competitions and permits House
Bill three forty three
introduced by representatives
Andrea Romero set up so and
Hernandez.
House Bill three forty three
having been read twice by title
is or printed.
And referred to us from a public
affairs committee then the house
commerce and economic
development committee.
House Bill three forty four
introduced by representatives
lane and cut in half an act
relating to public employee
pensions allowing retired public
employees to return to work as
uniformed county detention
officers under certain
conditions House Bill three
forty for entities by
representatives lane and
cutting.
House Bill three forty four
having been read twice by title
sort of printed and referred to
the house labor veterans
military affairs committee then
the house Judiciary Committee.
House Bill three forty five
introduce a representative but
I'd go an act relating to public
safety providing recruitment
disbursements of newly hired
firefighters creating a
firefighter recruitment fund
requiring distribution and
oversight of the firefighter
recruitment fund by the homeland
security and emergency
management department making
appropriation House Bill three
forty five introduced by
representative voted off House
Bill three forty five have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans military
affairs committee there's a
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three forty six
introduced by Representative
McQueen an act relating to water
providing for forfeiture of a
water right after ten years of
non use eliminating and notice
requirements for for future
after ten years of non use House
Bill three forty six entities by
Representative McQueen.
House Bill three forty six
having been read twice by title
is ordered printer for to the
house agriculture us a gas and
water resources committee this
House Judiciary Committee
House Bill three forty seven
introduced by representatives
Kate's and Harper an act
relating to elections amending
the election code to revise
requirements for signatures on
nominating petitions for minor
party majority party and
independent candidates
candidates House Bill three
forty seven introduced a
representatives Kate's and
Harper.
Forty seven.
House with three forty seven
amended twice by title is
ordered printed referred to the
house government election in the
Affairs Committee dense the
house Judiciary Committee.
The gentleman from the you.
Mr speaker recruiter that
disorder business announces a
missile and miscellaneous
business Sen objection is so
ordered.
Thousands.
The lady from earlier said
Thompson Mr speaker the health
health health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty in room three oh
seven thank you to the
appropriations chair.
Else.
Mr speaker.
J. from earlier present Chasey.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the speaker point a
committee to invite the
president pro tem.
Stewart on about members of the
Senate to me and joint session
with the house in this chamber
for the purpose of being
addressed by speakers in honor
of Asian American Pacific
Islander and native Hawaiian day
if there is no objection the
chair will appoint
Representative Kate's
Representative set up tool and
Representative read.
To notify.
And invite the president pro
tempore and the honorable
members of the Senate to meet in
joint session with the house for
the purpose of being addressed
by our distinguished guest.
Jelly for many of.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the house did in
recess subject to the call of
the chair the rules be suspended
to allow the seating of guests
in the chamber during the joint
session if there's no objections
the house was in recess subject
to the call of the chair.
Don't go far.
