I'm sorry to do need to take
well.
Okay and now we have worked on
we now we're officially.
Representative blocked present
Representative Lord.
Representative sorry.
Was the decision.
This.
More here.
Representative Thomson.
By video here.
Chair for.
Have a quorum thank you
Representative Thomson is that
she's on her yes okay.
Representative read.
Madam chair this is I'm
representative bill Reid and
this is actually something that
the chair woman knows quite a
bit about and if we look at our
D. W. I. statute we go to page
two and wind
two and three we see that there
is a different standard
currently for driving under the
influence of drugs that we do
for alcohol alcohol standard is
page one one twenty three and
twenty four.
Well of what this bill does make
that standard the state.
Then the other you'll see some
cleanup language through the
bill.
And then for for on page.
Thirteen
winds nine through thirteen we
talked about that if you have if
you've been arrested for DWI
so let's be real specific.
You've been seen by an officer.
You have Aaron driving.
He stopped you.
The service that you are
impaired.
His issue he is done a field
sobriety test and you failed
that.
You have been arrested for DWI.
Now if there if the test is
conducted any finds marijuana
the lab technician can testify
as to that marijuana and its
influence on driving.
Now when you smoke marijuana and
you create two hundred and
thirty four metabolites.
They're looking for metabolite
and it has a name like this long
I can't remember it.
That is a psychoactive
metabolite with the lives of
three to four hours.
And they have to relate that
metabolite to the A. R. driving
that the officers of served.
Well.
Every state that has passed.
Legislation for recreational
marijuana has also passed
legislation to deal with the
increased yeah drug driving that
results from recreational
marijuana.
New Mexico is not done that.
Unfortunately in my district we
have the first recreational
marijuana of fatal wrecked.
Of the first day the first
afternoon.
that recreational marijuana was
legal.
It was person was up and Elena
guy goes campground off of tram
weight smoke marijuana.
At about four thirty came out to
tramway Boulevard.
Turned
Southbound in the northbound
lane.
And hit a motorcyclist head on
killing.
And so this is to correct what
we've seen in other states not
only for our
impairment levels.
You know that the standards
would be the same that recognize
that
That THC in your blood can
impair your driving.
And madam chair with that.
Will stand for questions.
Thank you
we'll go to the audience those
are still.
Thank you for being.
K. there anyone on seeing yeah
in favor.
Yeah okay the head he wanted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington speak.
Greater review chamber of
commerce since New Mexico's
legalizing encouraging the
recreational use of cannabis
they should deal with the issue
of drugs Dr I think it's
reasonable to put in the state
law that people are not allowed
to drive the influence of this
drug and that law should be
enforced our long standing
problem with drug drive because
because chart in tragedy that is
affected so many as the state
moves forward with legitimizing
the wider use of the drug that
costs this impairments it must
do everything it can to ensure
that this decision doesn't
result in an increase in car
accidents and highway fatalities
thank you.
Shows here in opposition.
Do you like to speak.
Would you mind coming up to the
microphone so people want to
with the.
The fact is a little bit from.
This chart.
Trying not to crowd everyone but
still okay.
That's a lot of things the court
will go.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Daniel Williams I'm a
policy advocate with the
American civil liberties union
of New Mexico we understand the
concern that right that gives
rise to this bill we are not
blanket we opposed to any kind
of changes to D. W. I. statutes
but we just want to make sure
that this bill is is tackling
that as carefully as narrowly as
possible to
to address the issue without
causing more confusion over
incarceration over policing of
our communities so we would just
urge that that this bill really
be be narrowly focused and and
attention given to the issues
raised by the AG and out hello
PED's in the F. I. R. thank you.
Thank you anyone else in support
and opposition.
Okay anyone in opposition to yes
okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I would like to
state Corona said that it is.
I'm local to drive under the
influence of any drugs I think
you're you're driving the way
this bill is right you're taking
antibiotics you're technically
breaking the law I am a New
Mexican with multiple
disabilities and I take
controlled substances in order
to maintain and the eight
tribute in Woodbridge to society
and with this at this bill.
I will no longer be able to
drive so I would be able to
continue my employment and be
able to serve the people of this
state so I am close bill and I
ask that you propose as well
thank you very much.
Thank you very much else.
Thank you do you like to see us
before we go committee madam
chair to we do not discuss
antibiotics in here and the
standard and son safely operate
a motor vehicle stop.
Okay
Session.
I have a
couple questions.
You
There are I I don't know if you
had a chance to read the FIR
anything else these.
Have you madam chair yes Madam
chair representative yes so my
make major concern and then
there's others but the first one
is just on page thirteen when
looking at this law.
You strike out.
All of our current law regarding
intoxication alcohol and so we
replace it with the talks
occasion
cannabis.
C. strike out the the law
current law stating what it
requires what seems a person
intoxicated with alcohol and
replace it with cannabis
entirely.
So Madam chair representative
the way it reads now is saying
that any concentration of
alcohol is now deemed illegal
and any concentration of.
The line will teach the
is now the with the new law was
that your intent Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair Representative
Romero will have an attorney
respond.
Madam chair representative
Romero that was not our intent
and it's also not I believe that
that's actually a problem
because it appears that
the PAC the PAC is covered in
paragraph one of subsection C.
on page two it's right now and.
The numbers right now but at the
same information so
and I believe there's an
internal cross references well
that references a standard in
subsection C..
Madam chair representative this
is in regards to the charges
that the arresting officer would
be able to
provided to that to finding that
person is executed.
So it really is important to
identify what intoxication would
need to be in order for it to be
charge so madam chair
representative I agree and I
it's my opinion that the
language on page two and as
unlawful for a person to drive
the vehicle in this state if the
person has an alcohol
concentration of eight one
hundred or more in the person's
letterpress within three hours
of driving the vehicle I I
believe that's about as clear as
you can cover it but
Thank you.
Madam chair representative so
again just my concern with this
in New implied be it being I by
the AG's office and as well as
yeah the AG's office generally
is that the.
this go with that just
completely redefines what
intoxication is in that section
in order to be able to charge
Alcohol consumption
additionally you madam chair
Mike my major concern is with
the way that the work dropping
is also defined in this bill is
sort of creates that blanket we
heard from some of the testimony
against that so much is having
cold medication can now be teens
I criminal offense I think that
the challenge with being able to
recognize the substances
Is is really the fact that there
is just no viable passed for
many of these substances which
is too intoxicating which is you
know just trying to treat your
mild cold symptoms I think that
that that's really where the
revenues for me on this at the
state and generally just how it
is that we sort of tackle this
and I think some of the tools in
the toolbox rather than
criminalizing this is looking at
how to get drug recognition
experts into the field get them
trained and and understanding
how to be able to recognize the
scent just finally Madam chair
representative I don't.
After we legalize cannabis it
was the first time someone had
been
Consuming cannabis in the state
in fact for decades prior to
legalization we know this is
something that we were dealing
with I will continue to look
forward to looking at best
practices for how we can do that
but unfortunately I can't
supporting those thank you madam
chair.
Madam turned to table.
Thank you.
Their second.
Okay thank you the table.
The first second setting up.
I think what.
Representative walked no to
table Representative no to
table.
Representative Romero yes to
table Representative Thomson
yes.
Mr Rubio yes table for our yes.
Sure you have a go to forty two.
You have a fourty to table.
Thank you Representative.
Yes house bill four ninety one
because for me it's not that.
Presented the right.
Shares here.
That anytime you're ready thank
you madam chair members of the
house of representatives
so this is house bill four
ninety one and this is being
sponsored by myself
Representative Joseph Sanchez
and Representative particulate
Cruz who is in the audience.
And basically what this bill
does is it's relating to crime.
Fighting that multiple
violations of an lawful taking
of investment of fraudulently
obtaining or receiving or
transporting stolen vehicles or
motor vehicles applied toward
sentencing regardless of which
section of law was violated and
basically what this does.
for many well before I do get
into the bill I also want to
introduce my expert witnesses
Jennifer.
Yes.
Attentions and she is the deputy
superintendent of the office of
insurance and Devont'e Chapman
he is the executive director of
the New Mexico auto theft
prevention authority.
And with that madam chair just
give you a few talking points
here for many years on a theft
rates in New Mexico and in
particular Albuquerque have
ranked among the worst I in the
country as far back as two
thousand nine the legislature we
recognize the problem and
reclassify the auto theft
related offenses under thirty
dash sixteen T. dash one.
In those revisions the
legislature designated for major
offenses unlawful taking of a
vehicle.
Or or motor vehicle embezzlement
of the vehicle or motor vehicle
fraudulently obtaining a vehicle
or motor vehicle receiving or
transferring stolen vehicles or
motor vehicles these offenses
are self enhancing the penalties
for new violations may be
enhanced using prior convictions
for the same occurrences however
prior convictions of what type
cannot be used to enhance later
violations of any of the other
three offenses and so basically
what this bill does is it.
It changes the type of offense
if you fall into any of those
categories and it really
increases the penalty.
I have
my experts that I would like to
Have talk a little bit about it
and then we have Representative
Sweetser is going to give some
of the numbers of the number of
vehicles that are stolen
yearly.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee just wanted to
share some statistics New
Mexico's actually ranked number
one in on the twenty nineteen.
That's pretty crazy about where
to locate.
One of the.
One on.
Thank you madam chair so I'm
just going to share some
statistics on New Mexico is
actually ranked first installing
vehicles in twenty nineteen
that's pretty crazy Albuquerque
was the number two city in the
whole country.
In twenty twenty one
they were ranked number four New
Mexico in Albuquerque is ranked
number four a total of a.
Almost ninety four hundred cars
were stolen in not twenty
nineteen and twenty twenty one
that number rose to over ten
thousand Albuquerque alone over
sixty five hundred deaths in
twenty twenty one so this tells
you how about this issue is.
The bottom
People from the outside areas
are free to drive in to help her
because I know probably five
people that have had their car
still in the last five years
from under the New Mexico so
that.
The crazy thank you madam chair
all have the software expert.
Yep you madam chair members of
the committee as as
representatives explained the
deal today is simply to to
better target the offenders the
auto defenders that we are are
going after they have the
repeated history and multiple
prior convictions this is not
targeting or which increasing
the penalties for first time
offenders or even for second
time offenders necessarily you
do what it does is when the when
the Legislature ricotta fight
the auto theft offences back in
two thousand nine I believe was
it as a representative Gallego
explained it did create four
different ways an individual
could be convicted of of of
stolen vehicle offense and in
that regard occasion the
legislature said that if anyone
comes back on the subsequent of
fits for one of those four we
can use the prior to enhance the
exposure to the potential jail
time that a subsequent offender
is is exposed to.
That's been the the statute on
the books for at least the last
fourteen years if I'm not
mistaken what what didn't happen
however is does those
convictions were interchangeable
among the four so for instance
and we see this fairly
frequently with individuals that
have been convicted of one or
more of those types of auto
theft offenses in the past will
come back on when they have not
been convicted of and we have to
treat that one as a first
offense rather than looking at
the fact that this individual
may have been caught with stolen
cars three four even a dozen
times before and had those
convictions we have to treat and
but if if if they happen to be
caught in case we can prove the
state and have to prove the
store not just in possession of
a stolen vehicle the Max penalty
we can get in such a situation
would be just the eighteen month
fourth degree felony for a first
offense so all we're asking the
legislature to do is simply
allow us to use the prior
convictions for any of the four
types of auto theft
interchangeably when I come back
on subsequent offenses for new
auto theft charges and with that
inflation would stand for
questions.
will go to the audience is
in support.
What I see in support.
Okay anyone in opposition.
You like to come up to the
microphone and speaker.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is been a
power in the the chief public
defender and knowing that there
is a serious problem with auto
theft and I understand that
that's what the sponsors in the
the experts are trying to
address I think what's been
missed here is that there is a
sense to enhance people on
second third fourth conditions
for these and that is the
official thunder and hence mints
which applies to any felony so
anybody with one prior felony
conviction for either these or
any other felony on a second
felony charge would face at
least one year mandatory a
second five of a second if if
you have two priors for NPS
requires eight years mandatory
time which can be tacked on and
I think that's of eighty
sufficient of a penalty that
you've deterrence works that
mandatory time for priors he
sufficient deterrence we just
passed Topshop legislation last
year so I I would argue to the
committee that these
enhancements are getting kind of
confuse and muddy at the statute
structure it is unnecessary
thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Daniel Williams
policy advocate at the American
civil liberties union of New
Mexico we share the concerns
that you just heard from the
public defender and we would
also just remind the committee
as we have the for that research
is quite clear that
incarcerating people for longer
is not effective as a deterrent
and in fact.
Increasing prison time makes it
harder for people to re enter
society off as a crime objective
fact and so we do not believe as
you just heard from that to
public defender that that the
need for more enhanced penalties
is there are we believe that
there sufficient house they are
and we part are just never it
never in support as you know of
further in the cycle of
incarceration in the state thank
you.
Anyone else.
Thirty one opposition yeah.
One.
I had the chance the.
Yes can everybody hear me yes
yeah.
Yes I'm act I was actually in us
for I was not in opposition so I
I just don't think I raise my
hand in time.
But I I agree with with the
sponsors and the the witnesses
of these expert witnesses it's
really absurd that we have this
this crime I I knew that we were
high nation but I don't realize
that we were number one so
anything that we can to to
avert.
With this kind of
crime I think will be a step
forward and in the right
direction for New Mexico thank
you.
Okay anything else you'd like to
add before we go to the
committee.
Madam chair and representatives
I just wanted to add a personal
story I have a brother who owns
a dealership not in Albuquerque
but in Espanola and just last
week of one of his you showing a
car to someone and he turned the
ignition on and he went to get
the guy so he could go on a test
drive well the next thing he
knew his the automobile was gone
and somebody had to come in they
were watching on and they took
it they took it up into the tree
to my own churches into the
canyon and they dropped it into
the canyon and just left it
there to it is destroyed and it
was a brand new Toyota Tacoma
up last year a similar thing
happened to him there was
another vehicle that was stolen
from right off of his lot and
and I bring this up because I'm
at you know what you most of you
who know me know that I'm I
represent Bernalillo county but
I also have family that lives up
north last year another vehicle
stolen from his lot right off of
this lot and this is a regular
occurrence not just on his in
his area particular business but
throughout New Mexico they took
the vehicle to Los Alamos in the
burned it
so I just you know I'm not I'm
not certain that
You know and I understand the
reasoning of not wanting to.
You know penalties but if people
are not understanding that it's
not okay to go in and just take
things without paying for them
and you know I don't know how we
change that behavior other than
imposing stricter laws I mean if
we're going to look at other
programs and I I support that as
well but I think that we also
need to to look at our penalties
maybe I'll.
Thank you.
Thank you
At the rate.
Representative Romero.
Thank you Representative bring
this for
I'm you know just trying to wrap
my head around we had thankfully
the past learned a lot about
that to try to figure out how
to.
Thanks that and we do have a
bill in twenty nineteen or
Topshop bills and so maybe we're
in a different place now but my
understanding then in twenty
nineteen we pass that bill
please because part that then in
the data that we were seeing was
that it was the reason people
are stealing cars is mostly
property propagated by the fact
that they could resell it
before.
Madam chair representative I'm
just wondering based on the data
that we're seeing today is that
legislation working in
preventing heart that happening.
Madam chair representative
Romero these are the statistics
and they're going up.
So I'm I'm concerned that that.
Well it was in that intent it's
still not working and I will
also mention to you madam chair
as early as last year and
Representative Romero I also
said on the flood control board
in Albuquerque and it we found
vehicles in the Ryo's on a
constant basis and we worked
with APD constantly so I'm
concerned and I'm not I'm not an
expert on you know and I can't
say yes that that's working or
know that it's working but our
numbers are not showing it.
Madam chair representative you
got to see some of our analysis
regarding
Who this bill would affect and
basically with the tiered system
that you're proposing rather
than allowing the judge to
impose the penalties on what's
current law right the
convictions being eligible for
enhancement basically with act
nine people in our state Madam
chair representative was did you
I don't know if you got to see
that based on the enhancement.
In the sense of the commission's
analysis.
Madam chair and Representative
Romero where are you reading
from one page to the FY are
talks about he was arrested on
in twenty seventeen to twenty
two.
for as long for alright that's.
And so based on the conviction
rate this and looking at the
individuals who would have a
second third or fourth degree
property fell in the it would be
around nine people who would be
enhanced with these charges
Madam chair representative do
you feel like we need this walk
ring we are ready to allow the
enhancements to be needs based
on those who re offend Madam
chair representative
Representative Romero I will let
my experts respond to that.
Madam chair representative
Romero I I I don't have the
benefit of the numbers that the
since the commission looking at
all I can speak of from my own
knowledge is these anecdotal and
and I I.
I question the numbers that
represent only nine people would
be affected by this change only
because that would mean at least
eight of them of landed on my
desk in the last in the last
year or so because the the this
change to this structure is is
as I mentioned earlier is what
is already on the books for each
of these four offenses
individually each of these
foreign to each of these for
instance the fences individually
is impassable
up by prosecutors with prior
convictions for any one of them
all we're simply asking for is
is really at pointing out that
there is no reason will
distinction between these
offenses they're all involved
with the defendant found in
possession of a stolen vehicle
how about what manner they came
into possession of it doesn't
seem to be the the key component
as is as is the overall arching
pointed they're in possession of
stolen vehicles and on the basis
of the individuals targeted by
this legislation they're in
possession of stolen vehicles
repeatedly
and that's simply simply what
this bill is trying to to clean
up is is this seeming
contradiction actually in the in
the codification from on line
that for some reason seems to
silo these four separate
offenses as as being it's so
exclusive that they can be used
to point to somebody who is an
auto theft problem for their
respective communities and and I
apologize since I'm since I've
got the Mike I can speak to your
Representative your question
about the the chop shop building
in you do properly or accurately
recall that that bill was
floating around here back in in
nineteen
it's floated around here for a
few years until last year we've
we were able finally able to get
it passed and enacted
I don't know we haven't had it
in affected not yet there are at
least one or two prosecutions on
going under that new.
statute of one at least one in
our office that we're
prosecuting somebody under that
new chop shop Bill so it's it's
too early for us to point to any
numbers to say that it's having
an effect but that bill was
amended Tiley different class of
offender and type of offense
then then we're talking now our
office with the the the auto
theft prevention authority is
obviously trying to take a
pretty holistic view of the auto
theft problem that we have in
New Mexico and is and is
Representative Sweetser pointed
out is is pronounced across the
state especially so in
Albuquerque but it's it's gotten
worse everywhere all over the
last few years and we're trying
to take an approach that
addresses all the different
issues not just the chop shops
and not just the people that are
stealing vehicles parked about
but also the people that are
stealing vehicles just for for
pleasure or for a temporary
transportation or for whatever
reason but are doing so on a
frequent and repeated basis.
Thank you madam thank you
Representative.
Representative madam chair I'm
sorry in the Representative.
I guess nobody knows is this is
going to help but it's a what
else is being proposed to look
at this issue it's our if
somebody has better legislation
out there pushing our please let
me know so I could stand and
support obviously what's in the
the box right now isn't working
this cart this that's pretty bad
when people from northern New
Mexico to want to drive topic
you because they are free to get
their cars stolen like I
mentioned I I personally lost
five people in the last few
years and okay are maybe this
isn't perfect but it's an
attempt to do something on our.
What what's the what's going to
keep people from our keeping
stealing cars are a catalytic
converters doing I mean that's a
it's crazy
it's almost like a.
People are are standing back in
They were brought up in the
wrong situation are.
You know what I grew up in
Espanol I was around drugs are
not fortune the ABS at a father
that I jobs raise the kids my
mom stayed home with us I'm
lucky I had good parents I have
cousins that we're fortunate the
they were raised by their
grandparents we hear the story
over and over about a.
I guess at what point are we
gonna hold these people
accountable and do it I mean
it's our it's just disturbing
it's not just with a cart this
it's just a crime and the issues
were seen in our our state in
the country so
if someone knows a legislation
that's going to it just tarts
are getting something better
please let me know so I can go
stand in support but a this is
an attempt to address this issue
in our move us in the right
direction thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
The group has been alone very
sympathetic to this issue my
brother works directly in part
that we talk about it all the
time as to why this is being
done why
we have this these numbers that
we're looking at every single
day and have routed I'm you know
very sympathetic to how it is
that we I'm factor us these
issues and I and my reticence to
doing something like this is
just that we just passed a
historic building twenty three
two that we discussed for years
prior to being do that and
you're looking at the root
causes of why this is happening
and what we're trying to sort of
uniformly look at sentencing and
how it affects those who are
committing these crimes
unfortunately we too and I hope
that we will have some time to
look at the analysis for the
Sanchez but it it doesn't get to
the point of how we make sure
this doesn't happen again and
fortunately cost taxpayers more
to to see these repeat repeated
crimes
it doesn't address the root
causes and so money.
Suggestions first how can we
look at the data and figure out
what to do a look at things like
the Topshop bill that addresses
what we were seeing with the
data and and hitting the the
problem head on and seeing the
results of I look forward to
seeing better results from that
and and what we can do to fix
this issue thank you madam
chair.
Thank you for.
Thank you.
Chair representative I
appreciate this because I also
have really can.
Use it huge issue and I just
look at a distance of conscience
because we're trying to curtail
the problem I mean at some very
senior time you open the paper
special like you fall trucks I
tell all my friends honestly the
coming through do not stand
occur again but we have to tell
people please don't stand out
perky because you're gonna come
out in your U. haul in trailers
to be stolen and everything else
I don't want to be known for
that in my district so I
appreciate the support of police
thank you.
Thank you Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives and experts so
you know we heard today one of
the people who was against your
bills that.
They can use the visual offender
statute.
To do this do we have any
statistics on how often that
statute is used in these kinds
of cases madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
block I don't at this point I'm
sure we could get that
information for you but I I
didn't anticipate that question.
Madam chair representative like
I I try to don't have that get
specific information but I would
like to clarify one thing about
the use of the individual fender
Act is first of all any of those
priors that we would use under
the eventual thunder Act would
have to have occurred within the
last ten years
some of these folks that we're
talking about is the serial auto
thieves have been added for far
longer than that and because
because they've aged out
basically those priors would be
usable as visuals I it's also
very common for these
individuals to have multiple
cases that are all picked up in
a short period of time and
therefore resolved all of once
in a consolidated plea and in
those situations even though
there may be multiple auto theft
offenses that are encompassed in
that that resolution they would
only count as one conviction
under the eventual offender
enhancement the the additional
thing for the consideration if
for for the committee's
consideration I think it's also
with visual offender enhancement
the time that would be added
under that we use mandatory time
I it is not discretionary in the
judges with with some very
limited exceptions the judge has
to impose that time in the in.
Incarceration either in
penitentiary or Orange County
jail depending on how much time
is left.
With the increased penalties the
increased exposure we're talking
about in in spending on to this
bill none of that time is
mandatory so even more start
talking about second second
degree felonies there is no
obligation on the court to
impose any of it let alone all
of it what it does however give
easy gives the courts and the
system additional time to sort
of keep an eye on a particular
defendant because that time
could be suspended and put on
probation for five years
on a on a second degree fence
which they cannot be on a fourth
degree offense that the most
they could do is get the the
year and a half of probation and
they're back on the street so if
nothing else it gives it gives
the system more time to keep
these folks sort of closer to
the vast and and make sure we're
getting the services they need
any treatment they need any
counseling they need and also
hoping that the the threat of of
greater trouble and and long
term incarceration at that point
is enough to keep them from
offending further and so that I
think that's the a big
distinction the committee should
be aware of with regard to the
eventual for Vigil offender
Hanson's versus the the kind of
penalties and in that self
answers were talking about just
specific to these particular
offenses thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and you
know I agree with you I think
that.
Given that the harsher penalty
for stealing five or six cars
there probably will be a lesser
incentive to go around and
stealing are sending.
To me it sounds like common
sense some people probably gonna
go I don't know why.
Sometimes I wonder what bills
are sent to this committee at
all since you know.
It seems like we're not really
really serious about prime I am
and I really think this is an
important bill.
I have a cousin the it is course
going twice Albuquerque and it
was the but the the one month
is currently still in place and
the I'm sick of seeing our state
at the top of the headlines with
all these drug problems with
problems getting police officers
to come to New Mexico we have
problems with people stealing
cars we people probably yes and
I I wish the legislature would
actually act instead of the lip
service to this issue so thank
you I personally.
Thank you Representative
Townsend thank you madam chair I
just wanted to clarify times
what what the FY our state is
the sentencing commission
reports a hundred and eighty
nine people were arrested for
two or more of the different
specify charges over the six
year period from FY seventeen to
twenty two an average of thirty
two arrests per year using an
estimated conviction rate of
twenty seven percent this
analysis projects nine
individuals may be impacted by
the changes proposed to H. B.
four ninety one and then it also
says this bill effectively.
Increases sentences for acts
that are already criminalized
analysis does not include
potential benefits of crime
deterrence due to increased
punishment because research
shows sentence length has little
to no to terror the fact
certainty of being caught is a
significantly more effective
deterrent to criminal behavior
then the severity of the press.
If convicted thank you madam
chair.
You're just on that note
As we have certain and severe is
something that is more effective
than just raising the penalties
and if you have.
Property prioritized solving the
crimes in securing convictions
especially for the serious
offenses would be much more
impactful and to the safety and.
Henchman has got less certain
this crime has increased so I
think we already have the severe
we already have the enhanced
penalties and
I don't think this will make a
difference that if we can get
debtors with certainty your
Forsman yeah probably would.
And also
This is my son has a part lot
must creases and instills tracks
and he's only had one vehicle
stability thirty years between
his dad and he having that just
because they have hi six foot
chain link fence around a whole
lot so I think security makes a
big difference to.
So with that is that it was the
will of the committee.
Thank you.
Substitute motion to table thank
you tabling motion supersede so
we'll take a motion in the
seconded by Representative
Rubio.
But.
This tax.
Representative Thomson the the
motion the.
Representative walk.
Absolutely not no to table
Representative Lord second at
the table.
Representative Romero.
Yes to table.
Representative Thomson yes by
your Rubio yes to table.
Chair Ferrari yes chair of the
going to the table Hey your bill
has been tabled of the forty
two.
Yes we have.
Hello
we are we were asked to roll
House Bill five fourteen K..
and next will be House Bill five
oh nine pre trial detention pre.
Representative thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee House Bill five oh
nine deals with our pre trial
detention or lack there of.
What I did is I ask John Warner
use my experts.
Channel introducing then a
moment is
An attorney to look at all the
court decisions and then to go
ahead and draft a bill to go
ahead and clarify how we need to
detain individuals
while I would lands just Mr
Warner to describe his work
history so that you have an idea
of who he is.
I'd go with new folks hear me.
I'm used to not working with
Mike ma'am typically larger than
this that I would.
I worked as a prosecutor in San
Bernadino county for three years
then I moved to the California
attorney general's office and
prosecuted statewide for thirty
four after that I spent ten
years consulting on intelligence
issues and the law.
And.
That's about it.
I'm really up Mr corner to go
ahead and go through
How he looked at these loss and
how we determined this bill
Fetzer and then Google it then
finally go with.
Comment on the FIR.
Thank you Sir madam chair
members of the committee I'd
like to begin when we have
handouts you should have
handcuffs.
I'll let I'll let the gentleman
distribute.
Okay we have your hand out like
to go ahead thank you madam
chair
I believe the proper place to
begin.
Is to be sure that we are clear
about what a read article
presumption is.
The rebuttable presumption is
the backbone heart and soul of
the help of the United States
criminal justice system it's
called the presumption of
innocence.
And the procedures that I'm
going to.
Talk with you a little bit about
today all flow.
From making that presumption of
innocence work the goal of the
presumption this this provide
due process to two groups of
people the victims of crime and
the people cues.
So in the course of looking at
how the present medicines
works I provided you with in New
Mexico.
Instruction on the presumption.
This you will notice in the
second paragraph.
It says that the presumption
never moved never moves from the
time that an accusation is file
until the time that the Trier of
fact gets the case for
disposition.
That is true as well of the
constitutional provision of
about clear and convincing
evidence the constitutional
provision on clear and
convincing evidence will not
move.
When we get to the burden
shifting provisions that we have
in the bill you should
understand that it will not move
in any criminal trial.
The prosecution is burdened with
proof beyond a reasonable doubt
you've seen what reasonable
doubt is in New Mexico and it's
pretty much the same all over
the world are all over the
country and it's not.
Beyond all doubt.
It's.
Possible.
Reasonable possible reasonable
doubt not all possible.
So the prosecution has the
burden of going forward.
Yes ma'am your background on all
this but if you keep it directed
to what the bill's going to do
with respect Madam chair on
trying to set the structure and
so that.
some of the things that are
suggested in the FIR can be
elaborated on when I get there
we have about half an hour for
the whole deal I'm not going to
take that much almost done with
the of the.
You bet.
so at a point in time the
prosecution prove.
Provides the prime aphasia case.
At that point the burden of
coming forward with evidence not
the burden of proof the burden
of coming forward with evidence
that all criminal trials shifts
to the accused educators has an
option.
The accused may choose to remain
silent and challenge in final
argument the prosecution's case.
Or the accused may present.
Case in rebuttal to the
prosecution.
At the conclusion of that time.
Parties argue case goes to the
Trier of fact.
No.
With regard to this bill.
And members of the committee
you'll know.
That what happens in subsection
be found on page two.
Get assumes that probable cause
has already been established
under New Mexico's provisions
regarding detention.
Probable cause is established by
magistrate metropolitan or
district court and the
prosecution of course has the
option.
Open meetings the preliminary
hearing and the detention
hearing.
Probably because you all know.
Mains that there has been.
Proof for a judicial body.
That a crime was committed.
And there has been proof.
Google because proof not.
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt
that the accused was involved in
or committed a crime.
So with that in mind we come to
subsection B. which it does
describe.
What is required for the
prosecution to prove going
forward.
And subsection C. provides that
yes after the introduction of
the materials.
And the.
Presentation of those to the
judge if there is a prime a
state issue showing.
Then the burden of coming
forward with evidence to rebut
that prime aphasia showing.
Would fall on the.
The queues.
Who is fighting detention.
The same.
Ma'am.
As it would in any other
criminal proceedings.
At the conclusion assuming that
the potential detained eight
chooses to.
Present.
rebuttal information can I use
the information ma'am because
as the summary on the door as
basis the administrative office
of courts summary.
The second document I believe
that you received.
First establish that information
not just.
The type of evidence that would
come in under strict evidence
code application to
appreciating.
Broad scale information.
If after that presentation.
The parties have argued it is
submitted at that point in time.
To the body making the decision
with regard to the detention.
And that court for that judge.
We'll take a look at what both
parties have presented.
And determined using the
constitutional standards.
Whether that standard has been
met.
The.
Dangerous felonies.
Are listed in subsection F..
The rebuttable presumption is
that the showing of one of those
crimes.
And.
The circumstances of one of
those for more crimes.
And the reasonable inferences
that may be drawn from those
showing.
Would allow a court.
To determine.
Whether.
The defendant is a danger to
others and whether release
conditions
will quote reasonably protect.
I thank yous about the.
Appropriate amount of discussion
of the bill itself I only want
to make two other comments
before I turn to the FIR.
You will notice that in the FIR.
The only case
that I saw that was relevant to
the various situations that have
dealt with this was Mascarita.
And I will comment a little bit
further.
When I get to it on mastering.
Sir I can.
Are going to have to limit the
and input from the comments in
the audience if you could tell
us more about what the bill is
doing that's what the bill does
then the bill simply does this
it allows the prosecution.
After probable cause has been
shown.
In a detention hearing to show
from the totality of all of the
conduct involved in the criminal
acts that are listed and and.
To then have a privacy issue
showing at that point ma'am the
burden of right by us.
The privacy issue showing the
prosecution is made.
Moves to the defense for the
detainee.
He or she has a choice to not
present for to present if they
present they go through a
typical contested hearing the
facts are then submitted to the
judge and the judge concludes
whether the prosecution or the
detainees Attorney has persuaded
him that the burden for
detention is that where is not.
Okay.
Madam chair this is as you can
tell a very technical legal
arguments I would appreciate it
if you could move this to the
judiciary which is snacks even
on a no racked because it's
going to be attorney to attorney
talking about all this case law
that we've provided to you.
Sorry
Representative we are fully
capable of that.
What you're doing.
If if there is.
So would you like to conclude.
Yes Madam chair.
Chair yeah I ask the expert
witnesses name again John
GORDNER spelled G. O. R. D. E.
N. I. E. R..
Madam chair I apologize.
Thank you.
Okay in the audience is there
anyone in support of this bill.
Thank you like to come up and.
Is the might.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Melissa and
on this and I am the president
of the northern New Mexico
chapter for the crusaders for
justice and also the voice for
my nephew Joshua Vigil who was
murdered at the young age of
seventeen.
I support this bill and I
apologize for reading off my
phone but I just feel like
everything I need to say is
super important at this time
there is not enough staff to
monitor those that are accused
of committing a crime such as
second degree murder.
To ensure that the address in
which they're wanting to have
their conditions of release.
Actually approved and verified I
can tell you right now that I
would hope that there was more
staff to do that because then
that would mean that my brother
would be living a hundred yards
from where his sons of accused
murderer is currently on house
arrest with that being said
whether the Arnold pool is
ineffective because it's not
being used for its intended
purpose.
As a tool right now there's
people that are committing
crimes and it's their first
encounter with law enforcement
but it's serious crimes first
degree murder second degree
murder and so on but yet they're
still released out on to the
streets with ankle monitoring
where we know there's not enough
staff to ensure that they are
where they're supposed to be and
then in addition to that it
takes almost an act of Congress
for prosecutors to then have to
file another motion to be able
to actually find out where those
accused criminals are located to
ensure that our public is the so
thank you.
I forgot to remind people one
minute please if you join.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
struggle for men this time
special counsel to the Attorney
General we've raised in many
circumstances that the need for
Change to our pre trial
detention approaching New Mexico
off and we see individuals at
least it previously I was a with
the district attorney's office
and from the cutting we saw
individuals are often come back
when we had moved to detain them
and and commission of the crime
we saw those individuals come
back but one in five
but twenty percent of the time
individuals that would order to
detain and we're really sticking
back and committed another
offence it's clear that we need
to make changes we appreciate
the Representative and then the
co sponsors who brought this
forward I stand in support of G.
of improvements to the pre trial
detention system thank you.
Thank you anyone else in support
okay anyone else in your okay
have any three.
Alright.
One.
Excuse me.
It
sorry about that.
Madam chair members the
committee this is JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce every day in New Mexico
as we know find.
Serious crime to often face no
immediate consequences in
Albuquerque prosecutors moved to
detain defendants and only
sixteen percent assessed on the
basis and yet even among those
most serious cases judges
replace half of pre trial our
justice system is turning
criminals right back onto our
streets a quarter of the time
trial could easily be a year and
a half away the policy of pre
trial release is creating
victims daily this is not a
system that is working and it is
the responsibility of the
legislature to fix this that
starts with depreciating the
gravity of charges filed against
a person and if it's a serious
violent crime presuming that the
person is dangerous enough not
to be released thank you.
Thank you next.
Well.
Additional funding please.
Go ahead.
She's not a new during.
Discuss these.
Yeah.
Yourself please.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can't give one minute.
Believe Mr Terrel and I'm a
victims advocate for victims of
homicide I actually work with
over three hundred thank you
families and I am for the pre
trial release we have noticed
that a lot of these offenders
are cutting off.
Your ankle monitors and my son
was also murdered and.
He was let out a pre trial
release and he has now been
arrested again for committing
another homicide
We need to stop giving offenders
more right at the victim's
expense and so I'm all for this
thank you very much.
Thank you seven.
Okay and those in opposition.
Please come to the Mike.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is been
about I'm the chief public
defender and
very briefly there's been a lot
of session about rebuttable
presumptions over the last
couple years I would direct your
attention to research that's
probably cited in fiscal impact
report from UNM center for
applied research analysis they
did a very in depth study of
several thousand cases they've
been that that have been filed
and the outcomes of those cases
what they found was that the
rebuttal presumption if it had
been enacted would have led to
an additional eight hundred to
almost two thousand additional
people being held is Mr Clinton
state before when you talk about
cases taking almost a year and a
half sometimes you go to trial
that's a lot of people spending
a lot of time in understaffed
and dangerous jails many of whom
are never convicted of the
crimes of which they are accused
other bottle resumption we
believe is not an effective way
to address the crime problem in
Albuquerque or anywhere else in
the state we simply need to fund
properly the public defender's
office and if necessary to the
DA's office so that they can
file charges and follow through
on the thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Daniel
Williams of a policy advocate at
the state of New Mexico we also
oppose this bill we share we
share the same concerns as you
just heard the chief public
defender we have concerns about
the constitutionality of the
bill and we also worry about its
effectiveness and necessity
frankly as you just heard only a
small percentage of defendants
were released pre trial are
accused of committing a new
violent offense and while there
are many causes of the upward
crime rates and our communities
here in New Mexico and
nationwide the evidence simply
does not suggest the pre trial
release is one of the
them expanding support of
services to individuals for
current legal system involved
would likely have a much greater
impact on rates of reoffending
the detention what so for those
reasons we oppose this bill
thank you.
Anyone else in opposition is
there anyone opposition on do
you have any to okay.
I'm.
Thank you Karen committee and I
in the past and I propose eighty
five line I believe that the
legislation is not only
unconstitutional but that it
does a great risk of harm to
some defendants who may fall
under.
Thank you a woman named track
the matter further the likely
scenario working right perhaps
early buyer after the one is
able to get over the line this
tax that afternoon dot Houston
shock she curled up in a corner
and that's where the we can find
out of the next day we need a
lawyer to fill in shock
traumatized and then the program
across the project with our
traffic control
seeking anyone doesn't trust
anybody general family for her
local address the product
prosecutors you can easily win
their case for pre trial pre
trial detention jail one this
could happen but is that what we
want.
Thank you.
Representative.
Thank you madam.
Go ahead Sir.
Thank you chair and
Representative my name's
Jonathan Ibarra.
The system public defender and
also the vice president of the
New Mexico criminal defense
lawyers association I just
wanted to point out two things
one
even in the light most favorable
to the state one out of every
three people who the state files
for detention on are not
convicted of a crime I I think
it's problematic to be holding
more critical in custody when
there are conducting the people
they try to help infants in the
first place second in the bill
doesn't do with the with the
authors and other experts as it
does
the it doesn't actually say
anything about having to do
presentation and it's they just
have to present all relevant
evidence if there isn't any
relevant evidence that's all the
relevant evidence there is and
there would still be
Find that there's a rebuttable
presumption that they've have
clear and convincing evidence
according to the way the bill is
right so the bill doesn't do
what it proposes to do it and it
it just fails it
constitutionally practically and
so we have to table thank you
thank you.
Okay Representative Thomson.
Which thank you madam chair I'm
just reading the FIR and under
significant issues it's
constitutional concerns analysis
from the Office of the Attorney
General a we PDD and the
sentencing commission raised
concerns the creation of a
rebuttable prompt presumption
against pre trial when the state
could violate article two
section three of the New Mexico
state constitution which
requires a prosecutor to prove
quote by clear and convincing
evidence that no release
conditions were reasonably
protect the safety of any other
person in the community and hope
under the New Mexico
constitution the state bears the
burden of persuading a court
that a particular defendant is
in fact dangerous and that no
conditions of release would
protect the community from the
risk they present should HB five
or ninety enacted litigation is
affect we guarantee madam chair
and representative Thompson I
would note that the AG was here
in support and all have Mister
four years respond specifically
madam chairman representative
Thompson that's K. I take
coordinated in the week.
What you have here is there is
no tax.
On the constitutional provision
just to clear and convincing but
if you read the gross K. and
compare what justice the late
justice Daniels had to say about
how you have to understand that
the commission of the crime and
the facts of the commission of
the crime are intertwined with
the question of whether and.
There is I can give you a quote
but I understand we have a time
problem.
Justice Daniels basically said.
No.
Recommendation.
Isn't the test the test is
reasonable conditions and if you
read the gross K. not be happy
to give the citation ma'am I
think you'll find that the issue
is that.
What has happened in many cases
is that the issue of
dangerousness and the issue of
whether there are reasonable
release conditions have been
silos justice Daniel says in the
gross decision that is not true
and if you read the last part of
the Mascarene of decision the
court goes out of its way to say
totality of the evidence and a
case by case way of the facts so
I would submit to you ma'am that
that is a concern but where I
come from an Attorney General
have loves litigation and I
still like it to I I I'm not
trying to be flip ma'am I'm just
trying to point out.
That you are going to have
litigation over any remedy that
you come up with to make the.
Related.
Bill work the amendment works
the way it was supposed to and I
will I will close my comment to
you ma'am.
Madam chair and then.
Since there's legislature has
been unchecked.
There have been two events that
involved one of which occurred
just last Friday.
An individual who was out.
On a murder charge.
Cut off his ankle February
seventh and then last Friday
they finally found.
That settlement.
I understand how a lot of people
here have said Gee it's really
bad that some people.
Might be detained who are not to
be I I don't know about that I
would probably disputed but.
I don't have the stats but I
think you need to think about
the victims of the people who
don't follow the rules of their
detention like the gentleman.
Who was captured last week this
is not just about the person
who's going to be detained.
As I told you the beginning of
my remarks there to communities
on either side of this
rebuttable presumption.
The victims.
And the people who are accused.
And I think we can do a better
job.
Protecting the victim community.
Madam chair and Representative I
think I'm gonna go with the
opinion from the Attorney
General AOC PDD at the
sentencing commission and I also
will ask you Representative Rehm
is your expert witness staff.
Yes she is.
Thank you.
Sorry.
Representative Lord.
And chair and representative
thank you again for bringing a
plethora of bills to try to fix
the crime issues.
In New Mexico
I just want to make sure I
understand this that we went to
many current long pre trial
detention by creating a
presumption that the defendant
is too dangerous to be released
is that what this bill is about
chair representative.
Madam chair Representative Lord
yes.
Okay I don't have any other
questions and pretty much just
on that madam chair and
representative and of course is
going to be losses are lawsuits
but everything every bill we
pass somebody somewhere
somewhere want to take something
to the court to make a case
about it so as you said earlier
I'm looking here and with things
I appreciate on here very much
is that managers and we have
criminal sexual contact of a
minor.
Because we all know that there's
no cure for pedophile and
they're going to go out and do
it again there recidivism
recidivism rate is through the
roof so I truly appreciate you
hear this over and over again
doing anything to keep kind of
files behind bars because they
have no business running around
the street so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
What is the will of the
committee chair
to move to table I also.
Isn't it.
The single.
Representative law no to table
and I'd like to.
Representative Lord.
The table like to explain
without.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
I chair Rubio's yes the table
chair Ferrari at yes to table
madam chair you will go to forty
to the table.
Has a forty two.
Senator House Bill five.
And to explain your vote
Representative locked.
Thank you madam chair
representative I feel sick to my
stomach that really not had also
in that time thanks.
Thank you madam chair thank you
read reviews forward I
appreciate your constant
approach to trying to fix our
crime system I just want to
repeat something that one of the
victims.
I would rebuild they said stop
giving vendors.
Right at the victim's expense
and I think that's something we
need to take a hard this
committee and restaurants thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you for your
kind attention.
Next we have.
House Bill three twenty off I we
motor vehicle definition.
Receptive to questions and
sanctions thank you.
Members of.
It seems like a great time
looking.
You madam chair members of the
committee.
They're bringing house bill
three twenty.
Relating to the offering more
vehicle amending sections sixty
three dash three dash one
hundred it was a nineteen
seventy eight amending the
definition madam chair today
what with the madam chair I have
my expert witness.
Your J. R. Burke state
government affairs and director
for Polaris the bill makes four
changes to the definition in the
off road vehicle at.
I let my expert witness XP the
changes and why they are needed
madam chair members of the
committee.
Mexico.
Madam chair members my name is
Jerry Burke I'm the director
state government affairs for
Polaris
for those of you who aren't
familiar with last years as a
global leader in off highway
vehicles and power sports more
generally we have over twenty
dealers that are all
independently owned that retail
the products that are subject to
the legislation across New
Mexico.
as the sponsor mentioned the
builders for things first under
the under section one the ATV
definition it would change the
definition for tire to from low
pressure to non highway tire
that is consistent with the
existing definition for
recreation off I would be able
to you also see elsewhere in
section one and frankly is is
more systematic of the types of
technology that is available on
today's market for the tires
that are using off highway
vehicles.
The second thing that it does is
it changes the cat the category
of weight from gross vehicle
weight which includes things
like passengers the product we
itself the flu is an X. X.
cetera which are there to all
very in depending on
circumstances to standardize
would only driveway on the
driveway is the type of weight
that is used almost universally
across the country and is
provided for on the manufacture
certificate of origin so when
someone goes into purchases this
product they have to show that
and manufactures W. towards into
title and register the vehicle
here so creates consistency
between what is provided for
proof of ownership and
alternately for registration.
The third thing that it does is
it it proposes of weight
threshold of three thousand five
hundred pounds of on let it dry
weight for these off highway
vehicles there's two rationales
behind that there is about a
year ago began the introduction
of electrification into off I
would be able market something
that we're very proud of and
certainly I think it's
consistent with the direction a
lot of seats are going as they
look at their economies and how
they can continue to be more
sensitive to the environment
ingresos gas emissions the
second piece of it is that as we
even sell outside this morning
there can sometimes be extremes
in weather and caps and other
enhancements to the cap system
are increasingly desired by
consumers so that they can use
their vehicle both under warm
conditions with a Traxxas Ms war
under cold conditions where they
have the heating systems.
The the final thing that the
bill would do is it would remove
the engine displacement
restriction.
The the engine is placed a
restriction as is found only in
Arkansas California New Mexico
so it's rarely used
As a standardized specification
for the registration of these
products and then quickly to the
customers that are purchasing
these products today.
Eight percent of them would tell
you that the primary reasons
that they recreation or each
fees here in New Mexico and
elsewhere is that they like to
provide leisure relax you could
venture spend time with their
family friends create memories
and pass on traditions I would
note that those same
characteristics are found in
nearly every type of October
recreation whether it's more
resin on motorized so I'd be
happy to answer any questions I
appreciate the time to visit
with you today.
Thank you.
Is there anything else you'd
like to add your okay we'll go
to the audience is there anyone
here in opposition.
When I was yeah anyone here in
support.
Okay anyone answer okay you have
a.
That
I should say
And Committee when I to ask
questions.
Okay is there any opposition R.
I have a motion.
Madam chair only would you pass
on house bill three twenty.
A second.
Any opposition for the past.
Okay we have in the past
Five two zero.
Madam chair members I have no
idea how hard it was for me to
vote yes on this bill.
Its intentions will help some.
Yes at the trails where they
already are
thank you thank you for that.
Sorry.
Okay sure.
Next year.
sure.
I can texture.
Yeah.
Representative cleaner.
Are you carrying seventy three
right.
Hey.
It is.
One of the.
Sure I didn't know if you heard
back she hasn't responded yet
okay Representative would you
like to go ahead with three oh
six.
Substitute.
Three of six purchase of higher
arms for another.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
I read before you the hostage
Republic's first Committee
substitute for House Bill three
of six I do not.
The substitute.
Madam chair I'd like to
introduce a committee substitute
or House Bill three oh six and I
will make a motion to the
discuss with the committee said
to do thank you second of.
Motion for discussion on the
substitute thank.
Representative Thomson yes I
did.
Representative.
Okay.
Twelve.
I.
Thank you here for.
House bill seventy for the pre
trial detention hearings
it is going to be rules so
people were waiting for that
sorry.
I did not see the tax for the
year.
So this will be our last two.
go ahead and
could you go ahead and explain
your thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
The committee substitute makes
changes to paragraph eight of
six and one.
It makes the class that the
class of persons of this bill
applies to is not overly broad
and intrusive redundant
provisions and basically what
this bill does now it's about
talk with people who are
knowingly aiding and abetting a
criminal and by doing that by
purchasing a firearm on behalf
of the person who should not
have a firearm who should not be
able to purchased one in a
regular manner that's why these
these other persons for purses
firearms for these individuals
the important part of the bill
madam chair and representatives
is if this person who is
purchasing this firearm is doing
so knowingly.
The person the person purchasing
it for cannot possess that
firearm.
Madam chair members of the
committee with that of madam
chair like for my expert witness
to introduce myself major major
any large with the New Mexico
state police thank you madam
chair without separate
questions.
Okay
And that included your whole
bill not to speak.
Yes well the committee says to.
Madam chair I move that we adopt
a committee substitute a second
okay is there any opposition to
Accepting the twenty seventeen.
Seeing none have.
We just proved.
Okay anyone in the audience in
opposition to this.
Anyone on zoom okay those in
support.
soon.
You okay go ahead.
Thank you.
Make you have one minute.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm relieved to
see I person action on gun
safety target criminals
structures number two way
criminals get access to firearms
after F. this is duplicative
federal statutes but the federal
government rarely enforces laws
and straw purchasers in two
thousand thirteen the ATF admit
to knowing four forty thousand
three hundred twenty one cases
involving straw purchases just
partner prosecuted forty four.
I have some concerns about this
law in light of other gun
control measures throughout this
year
hello may be overly.
From fund there's a balding
jurisprudence that indicates the
government may not profitability
I finally fell into their gun
rights so there might be an
opening for litigation against
the state because of that.
The other issue is that under
federal law this is a crime with
a ten year penalty and the
penalty under state law here be
significantly less thank you.
Thank you another TV movie.
Okay JD.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee this is JD speaking on
behalf of right around change of
commerce New Mexico's violent
crime problem should prompt our
legislature to do a range of
things to keep serious dangers
fenders from having the
opportunity to commit crimes
this should include of course
holding more of them in jail
prior to trial and if they're
out keeping firearms falling
into their hands and this will
help address the latter giving
prosecutors and police an
additional tool to stop those
who supply firearms those who
are destabilizing our streets
driving up our crime rate thank
you.
Is that for.
Okay.
all right is there anything else
you like that before we go to
the committee.
Madam I just wanted to to say
that this this bill would apply
to someone purchasing a reporter
with the sole intent of
transferring the form to fill in
or someone who's going to commit
a crime with a firearm and what
that Mr chair was our
professions.
Thank you.
Senator.
Thank you madam chair
representative started still
I've questioned Committee stop
purchases have been made in the
past year and.
Mr Representative I like to
defer to my experts with this
and this time we don't have any
any statistics on OnStar
purchases in the last year thank
you and tackle that ATF and
there is no data on the stock
purchases so I we don't really
have a starting point or
anything show if this is
significant or insignificant
chair representative are you
familiar with eighteen important
half I'm sorry four four seven
three was must be filled out
before you purchase any.
Chair representative like to
defer to my experts I'm.
Okay so I have a lot of
questions and talking law
enforcement bills all day so I
got quite a bit of questions
just bear with me so madam chair
representative form four four
seven three asset purchaser to
confirm that here she is the
actual transfer require the
farms of stated
you're not the actual buyer
point of fire from the person to
commit a crime so basically what
it is what it's saying and
there's you cannot.
Straw purchase a gun did you
know that that's already in the
important four four seven three
I wasn't I wasn't familiar with
the department sites are Madam
chair and
I wasn't familiar with the form
but we did know that it is a is
already federal law right yes
that's I was gonna pass it to
chair representative so eighteen
USC nine three two as
Representative federal stop
purchase
So I have a question about that
so one form four four seven
three.
It says chair representative
sorry are you an unlawful use of
marijuana.
So.
The ATF also came out.
They have a form letter that
says.
The street this summer right
here every person that uses
marijuana regardless whether his
or states passed legislation
authorization I want for even
medicinal prop on purposes
cannot I have done so with that.
What I'm looking at we just
legalize marijuana.
The pharmacist you cannot
purchase guns.
In our state.
Sorry and our state we have that
you can purchase again as a gift
you with universal background
checks to purchase again as a
get out with your immediate
family so when I'm looking at is
now.
We're going to add a New Mexico
crimes Authority federal they
can't do that.
Are you aware that because they
can't purchase a gun if I were
to let's say I done for my son
and he smokes where wanted to do
that that's no structure just so
you're aware that chair
representative Madam chair
representative
I'm trying to need to understand
what you're telling me that what
you're asking so what you're
asking is if I purchase a
firearm.
For my son.
It would what this what this be
part of that with this fall
within that scope with one of
the school yeah well chair
representative it's it's you
can't.
Purchase a gun based on
form four four seven three if
you smoke marijuana state legal
you cannot buy one so couple
things and thank you one.
A possibility to get this block
can you get it for me yes okay
your birthday that's a straw
purchase because that son if you
smoke marijuana even display
cannot have it.
So now that person is now going
to be charged with felony New
Mexico terms and so Madam chair
representative so this bill.
Proposes that a person who is
who would make a structures is
not only purchasing and for
well.
So if I do that fire for my son
and he or she if he has
Madam marijuana card he
technically isn't hello so I'm
not purchasing that gun for a
felony knowingly purchasing that
that for folks to chair
representative on the federal
level you can't do that so this
we're still doing strop purchase
so strap purchased cannot just
apply to fill in because drug
purchase on the federal level is
a multitude of reasons and one
of those is smoking cannabis.
Madam chair representative so.
This bill.
Understands that there that the
federal law is in place and is
there but.
We don't have anything in state
law that allows that that asked
about so this bill is asking for
up for prosecutors to be able
to.
Possibly persons in the state
what otherwise would be
prosecuted federally and I would
like to Madam chair
representative of defer to my
experts here to to my left
because what I do have you know
that is is since we're asking
these type of questions where
this type down this down this
road I would also like to.
Representative it's okay with
you at the sergeant give us a
mandatory evidence as to how
this applies and how this
happens.
Mentor.
Madam chair and the
representatives of the committee
so winded so this opportunity
because we have the federal stop
protesting this is separate from
that so it independent of what
the forms on the federal side
say for some the provisions
regarding marijuana usage they
they these are actually separate
issues so as we and and the New
Mexico state police or other law
enforcement agencies in New
Mexico I have very frequent
occasion to come across
legislation to perhaps maybe a
fireman to their seat but then
the passenger property
girlfriend or wife the same with
my gun or in a night stand that
we provide which is on the
nightstand of our felon and then
the the spouse or girlfriend or
whoever it is says that's my
firearm of those of those are
actually the that's what our our
officers are dealing with every
day as we as we continue to try
to keep ourselves safe enough in
a state that is fraught with gun
crime.
This is the provision allow
because not all straw purchase
what what regardless of what the
feds have we don't charge all
those don't look at all get
charge necessarily this would
give us the ability on some
charges that the was a disk
declines to charge for whatever
reasons that we would have that
to to move forward on and this
is not just anecdotal as as I
gave a couple of those stories
now we not so long ago twenty
twenty one lost in New Mexico
state police officer in the line
of duty and I was there I'm I'm
from Los crucis that's where I
live so I was on that I was on
that scene and able to are to be
at that scene and and seeing
that we basically had a strop
purchased firearm the that was
that was used to kill our
officer now that the Feds were
able to take that case but in
some other cases aren't so high
profile this will give us the
ability to to charge these
individuals who are knowingly
purchasing a firearm for failing
okay so madam chair
representative so what you're
saying is this one.
Does not coincide with federal
and it does not coincide with
the purchase of a gun with
eighteen four four seven three
which is felony convictions drug
conviction smoking marijuana
mental illness
institutionalization domestic
violence harassment stalking
are fugitives the little aliens
or dishonorable discharge
application submitted Madam
chair representative thank you
not see that no one of any of
these are the provisions listed
in this in this bill here.
Okay.
My question is not to continue
on with this because what I'm.
Several years ago I talked to
today what I was told is let's
see pull over somebody and they
have fireman there felt and they
are in possession of that so the
first thing you have to do
because you don't know this
properties or whatever intend
don't get me wrong I'm not phone
seven guns or stock options or
anything but I a lot of
questions.
Thank you guys have to go okay
we have this weapon we don't
know if it's stolen or how they
got a hold of it so then you
have to call the ATF for each
race since you guys don't have
the access to that and then at
that point the ATF checks the
check of the transfer and then
you guys start doing
investigation based on what the
ATF again you and then of the
Los Marshall officer Blazers
intent.
And that's when it becomes.
Yeah this is where I get
confused.
Thank you have knows about this.
They said oh yeah this is that
we see.
Percent AXP office they did not
buy it you're going to test you
again that you see this intent
so now how do you not give it to
the fence even though the ATF
knows about it thank you guys
handle it or do you handle it.
And tell that is that do they
want to I never have double
charges so how that's part of
the most confusing has this been
played out chair representative
Madam chair representative also
the Altice's we reach out to the
west chase office and they have
the the purview to take these
cases as we know with the
federal mandatory minimums they
obviously a bigger stick to it
these so to speak these
defendants are with and we do
and so if they turn down those
charges which would which can
happen at that point we really
don't have anything without this
law we have no ability we pretty
much instead the water because
the fed's decided for whatever
reason to to not charge this
this would allow us to then
charge on the state level and
and and push four and and those
regards.
What was just trying to figure
out I mean the feds have got a
pretty high record of with their
arrests so I don't I don't
understand why we just want to
stay with that that's one of the
questions right now the other
question I have is.
But this seems like it's just an
expansion of the universal
background check because what
you're saying now sees family
members can no longer purchase.
Knowingly the hard part becomes
I can tell you when we did
passed cannabis I got a huge
arguments with people that you
cannot buy a fire on the screen
people say we just don't put
that on there well it's your
money and that.
I have that on here as well if
you lie about that that is also
County so I would try to tell
people this whole time if you
smoke cannabis whether it is.
Medicinal Representative cannot
purchase a gun you cannot why
you cannot say that I don't
smoke.
Marijuana so what what was the
reason for not just putting it
into the universal background
check as an expansion on that
you absolutely cannot purchase
for your immediate family
because that seems what this is
falling under me we really have
the fed this just seems more
like an expansion of the
universe background check for
the family members and.
Madam chair representative
I understand the the description
to your tears your matching
about family but this is for
goes beyond passing as well as
for other individuals friends
acquaintances and other persons
and
The person who usually
interpreted from what I've seen
of what I've read and I do my
homework on this is a person who
usually does purchase those
farms for the for these
individuals
Much you purchase it with the
background check and this person
is pretty much besides
purchasing the gun or the
firearm I should say for this
individual pretty much a law
abiding citizen.
So the the nothing like this
will pop up so yep grandma goes
to buy a gun for her thank you
because he wants to defend
itself or whatever reason.
She goes into the gun shop she
selects a gun that he likes he
walks back out into the program
here's the money can you buy
this for me so grandma is not a
cannabis user Graham was the
kind of she's not the criminal
she doesn't have anything
background that would
Representative like it so this
is what the the these are the
types of situations that this
bill is trying to address is
those types of situations and
not necessarily people who were
cannabis users or or or live on
the forms which are which I know
about this when I when I
purchased my apartment tool that
for the fourth and so it.
The point is that that I would
like to emphasize Madam chair
representative is that this is
this this these to apply this is
gonna apply to of those persons
who knowingly once again
knowingly purchase firearms for
people who shouldn't have them.
And the reason these people are
purchasing for madam chair
representative it's because the
cat and we have a clean
background check and then
Senator Representative yeah I
totally understand that on that
point I just the marijuana thing
is the biggest thing to me
because I've just argue to
implement a face and also you
cannot be impaired and what is
impaired to have smoked
marijuana again so I'll leave
that alone but there's a big
problem I have with this white
white we want to go soft on
crime.
Because the feds have high
conviction really do and that's
ten years in prison with a to a
two thousand dollar fine and you
want to do a fourth degree
felony with only eighteen months
white white hi that is the one
thing that's really killing me
about this I want to be softer
crime and chair representative
Representative are you asking
just why is it a point to fund
as opposed to third or so what
we're going from the feds are
going to get in for higher
conviction and now we're I mean
because this is talk reality in
the real world is you know
mentors and they're gonna go and
they're going to need is going
to be this is going to be that
person to be maybe just
probation or whatever why why
are we going.
To this option that you guys
have and not make any equal to
the Feds I would I would have
easier time digesting this if it
was a quick one and every level
including the level of families
because we're putting it with
larceny.
Basically so so can you explain
to me why we didn't go.
For a grant to.
Madam chair representative so
this this is this is the
starting point this is bills
that that we.
Exploring and so here in in as a
as we were as we were to second
go back to grandma purchasing
that's not anecdotal either of
course we have the cure can be
stored in twenty twenty two
Michelle Pretorius who purchased
a firearm that was for her.
Manson was in use to kill her
brother I guess it was first
time to kill to kill his uncle
for her brother and in those
kind of cases to to see to to
purchase multiple firearms for
him as as we start to to go down
this road I wanted to touch back
on the the idea of the what
state does not take all the
cases referred we would love
them to but as an interdiction
case of you know ten pounds of
methamphetamine is going through
the the state is passed on to
another state was especially
some of the new estate USA
regulations and guidelines that
come charging guidelines that
they've given us is a lot more
restrictive if it's partially
because they're busy and they
they have a backlog as well and
so madam chair and
representatives with when we
start to look at these laws we
have to have something to fall
back on because the estate does
not take all of the cases that
we give them we refer cases to
the all the time with this
composition or otherwise and
they really want to to start
narrowing down a little bit SO
please give us something to to
go on New Adventures in again I.
This might cause heartburn is
that right there is that problem
my other thing I have is I love
my forcing officers and I'm
wondering where you guys going
to get more officers because of
all the sudden they're not we're
not be able to pass but their
numbers have the secretary work
how are you guys going to be
able to handle the extra work
when investigating talking to
people and all that stuff is
that it's politics at the chair
representative is obviously the
million dollar question right
now how we're going to get more
people certainly would like a
lot like this I just wanted to
break at this other point is we
are a very rural agency in my
mind to see in particular is all
over so we don't necessarily
have task force officers in
Lordsburg or in Clayton for
example so we would be able to
charge maybe if you're not occur
to us crucis you know other
other metropolitan areas it's
easier for you to get the Feds
to come over and and help you
with this A. T. F. or or others
but often times we are spread
out in the middle of nowhere and
so we have this case we call
occur can save you want to send
somebody over to most of the
state you know cities that some
of these bad agencies haven't
even heard of in New Mexico
which we know this is not
uncommon to go to Uniserve
Melrose to charge a suspect but
this leaves allows us to charge
them if they're if they're on
willing to both travel or to a
to move about the state as well.
Yeah mentors at points in the
notes for that is to understand
that so I think the last
question I have is.
How this is let's say.
Just.
Let's say you're agencies that
we really want to do this
because we know this person on
the back on the course of the
guys that.
Thing that happened
we would like to pick this up
it's personal whatever you want
to have this and the feds say no
we're going to handle it and now
I got to people going after the
same person and let's assume the
worst case scenario they got
convicted on state and federal.
How would that play out what
they do there eighteen months in
prison and then he picked up on
the last day for the if they got
ten years how with that I'm just
I'm probably would not thank you
guys work it but was just stated
how with that Madam chair in the
representatives that this is
really one of cases we we have
this happen either in other
cases where maybe a suspect from
another state kill somebody here
but it also killed multiple
people in other states we have
to kind of that's usually for
the district attorneys and the
USA the the the U. S. attorneys
to figure out in this particular
case up the one that carries the
largest sentence in my opinion I
think we but when the day and if
I was if I was in charge of
investigation and and have a
situation where they were states
like we love to take this I
my file means that once again
because they do have higher
mandatory minimums and that will
service purposes like it did
with mark with his wife as well.
You.
Madam chair representative so
my.
I really want to support this
bill I want to give gets more
tools to go after the bad actors
and I'm very frustrated that we
can increase penalties for
felons with the gun and.
Felons are trafficking drugs
which was also situation down
there as well I have some major
heartburn about I want you guys
if you're gonna do this to be
able to charge at the same level
that the Feds to I don't want
somebody to
be honest I don't want somebody
to go and say okay we got all
these huge charges on this is
drop this one or eight you know
not convicted in this our plea
bargain this I want you guys
have some teacher that if you're
gonna do this you know I really
do so.
I think that's all the questions
I have thank you madam thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and sergeant I
appreciate you for being here
and so you know I'm reading your
bill here and I just I don't see
a definition for knowingly
purchase.
You know in your scenario madam
chair representative you said
grandma is buying a firearm for
her nephew or something and you
know what if grant you know.
let's for now if you
conditionally and her nephew
wants to once again and she
knows he is prior to she doesn't
know necessarily what they were
and she buys this firearm
important Madam chair
representative would grandma go
to prison because she knowingly
New.
Fires.
But she's a lot of important.
and chair representative that
that's once again something for
for the courts and and as was
mentioned earlier by
Representative Lord it is
difficult we we would and I'm
not saying that's not a hard
hard path for us to to find out
if there was intent whether
whether junior here in this
particular case that only a
grandma will you know I I I
wasn't it wasn't actually
technically a felony was a
misdemeanor she's like okay okay
now so we acknowledge the fact
that there there is is not help
battle to prove and intent or
knowingly provide some of these
cases.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative get at this point
and I have a.
And since these people could
technically No legislative
buyers.
There there may be some kind of.
Following accidents plans.
Madam Representative up I I have
to
mention that these individuals
who are purchasing these fires
have actual knowledge.
That that the person that
they're purchasing it for years
had does have only or should be
a position require so if that if
that's the case Representative
that madam chair and then that
way it gives the district our
district attorneys you know more
more ability to to prosecute
these persons who knowingly.
Purchase these firearms
regardless if junior tells
grandma you know it's only a
misdemeanor she still knowingly
went and purchased up our
Madam chair representative
Instagram so.
You know I just yeah.
I know that's thank you madam
chair.
Thank you.
A what else on the committee
have questions Representative
Romero thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
I have been in favor of this
bill for the reasons why we want
to ensure that whoever is
getting access to firearms the
plate the plant sale we want to
know that that's the person who
possesses it was going to use it
for whatever purpose and this is
an important way and and sort of
following that logical line of
what we're trying to wrap our
hands are violence in our in our
state
my only question and concern and
I I think we need this law
because you know we're right now
we can only really charge under
federal law for this type of
crime this my understanding.
and my my question is more so
just because of that federal
panels more expensive is
Representative were discussed
how with the deliberation and
deciding upon the
granddaughters of crime that
we're forcing here.
madam chair and representative
did you clarify this that the
penalties are in the penalties
at the level yes Representative.
Madam chair and representative I
can speak to that with with with
the level felony that was.
So madam chair representative is
it's just more so the fact that
I think right now with what I
understand is that we don't have
a state law on the books for
these types of straw purchases
we want to be able to grapple
with the fact that this is
happening in our state the only
way to actually charge this
right now is federal is that
correct Madam chair
representative on yes Madam
chair representative yes that is
correct and so at this point we
we would we knowledge the fact
is to require some investigation
as was mentioned earlier we do
have access to you trace we do
not we're not the three traces
the the ability to run the
pharmacy who just purchased the
spiral and that we have people
are you see that run that the
the date due to run that through
the a TF but alternately we have
to prove that and so once again
we knowledge the fact that there
is some some investigation needs
to happen on that on the other
side but ultimately this would
give us something because I'll
argue again that the US
attorney's office does not
accept a lot of the cases that
we for not not a lot I would say
it's more fifty percent but you
know certainly there's a lot of
cases we're for them and they
don't take them so we we need
something to fall back on thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative I I really
appreciate that I really
appreciate the thoughtfulness I
know this is bipartisan in
looking at how it is that we can
we have or at.
Effective at understanding who
has a firearm what purpose and
sorting out you know what what
happens if does get in the wrong
hands and so I appreciate the
thoughtfulness I would still you
know appreciated discussion
around the penalties and the
ideas surrounding that because
it is so disparate between
eighteen months and ten years at
the federal level we're not
necessarily in the and five
thousand dollars versus two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
at the federal level so I I the
disparities is huge but that
said I mean I think this is a
good starting point and also a
better discussion for where we
want to be as a state so thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative for being
important.
Thank you
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair thank you both so in
the FY are.
D. O. H. suggest that H. B.
three oh six should also require
gun owners to notify the police
of stolen firearms I think
that's a great idea and if you
would consider that amendment
before your next committee would
make me very happy thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
thank you Representative thank
you mentors.
And I just have one comments to.
You know we don't have anything
that says up prohibit the
transfer of a firearm to a
prohibited person and on.
Section see if
if it's not anywhere in the
whoever commits unlawful
purchased
through our transfer of that
fire on for another he's guilty
of four three thousand.
That sector job could you
consider sure.
I.
That will also you know
someone's buying a firearm and
then the intent is to transfer
it not just sell it.
Share with us.
In the first version Act.
That
question where.
Brawlers.
Have.
All.
But that was.
So I can do for to million to
fund committee.
This is in the original I see
how the regional okay so we
could just insert on C. line
three.
Because of lawful purchase for
transfers.
The two words or transferred.
Hey.
Recent.
Fire.
So
you would be amenable to adding
this.
That comes to that.
Committee substitute of
Mediterranean yeah yes I think I
I would be open to the.
Friendly amendment thank you
I just moved that we do that and
madam chair I move that we adopt
that almost line and.
Thank you.
Thank you is there any
opposition to the amendment.
In that yes Sir just a point of
clarification so it's it's an of
section four of the original
bill.
A section one of the four P.
line three if this is sell or
otherwise transferred position.
Iran to any other person
prohibited by law is that
correct we don't at all that no
I I'm just verifying that the
trip that's what we're gonna do
any.
Nope we're just adding two words
on on your committee staff to do
you have a copy of it yes okay
on page two nine three I never
see.
Unlawful purchased that just
insert for transfer of a
firearm.
Or another is guilty of a fourth
degree felony that those on.
Okay.
Using yes.
Thank you.
Chairman of the to pass.
Hey we have to redo the
hold on.
Madam chair I move into I do
have one okay looking on the
internet and through have the
language
For transfer I just want to make
sure we.
The because of the action of the
transfer that transfer
procession the fire to any other
implicated by law.
I just want to make sure because
when we hear this thank you
through a lot if you I'm awfully
purchase that for now saying if
they transferred it to a person
any person.
it's they're guilty of fourth
degree felony and my question or
concern is that if we don't
answer that prohibited by law.
Somebody got into a situation
where they thought they were
purchasing something from
someone legally.
Add that person wasn't found
disclosed that after some of the
filling or otherwise.
that they needed to know or if
the person was.
We present the firearm that
innocent person might now we
charge of four degree felony
having received staff.
That's right so we just say or
transfer madam chair my concern
is that an innocent fire.
Just now felonies if they didn't
know that the person I'm awfully
purchased.
Thank so I might.
A recommendation or if that's
the case everyone agrees that
that is a weird call
I'm seeing was not that.
Madam.
The law actually applies to
things that we would Tyner's.
I.
There's actually a really.
Hopping on administrative or
other reasons the other thing.
Especially considered is that on
page one.
I thank you for joining.
I potentially unlawful if you
know the person.
That's going to.
Yeah so my concern is just opt
for transfer do we need to add
in the language.
Transfer procession of the
firearm to any other person
prohibited by law or something
like that Madam chair I think in
sea though doesn't it unlawful
purchase does that I'm not a
lawyer does that not coverage so
my my coach again madam chair
representative might my concern
is that if we say whoever
commits an unlawful transfer.
Guess that maybe does make sense
that.
Now we.
Yes we get that.
Yeah.
Eight that.
You have to do is here right to
go up make sure that.
In doing just how to do it
properly that
we will accept.
Argument yes I would drop my
amendment.
What matters I think for the
fusion licenses that is I will
hi.
Thousand homeowners referring
patients to other.
These and more.
We want to achieve that.
Also.
Correct so yes you would.
That we're to Judiciary.
As we make that change.
Four or.
That and then it's ready.
We appreciate that thank you
madam chair yes will work on.
Chair I move it do not pass on
house bill three oh six but I do
passed consumer public affairs
committee substitute for Health
three oh six.
Okay we have a do not pass on
that house bill three of six and
do passed on of the substitute
working at a six.
Is there any opposition.
Honestly actually think that
Representative applaud it or
transfer because Representative
York noted explanation
Representative Romero yes time
Representative Thomson yes.
Excuse me but you're Rubio yes
chair for yes.
Sure we all go to page two okay
perfect.
Okay go ahead but let me you
have a do pass on.
The.
I do not have frontier house
bill three oh six they do have
to committee substitute at
Representative Lord point about
thank you Madam chair
representative secretary I I
want to help you guys I always
to do so much things that can be
able to lose money and
everything that you need to have
done I have a problem with the
building software crisis just I
can't in good conscience vote
for that and then it's just fell
in this not domestic violence is
not percent restrain order
eating me up inside so because
of that those are the main
things I can't comment just push
it forward but I I always try to
help you guys as much as
possible so.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you and I have to mention
it was a vote of four to.
we will stand in recess until
next.
Those.
Thank you all.
Mr.
The stuff.
It was not.
