also bring New Mexico into
alignment with the
internationally accepted
standards for the treatment of
prisoners by lamenting the use
of solitary confinement for all
incarcerated individuals to 15
consecutive days and no more
than 90 days in the calendar
year.
HB 533 also ensures
accountability by strengthening
the reporting requirements and
the existing restricted housing
Act, making it easier to track
compliance with the statute.
Finally, HB 533 closes dangerous
loopholes by making even more
explicit what the restrictions
imposed by the restricted
Housing Act applied to all
confinement falling under the
Act's definition of restricted
housing regardless of what other
terminology may be used to
describe it, Madam Chair, come
today in front of you with this
bill.
And to really have and open up
the conversation around this,
this issue and this topic we
have.
We have, um,
We have a system that we're
looking to really identify and
have uh the issues put before us
uh again today. I believe the
last time this this bill was a
version of this or an update to
this um.
Sectional law was in, I want to
say 2018.
And then we, we, we came
together to have um.
Really wonderful conversations
and really putting together a
lot of efforts to figure out how
we can update and how we can
have this conversation in a very
holistic way, and that's where
I'm leading our conversation and
the issue we have before us
today.
Today I have an expert witness
with me and and I'd like her to
introduce herself and give a a
brief presentation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, Representatives.
My name is Selinda Guerrero.
My organization is millions for
prisoners.
I am here today merely as a
vessel for all of the people who
are in confinement across New
Mexico in adult detention
centers, prisons, and jails, and
youth youth detention centers.
I am bringing Ramon into the
room with us. He is 68 years old
and uses a wheelchair. He is
losing his feet due to serious
medical conditions and is being
held in solitary conditions.
I am bringing Michael into the
room with us, who has been
classified in some variation of
solitary confinement for more
than 15 years in New Mexico.
That is more than 5,475 days.
He shares that his eyesight has
suffered, he said that sometimes
when they go into the cages, he
cannot make out the face of the
guy in the next cage. He cannot
see well at a distance any
longer. They refer to it as face
blindness.
Many have received vitamin D
supplements because they do not
have access to sunlight, only
concrete walls. I am bringing
into the room a 16 year old at
JDC who has been in solitary
confinement conditions since
last March and is
pre-adjudication. We comforted
his father with tears rolling
down his face as he described
the changes in his son's
personality to feeling hopeless.
They have all shared that
anything can land you in
solitary confinement. It is
arbitrary. The institution uses
something called confidential
information that could come from
anywhere and cannot be
challenged to label people a
threat and also to mandate
people and administrative
segregation.
People can get locked down just
for filing too many grievances,
having a good lawsuit or even
knowing too much in the law
library. Yes, people are
punished and tortured for
exercising the very little
rights that they have.
As we are discussing HB 533, it
is important we ground on the
definition of torture.
As defined by the United
Nations, torture is defined as
the intentional infliction of
severe pain or suffering on a
person, the pain and suffering
can be physical or mental. The
pain or suffering is inflicted
by a public official or someone
acting in an official capacity.
The UN human rights expert has
voiced alarm.
The excessive use of solitary
confinement by correctional
facilities in the United States
citing there seems to be a state
sanctioned policy aimed at
purposefully inflicting severe
pain or suffering, physical or
mental, which may well amount to
torture.
He said this while addressing uh
the use of solitary confinement
in the United States.
One person imprisoned at the
Santa Fe North facility where
the highest number of people are
held in isolation conditions
shared that over the decades he
has seen changes, the changes
are that they went from tears
and bars to small concrete
boxes, compartmentalizing the
prisoners, creating these
separate small groups of 12
isolated to the same concrete
walls and small cages outside.
One person reflected that he has
not been granted parole, and the
only so-called programming he
is accessing is that he cleans
the pod. He has been cleaning
the pod for 30 years between the
same concrete walls, but he
stated it does not count for
anything.
We may not all agree on where
the lines are regarding prisoner
rights, but there is something
more people can agree on than
anything else, and that is that
people should not be tortured.
We need you to understand that
we do torture people here in New
Mexico. Hundreds of them, every
single day, and it's called
solitary confinement, and it's
done in our names using our tax
dollars behind closed doors and
as a result, we are undermining
the very core values of our
justice system.
Hundreds of people across the
state of all ages and genders
are locked in cement boxes who
sometimes are taken to solitary
exercise cages that are referred
to by prisoners and staff alike
without irony.
Calling them dog cages, dog
runs.
Well, John McCain and Nelson
Mandela said that of all of the
horrors they suffered in prison,
solitary confinement was the
worst form of torture.
A psychologist, Doctor Craig
Henley explains that this is
because the human identity is
socially created. We understand
ourselves through our
relationships with other people.
Solitary confinement can make
you change the way you think
about yourself.
Or if you even have a self.
Some people in solitary aren't
even sure they exist, so they'll
mouth off to a corrections
officer and end up getting
sheckled and beaten, but at
least then they know that they
exist.
The craving for human contact
and the sense of existence leads
to high numbers of self-harm and
often suicide.
Recently in the North facility,
a prisoner noted that they
changed the light fixtures
inside the rooms because people
kept hanging themselves so now
they installed round ones in the
2019 report by the ACLU revealed
that at least 50% of all
suicides have been in solitary
confinement conditions.
People in solitary confinement
have family and communities who
are also suffering and during
this time suffering alongside
them and have to hold the grief
and loss each day and especially
when their lives are taken.
It is very important to also
point out the impacts on
correctional staff.
Numerous studies have shown
solitary confinement can
significantly impact
correctional officers by causing
psychological distress
contributing contributing to
burnout and potentially leading
to the negative coping
mechanisms due to the constant
exposure of highly distressed
individuals in isolation.
Often exhibiting behaviors like
aggression, anxiety, and
paranoia.
Which can be emotionally taxing
for staff to manage. This bill
will address improving
conditions and exposure to
everyone involved. There's also
this thing in America, criminal
legal system that is about
transparency, and generally
there is transparency from the
time a person is arrested and
booked, and even into the
courtroom doors or they are open
to the public before someone
gets into prison, transparency
is largely true. Legislators, we
meet in these public spaces.
debate and define the laws that
prohibit um and guide criminal
conduct. Citizens in our
communities serve as jurors on
criminal trials and all of these
systems are largely transparent.
But this transparency ends with
the prison doors securely shut.
What happens behind prison walls
stays behind prison walls and
without the scrutiny of the
public gaze and uh the darkness
vestures. No other government
institution but incarceration is
allowed at this level of
intrusive power by the state
that deprives citizens of
liberty, and no other government
institution is more opaque and
less accountable than prison.
Even though prisons are
supported by taxpayers and
return 95% of their residents to
our communities. It is that uh
secrecy that allows prisons to
disappear people and so we have
an obligation as a democracy and
as a people, we must know what
happens after a prisoner is
taken away. The prison system
must be the concern and
responsibility of every citizen.
This is your justice system.
These are your prisons. Torture
happens in the dark, and so we
need.
To embrace that sunlight that it
is the best disinfectant, not
only because we know what
happens inside, but the knowing
itself can create the change
that is necessary. Prisons and
jails are administered in our
name and on our behalf.
the conditions implicate our tax
dollars, public safety, and most
of all, our shared belief and
inherent dignity for every human
being. We have an obligation to
bear witness and respond so that
when prisoner from as one
prisoner from the North said, no
more bodies disappear into the
abyss where nobody is thinking
about you. Nobody is praying for
you anymore, he said. We need to
know that people out here are
thinking about those concrete
boxes.
Thank you.
Thank you. And now, um, to the
left, I have our secretary of
Corrections, and she'll
introduce herself in.
And um explain her position as
well.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alicia Tafoya Lucero.
I'm very grateful to
Representative Lujan for
allowing me to sit here today to
speak as an expert, uh, I am
here.
In opposition.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
here to speak in opposition of
this bill and uh there are
several staff members behind me,
folks that have worked in the
correction systems for years who
will share their perspectives,
uh, and I think their words will
be a whole lot more meaningful
than mine, uh, but just to be
clear about this particular
bill. There are several areas of
it where we are very concerned
that if it were to be enacted
and made law, that it would end
up resulting in a very dangerous
environment.
Violent prison system, it would
endanger not just the staff
members that work in those
institutions, including
teachers, correctional officers,
uh, behavioral health providers
and the like, it would also very
much create a dangerous
environment for the inmates that
are living in those
institutions, uh, the way that
it works right now is that we
are only separating individuals
that.
It display predatory behavior
and cause violence in our
institutions at this point in
the agency, we do not ever place
anybody in restricted housing
for longer than a 30 day period,
um, we are making sure that
those individuals are
socialized. They have access to
educational opportunities,
medical services, behavioral
health services, and they have
regular meaningful contact with
staff members every day, uh, the
people that are housed in
restricted in the restricted
housing unit. We do have a
Specialty housing unit at the
North facility in Santa Fe
that's referred to as the
predatory behavior management
unit. That unit is essentially
what functions as a jail within
a prison system, so in the
community we have to have jails
because there are people out
there perpetrating dangerous
acts upon members of the
community and similarly
restricted housing behaves as a
jail in a prison institution
where sometimes it becomes
necessary to separate predatory
individuals from other uh people
from.
being able to create additional
harm and so there are time
frames in this bill that create,
uh, I believe dangerous
situations for our inmates, and
then there are a variety of um,
what I believe are
discriminatory actions in this
bill by making it such that
individuals under the age of 21
over the age of 55, could not be
considered violent. Any person
who has any sort of uh LGBTQ
plus status cannot be placed in
restricted housing for any
reason, and so,
I think that we are
discriminating um by age and
we're also discriminating
against people for their uh
LGBTQ or or not status, uh,
there are a variety of these uh
of these concerns within this
bill, but in addition to that,
we're very concerned that
because of what we believe will
be very dangerous conditions in
our prison systems across the
state that we will continue to
lose staff. We will not be able
to adequately support the people
that need to be housed.
in prison as of now we're always
comb to make sure that people
aren't working too much overtime
and getting burned out. We're
trying to manage our facilities
based on where our people are,
uh, where our inmates are housed
based on where we have adequate
amounts of staffing, and I
believe in this situation, we
would probably lose major
amounts of people and it would
make it near impossible for us
to refill those positions and
then, of course that creates a
cycle where it continues to get
more and more dangerous.
Madam Chair, I will then stand
for any kinds of questions that
you might have and I'll be happy
to hear the uh commentary from
the, the audience. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I
have met with.
Both parties and both with the
regards and concerns to this
legislation, and I believe that
it is our position here to have
these full and open
conversations and to hear both
sides of where we are in regards
to how this issue is being, um.
Discussed and debated, and that
is why you will see him on
either side that we are all here
together in our concerns and
addressing this issue, and one
thing I would really, I, I want
to stand upon is addressing the
issue that we have as uh
propriators for our state and
our state's budget and in
addressing the issue of fully
funding our corrections
department and assuring that we
are going to have the the safe
staffing that.
We need, um.
In addressing and helping to
address this issue, um, Madam
Chair, um,
Committee members, this is a
time for us to come together and
to have this conversation and to
hear both sides and to really
get into the crux of this issue.
It is very um.
Very critical, I think and very
uh.
Very pertinent to the point of
how do we.
Address this holistically, how
do we come together to define
what we envision for um our
correction systems.
And with that, Madam Chair, we
would stand for questions.
Representative
This is highly unusual.
Thank you. To bring both sides
together.
We
don't know how to invite people
to.
Speak in support or opposition
if you have both sides.
Ma'amer, as you would normally
proceed, I would, I would, I
would say please proceed and
hear from us and hear from our,
hear from everybody. My position
is is on the on the bill and to
address and to um.
To address this bill in the
normal fashion what we normally
do in committee, Madam Chair.
Representative Romero. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Just for
clarification, so on
deliberation of the policy
before us today. Um, because
we're trying to balance our
interests is the idea not to
essentially have a piece of
legislation say that we would be
voting on or that we would be
ready, prepared to, we just
deliberating on ideas today, Ma.
Madam Chair, we would be, uh,
uh, yes, deliberating on ideas
and how to move forward with
this, but also it to I have to
give.
To, um, the respect to the chair
and the committee as as how they
would like to proceed.
Madam, do you have a question?
Go ahead.
Uh, I see a lot of people that
came here, took their time, and
I would really like to hear what
they say so we can start making
some decisions on terms.
And this seems more like a
interim an interim discussion,
um, it's
Obviously there's a lot of
people here we're not gonna be
have time for all of them to
speak and this feels like more
what I at least I personally
think of interim work is where
you can get both sides together.
We have such limited time in our
60 days to try and do this level
of
Sorting, etc. etc. um, this may
not be the place, that's just my
opinion, Madam Chair.
And we, the bill, the bill
before you is for consideration,
but we would like to have, I
would like to show that we are,
you know, we, we need to have a
balance of information in front
of you so you can make the
decision, Adam Che.
Um
Representative, I think that
would have happened anyway.
But not with having, you know,
one of your experts as in
opposition, highly unusual.
Um, man, I, I wasn't planning
on, on the, the position of
opposition, uh, I mean, in to a
degree, but also for our
secretary's expertise on this
issue.
Just.
Go ahead. Uh, thank you. Just,
um, again on process, um, cuz I
think in all due respect, we do
want to hear from the folks in
the audience, um.
But is there a, a proposal for
like a compromise or a vetting
of being able to work with the
actual policy that's in front of
us today or are we actually
thinking
That this is ready for a vote.
That's, I think ultimately what
I'm
concerned about,
Madam Chair, ultimately that's
what the committee, it's to the
committee as we always
deliberate whether to vote or to
um propose amendments or any of
those things, Madam chair to
roll the bill, all those are
still under, it's still.
The same function of a reg as a,
as you normally function as a
madam chair, just so I'm clear.
The opposition that is here to
speak in opposition, um, as your
expert is about the bill before
us without any changes or.
Um
Proposed amendments that are
prepared for today. That is
correct, Madam Chair.
OK
Uh, with that, we will go to the
audience and those who are in
support of the bill before you
for the changes.
Um
Looking for the title, I'm
sorry, um.
The solitary confinement,
enforcement and accountability
Act, um, would you raise your
hand and we will.
We will take 10 people, um, one
minute each.
Please state your name and one
minute things, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Courtney.
Courtney Montoya, ACLU of New
Mexico. ALU is in strong support
of HB 533, all incarcerated
people in New Mexico deserve
inherent dignity and value as
human beings, no circumstances
whatsoever justify subjecting
prisoners to cruel and unusual
punishment and solitary
confinement is internationally
recognized as torture. It does
not make our communities or our
prisons safer and does not curb
prison violence, and studies
have overwhelmingly shown that
long-term solitary confinement
is.
ineffective at reducing prison
violence and may even increase
instances of violence,
withholding dignity from fellow
human beings and correctional
settings causes permanent
psychological harm to those who
work in correctional facilities.
The stress of managing prisoners
in solitary confinement can
detrimentally impact officers'
everyday lives, without access
to sufficient sunlight, locked
in a concrete box, smaller than
a parking space with no
meaningful content to other
humans, we are setting a
standard of irreparable harm.
by prolonged isolation,
including shortened lives.
Madame Chair and committee. My
name is Kimberly Apodaca. My son
is doing a 10-year sentence in
the Department of Corrections.
Upon his arrival in Los Lunas,
RGC facility, he was involved in
an altercation and was put in
solitary confinement. I was
unable to have any communication
with him during this time.
Confinement does not accomplish
behavior modification, but
worsen the individual's mental
health. I realized on day 35
that they were going against
rules and regulations that are
set in place regarding solitary
confinement. I drove down.
to the facility after they
failed to return my phone calls
and asked to speak to the
warden. I made her aware that
they were in violation and my
son was out of solitary within
15 minutes. During his time
there, he developed a severe
anxiety disorder, along with
claustrophobia. I find solitary
confinement to be inhumane and
torturing. Animals do not
deserve to be caged, more or
less human beings. I would
deeply appreciate your support
with HB 533. Thank you.
Good afternoon, chair and
committee. My name is Diane
McCash. Keeping in mind that
more than 90 of every 100
incarcerated persons will be
returned to our communities and
knowing that solitary
confinement is a harmful
practice to the point that
solitary confinement is often
referred to as a form of
torture. I urge your support of
the proposed changes to the
restricted Housing Act. We are
social beings and a large part
of our social and emotional
health centers around
connection. When we deprive
people of meaningful connection,
we risk everyone's safety. I
would go so far as
to say that one of the drivers
of criminal activity and
recidivism is people feeling
disconnected and devalued as
human beings. Of course, the
poverty and extreme inequities
that exist in our communities
are powerful determinants of
outcomes that we do see in our
communities, but please vote yes
on HP 3 533 and take this step
toward making our prisons and
jails more humane. It's a win
for all of us. Thank you.
Hi, my name is Christopher
Herrera, and I'm with
Albuquerque Justice for Youth. I
had as a juvenile that was in
the system, I had to learn how
to deal with anxiety attacks and
teach myself be the mechanisms
to calm myself down. It would be
so quiet to where I could pretty
much hear my own thoughts. At
times, sometimes all you do is
daydream and think of any other
place instead of being in a box,
supposedly methods like this
reduce violence, but if
anything, it only causes more
violence. It never helped me in
any positive ways. It only made
me more mad, and it made me mad
because it made me feel like
I was less than a human. When I
got involved, involved in the
adult system, it was even worse.
And let's not get started on the
treatment inmates received by
COs. It's easy to say that
solitary confinement is
necessary when you're the one
locking the door. How crazy to
say that there are people as we
speak that are locked in a box
and haven't came out in months,
maybe even years. I'm here
representing myself and
everybody that cannot represent
themselves in efforts to protect
it from harm, and I ask you all
to strongly consider passing
this bill. Thank you.
Chair and members of committee.
My name is Kat Sanchez. I'm with
Bold Futures reproductive
Justice Organization for the
state of New Mexico, and we are
deeply appreciative of the
language that gives space for
postpartum needs of incarcerated
pregnant people. Um, those of us
who've had children, even those
in uniform, understand just how
critical that time frame is for
individuals to recover, not just
physically but emotionally. Um,
we would prefer if the language
was inclusive of miscarriage
management as well, since
currently the new verbiage only
has births. I would also love
the bill to be renamed the Baron
Jones Solitary confinement Act
for the years of work that
Barron did for incarcerated
individuals.
Thank you. Yes, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my son
has been locked up for 22.5
years, 18 of those years he's
been in level 4, which is not
considered solitary confinement,
but he is locked up from 20 to
24 hours a day.
Um, so that's pretty much the
same definition as solitary.
He's had clear conduct for over
15 years. He's taken every class
he was allowed, and he still is
in level 4. He can't
Can't go anywhere from level 4,
cause even though he is not a
gang member, he was classified
as a gang member. Um, he's also
locked up with a gentleman who's
in his 60s, who is crippled,
he's in a wheelchair. He cannot
get around by himself. My son
has to help him everywhere that
he goes. He should be in a
geriatric facility or a medical
facility.
He's also in there with a
gentleman who is old enough to
have been in the riots of 1980.
OK, that's all. That's all. Adam
and everyone else sorry I'm a
little bit nervous. Um, I want
to say that um.
I'm, I'm sorry like a panic
attack, um, I just wanna um.
I just want to say thank you for
giving us the opportunity
because I can see both sides to
it. I've been impacted by the
system on multiple levels, um,
but what I would like to say,
there's people who um who end up
in solitary confinement
unnecessarily, unnecessarily is
the key because um
I, I got the privilege of honor
of speaking to some of these
people today and, and, and what
they have to say is also very,
very valid, um, but I I would
like to hold correctional
officers and people accountable
because what I saw was
The correctional officers
abusing their power and if I
didn't sleep with somebody or if
I didn't whatever, a lot of the
abuse would take place, and then
when I would react, that it
would be justified their actions
to throw me into solitary
confinement, so it, it, it
would, it reactive abuse, so, so
my abuse became justification
for the correctional officers to
throw us into solitary
confinement or to throw us into
a position where we don't have
any control, um, but yeah, I
could go on and on.
Uh, my name is Rachel Ray. Uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for
allowing me to be here today to
give comment also on behalf of
Bold Futures. Um, I'm a former
healthcare chaplain, and I had
the honor of supporting folks in
the hospital who were
incarcerated, um, and we know
that what creates healing, what
creates growth is connection,
it's community, it's
opportunities to be in
relationship with folks, that's
what allows us to grow and to
change, not isolation, not
separation, um, and so we really
just want to emphasize that, um,
as you all are considered.
this bill, and we urge you do
pass.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Lena Weber, interim
policy director with the ALU of
New Mexico, um, the ACLU knows
along with all the voices that
have already spoken that when
somebody goes into the system,
the goal is that they come back
out, that they can be with
family, that they can be with
community, that they, they can
reintegrate into those systems.
And we also know the very real
harms that solitary confinement
inflict on an individual's
ability to be able to do that in
a healthy way. Um, and so we're,
we're in strong support of this
bill.
We really think the, the
sponsors and the organizations
who have been working on this
for bringing this forward, are
really important efforts to um
to change the, the system of
solitary confinement as it
currently exists in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Uh, next we'll go to Zoom and
people in support.
If you're on Zoom and want to
speak in support, please raise
your hand.
Isabella
Chair,
my name is I'm in New Mexico
people have a history of
administrative discrimination
and abuse the long time to deal
with er individuals have taken
the road of whatever is easiest,
often without the same level of
care compared to those who are
not LGBTQ. Solitary confinement
is one of those administrative
punishments, a punishment proven
to exacerbate pre-existing
mental illness, forms of
ideation of
side and a punishment that is
most often forced onto LGBTQ
folks while they are
incarcerated, who face this
punishment at a
disproportionately higher rate.
This is often done under the
excuse of protection, where
detonation where administrators
place their own good. This bill
will ensure that our community
is no longer punished for their
identity. Instead, we are
treated with the same dignity
and respect that all humans
deserve. Solitary confinement
should not be used as an easy
way out. It is a serious and
psychologically damaging
punishment that should not
be used as a replacement for
institutional protection.
Equality New Mexico urges a due
pass on HB 533. Thank you.
Evangeline Baldonado.
Hello, my name is Evangeline
Baldonado.
And I told the bill 5:33.
Um, my brother, I have several
brothers that are incarcerated
and
This part really
touches my heart because one of
my brothers.
Excuse me, but one of my
brothers is very, very
institutionalized.
He, at this point,
He thinks he's the president.
If I tell them any different, he
gets aggravated. He you see the
The
Just the anger in his eyes and
everything, and my mom was on
dialysis for 27 years.
And plenty of that years. My
brother was incarcerated.
And when my brother finally got
released from Santa Fe.
My brother was no longer my
brother that he was when he went
into incarceration.
My mom
Waited for that for so many
years and when my brother
finally came out and he got to
see my mom, he would tell my
mom.
She's not ill.
Uh
She's not all these things, you
know, and it would just tell her
some hateful things that I know
my real brother would not say.
My brother has about 10
different personalities.
And he argues with them every
day
or not.
I'm sorry.
Your time is up. OK.
So, so my thing is to end
solitary confinement. I, I would
like my brother back. His
psychological, his mental, his
physical, all of that is gone
and solitary confinement did
this to him. And if I can have
my brother back, anything, you
know, to have my brother back
would be awesome.
Thank
D. Barker.
Hello.
Committee chair Ferrari and
committee members. My name is
Deborah, and I'm a community
activist and former educator,
now retired from Albuquerque
public schools. Please vote do
pass on HB 533. The United
States, when compared with the
rest of the world is an outlier
in its widespread use of
solitary confinement. We must
change that. Just like in
education, we change how we
teach using new
research and data.
Research shows we must limit the
use of solitary confinement.
Solitary confinement is a form
of torture.
Placement and solitary for any
length of time, whether days or
even hours causes lasting harm.
We know this, and New Mexico can
do better. Please vote yes on HB
533. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Robert Hoberg, and I
work with Justice for Youth as a
social work student and um I am
here to express my support for
this bill. Uh, we have a
responsibility to the folks that
we incarcerate to rehabilitate
them through a supportive and
helpful environment, and I
understand why, uh, corrections
officers who may feel
threatened, um, may be compelled
to press this button and just
have somebody disappear. Maybe
the, in some cases they're doing
it for their own good and what
they see as that.
But we know what this does. It's
scientifically demonstrated to
be harmful and from the stories
of folks who have spent
significant time in that place.
We know that it's not
contributing to this goal of
rehabilitation. There's other
ways that we can restructure
these blocks, these wings, so
that there is a different
culture and that there's less
violence and that's what we
should
be looking at. This doesn't even
ban, uh, solitary confinement.
It just restricts it.
Thank you. We
There's more than 10, so the
If there's more from correction
there's groups, but we're doing
10
1 minute each of the committee,
Carter asks me, we represent
correctional officers at the
state and county and local
level.
We all agree solitary
confinement is terrible. We wish
nobody ever had to use it. But
there's another reality that
there are different types of
people and sometimes different
people have very violent
outbreaks. This is about inmate
safety as much as anything else,
and if we didn't have ability to
separate the most predatory
violent offenders from the
general population, you would be
facing lawsuits and complaints
that we don't do enough to
protect our inmates. So there
are a lot of specific things.
that where we have issues for
the bill, we do thank the
sponsor for being willing to
engage in discussions. This is
setting up the county for value.
Um, the physical facility, the
employees necessary to carry
this out, this would be
absolutely dangerous to allow 7
hours a day outside of of
solitary confinement. Right now
you have 2 hours. We're also
concerned about the prohibited.
the use of prohibiting um
confinement for the 1st 3 days.
Often we have individuals that
are detoxing and it's not safe
for them or for others in the
facility. Again, we don't have
the physical facilities, some of
our detention facilities are
small. They would have to, we'd
have to do some major
reconstruction, new
reconstruction. We don't have
the open spaces in order to
carry the I'm a classification
officer, a former sergeant. I am
in opposition of this bill.
Uh, segregate security of
facility for staff and inmates
in a controlled confined area
temporarily. It is a vital
component in the Department of
Corrections. This is a temporary
tool for those inmates who
become a threat to themselves or
others. This could be due to a
number of different have regular
access to on-call behavioral
help rounds by department heads
are and uh and security staff
are conducted regularly,
regularly to monitor inmates. So
if an inmate no longer goes back
into general population. They
have time to access phones. The
only difference is
They are in a cell when outside
of a cell. This is because they
have done something to lose that
trust to do normal tasks without
issues.
There are inmates that are at
any given
No,
I'm sorry.
Uh, Madam Chair,
Representatives, uh, Chris
Aragor with the New Mexico
Department of Corrections.
Solitary confinement or
restrictive housing.
Uh, this tool is vital to our
department and staff across the
state of New Mexico.
If restricted more removed
indefinitely, the possibility
arises of our staff and inmates
being more prone to assaults.
Sexual abuses and being verbally
abused with no consequence.
This tool we currently have is
valuable to the men and women I
work alongside.
Valuable in a way that if they
are assaulted, they have means
of disciplining the individual,
allowing this individual to
recollect on the behavior and
correcting it with help through
the unit management team.
I personally have been assaulted
in my 15 years of corrections.
Several times.
My first time offenders,
lifelong criminals, restrictive
housing was a tool that was used
to stop the assaultive behavior
of those individuals. It was
used for disciplinary purposes
to correct their behavior.
The individuals completed their
sanctions for guilty offenses
and were reintegrated back into
the general population.
And I have asked several inmates
through the years beneficial.
New Mexico, my, myself, and I am
against this bill because I have
physically been assaulted
myself. I was stabbed 10 times
Thank you for your time, Madam
Chair, and I oppose this bill
because um 3 months of uh PBMP
program. I don't even think it's
enough recovery time for a
victim who's been um
In correctional setting and um I
don't, I don't think any of you
on the other side would feel
that if it was your family. I
don't think you would think 3
months. I don't think you would
think 3.
3 months of, of, uh,
Of a PBMP would be too much if
the shoe was on the other foot.
Um,
Another thing is, is it's going
to be, if you do this, it's
gonna be open season on both
staff and sex offenders as well.
We just kind of got a lid on
that whole situation where
people stopped offending, uh, or
stopped hurting sex offenders
and assaulting them and killing
them because they know that
they'll go to say for PBMP
that's gonna reverse all of that
and open up another can of
worms. Thank you.
And I just like to remind. Madam
Chair, thank you for your time.
I'm Lieutenant James Moyle at
Central.
I'm against this bill just
simply because of safety
concerns. All the demographics
that are listed in this bill
that you guys want to keep out
of restrictive housing. I've
seen them as victims and
aggressors for physical and
sexual assault.
So using RHG as a resource to.
Attempt to correct their
behavior, get those individuals
the help that they need. And
recently working RHU myself, I
have seen it work firsthand if
an inmate needs something, they
come to me.
And as a public official, I'm
supposed to take them seriously
and I do every single time.
So thank you for your time. I'm
against this, Bill. Thank you.
I'm Officer Robert Chavez. I
work at Central New Mexico
Correctional Facility.
Uh, personally, I've been
involved in multiple assaults
against myself and against uh
the men and women I work with,
multiple incidents.
That happened from your basic
level incarcerated individual up
to the highest level. It is not
a certain nomination or certain
person or gang member, stuff
like that with everybody. Uh, we
are trained and taught to build
a relationship and to know what
these guys are going on or if
they act a little bit different
to get them that behavior health
or to offer him assistance or to
get them those books or to get
their tablet going to get these
guys that are.
Help that they might need, OK?
RHU is a tool that we use that
helps a lot, and when they get
out, unfortunately, they
continue to do those aggressive
behaviors or predatory
behaviors, it's just a thing
that how it goes as officers, we
see it on the front line. That's
something we deal with why I'm
against this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. My
name is Jacquere. Uh, my wife is
Brianna Regg. I oppose uh the HB
533 bill. Uh, prime example
would be that my wife at the
time was in a correctional
setting, was a pregnant with our
Uh, daughter and was um
stabbed, she was assaulted and
uh thank God that she's still
here. However, uh,
HB 33 was, uh, is going to be an
example of a threat to the
security and safety of the
institution. Only staff,
visitors and contractors, but,
uh, to the inmates themselves,
uh, we do all safety and
security to those inmates as
they're going to be returned to
our communities and using
solitary confinement to house
only predator, uh, individuals,
predator behavioral inmates, uh,
it makes a great bigger deal to
the safety and security of the
institution.
Uh, not only that, but we uh
offer, uh,
Facility programming to make
sure that these inmates uh do
get what they need.
Well
Hi, my name is Sergeant Michelle
Gonzalez. I work with the
Northeast.
And used to put these guys that
are assaulting us, what do we do
with them? Do we come back to
work and fear.
I mean
This for behavioral issues.
It's not used for punishment
because to correct the behavior
and.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee. I'm just here to
appreciate you all, Madam Chair,
in this conversation, and shout
out to Representative Luhan for
coming into this conversation
with such grace, um, Madam
Chair, about a decade ago, I was
the served as the bureau chief
of recidivism reduction at the
in rooms like this in this
capital for years doing advocacy
towards criminal legal in a
different era offered me a job.
With that job came a badge that
led me into any prison through
any
warden, no questions asked. I
had to room to walk through
housing units, to talk to the
people we locked up there, and
certainly after those couple of
years, what I learned more than
ever before is that prisons are
terrible places for people
locked up there, but they're
also really hard places for the
people that do this incredible
job and walk behind those gates
every day. So I'd ask aspect
that there's hardworking New
Mexicans from who show up with a
lot of care and compassion, um,
to do right by our families and
understanding that these people
we've locked up will be
returning to our communities,
um, with that.
Um,
have a great conversation.
Uh,
good afternoon, Madam Chair
committee. Uh, my name is Tim
Match. I'm deputy director of
Bill Prisons, unfortunately I
couldn't.
Be there. I'm, I'm
So does manageable me. Uh, I
just want to say I've been
working in corrections for 30
years. I've seen the pedal and
swing from one side to the
other, um, going through 5
different.
Corrections, I can see that the,
the, the, what, what our current
secretary has put into place is
we do not do the things that are
uh being said inmates are very
on a very, very small level
placed into RHU and it's only
for the safety of staff, for the
safety of other inmates, and at
times the safety of themselves,
so I, I do not think this bill
should go through in its current
capacity, um, and thank you for
your time.
Philip De Herrera.
Hello, thank you for your time.
I oppose this bill, um.
People aren't put in restrictive
housing.
Uh, for punitive purposes or
retaliatory purposes, we have
policies and procedures, and
it's used as a
Last means, but this is for the
safety of staff and inmates
alike from harm and uh abuse,
sexual abuse.
Um, I've been in corrections for
23 years, and I personally
witnessed the aftermath of an
inmate trying to stab.
Uh, individuals and, and we have
to keep this place safe. So I
definitely
You know, oppose this. Thank
you.
Deputy Warden Crystal Riviera.
Good afternoon. Um, I'm opposed
to this bill. I've been a deputy
warden here for 3 years now.
I've been in corrections for 19
years. I just kind of want to
mirror what the deputy director
said in that we don't use it.
In a retaliatory manner, we use
it as a last resort. Several
occasions we placed inmates in
restrictive housing. They've
done, you know, their time in
restrictive housing. They've
also, they've gotten out and
we've seen quite the benefit in
their behavior as a result of
being placed in restrictive
housing. I've had several
individuals thank me for the
time and consideration that
we've given them, and the
counseling that they've received
while they were in restrictive
housing, so it's actually a tool
that's used to their benefit. In
my time I've seen several staff
members.
inmates assaulted. I've had
those inmates that have been
assaulted come back and thank me
for, for taking care of the
behavior of the the predators in
this in this environment, so we
are very opposed to this bill,
and we thank you for your
consideration.
Montoya M.
Yeah.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Major Matto. I work at
the Northeast New Mexico
Correctional Facility in
Clayton, um, and speaking from
experience, I could tell you
that uh RHU restrictive housing
is used as a tool and at the
facility level we do do a very
good job at a assessing the
individual's housed in those
areas, um whether the displaying
predatory behavior, whether
they're in RHU, um, for for
being aggressive, we do talk
about these individuals daily,
um, or weekly, we're doing daily
rounds to ensure that these.
Inmates are receiving contact
and we are consistently
assessing the situation with
every individual on a, on a
great level thanks to the
administration up at the top of
the state to ensure that these
individuals are receiving the
best care for the safety of
themselves, other inmates, and
the staff, and we're, we're
kindly asking that you would
vote no on this bill. Thank you.
Arthur Maldonado, good
afternoon. Um, my name is Arthur
Molinaro. I'm a lieutenant down
here in Southern New Mexico
Corrections Facility. Um,
I would hope you vote against
this bill, um, I've been in the
corrections department for 20
years plus, um, solitary
confinement.
Uh, for those that have tried to
commit suicide. We have saved
many lives, um, due to the fact
that they have been in solitary
confinement, um,
We also use it as a tool,
obviously for
Um
Those individuals that commit
assault, uh, since things have
changed from the past, um, when
we have them longer in solitary
confinement. Um,
I have seen more group assaults.
I've seen more staff assaults,
um.
I've been assaulted. It's a tool
that we use and I think if you
take it away, it would be a very
dangerous situation for all of
us in corrections. Uh, thank you
for your time.
Just as you can hear, this is a
very um.
very hard topic, um.
But well worth our time to
address.
Um, as legislators, we have to
um look at these issues from the
scope of wanted just to show
that I have been in conversation
with um.
With our stakeholders.
But we still have to push the
envelope, so to speak, to see
where are we going to make a
change in the culture, our
corrections facilities.
And what does that mean on both
sides? What does it mean? How do
we get to a place where we are
truly.
Address of our.
Correction officers and those
that are working in these um.
facilities because
If we're not
Having that conversation and
we're not addressing it and
we're not looking to see what we
can do better to make these
improvements, they are not then.
When we are doing that, excuse
me, then we are fulfilling what
we are to do here as legislators
and looking at these laws and
where there can be revisions,
that is where we're moving,
that's when we're question from
the committee.
In a solitary restraint.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, an individual would end up
in restricted housing after
having committed a violent act,
typically is the is the route
that there are some limited
circumstances where an
individual might be reporting
that they're having a mental
health crisis and they need to
be separated or they might be in
fear for their life. Uh, I
remember working at the agency
years back where it was
commonplace to put people who
had protective custody needs in
restricted housing for extended
periods of time, uh, I mean, and
I did.
see it happen in the past years
on end, but that is not the
situation somebody out from the
general population because they
feel like they're in danger, but
we immediately find alternative
placement for them. So
ultimately people end up in
restricted housing due to
predatory behavior.
Some to harm to others, maybe
madam chair, Representative
Lord, absolutely yes.
when somebody's in restricted
house, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lord very
briefly, we use the
classification custody level
system that's based on a variety
of objective criteria that
determines a person's custody
level from, uh, level 1 through
level 4, those are our general
population units, and then we do
have special management units
for things like uh gang members
that are part of security threat
groups, uh members or, or
individuals that got themselves
into the predatory behavior
management program by
displaying violent predatory
behavior, specialized units for
geriatrics offender specialty,
ex-law enforcement, etc. So we
have lots of different specialty
housing units, but in those four
general population units and in
most of our specialized units,
yes, they are large scale units.
Some of them are dormitories
with bunk beds, some of them are
ourselves with one person per
cell, some, some are cells with
2 persons per cell, um, it
really just depends on what
custody level that they're at,
the higher the custody level,
the more
restrictive, uh, as far as they
might
be moved into.
Madam chair, representative, I'm
having a hard time.
Is this helpful?
It might be a little too too too
loud, OK, sorry, I moved it back
because it was, I will speak
louder to the people in the back
of the room.
So Madam Chair Representative,
um, so we're looking for.
A risk expert.
why these specific exclusions
because I'm gonna tell you a
lived experience story.
So I was adopted by a doctor who
found herself in jail.
Uh
For distribution of drugs. Her
name was Lite, um, she was a
lesbian and she punched a
Um
Kurchill.
Facility officer in the face.
Why would she be excluded from
transgender are often, um, I
sell their conditions based on
their identic assault.
But because of their mere
identity.
They are being put in solitary
confinement.
That's what this is to address
an expert, can you explain to me
how many times that has ever
happened that you know of or why
put in there based on, explain
to me, is this something that's
happening a lot and that there's
people.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
know that there are.
Well, I've heard, I don't, I
don't know by um.
By by witnessing it, but I knew
that I have heard that there um.
There are exceptions made.
But to have the exact numbers
I've been we're looking through
our data and through our
information I'm not finding
that's explicit, we know that
through national data that that
is a concern and that is
happening, but we don't have.
Exact stats for represent
expert man chair uh
representative because we don't
want that to happen in our in
our facilities. We want to make
sure that there are protections
and that uh specific status
are beam that's where we, um,
but what I'm saying is.
An inmate who belongs, etc.
Shall not be playful she's
passed.
Um, she stabbed.
Another inmate
Or she raped another inmate or
she stabbed a correctional
officer. Why should she away
from other people. She's
aggressive and a threat to staff
and herself and others. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
the question, clarifying that
question, but that this that
would not be under this uh
Or she raped another inmate or
she stabbed a correctional
officer. Why should she away
from other people. She's
aggressive and a threat to staff
and herself and others. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
the question, clarifying that
question, but that this that
would not be under this specific
um reasoning that would be
you're specifically addressing
and an assault, but not in
context or context of status of
that person. So on page 3 line
12.
The following people shunned
because
I if somebody is a heart.
Why
Why, why are they?
The bill is speaking uh.
Directly to identity.
So if
the institution
should not confine you to
because
it it should say solely based on
these identities, which that I
would agree with if you came to
your data and and said the
community were placed in
restrictive housing, didn't do
anything. Yeah, I would agree
with you on that one. But if
there's documentation because as
knowing my mom and watching her
get into fist fights with her
lesbian partner.
So
That would be, would say.
You cannot get the experts about
what kind of review board.
would be looking at that, how
the records would be accessible,
would be, I'm not. Madam, may I
ask uh or I um address your
first question as would this be
something we would consider as
an amendment, and I would say
yes as to your second question,
who, who oversees this Madam
Chair Representative Lord, so,
um.
I would imagine that the agency
would put together a policy but
based on whatever law that
passed, and I would most
certainly agree with your
perspective that the bill in its
current form involuntary or
voluntary no matter what, uh,
and it does a perspective that
was brought up by uh I think
that that would be a good start
with that.
So when we move on to page 3
facility shall not be housed.
What happens to repeat offend.
Where was presented expert Madam
Chair represented.
United Nations model, and I
would defer to my expert to
that.
by the United Nations, and I do
want to say that 7 other states
have passed similar legislation,
and it is working where they're
at, um, I would offer that South
Dakota actually created a
special pod, so instead of
solitary confinement, uh, people
that are prisoners are taken to
this pod and provided mental
health resources and actually
given lots of um human
interaction with therapists, and
this has remedied the need for
solitary confinement in that
state altogether, so they're not
using this practice at all.
anymore.
So Madam Chair represent a move
section C because it says in the
UN the present rules shall be
discriminate about who gets to
be locked up Madam Chaps in.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, we are
going to talk to you about that
section, thank you to the facts
and circumstances.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, absolutely there is. Uh,
we use um a bunch of
documentation. It would be the
import that followed after the
inmate goes through due process
to determine that they were
involved in that incident and
were responsible for it, uh,
then there are several
classification committees that
take place, special management,
uh, assessments that take place,
the behavioral health, uh,
assessments that take place to
determine whether a person can
be placed in that unit safely.
Uh, so there's a lot of uh.
Steps that take place before a
person is placed in uh in a
restricted housing unit and
particularly in that predatory
behavior management program, um,
and then just to be clear on
what the agency is doing now, we
do follow best practices and in
fact we've well exceed best
practices with the use of
restricted housing, uh, in
accordance with the American
Correctional Association and uh
the correctional Leaders
Association and um other
organizations within the United
States.
Ma'am, I, I figured they would.
I didn't didn't think the state
shall not be held in
restrictation. Ma'am, OK, it
says accepted that there are
harm to themselves, have a guard
or stab another inmate,
except when the.
Um, finding that the inmate is
not likely
on
an inmate and they shall not go
away from everybody or what if
they stab Madam Chair
representative, yeah, that's not
unusual that somebody already
they're going through a
screening process, and it's um
very difficult to address a what
if scenario when we refer to the
data we've had 2019, uh, when
the solitary bill passed and we
have not come in restrictive to
the ins protect people.
in their care. Does that work
out?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lord. So the section that you're
looking at on page 4 looks like
it applies to jails, county
jails, and not to uh state
correctional institutions, um,
but on that notice the law that
was passed in 2019 refers only
to correctional state
correctional institutions and
jails do not do the reporting,
so, uh, I believe what what is
being seen perhaps does not
capture what's happening in the
jails, uh, from my understanding
and working along of the
corrections.
world that work in jails, uh,
from what I understand they do a
lot of assessments, mental
health, behavioral health, um,
uh, detox and uh medical
placement and things like that,
so their intake would be far
more intensive than I would
assume ours is because into our
custody they've been in jail,
uh, or at least they've been
through the court process, so
we're receiving them well after
the convictions occur.
OK, so ma'am ribs and that and
that makes in California,
they'll put them in Chino
inmate.
filtered out.
When they take them now.
I'm I'm seriously not go out if
you meant prison and then
separated so.
I, I'm not sure what you're
meaning to.
Madam Chair, just for
clarification, are you speaking
specifically just to section uh
subsection F on page 4 to me
there's a difference.
Comes from a jail, usually
everybody.
And representative has explained
this is under the reporting
section and this this is this is
um.
This is part of the process, so
I'm not quite sure as you're
referring to these other
situations, but this is just the
reporting because.
Someone gets bigger jail system
jails have any Easterarian
representative, and I, by the
way, OK, so I just pointed out,
so in in Torrance.
Is there restricted housing in.
I just wanna acknowledge your
your your uh commenting about
misdemeanor are usually released
why even if they shank somebody,
uh, that they can't, they cannot
be removed from the gender.
Manure uh.
I'm trying to, um.
I'm trying to eliminate what
that would look like and how to
address your question. What I
would say is that there is,
there seems to be that not all
facilities, but in these
facilities
there is a possibility that this
could happen, so, um.
But as mentioned,
If it's
What you're talking about
specifically is it about that we
have some waiting.
If they were in a general
population situation and they
shank somebody, stab somebody,
beat somebody up, rape somebody.
You can't go into any restricted
housing. Would that mean they
couldn't even remove him with
all of this. I'm just gonna say
it.
That they cannot cause you're
not, you're not taking in you to
go to trial.
That's what I'm trying to get
representative,
I'll just have you go back to
page 3 and if a warden in jail
administrator or other person in
charge of a correctional
facility finds that an inmate
requires housing in restricted
housing for more than 90 days
total one make a written record
of the facts and circumstances
it necessitated the inmate's
placements in the restricted
housing to prepare written
action plan describing how.
The facility
out of restricted housing at the
earliest opportunity, so it's a
process and procedure.
Madam Chair Representative.
a guard and there's no
repercussion, that lady.
Um, X on my paperwork.
Um, they were about the
significant issues.
The one that concerned me the
most opera.
That the following.
She can and then she kills an
officer.
She kills
You're saying she would still
stay in a population where she
would have access, Madam chair,
go back to the process and
procedure that if.
There, there could be a plan in
place and be required if this.
The previous steps there would
have to be a plan in uh in place
for those decisions to be made.
Madam
cause I'm not going to belabor
in this.
This has got too many issues and
But this is looking at that
liability issue of God, I would
hate.
Retain and they're habitually.
You like to make that motion
now, uh, madam chair, I'm not,
no, I'm not I'm willing to hear
of any other committee questions
at this time, but I.
I hear what.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I've
been looking at other
Try to figure out what other
states are doing in our
California Gavin News I'm
actually vetoed that piece of
legislation, and he said it
establishes standard staff.
And incarcerated popular people
and staff at these facilities to
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
wondering, do we thank you Madam
Chair, I would defer to Madam
Chair Representative Block, uh,
yes, and I do believe that was
brought up by some of the folks
who spoke in the audience in
opposition talking about the way
that it would disrupt people and
disrupt their intervention, in
fact, I heard one of the
officers mention that he thank
you for separating me. I was and
and was grateful for the
treatment and restricted
housing, so we definitely have
concerns that there would be an
erruption to a person.
person's ability to reach that
really intensive level of um
rehabilitative attention that
they receive when they're in
those specialty programs. Thank
you and thank you for that and
thank you for looking at, but I
would, I would like to say that
there are 7 other states that
have implemented
this legislation as well and
that results from um and and
information we're receiving from
those states show the chair
representative, I would also
like to note that.
As we're going, as we're going
through this process and
understanding this, I would say
that.
We are here to address the the
culture of, of our, our
facilities and and look for some
better results and we're looking
for those results and
implemented California decided
not to do that, so we don't have
those results, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So those other 7
states, did they have a carve
out for LGBTQ place.
I'll defer to my representative,
um, I have anas because they
seem to have a really um robust
um response to the ways of
combating solitary confinement
and that was that special pod
that I spoke about earlier, um,
and they do have carve outs, um,
to the point of saying your
identity, your mere identity
will not get you put into a
solitary confinement cell and
Dakota is really important
because they have done away
with.
solitary confinement. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Did we say North
Dakota and I, and I get that,
but the way I read the bill
currently, it's not actually
saying if you're in a class of
protected class or.
Vulnerable population, so an
inmate who belongs to a
vulnerable population, including
an inmate who had to be a slur,
shall not be placed in
restricted housing. It also says
uh younger than 18.
used to be 18, now it's 25 or
older, 55 or older. And so,
Madam Cha represented when I see
that a bunch of cases, the 8th
Amendment, 14th Amendment.
Uh, there is equal protection
clause by separation of powers
violations that Wilkinson v.
Austin, 200.
That could help because these
people can't be dangerous.
If they're, if they're older or
younger, or if they're in a or.
Whatever, I'm not going to say
that word, shall not be placed
in restrictive housing
involuntarily someone who falls
in one of these classes and they
are indeed violent in some way,
they, they have a warrant.
There, there's reason to put
these people in another.
place for their own safety or
the safety of others.
This, since it would restrict
that
representative we've already um.
Identified this section as as a
place to work on with
representative Lord
and we're we're welcoming that
feedback. Thank you. OK, and
then madam, how did we arrive
over more because that was also
seen as a concern by the
governor there. So is that
mirror Ring South Dakota, and
what is that mirroring the 15
days. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Deer to my expert.
This actually is the guidance
from the United Nations, and
that is where that at the
congressional level in uh 2022
and um back again cause what we
wanna the United Nations
guidance has been.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I have the,
And uh representative, it's,
it's, it's a um.
It's part of the guidelines of
why the this is in the and that
is what we referencing and um.
It was a stairs,
yeah, I just don't see that
specific timeline because the
guy
Intervals, but they don't say
anything. So I think when it
comes to that, it says to
I think the current how is that
working with those rules instead
of human interaction.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um, as we are trying to again
address how we can like
facilities and institutions.
This is one of those changes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and then also
known to be pregnant or in the
first period after giving birth.
Where is that?
Madam Chair Representative
Block, I just wanted to share
some information about the
department currently, um, we
have implemented.
That we do not ever use
restricted housing, use it for
not only pregnant women, we've
been doing that for many years,
uh, but also postpartum women
and to be uh general and, and
truthful about our policies, any
women ever.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and as
we heard in um uh public
comment, one of the one of the
recommendations is to address if
there is a miscarriage, and that
is something we would like to
consider. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and I.
I mean, I, I
I will commend you for taking
such a, a bold endeavor on.
However, I do think that there
does need to be a lot, a lot
ironed out and I won't keep us
all and because of
All the problems I see with the
bill, but I will say, Madam
Chair Representative, this
definitely, you can work with
the corrections department on
this, see what they, what they
have to say across the state
even in certain, certain places.
A guideline, we also have to
look at the diverse and vast
number of facilities we have,
because they don't all have the
same kinds of individuals who
are already added that, but
thank you, Mr. I really
appreciate that that last
comment of yours and that is
exactly why we are coming before
you so that we can find those
um.
Find the appropriate way of
addressing these issues and
really looking at how we can be
very holistic in changing those
cultural, um.
Disparities that we see, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative, and I, I do
want to say just finally that I
do think that it's important
that we do at least have some
solitary confinement because
there are some people where they
could indeed harm people and
they have indeed harmed people
in this very to that if we, we
have blankets of certain
guidelines when it comes to
this, not workload, which
they're already overworked as it
is, I already working very hard
as it is. So, also I see the
fiscal impact report, and I
don't know if you've seen that
as why 20.
633 year cost would be 47
million and I do think that
that's something we all be in
there, in their budget. So
I'm sorry go ahead
I was gonna say you're on the
finance committee, so please,
please comment on that very much
an issue need to really invest
in our dollars and our values,
and if we are going to see
really incremental changes and
then we absolutely have to look
at those um those dollars that
we need to invest in, Madam
Chair, Representative, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I would just add on.
on the corrections department's
uh FIR. I was pretty scary stuff
could happen, like, likelihood
of large scale facility
disruptibility takeovers, which
would rise dramatically. And we
all know what happened at the
Santa Fe riot here in Santa Fe
years ago, we certainly don't
want to relaxidaisical or or any
other kind of uh.
Less
appropriate measures. So I just
think maybe just talk, talk to
the secretary. She's a good lady
and I'm sure that you all can
work, work this out in the
interim.
Thank you, Madam
Madam Chair, representative, by
no means with this in any data
that we have in front of us
would, would, um.
would support that information,
but I, I appreciate you bringing
this forward and yes, I.
I've been talking to our our
secretary, and that's why she's
here today. Thank you, man.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I do say I definitely don't want
to say that it's not happening
in data.
It was a,
I would just say that there is
no doubt that would exemplify or
support that. Thank you.
National, it's a concern of
theirs,
I would defer to the secretary
on.
Did you have anything to add
regarding according to your FIR
on page.
Madam Chair Representative
block, uh, thank you, no, well,
I would say there's no data on
that because this is not
something that has been done,
but we absolutely believe it
will based on the loss of staff
and our loss of management
tools.
Sure, thank you. No need for
comment further.
Society bringing up that incarce
is really important, I think in
the conversation that we to
But perhaps for the interim sort
of about that and have the
Go ahead.
I'm sure to be um on very
important that we.
hear this discussion and um
maybe
perhaps during.
Yes, thank you. I would just
like to say that as we were
having these serious discussion
and as we further this
discussion that we really.
who are operating at only 64%
capacity with some prisons below
50% demonstrating that closures
are possible while still
maintaining adequate space. This
goes to the discussion of how we
are funding and where our
dollars are going into a really
focus on those those supports so
that we can come together and we
can fix this, and we can change
that culture that is, that is in
the 100 years of making, I want
to thank everybody that showed
up today, I want to thank.
Uh, our secretary, expert
witness here today for showing
up and really having um.
Having this this this
conversation, but I, I really
feel like we need to move this a
little bit faster.
Or a lot faster in order to make
those cultural changes back to
our first house pill 125.
Please hurry, we need to start
our next.
Hey, representative Matthews,
are you on House Bill 125 live
and I believe you have a.
Yes, madam Chair.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, um.
Uh, with me today is um.
John Anderson.
Uh, thank you, John Anderson,
uh, with the Bankers Associate.
Um, and this bill comes, uh, the
committee substitute and so
forth.
Um
For a very long time, New
Mexico.
Uniformed
Uh, provisions that Mexico
version of the.
Uniform probate code and what
they did was essentially the for
people who served or
organizations that served as
conservators.
And that was a problem because
whole lot of organizations or
people who wanted to serve as
conservators if they had
unlimited live lives.
Uh, and so John Anderson and
others got to talked with the
New Mexico Spring. The result
was that uh is is the substitute
bill that we now have before us.
Which sets forth a process by
which
Um, the conservators.
Liability.
Therefore, hopefully going to
cause a lot more organizations
and people willing to take on
this task and.
All right, but that's what and
uh we understand like.
you'll be able to get this done.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, could you just
go through, because I see a lot
of new language added.
referring to your expert on
Zoom, yes, OK, madam chair.
I see.
All right, can you hear me now?
There we go.
Madam Sher, can you hear me,
Oh, excellent. Thank you, uh,
representatives, thank you for
letting me appear by Zoom. I
appreciate that. So
Representative Matthews has done
a great job summarizing the
problem, um, in terms of the
changes that are in HB 125. What
this um bill does is it creates
a process by which a conservator
can approach the court for the
purpose of getting an
action approved a proposed
action or a report approved, uh,
those processes now don't exist
under the existing section 429
as it was revised following the
2018 revisions to the probate
code, um, what's important and
to, to go to the
representative's question about
the details, what is important
about this is that um.
The fixes to 429 that the
committee has before it in HP
125, normalizes conservatorship
practice to other fiduciary
practices. So for example, uh
trust relationships or probate
estates and it does that by
setting out a process by which a
conservator can approach the
court. It requires the
conservator to file a written
petition to have an act.
Or a proposed act or a report
approved, uh, it requires the
conservator to serve, uh, that
petition to all persons entitled
to notice and those in a
conservatorship, those
individuals would have been
identified in the court order
following the adjudication of
incapacity, so there would
already be an order identifying
who those persons are and those
individuals would be required to
get a copy of the petition.
Um, in addition, uh, by
definition, the process would
allow interested persons to
object to the relief that the
conservator was seeking, and
then it would require the court
to schedule a hearing, and so at
the end of the day, what this
does is if there is a particular
issue in a conservatorship case
such as a need to sell a house
for a certain amount of money or
a need to make an investment in
a certain way, um, this allows
the conservator to go to court.
Uh, to with notice to everybody,
uh, to get court approval and
then to have some assurance uh
that the conservator won't be
liable for the action that the
court approved. Um, and it's the
same thing with respect to
approving the conservators
annual or final accounting.
Um, so the, uh, the changes that
were
put into place in 2018, um,
effectively, uh, uh
Uh, cast a huge cloud on whether
or not a conservator even had
the ability to ask these things
uh of a district court, um, and
notably in indicated earlier in
the context of trust or
probates, this is kind of uh it
is just standard operating
procedures in those contexts for
a fiduciary to be able to ask
the court for approvals in those
areas. And so because of that,
Um, immediately after the
liability provisions which were
in the old 409.1, immediately
after those prohibitions were
passed in New Mexico law, uh, we
saw a uh many uh qualified
conservators flee the
marketplace and we're completely
unwilling to take on new cases
because of a concern
aspresentative Matthews said
that there would never be a way
to limit their lives.
ability.
Uh, uh, uh, in terms of what it
was that motivated uh these
changes back in 2018, um,
Representative Matthews was
correct, uh, as far as I know,
there was no, there is no other
state, um, that has this kind of
a provision. um, I will say that
in 2018, uh, New Mexico
considered the uh revised
uniform guardianship,
conservatorship, and other
protective arrangements Act, um,
that act did not.
have this provision in it and in
fact had provisions that were
somewhat opposite to it, um, New
Mexico adopted it, um, and, um,
as, as far as I can tell.
I think you answered the
question if we could.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you,
yeah, I, I appreciate that.
Yeah
liability for consent.
If they sign this, then it
would.
not be valid. Uh, Madam chair uh
representative, so this um this
section, and I think that what
you're referring to is line 4 on
page 4 representative, is that
correct.
Yes.
At the end of this section.
Yes, yes, so, uh, Representative
uh Madam Chair, I will say that
uh when looking at what um gave
rise to the concern that uh
caused these liability
prohibitions to be put into the
probate code in 2018. 1 of those
concerns was that uh protected
persons were being asked to sign
releases of conservators, um,
uh,
I, I cannot imagine any
profession.
that would think that that was
appropriate, um, and so in
conversations with a subgroup of
wings that we dealt with, um, we
agree that this uh this part of
the prohibition of liability
should remain and so
Representative, what you see at
line 4 on page 4 is a
reiteration of what is in the
existing uh 429, which basically
just confirms that if a person
is
to a conservatorship or a
guardianship, that person does
not have the ability to release
the fiduciary, the fiduciary
needs to go to court, which is
the way it ought to be.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative OK I kind of
understand that, and then I just
kind of some of these
provisions, I just want to make
sure that this is of that person
who has the guardian. Maybe
they're, they're in and out of.
it comes to performing these
kinds of tasks, legal tasks, and
so with this in any way.
Take the regain that that
ability to sign legal documents,
etc. and how would they petition
the court on that. If they were
deemed uh.
Not, not.
Capable at the time,
uh, good question and the answer
is no, reduce the
responsibility.
Uh, of the conservator
the sub is longer than the
original bill, so
congratulations on that, but
that's all I have.
determination is that loop on a
certain case or.
That role
is that
Answer that
Um
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I think that the um termination
of a conservatorship would allow
the conservator to come to court
and have their final report
adjudicated whether that
termination is due to death or
Madam Chair
Representative Can I, can I be
heard? Um, so, yes, ma'am. Madam
Chair, uh representative, I
think that if a conservator
wanted to have their final
report approved in any way,
shape or form, they would be
required under HB 125 to file a
petition and file the notice
requirements, they would not
have the ability to have um any
of their actions approved unless
they followed this.
procedure regardless of whether
the termination was due to death
or restoration of capacity now
under um uh HP 124, which is
pending, um, uh, there is a
procedure for terminating a
conservatorship due to death.
Um, there's nothing that
requires a conservator to seek
court approval of their report,
whether due to death or
restoration of capacity, but if
the conservator wants that.
judicial protection, then they
would be required representative
to follow the procedures that
are set out in this HB 125.
Um, about if they're in the
middle of it.
Um, at the end, to decide what
liability they want to take on.
It doesn't, it's not required,
for instance, to pass on a.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
you are correct. If the
conservator elects to not seek
court approval of their report.
This HP 125 would not require
them to seek that approval.
is incompetent, whatever.
The file
I think I will trust you as to
um how that process.
Fine, and I will trust you. I
think the language um.
Provides
Yeah, look forward to, I just
like to add that, um.
Thank you, Representative for um
we.
Because in our committee, um,
recognized the death of a
protected person or the.
Guardian, well, not the
guardian, but anyway, we put it.
Uh clauses, you know, or refer
to your bill.
So
we have a consistent system
throughout.
this process.
OK.
We have the motion on that as
well as the motion on.
Um, consumer and public affairs
Committee.
OK, next.
We have um house bill for.
Thank you
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Um
presenting tonight.
Um, much simpler than what I
just presented representative uh
go back to our boat so that um
um for um. Yeah.
No.
OK.
Adoption of the substitute for
House Bill 125, and we also had
a motion.
Oh
Yeah, yes.
OK, let's go back now to the
motion for a do not pass on the
committee on the bill of 125
and a Marian, we're not done.
OK.
Want to hear the whole vote, um,
that was just on um accepting
your committee substitute.
So now we're on.
on house.
I said that. How you can leave.
Thank you.
All right, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. Um, I hope this
is short and sweet, but this
bill uh simply amends existing
statute to extend the period of
time that a resident has to pay
an outstanding rent from 3 to 10
days. After that time and with
notification to the resident, as
specified in existing state law,
the rental property owner of
Madame Chair, um, with that,
I'll stand for questions on how
Madam Chair, I'd like to move
with you.
But
Thompson.
So, um, with that.
Would you like to present it
now,
um, I'm standing to it's a very
simple bill, right?
Section 47-8-1.
Um
Yeah, right, all this is doing
the the time of resident to go.
It's been a long day to, um, for
late payment, we are looking at
several uh several to help
accommodates and so this just uh
minor accommodation, we need to
check and see, is there anyone
in the audience who wants to
speak and support.
Maria
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Maria Grego. I'm an
attorney and the director of
economic equity with the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and we thank the
sponsor for this bill. Uh, we
stand in support of this bill
because New Mexico's housing
crisis has reached a breaking
point with soaring costs and
rising homelessness, putting
stable housing out of reach for
countless families. Um, rents in
New Mexico have skyrocketed 60%
since 2017, which is twice the
national average. Uh, meanwhile,
also since 2017, homelessness
has surged.
87%, 47% higher than the
national increase. House Bill
462 is a critical step toward
reversing these trends. 3 days
to get caught up on late rent is
simply not enough time. New
Mexico's time frame for notice
of late rent is far too short.
We are in the minority of states
with such a short time frame.
Only 10 states allow for 3 days'
notice or shorter when a tenant
is behind on rent. This bill
allows time for an extra
paycheck to come through for
working families or for a tenant
to pick up a few extra shifts to
make rent
Before facing eviction. For
these reasons, we strongly
encourage the committee to pass
this important piece of
legislation. Thank you.
Good have membersent Cravens of.
Registered lobbyists for this
bill, but for some pretty, uh,
we really don't feel like it
will.
Help the situation in the end
other than to really add burden
to the property in many cases
just to hold on inflation.
so
Uh, I gotta tell you there's a
vast amount of inventory, and
they rent those homes out and
they struggle to make the
mortgage deal. Uh, there are a
few instances of tenants and we
don't like that either. It's
already a very long process.
Uh looks like there's one. OK.
Allan Laik.
Madam Chair and representatives.
My name is Alan Mosek, and I'm
the executive director of the
apartment Association. We
respectfully oppose this uh
bill, but, you know, I'll tell
you we're not necessarily
opposed to any change in the
timeline, but we do feel that
there may be some unintended
consequences with this bill. Uh,
many owners currently do not
post a non-payment of rent
notice immediately, but after
this bill they likely will. So
we think that, you know, it'd be
better to either have maybe a
potentially a short grace period
with a shorter notice or
potentially a 7-day notice.
So that it matches other notices
in New Mexico uniform owner
resident Relations Acts, and
both of those options would more
than double the length of the
notice, uh, with that, we
respectfully stand in
opposition. Thank you.
Admin
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just had to sleep right over
from the webcast to the Zoom.
It, it's only Tuesday and, and
we're all like frogs, so.
I, I'll, I'll bring fish and
chips next time. My name is
Nadine and I'm a disability
advocate, uh, not a lobbyist,
and I'm a person with multiple
disabilities and uh I am in
support of this. I think there's
a bit of confusion about the
three-day notice or quit is
typically what happens after
someone has not paid their rent
for their rental period, say
it's uh a monthly rental period.
They haven't paid it for a
month.
Then
you can do the 3-day notice or
quit or if it is a weekly rental
and someone doesn't pay for that
week, you can do a 3-day notice
to quit. So it's a, a bit more
complicated and then there are
potential mechanisms to utilize
where if, say, a repair was not
being made and the rent was
being withheld so that the
repair could be made, that needs
to be done in a very specific
way, and there is a mag
magnificent handbook written in
what's called plain English. It
needs to be at about 4th grade
level of reading and writing,
that's available from the
Department of Health. That's a
landmark to handbook. Thank you
so much.
OK, are there questions or
comments from the committee?
So we will have to wait.
Thank you,
um, staff.
Analysts are sergeant of arms
are.
Zoom and
everyone, thank you for staying
