Economic and and large capacity
magazine ban was in effect I
protect the tell you mass
shootings fell by thirty seven
percent and the number of people
dying in those shootings fell by
forty three percent when when
band with the band lasted two
thousand Ford increase of a
hundred and eighty three percent
hi fidelity Mehsud ins and
twenty three percent in that
the.
Increase in deaths in those
incidents I I strongly support
this legislation
and I I can tell you that we've
got to start at some point and I
understand gun owners concerns
but I will just close by saying
the following you don't need
these huge magazines to hunt
with you don't need these huge
magazines to defend your home
the only time you need these
huge magazines quite frankly to
defend your home is if there is
a swat team perhaps outside
we know that this Legisla-
legislators were individually
and we're prosecuting that case
as you all know where
individually their homes were
shot at recently in one of the
firearms in.
Number of the farms that were
retrieved from from some some
search warrants included a nine
millimeter with a up Daryl
capacity with far too many boats
in that capacity magazine that
should have been allowed out on
the streets I fully support this
bill and urge this committee in
the entire legislature to make a
little bit of a difference here
and I think we make a large
difference when it comes to god
forbid any type of mass
shootings in New Mexico so I
strongly support thank you thank
you madam chair it was
appropriate for for in our
estimation that
district attorney pregnant make
this statement because of one of
one being on the agenda and
because of what we are proposing
and because yes please and he
came up specifically for the
senator Linda Lopez has joined
us she's aware of our
negotiations are discussions
he's fully supportive and
because you're anxious to move
on with the agenda I'd like to
go ahead and formally request
that house bill fifty be rolled
over and that on it like
everyone here in support of
large capacity magazines to
understand that we have entered
into discussions so that we can
merge our efforts on house bill
one zero one so we're fully
supportive of house bill one
zero one and we look forward to
having the really great
discussion I'm gonna exit if you
accept my request to roll it
over and then I will be back
with Representative from metal
on one a one at that time
appropriate.
Madam chair thank you that is
that is that good okay thank you
thank you very much thank you.
Thank you.
This.
Your.
Thank you madam chair the title
says it all this is community
safety bill that basically is
looking to ensure that we're
closing a loophole on those who
unfortunately are still able to
access guns with our background
checks in place we've caught
some errors unfortunately madam
chair members of the committee
we're those who are still able
to obtain a firearm typically
are those in the category of
domestic violence offenders this
bill is a community safety
provision that provides fourteen
days to as a waiting period as a
cooling off period really for
those who are seeking to harm
themselves and others madam
chair so with me is my experts
around at the school we with New
Mexicans and gun violence and
she'll be serving on behalf of
that community.
We were happy to stand for
questions chair.
Yeah and I will this year.
Your one minute for each person
on.
Are with the.
If you would like to invest
three.
Impact on really get into the
twenty twenty minutes first
mandating that.
And then
The lights.
So
those in opposition.
I want to be.
And everyone wants to be.
This is a story okay.
Start.
Thanks to the fact that they
were.
So we just want money that we
raise.
Okay your question if we're
going to yes applies to more
than in opposition more than
with the of the medication.
We cannot.
I remember It change
in general economic verbiage.
Four thousand students.
Yeah
stand for on the weapons.
Thank you for that we're
yeah economic programs.
And for these often lapses
A lot.
The
very.
You.
Yes
New Mexico.
Right here.
I can.
I went off of the and.
Thank you.
As I have a plan.
Are needed to be had.
Well I will be found at that
point.
And the wedding band.
It's not going to help the women
that are kick in and get a
divorce.
Have the right to buy a good
protectors of thank you.
I.
Hello I'm terrible already I've
been a peace officer in the
state of New Mexico for sixteen
years I'm also a firearms
instructor and a certified
active shooter instructor.
The only question I have for you
folks is.
These laws have been done in
multiple states across the
country and they've been in
place for decades and they've
had no impact on crime or
reducing it.
What makes us think that it's
going to work in New Mexico when
it's failed everywhere else.
As a peace officer I do not fear
high capacity magazines.
As an active shooter instructor
I can tell you that the most
heinous active shooter events in
this country that have taken
place took place in gun free
zones.
How how are we going to fix
these problems it's a deeper
rooted problem with our society
not weapons try you can't
regulate morality you can't
provided.
Taking these weapons away from
law abiding citizens just leave
them vulnerable to criminals who
by definition don't obey laws
anyways.
Do you guys have an answer for
these problems.
It was a false or yes I just
retired from law enforcement for
twenty six years of serving the
state of New Mexico.
The people that that Mr Redman
brought up that are using high
capacity magazines are law
abiding citizens the other
criminals to take high capacity
magazines and assault weapons
that you guys can't even
properties fine away from people
like my seventy four year old
mother going to defend
themselves with high capacity
magazines and assault weapons
including my mother there
fifteen.
Also a fire instructor also a
and and active shooter
instructor we're not.
You know the the simple fact of
it is is that you guys are by
the constitution that's about in
the second amendment by creating
these bills and you should know
that your oath when you took it
said that you would support the
second amendment and the entire
constitution you're doing the
opposite of that.
The second member protects the
first amendment the third the
fourth the fifth the seventeen.
All the other ones that we like
but you don't like this one.
To madam.
I was getting a five seven okay.
We're good.
Seventy seven years old.
Well almost as well with ours.
For a school year.
And
of course.
Really.
We are.
Your.
House Bill B..
When.
involved
the was
for the magazine was only nine
one of.
George was very.
Your.
Education reporter over apple
fifty two for one.
On.
Thank you public comment.
Members Jim young co founder
calibers Lee retired early after
twenty years.
A constitutional right the
primary reason for the enactment
of the second and this is the
one we Mexico situational
in the farms what's for Senator
protection of our form of
government.
The constitution against all
enemies foreign and domestic
that was the primary purposes
now because we enjoyed the ready
for so long we've forgotten that
is only for for planning
and only for self defense.
So that that's primary what we
got examples of oil right now do
you create another places that
maybe you're really nervous it
is good to have this on
population they can prevent that
from happening.
Okay so real quick fourteen day
waiting period.
Unnecessary ineffective
redundant.
Eight already has a we.
There's.
Madam chair is.
Madam chair of members of the
committee my name is David taxes
I'm a rancher from the Chama
valley Rio Arriba county up.
I represent more New Mexico
stockman's organization who also
does the voice for sixty
thousand farmers and ranchers in
the northern counties many of
who are Representative Romero's
constituents we stand opposed to
all of this bills today and
we're very concerned that this
bills are gonna take the ability
for citizens to protect
themselves the car population of
the state right now is right at
two million one hundred thousand
just a little bit about that we
currently have a hundred and
ninety eight state police police
officers in patrol clearly shows
that the our populace is is
valuable we just don't have a
law the law enforcement to to
support or defend or protect our
citizens of the state thank you.
Ladies and gentleman madam chair
my name is Nick Sanchez I'm also
a rancher from northern New
Mexico
I'm not gonna waste the time
bickering or playing with
anybody about what I think about
this I'm just gonna remind
everybody of the law article two
section six of you New Mexico
state constitution states the
right to bear arms shall not be
infringed upon.
Legislation like this is a
declaration of war against law
abiding god fearing gun wielding
American citizens.
It's unconstitutional you people
were elected to uphold the
constitution and defend our loss
is not an accessory to the
constitution or some sort
privileges and American it is a
law put in place to protect us
from you guys and government
overreach and shall not be
infringed upon.
We are the low the largest
fighting force on the planet
American gun owners but we don't
take it lightly.
Yes.
Good afternoon ladies and
gentleman
my name is Leonard Belletti own
I'm also from northern New
Mexico I am the vice president
of farm bureau and I've been on
school boards
might might be
Question today is you know what
New Mexico has such weak laws we
have people from other states
coming to our state to commit
crimes with with rifles and with
firearms know what we bring back
the death penalty why don't we
bring back you know stronger
laws that will scare some of
these people and make people
obey the laws a little better
and and and think twice before
they commit these crimes in our
state you know there is there is
a Senator
States are neighboring states
that have stricter laws than the
state and the state of New
Mexico I just don't understand
why you target law abiding
citizens taking away our rights
or trying to when we should
start looking at our laws to you
know to to prosecute the people
are committing these crimes
because obviously they're
finding firearms illegally and
it's affecting us thank you for
your time.
Thank you Mr okay.
Statements last.
Committee members my name is Tom
Turner I'm the president of lost
almost sportsman's club and we
have over eleven hundred members
so let me do the math here based
on the population of Los Alamos
five percent of the counties
affiliated with our shooting
club and I I wanted to talk
about unintended consequences
that might occur here so.
Most of our members shoot semi
autos with large magazine large
magazines so.
A lot of those activities would
really drop that includes the
youth programs the safety
classes we put on the matches we
have
and finally I'd like to say.
With our
Los Alamos offers all these.
Open amenities.
You're supposed to laugh.
But a draw for Los Alamos
national lab you the new hires
there is our club in being able
to shoot thank you for your
attention.
What.
We need a bigger hammer thank
you for allowing me to speak my
name is Khalil Spencer I'm also
when the board of directors of
Los Alamos gun club and a
retired Los Alamos scientist
up three points since we don't
have much time for a bill one
hundred we are being asked to
have a fourteen day waiting
period there is already the
possibility of a three day
waiting period something like
the Charleston loophole for
people to get their data in
order I'd like to see
justification why to take two
weeks to me you're asking people
to take a long way to rather
than justify why it takes two
weeks for the law enforcement
community to have its act
together secondly I don't know
if the line round limits been
transferred to one a one but as
far as I know there are no nine
round converters for magazines
and Furthermore when New York
state tried to put a less than
ten round limits in the New York
state safe act that was the only
part of the state fact that was
overturned in federal court
lastly I don't know what to say
about what I wanted looks like
it's massively changed well I
appreciate that you're doing
some things to try to make it
possible to grandfather in
rather than just confiscate
people stuff I don't know what
to say about that thank you.
Just.
Okay.
Much to do so but I'm not going
to press the number of districts
I okay hello my name is mark
curry I am a transplant from the
east coast
liberal Connecticut and
there's a lot of people there
that love guns and we actually
have some lost their that are
less strict than that we have
here which I find really
interesting one of the points I
wanted to make a unfortunately I
don't have time not really time
I didn't realize this meeting
was happening so I don't get to
study every aspect which another
time I will do however one of my
main points is I spent a couple
hours last night studying
statistics from both sides and
what I found interesting is that
both sides of the argument came
up with what appeared to be
ballots statistics to support
their points so what I know
about statistics is you can
highlight things to support your
point so people who come up with
statistics on either side I'm
not sure that's the the best way
to go and and finally I want to
put into words for the rights of
law abiding citizens the gun
culture most of them don't just
like guns we love that like some
people love ceramics or any
other thing sports cars so it's
easy to take away the rights
when you are not interested in
that thank you Sir welcome.
So you want to speak.
Yes my name is Senator that I
live in Rio Rancho.
I only would like to say that
anytime someone threatens to
reach into my gun cabinet and
take away several thousand
dollars worth of money.
Personal belongings I would
consider that theory I would
really hate to see that being
done via legislation or via
regulation thank you I yield my
time.
Not everyone the decrease.
The change.
Twenty twenty.
All together right now with.
Okay.
Okay good morning good afternoon
actually my name is Laurie may
when I'm from Bernalillo New.
I'm a treasure of the Sierra
Club in Albuquerque hi of course
eight out or the indoor
precision pistol Lee we have a
club that have a junior program
and should coral and anyway I
respectfully request the
committee to.
Propose the
assault weapons bill of one a
one
we that is a very that that's
used for
most of our competitions I
competed for forty years I
became a national champion with
firearms that were would be
banned under this and I would
also use of force instructor at
the law enforcement academy and
I can assure you that your
average
Senate and that bear with if if
the active shooter not active
shooter but actively come
competitive shooter with we are
law abiding we have been OpBud
we have no intent to become a
felon if this bill is passed we
shall become one and I don't
feel that that's better to meet.
And.
Okay.
Demographics.
You are to.
Thank you.
Can you hear me correct finally
a lady speaks my name is
Christine arrogant I'm seventy
six years old I lived at our
house in Santa Fe for over
twenty one years I'm a retired
lawyer and I looked at all of
these drafts and I have C.
several problems first of all
it's your turn tens of thousands
of law abiding citizens into
felons overnight these people
acquired objects legally and all
of a sudden it's a felonious
thing to possess them and
Yet ugh I'd like to address the
problem with the definitions vis
a vis women I am not a giant by
any means but I think I'm over
appetite for women I have very
short arms if I'm sitting at
home and I have three little
kids and I hear somebody cracked
my sliding glass windows I don't
want to have a twenty two
caliber pistol this line by line
shots in it I want to have a
nice big rifle that has been
expanded for my tiny little
short dinosaur arms so that I
can shoot the bad guys thank
you.
Please.
There's quite a few people
outside that are very.
Yes we would love to be here but
they can't come in and they're
very frustrated they don't want
this
all the giants will catch them
on the other bills as we go.
Madam chair members of the
committee money machine for I'm
sure for San Juan county
president of the New Mexico
sheriffs association
Representative like to address
the bill one hundred on the
fourteen with the waiting period
I can understand the the
philosophy behind about a
fourteen day cooling period for
the suspect but what about the
victim think about the suspect
is in jail right now and there
are threats towards that victims
you're denying her right a right
denied is right are right
delayed is a right and I'd and
that's gonna prevent these
people from protecting
themselves against regressors
the second thing I do appreciate
some of the changes that happen
I want to want really this is
getting rid of what we the so
called assault rifles through
attrition to generational
traditions what's happening here
what we need as far as law
enforcement we're all looking
for answers against violence in
the state of New Mexico
especially gun violence for the
Attorney General actis
reassessments right yes we we
know what the acts are and we
know who's committing these the
problem is New Mexico courts
have no teeth I'm severely
disappointed to find that so
that a representative of reams
bills were shut down the should
been bipartisan bills.
The other thing I want to
mention and that is just we need
more supports law enforcement
let's go after the bad guys not
law abiding citizens.
Yeah I for people.
It's like.
Good afternoon my name is bill
Roni I'm owner of the
outdoorsman retail store here in
Santa Fe which over the years
assault firearms to more than
fifty thousand of your law
abiding constituents our
customers include men and women
liberals and conservatives
doctors lawyers artists ranchers
construction workers quarter
need law enforcement military
please know that virtually every
one of my customers opposes
these proposed House Bills but
strongly support enforcement of
existing laws to curb unlawful
use of firearms our request is
that you not punished or
penalized law abiding citizens
by depriving them of.
But rather to focus on the wrong
doers and given to law
enforcement and mental health
experts the tools they need to
identify and apprehend and
punish those who would break our
laws please hear your
constituents we do share the
common goal of a safe and
peaceful community.
Madam chair committee members
and in terms.
Madam chair committee members my
name is terra mention I
represent the national rifle
association and fifty thousand
members here in the state of New
Mexico we're in opposition to
house bill one hundred house
bill one a one with regard
helpful one hundred the fourteen
day waiting period imposed on
all firearm purchases isn't
rational requirement considering
the volume Mexico gun buyers
must already passed a background
check as required by twenty
nineteen law the mechanics of an
FBI nics check will not be
altered by the bill and no
additional criminal history
information will be on covered
by the existence of a waiting
period statute the bill would
simply delay your ability to
protect yourself and your family
regard house bill one or one
twenty twenty Survey available
research by the rand corporation
hello there is no conclusive at
evidence for the effect of large
capacity magazine bans as so
called assault weapons bans on
firearm homicides Colorado
enacted a big magazine limit
lost fifteen rounds in twenty
thirteen and is not reduce crime
or halted mass shootings in that
state in fact the number of farm
related murders has risen every
year over the last decade and
now stands at three times the
twenty thirteen level thank you.
I'm sure committee members my
name is not Lawson thanks for
hearing me today my first job
was as a working cowboy I've
been involved in two separate
incidents where there were
fifteen one seventeen coyotes in
another threatening non
livestock and that's hi capacity
magazines got the job done
waiting period not spend
settlement
what I'd like to address all of
the other things that this is
trying to ban people small
stature people disabilities rely
on from all stocks pistol grips
for worked hand regards to even
be able safely operating control
firearm if you're a rancher with
the you know he six three she's
five two new could only afford
one rifle you gotta have a
collapsible stock for both
people to be able to defend the
home and why are we worried
about people burning their hands
you really want.
Almost all of the current owners
that are legal gun owners to be
out there burning their hands I
mean that's just to the up
Senator it kills me all the
other things is trying to ban
thank you.
Hello my name is John Lee back
I'm vice president of process
engineering for a fortune fifty
company and over thirty years of
experience I've conducted and
train folks on root cause
analysis and I can say with
certainty not one instance
resulted in a root cause that
was an object.
Secondly when we have folks that
can drive their car
irresponsibly recklessly or
drunk not one person is going to
blame that car.
These bills the way they're
written are wrong they're not
going to work please this is
what I ask of you.
These bills changed law abiding
citizens like myself into felons
I challenge you to change
felons into inmates thank you.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Dennis
could get us a lifelong resident
Santa Fe New Mexico a registered
voter and responsible got gun
owner I'm here today to oppose
H. B. fifty guns don't kill
people evil people kill people
guns are neutral on April twenty
third nineteen eighty eight they
person walked into a seven
eleven Santa Fe route the
straight shot to the twenty five
caliber pistol that only held
six rounds I grew up in a
military and correctional
officer home my father brothers
were avid hunters respect for
guns was instilled in me at a
very young age in nineteen
seventy four my oldest brother
was shot and killed with thirty
eight revolver that only held
six rounds I have a huge respect
for guns the person that Shami
was never caught and the person
that killed my brother was only
serve six months in prison I can
bet that the guns used to shoot
me and my brother were point
legally purchased my question to
you madam chair committee is how
many books does it take to kill
a person the answer is one thank
you.
Opposition
I.
Right.
Go ahead may.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I joined all other
members of the public in their
opposition to these bills house
bill one hundred will endanger
to victims of domestic violence
waiting period delays the
ability of those now sudden need
for defensive firearms such as
women fleeing abusive
relationships to protect
themselves of the abused person
counting down the days until
they can have an effective tool
to do so open their abusers
doctor doesn't attack in the
meantime is horrifying I have a
dear friend is one of the
largest DPS certified concealed
carry instructors in the state
when I asked her for her
thoughts on this bill she said I
think it's offensive to women
especially those in domestic
violence or stalking situations
they would have to wait fourteen
days you could be dead by the
time allowed to pick up their
gun she thinks gun rights are
women's rights with hospital one
a one Sanchez recognized utility
of standard capacity magazines
and make no mistake that's what
the bill seeks ban assault
weapons so called for defensive
purposes given the exceptions
for law enforcement officers
these are weapons of war with no
place on our streets why armed
police with the the amendment
distracted during part of this
too to conceal carry class with
instructor recommended time is.
Alright
alright we have one more I'm
sorry yeah one minute.
Thank you so much for taking my
call.
I want to remind everyone that
you're.
Growth was to protect and defend
the constitution criminals if
you do not.
Alright sure.
Sorry about that
so your you guys took an oath to
protect and defend the
constitution criminals do not
obey laws
we've had higher and higher
crime rates and people need to
be able to defend our state
ourselves.
I know that many who support
these bills on restricting law
abiding citizens were the same
ones that we're supporting
Ukraine are people getting
weapons to defend themselves yet
American citizens are not
allowed to defend themselves
this is wrong I do support HB
sixty one now
people need to be able to carry
Kerry without permits thank you.
Thank you Marci.
Go ahead law you have one
minute.
Okay thank you for your time.
My name is are women.
a lifelong resident of New
Mexico
the graduates Mexico State
University in two thousand ten I
like state that I oppose house
bill fifty and house bill one a
one because of the racially
disproportionate impact our
community I do not believe it is
an intended consequence but I do
believe that it is an
unavoidable what.
Full of color are over
represented in the criminal
justice system and even more so
in terms of firearms consist a
study published by the office of
justice programs twenty twenty
one found that seventy percent
of all defendants convicted of
federal firearms offenses were
minorities in cities and states
have adopted bans on the
possession of high capacity
magazines or sell weapons bans
there appears to be widespread
noncompliance.
In twenty fourteen three years
after the passage of the New
York state safe act which bars
registration assault weapons
analysis found that of the one
million weapons meeting this all
level criteria only forty four
thousand or four percent had
been registered.
There is little evidence to
suggest that gun owners will
discard the magazine seldom and
he's on the dollar turned over
to law enforcement there's no
mechanism mechanism in place to
detect.
At.
Right.
Thank millet.
K. thank go ahead Mike if you
have one.
Yes hi thank you very much my
name is Mike I'm a resident here
Dr give credit to my whole life
I don't understand why any of
these bills on the table I think
we all agree want Mexico the
state for I've been in in in New
Mexico where I could ride my
bike all over the city and be
safe just as long as I was home
before the sun went down.
I don't have to worry no parent
nowadays can do that and and
what are we doing we're going
after gun owners we're going to
criminalize half the state fifty
percent of the state are gun
owners I guarantee you pretty
much everybody has a gun that's
going to criminalize them in the
state you're going to have to
the state not just conservatives
liberals independents everybody
this isn't a partisan issue will
want to be safe the F. B. I.
report in the last four years
running American citizens killed
more criminals than cops it
because the cops are came to us
in time we have to protect
ourselves and not giving women a
chance to defend themselves
within the fourteen days that is
absolutely an anti women bill
come on we can do better let's
go after the criminals as a
force laws our prison population
is down twenty seven percent
every single.
Next you'll.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and I
just wanted to let you know that
I'm from the organization of
controlled for border control
crime and I do believe in just
that if we had more regulations
on our border where these high
part Howard rifles that
partridge's stirred are coming
in that would be a move towards
a safer street and safer schools
we can't forget what happened in
Australia when they thought it
would be a good idea to be
honest
Law abiding citizens from their
guns when the pandemic happened
and everybody was constructed to
their homes could even lead to
the groceries or the church or
any of their first or fifth any
of their amendment rights were
all taken away but
they were they were of a high
priority rifles keeping them in
their homes so we just kind of
remember that every law is in
place in our constitution for a
reason and it laws are in place
to see a support them not
instruct them and this is.
Practice.
Francis.
Yep one minute if you could
speak as loud as possible.
Thank you are muted.
Francis could you and you
yourself please.
Okay that's going to the next
person.
We're.
Go ahead Steven you have one
minute to speak loudly.
Good afternoon my name is Steven
are the retired commander United
States Navy for the very same
working folks did this board and
the constitution United States I
took that very seriously.
We all know the second amendment
says the money's talk about
that.
But to New Mexico constitution
talks about the same thing only
better no law shall abridge the
right.
Of the system to keep and bear
arms thanks for the.
Compressed version.
There is no such thing as a high
capacity magazines full steam.
Speak louder.
That helped.
Nope the latter.
Let's get this thing closed.
Is that better yes.
All right thank you.
There's no mention of how our
new method of how to convert a
standard magazine which is ten
rounds that's what sold with
pretty much every semi automatic
firearm out there tonight so I
don't know how that's gonna
work.
Nine this seems to be meant to
abolish the farm.
Because they just simply come
with standard magazines anything
a semiautomatic is now illegal
because you can't find this time
is that.
Next login.
Go ahead login.
It would and it.
Hello thanks for taking the time
to hear from all of us I'm not
going to bill the labor of the
points that were already made I
am strongly opposed to the three
gun control bills most of them
will be shut down in federal
court they're on constitutional
all the things other people
Marty said
it's interesting the high
capacity magazine
that there can be a lot for law
enforcement so you're saying
that law enforcement has a
greater right to protect
themselves and do their job in
the average citizen does the
fourteen day waiting period is
going to drastically affect
women in.
young women that are seeking
firearms to protect themselves
against sexual assault or from a
domestic violence so really a
lot of this is government
overreach and it's sadly it's
par for the course for New
Mexico I really hope it doesn't
pass and please no all the gun
control bills.
Thank you.
X. the.
At.
Hi good afternoon my name is ed
Brady I'm retired scientist
engineer from expanding national
labs and I'm I'm also opposed to
all these bills I'm gonna to
simply speak to one on one I
mean this bill is about
aesthetics and magazine size
we want to be in these bills
because they have additional
grips barrel shrouds.
And other particular aesthetics
to do nothing to make the gun
more dangerous it's all about
being able to pass this bill.
And and make a group happy but
let's be honest with look at the
Ruger in fourteen it's the same
gun other than is made of wood
and metal that's not illegal
let's take a look at the in one
in one eight anyone growing
that's an actual military rifle
I only one it was my father's
rifle when he was a marine that
built that done is exactly the
same but yet this bill doesn't
make it illegal.
if you're gonna pass gun control
laws at least be consistent if
you're gonna say that semi
automatic.
Handguns and rifles are more
dangerous than anything else.
Alan.
Thank you.
Your.
Go ahead that you.
One minute.
Matthew need and you yourself.
Madam chair members can you hear
me.
Yes now we can.
Thank you thank you for allowing
me to speak today not gonna
repeat a lot of excellent points
have already been made today I
just have a couple questions who
is going to enforce these
if they pass law enforcement
officers were neighbors are we
gonna get taxed who's gonna be
prosecuted how is the state
going to defend the sin in
federal courts I just don't see
it happening this is a very very
bad bill.
Wardley written and so I'm in
strong opposition to it thank
you.
Thank you at our last season
opposition.
Go ahead Tom.
One minute there you go.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
of the brewing decision requires
a store called analogs to
justify these pants on magazines
and so called small rifles there
simply no eighteenth or
nineteenth century bans on
firearms based on the rate of
fire capacity muzzle velocity
appearance for cosmetic features
these clear analysts do not
exist currently there's federal
poll on the California magazine
laws and the L. one hundred laws
in Oregon laws role to to these
situations these do not meet
your criteria required for
brewing decision thank you.
Thank you thank now will go to
the audience for support and
those who would like to speak
please raise your.
Right.
Thank you.
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Alan
Sanchez on the executive
director of the New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
thank you for welcoming public
comment we're here to propose
not to impose we understand the
struggle you have to find the
common good.
But when we think about the
problems in our country
the bishops are concerned we
bury the victims I want to
repeat that we bury them these
are real people with real
morning families we have to
start somewhere and I know that
we can all agree on the same
thing but this effort is a great
start we need to look at all the
ways that we can create the gun
safety needed for our country we
cannot state on this same.
Path thank you.
At.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Maxwell with New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
and we are standing in support
of both H. B. one of one hundred
and one a one and I just have
one thing to say that there is
no absolute constitutional right
either under the New Mexico or
the U. S. constitution thank
you.
Thank you.
One.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is Cheryl Harris
I've been a long time activist
and a new volunteer with moms
demand action I'm asking you to
vote to pass all three or two of
these bills whatever it ends up
with we have no restrictions on
the size of magazine capacity
now in New Mexico and the man to
CDC you can fire a heck of a lot
more bullets per second with an
automatic rifle then you can
with the less capacity gun that
equals more people dead we heard
about the number of events we've
had in the last ten years it's
just horrible as far as the
fourteen day waiting period
we've heard about endangered
women who have to wait to get a
gun but we have not heard about
the other side of that and that
is if the F. B. I. cannot
approve a of gun in the three
days they have now that done can
legally be purchased
it.
May be it is not a life and
death wait for the purchaser but
it may be a death situation for
you or me if the gun sale goes
through.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Deborah Baca I volunteer with
and Representative New Mexico
moms demand action I'm here to
ask you support for H. B. one oh
one and H. B. one hundred.
Passing these bills would give
New Mexicans protection from
assault weapons and high
capacity magazines by taking
these weapons of war off the
streets.
Twenty two states have waiting
periods prior to possession of a
firearm after purchase nine
states already prohibit assault
weapons and fourteen states
prohibit high capacity magazines
New Mexico should join.
With these in passing these
lifesaving and foundational gun
safety policies thank you.
You.
Good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is Daniel Pritchard and I live
in towns.
I really appreciated the
testimony by Mister Sam
Brickman.
Hi he spoke with leadership and
authority I'm on his side.
Thank you I own a firearm
economic.
That is not a felony but that is
not the issue here today like
him I believe that gun control
is the path to increased public
safety.
And who does not want increased
public safety.
I support these bills that
increase public safety I would
also like to thank the authors
of the fiscal impact reports.
I've read them and they provide
a wealth of information and I
really appreciate the
opportunity to speak here today
thank you thank you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Ellen
Peterman I am from New Mexicans
to prevent that violence and I'm
here to speak in favor the bill
both as a member of that group
and as an educator and as a
grandmother who has
grandchildren that are that
every time there's a school
shooting with automatic weapons
are totally terrorized upset
they go to they have to go to
what is it hide shoot run run
run fight run hide shoot
trainings in school now and it
you know I think we have to
think not only of making our
world safer but what we're doing
for our children and I think
he's bills will help our
children feel that the world is
a safer place for them thank
you.
Thank.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee my name my name is
Monica Montoya and I am a
lifelong New Mexican with a long
family history in the state I
understand the sentiment of
those who oppose the proposed
legislation.
But there are more issues to
consider in my opinion I am a
step mother of a state police
officer who is out on the
streets on a daily basis I
support this bill.
It makes sense to me that a
grace period pry Tor purchased
is a reasonable compromise and
will improve the possibility of
a safer society.
In this case doing nothing
should not be an option we have
to start somewhere.
Thank you.
S. person you would like to
speak.
Okay that we're going to.
Support.
More insurance.
Lawrence yep one minute.
Madam chairman.
Members globalization repeated
treatment from Santa Fe and I'm
here representing the Mexico
pediatric concerning the state
chapter of the American academy
of pediatrics and we support
house bill one hundred and house
bill one or one.
House bill one sixty four.
Yes.
I have seen an increased number
of children die from gun
violence wrote the same time we
sent a decrease in the number of
children who have died for motor
vehicle injuries.
One hundred deaths in children
does not come because when
Bentonville Clarence which
country Christmas at some
sensible regulations that in
France France in safety of the
vehicles.
Most of the same.
To prevent gun violence in
children so we support house
bill one hundred and house bill
one hundred one thank you thank
you just.
And it William.
Go ahead Janet you could speak
as loudly as possible thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am here from Santa
Fe national organization for
women and we are in support of
H. B. one hundred and HB what I
want and we oppose H. B. one
sixty four we feel that myself
personally having grown up
shooting guns I have no.
I just cannot figure out why we
needed automatic weapons for
hunting they're made for mass
killing and they should be taken
off the streets thank you.
Thank you the next.
I.
Scott.
Yes hello
I'm is to seal just my name's
Scott Segal thank you for
hearing me I just wanted to say
as Bregman said at the beginning
I think there are good
compromises to be made
I hope that I do I am a guest
one of a hundred and one a one I
spent long nights in the south
Bronx saving people's lives have
been shot from a state that has
much stricter gun laws I think
we all should have a compromise
but I don't think making many of
us balance is the right answer
thank you.
Thank you.
Sorry others in support.
What is in support okay.
So with that
Representative do you want to.
Food or.
I'm not sure I'd like to
director of the testimony
concerning how this works we do
that I'm sorry we're done with
public comment you don't need to
correct.
Thank you up Representative.
Madam chair I think we have to
use this might so forgive me.
It will do.
All right we do all of it here
madam chair
Full service I. T. and tax so I
just wanted to respond to a few
of the comments and thank you
all for being here today for
those that are are here today to
testify into it to talk about
gun violence in our state madam
chair there was just a freak few
things of course I'm focusing on
house bill one hundred for for
this time and and just to bring
us back to the bill and and to
what the purpose is here
I'm sure that we talked about
the Charleston loophole you
heard that I just want to make
clear that that was a situation
in Charleston where gunmen who.
Came into a church and fired on
patrons within a church
submitted to a background check
but within three days that
background check was not cleared
and therefore he was able to
obtain these weapons lawfully
because the background check to
took too long so when you look
at a state like New Mexico that
is very rural we don't have
uniforms systems when we talk
about one county to the next we
talk about this a lot when it
comes to law enforcement to the
data sharing to those those many
things that we have grappled
with as a state being the most
rural state in the United States
this is one provision madam
chair when you hear the
references to the Charleston
loophole that we want to make
clear is why we want a fourteen
day background check waiting
period.
The second thing I'd like to
bring up madam chair is some of
the committee about self
protection and this prohibiting
those from being able to obtain
a firearm who need it quickly
I just want to speak to the laws
that we currently have on the
books madam chair at that this
many members of this committee
have already seen which is the
fact that domestic violence
offenders cannot get access to
guns in our state if they tried
to this
this proposal for this
legislation would prevent them
from being able to do that
within for fourteen days on the
second it is that we do have a
temporary restraining order
provision on the books which for
those that are in danger who are
seeking support and protection
I'm can call upon law
enforcement to be able to get a
restraining order on guns for
those who they may be
Afraid of that had get access to
guns as well for their
protection madam chair so we as
a state have already I
determined that we want to
protect those folks who are
worried about defending
themselves against those who may
harm them and finally madam
chair we look at our our state
statistically the number one
killer of children and teens in
our state are firearms and I
know that in many of the
backgrounds that you received
today and and many of the
analyses talks about suicide.
And when you look at those in a
volatile state who are.
Making the act of suicide happen
they're going accessing these
guns typically in a very fragile
state it's a it's a rash
decision it's twenty four hours
typically when they're having
these
Mental a mental health
challenges and that fourteen
days gives them an opportunity
to cool off and work down
through these these mental
states and if you just look at
some of the statistics on where
we are as a state with suicide
and and some of the numbers that
are presented before you madam
Madam chair and and members
there were three hundred and
three suicides in twenty twenty
alone out of the four hundred
and seventy nine firearm deaths
in our state so I just want to
make connect the dots about why
this cooling off period is so
important and bring back the
real reason why we're proposing
that today thank you madam
chair.
Hello to the committee to.
Yes thank you madam chair New.
One repair.
Because of their but.
Thank you all for coming today
appreciate every single one of
you to come in and support the
second amendment especially
thank our law enforcement
officers for coming here today
really appreciated so it's good
to hear your side of the story
so I do have some interesting
questions up first of all.
the number one country was
suicide is Correa.
They do not have guns protesting
they kill themselves fire number
one number two is by overdose
and number three is by poison so
when I start looking around the
country's if there's a will
there's a way unfortunately so
we're not addressing the cost
thank you.
The second we madam chair
representative you said it was
twenty four hours a need to cool
off the next gets in three days
thirty have three days and then
is also to F. off they're going
to decide whether they're going
to give that person.
so the question.
Chair representative.
There's a temporary restraining
order.
And it's ten days.
I'm gonna tell you from personal
experience of being survivor of
domestic violence it does not
matter what kind of piece of
paper you have if they're going
to come for you to copy and as
you know as as representatives
are also vulnerable because are
some people who do some bad
things.
So even if we got a restraining
order against someone.
It expires in ten days.
So what is that person the
representative for a female what
are they supposed to do.
For those fourteen days if they
need to get a got this person
said that they're going to kill
them and they feel that their
lives why would they have to
suffer for this.
Madam chair representative so
the substance of this bill is
about a fourteen day waiting
period for those who are seeking
a firearm we're talking about
those who need protection and
domestic violence protections
are those that are are looking
for those that form of
protection Madam chair
representative there are many
forms of text you can call the
police today there are shelters
Madam chair representative we
can talk about excuse me.
As anybody.
The fact that maybe.
The fire thank you secretary my
the Madam chair representative
when we talk about self
protection there are other means
of protection and.
This what you're right you're
suggesting madam chair
representative and for us and we
look at the data we cannot.
By any means of data and I've
heard this
before this idea that folks are
trying to get access to firearms
in this prevents them from that
there's no form of data that I
can speak to statistically where
that has been the case I'm I've
heard anecdotal stories and one
in fact that gets told over and
over and over again but again
that's not what we're trying to
do we're trying to create a
system that works for what we're
trying to prevent we look at the
statistics and the data for how
our state operates and when we
look at what is available here
madam chair representative there
are many options this is one
that we have for prevention of
harm to others thank you madam
chair representative and and and
I want to pursue a long course
we just told me it takes at
least ten minutes and I love my
loafers other rural New Mexico
and it's much longer than that
so ten minutes is not time for
you to say Hey ex husband wants
to kill me I'll hold on one
second
they're gonna be here so that
that does not work and I do not
want to put our webinar at rest
and unfortunately
The law enforcement officers
they have to come to clean up
the mess a lot of the times.
What I'm seeing madam chair
representative is you said it
was twenty four hours a need to
cooperate we have three we are a
universal background checks
state
What would be how would we stop
somebody who wanted to get a
weapon from going to Texas or
Arizona where there are no.
Background checks and they just
would have to wait three days to
stop them from going there.
Madam chair representative the
way we prevent anyone from.
Any other law that we have on
the books it's different from us
than any other state we.
Enforce the laws that are in
these four corners of this state
madam chair representative and
we.
Every do what's best for New
Mexico thank you madam chair
representative so there's really
no way to stop there's also no
way to stop anyone from buying
guns on the black market.
Or having access to anything
because we have a wide open for
where we got.
Which everybody needs to
understand people out of semi
automatic semi automatic is what
we I fully automatic is
something you can purchase we
have to go through acceptance
into the cartel can get easily
access to
so that leads me to another
question how with this at this
for the past.
How would this stop criminals
from getting a hold of economic.
Black market I guess there that
would this be not applicable
applicable to criminals is that
correct Madam chair
representative as long as
they're in the supermarket for
guns we won't be able to touch
that we're talking about those
that are subscribe to a system
that we are trying to put in
place Madam chair
representative.
Okay so.
what I'm look at that because
I'm a big staff person and
looking through here and waiting
periods are arbitrary.
I don't see the status for the
crime of the suicide and like I
said Correa of people that want
to kill themselves are going to
find a way I think if you.
There is going to front up on
trying talk about bridges the
state don't have tons of people
are going to find a way to end
of life which is very
unfortunate because again we're
not address all because of what
is happening New Mexico's
greatly underfunded with mental
health.
the research and I show.
and
Don't do what you're saying.
And what my biggest concern is.
As being a survivor of domestic
violence and one of the women
and.
Okay then also status of our
domestic violence and then
because women can be equally as
brutal.
I don't think this is fair to
them next year saying once I put
up to the staff that are backing
on this I see women.
I would.
For us as legislators to have
someone out there and I
personally doubt threats against
me.
And I would hate.
That's what Sam what do
representative I get death
threats.
And I don't have the ability to
get something to protect myself.
A place to everyone in New
Mexico they want to be able to
protect themselves this tax of
fourteen days.
Does not hold up with the
statistic you're trying to say
because of statistics is the
exact opposite.
So madam chair representative.
I have a issue.
With.
All of bills today except for
one.
But this one is I think grossly
negligent and that we're
putting.
Two people at risk.
And that they should have.
The ability secretary for their
just right to go and get one.
To not have to rely on a
temporary restraining order
which does nothing.
And part of all of this As You
can pass want fortune officer
here somebody's going to kill
themselves it doesn't matter
what the red flag take all their
guns out which we count right we
leave the person there and then
everything I'm hearing on top of
everything else was resources
here but you want for I just
tell me.
Yes definitely by the time I
take them from grants counter
were also put them Senator full
by the time about thirty helped
so we have a huge problem with
this.
All the guns off planet earth
people are going to find a way
to kill themselves I'm not
buying into the argument this is
a cooling off I just see this is
more restrictions are right.
I see people being able to go to
Texas and Arizona find black
market which we have quite a few
last summer for this fully auto
Cruces floating around that came
across the border.
So we have an issue with that we
have an issue with women and men
that can't be able to get a hold
of this and I don't see any
effective criminals whatsoever.
And people that want to kill
themselves are gonna find a way
to create this lighting and so
on.
So madam chair representative
Based on those.
Real life situations and
statistics Sierra institute's
executive and read them all day
I got time I know you equal in
your side I'm on my side of
things statistics we all day all
day long depending on who did it
but this is the fact criminal
and we already have a falling
on and for those reasons I
cannot support this bill thank
you madam chair.
Thank you yes Representative
long term.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and I think
we all have the same goal we
want to keep people safe I think
that's an important goal to have
however I have questions about
your bill here so you know this
is about.
Waiting periods to purchase
firearms can you give me a
little bit of the history of how
this came to be in this in this
country and how they've worked
previously madam chair
representative thank you madam
chair representative thanks for
the question so as you heard
twenty eight the district of
Columbia already have this on
the books the reason for this
Madam chair representative is
that statistically shows a
decrease in gun.
sites and we're talking about a
seventeen percent decrease so
with this waiting period we
actually see a lower rate of gun
violence and that's why this
proposals before you today when
you look at New Mexico madam
chair and twenty twenty one
fifty nine percent of gun deaths
were suicide so again this
cooling off period gives folks
the opportunity to think
differently perhaps about what
their their mental state is in
that moment when they're trying
to get a firearm.
Additionally Madam chair
representative those states with
with the waiting period have a
fifty one percent decline in
suicide rate because of the
waiting period Madam chair
representative and when you look
at background checks today we
have universal background checks
however in twenty twenty there
are five hundred thirty five
thousand seven hundred and
eighty six background checks
that could not be resolved in
three business days these are
complicated for many reasons and
in twenty twenty one their four
hundred and sixty six four
hundred sixty six thousand four
hundred eighty eight background
checks that had not were unable
to be completed within three
days so this is basically taking
that loophole that currently
exists using the data and
statistics to inform what that
waiting period should be and for
what reasons and being able to
apply it to our current laws in
current form that ensure that
these folks who may harm
themselves or others no longer
have that access within that
fourteen day period madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
So do you know how far back.
Waiting on.
Nineteen.
The nineteen.
Money wanted to start.
Madam chair representative we
could Google it for you.
But I don't have that in front
of me Madam chair representative
I'm not familiar with other
states approaches.
Yeah I just I just like I know
like a long long term history
how the state.
Because as you stated earlier
wasn't that Representative I
believe that certain amount of
background checks were kicked
back with that three day with
waiting for the federal status
however it's my understanding
that's one percent.
All the applications.
Is that correct.
Madam chair representative you
could point me to where you're
getting that statistic I could
be happy to unpack it for you.
I have a lot of tabs open right
now again and make sure out
there but I will I will keep on
going on that one Madam chair
representative so.
I want to go back to.
That that.
Due to.
Firearms especially I'm sure
that that number probably to
just buy it
asking them.
Ending someone's life during the
pandemic Madam chair
representative sample is Madam
chair representative that's
actually not correct if my
experts.
Madam chair members of the
committee just on it was
interesting we just did twenty
twenty one which is sixteen
point eight percent spike in gun
violence and with COVID we
expected we thought it'd been
suicide suicide remains exactly
the same to spike actually came
in homicide in the.
Okay and that those numbers come
from the department of health
Madam chair representative when
we talk about suicide with a
firearm it is the most lethal
form of suicide attempt so when
you look at some of the other
attempts whether we we heard
Representative Lord about other
forms of attempted suicide that
typically it's not it's not as
legal as a gun Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative like.
I understand.
If someone is intent.
The ending of life.
I'm sure that there is a reason
for that role is there any kind
of provision in this bill that
would give them some kind of.
It's true that they have elected
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative the
the days the waiting period is
the eight right these folks that
we know statistically are in the
states of despair are within a
twenty four hour period Madam
chair representative and so if
you give them the two weeks to
really think about what's going
on if they were trying to access
to firearms in that time frame.
Madam chair representative you
could save a life.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative C. said that
twenty four hours after.
That that would be most
effective Madam chair
representative I'm saying that
those who are seeking to end
their life and seeking after a
firearm in those mental states
that this cooling off period
provides them time to break away
from that to spare and
statistically we can see a
seventeen percent decline in it
in I'm sorry fifty one percent
decline in states that have
these waiting periods on suicide
rate.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative well I'm
looking into the study here from
twenty eighteen it's the the
economic.
Review journal
so that there was a decrease in
suicide after she but it was
only tax.
So you know we can this is
really to make a large impact.
stating lines to settle you want
to percent impact that shows
that ninety percent of the other
people six of them selves but it
needs or they may have gotten a
handgun or any kind of fire on
the.
Is there any provision in this
bill that.
For things that are at least
once in higher than two percent.
Madam chair representative to
lives out of a hundred people a
significant enough for me and
our communities that to propose
this bill and madam chair
representative.
You're talking about an economic
journal we're talking about
medical journals that we're
referring to their dad do
statistically look at how state
lives are saved but that said if
we're saving two lives out of
every hundred people
statistically from the economics
journal that's enough for me to
be able to have a waiting period
madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you know I'm
still not convinced I I think
that we need to save people's
lives and I think behavioral
health programs so many
resources could be a better
happened state these vulnerable
people from ending their lives
chair representative I have
friends that I sell these celebs
I have one friend self manager.
Reserves and we just we want to
make sure that these people
people who are in minority
groups.
Eight they don't feel like they
are.
In a box because I I understand
myself healthiest be boxing
times and the I think it's
important that we don't punish
law abiding citizens by forcing.
Fourteen day waiting periods
when if we're talking about
the states that didn't happen
here it's just it's the
California there is yes can you
tell me why just fourteen days
chair representative absolutely
madam chair representative so we
often talk about the state being
the most rural state and we talk
about be able to share data and
ensure things are uniform across
the state we looked at Hawaii
who also has this fourteen day
waiting period madam chair
representative we felt that it
was uniforms to be able to
understand a one to two weeks
right just a fortnight and to
also understand how information
is shared between are counties
are municipalities in our state
and so we wanted to make sure
that we gave ample time for that
data sharing and so that because
we don't have uniforms laws
regarding that sharing madam
chair representative that we
could make it effective and
effective waiting period madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank Representative
so you pretty much just why did
Madam chair representative Madam
chair representative in order
for the health ability of
understanding that there's a
there's uniform a wait time for
two weeks verses I mean we could
wrestle over what is ten days do
you verses fourteen days verses
eight days
when we looked at all of the
data we looked at the structure
of our state again.
This for all those reasons madam
chair representative fourteen
days made a lot of sense for us
is New Mexico thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
activity studies that made me so
that state I like to look at
local data rather than local
there are national data do you
have any studies in New Mexico.
House memorial something extend
past shows that fourteen days
works you're in Mexico after.
Madam chair representative it's
we don't have a memorial or at
specific you know.
Pointing to as to why fourteen
days other than everything else
that I've already stated madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative start with just.
State this is a twenty twenty
gun deaths suicides thank god
they actually went up asked.
Can you give me some insight on
that it is that we.
Change.
Madam chair the experts.
Madam chair members of the
committee that
when COVID started in twenty
nineteen it was a huge surge in
gun sales throughout the
country.
One of the biggest surge in gun
sales when every of us speaking
to test one of the of the
surging sales is usually takes a
bit of time you can researching
gun violence that's why we saw
that sixteen point eight percent
spike twenty twenty one twenty
twenty had increased but wasn't
this by pressing we we link that
to the fact that there was such
a surge in gun sales madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Experts.
Going so what can you just that
stay on our first tell me more
about how long does it take from
the time that someone purchases
a firearm taxing using it in any
kind of violent way.
Your.
Madam chair members of the
committee I don't have the
statistics on hand but I will
tell you I know three families
to buy a gun at the local gun
shop here in Santa Fe and within
hours they were dead the type of
services hi I just take offense
to any kind of abuse and
anecdotal evidence it doesn't
matter.
previous.
Meeting so many rob statistical
data so that chair
representative Madam chair
representative when we look at
the statistics and in
particularly on background
checks which are universal in
our state the I think the
biggest issue with with what
we're trying to close
indefinitely is the fact that we
can speak to those that can't be
resolved within the three day
waiting period at the national
level that's four hundred forty
six thousand in twenty twenty
one alone and then when you also
look at who gets access to these
guns when you look at I think
it's the house committee
analysis report that's in front
of you as well that
thirty seven hundred
Violence offenders were known to
have been able to access these
firearms so in fact madam chair
representative we're we're
speaking to I'm sorry thirty
eight hundred and knowledgeable
people requiring firearms
through the default proceeds to
so madam chair.
Representative the issue here
for those folks who should not
be having access to about
getting access to a gun and
again coupled with the cooling
off period chair representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative service there
I'll just move on to another
topic is there any place in the
bill that sets.
Specifically.
Folks who are victims of any
kind of sexual violence or any
violence.
Are they exempt from this are
they able to get a firearm
because they have a period of
alright Representative.
Legal.
Product they have some kind of
protection Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative this would be
universally applied to all those
seeking ownership possession or
control over firearm to not be
transferred their firearms for
fourteen days.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so.
If I may I would like to.
Amendment to your bill okay.
Representative it would be on.
To.
Check.
And then the words less fired
reduces invalid
the violence.
Can you say that one more time
unless the unless the buyer for
each balance domestic violence
protection order.
Madam chair representative that
would be on friendly for many
reasons Madam chair
representative because if the
intent was now for folks to be
able to purchase the gun in
order to actively.
You were we would potentially be
creating a loophole for those
who were speaking after again
because they had a domestic
violence protection order and
could use it often simply Madam
chair representative and not
something we wouldn't want to
invite.
Madam chair representative
lately that would actually be
depressive.
Measure by the individual
because if they're the one who
has to be ordered they're the
one file that worked the ones
whose lives and livelihoods
state to here at risk.
At the house in the act.
Right Madam chair representative
again this creates a loophole
for those just trying to seek
after firearm in the current
waiting period where work which
we're trying to prevent you can
get a domestic violence order
whether you are offender or a
defender within that sort of
circumstance and so this would
create a loophole for those that
essentially wanted to use a
firearm often simply to to be
able to just get that protective
order and now be able to get a
gun within minutes perhaps madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair thank
representatives and I guess my
amendment would read.
After order.
There would be the words against
another.
Madam chair very clear that it
was
not a person is.
Slide to this order at Madam
chair of Representative in your
scenario.
And anyone can create go and
seek out a protection order
including using that offense of
late madam chair representative
in order to be able to access to
firearm so Madam chair
representative that's still on
friendly equipment.
Fourteen but can you give me any
any other protections that
dispersing could potentially be
a victim of violence.
What Kate.
Instead of.
Pursuing a firearm to protect
themselves I madam chair.
Madam chair representative as a
state we have done numerous
things to prop up the protection
of victims of violence and
whether it be domestic and and
what have you Madam chair
representative.
There are hotlines there are
shelters there is law
enforcement available there are
so many mechanisms that we work
to put into place to for those
in either a situation with which
the required support for
defending themselves or required
support for despair Madam chair
representative this is to to
stick we the proposal today that
makes sense for New Mexico and
for the prevention of further
homicide and suicide that we can
speak to as a gun sense laws
that on the books that that
really could save lives and so
madam chair representative
we will continue to do
everything we can as a state to
support those in need of
protection and you know anything
we can continue to do in that
regard madam chair
representative we well.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative why I would
make the case that the man that
is proposed.
That would provide these
individuals with the added layer
protects to be able to get are
needed.
If it was my cases I was.
Scared for their lives.
For someone that was in your
household family member or
another kind of individual I
wouldn't want to just.
To to going to the extraordinary
needs possibly.
Even the legal means madam
chair.
And so I think this is this I
the local obtaining your
guidance madam chair
representative by these
individuals who are in desperate
direst.
Chair and Madam chair
representative statistically.
Those who are in these
situations where they are and
are seeking protection.
Over half of those
We are in are in intimate
partner relationships where
those guns unfortunately our
More likely to be used against
them rather than those be used
offensively to defend them so
that said madam chair over half
of all intimate partner
homicides are committed with
guns and women are five times
more likely to be murdered when
her abuser has access to a gun
so we're talking about this
cooling off period Madam chair
representative it is much more
likely that those seeking after
these weapons are those seeking
to do harm rather than to
protect themselves madam chair
representative Representative I
or I use it we are five times
more likely to be killed.
Firearms of their partner is
that correct that we that is
correct Madam chair
representative based on the
statistics that madam at my
experts just shared with me
Madam chair representative I'm
sure the statistics are beyond
reproach and so that's why I
would I would be the case that
one and should have the option
to get a gun if they're with
their partner is one who has a
firearm you I.
would make more sense madam
chair to allow that.
By not putting an arbitrary
School TDP.
Madam chair my experts service.
Representative blocks there's
yes sorry there are there's five
hundred times more likely chance
of a woman in possession of a
firearm to be killed by there
abusers simply having a gun
doesn't necessarily mean that
they won't die by that time why
house bill one hundred is so
important is that what it does
is it reduces the risk because
that default process so back in
twenty eighteen twenty two
percent of the cases in which a
gun was transferred transfer to
a prohibited purchaser through
default posi transaction
involves someone with a
misdemeanor conviction of
domestic violence a total of
more than eight hundred fifty
guns we're seeing an issue right
now Madam chair representative
when we passed the domestic
violence storms replacement law
we're having a hard time making
sure that those names get into
next in time there's a little
bit of a backlog they're having
that extra fourteen days would
help law enforcement have more
time to make sure that that
person could not possess a
firearm and that's why it's
important madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative so help this so I
I get what you're trying to say
so how would this.
Protects that person who is
violent western state against
their spouse or their partner or
their girlfriend or boyfriend
how would this.
TD notifier I see the statistics
about two thirds of governors.
RT.
Work on.
So you know how would you why
would they just another instead
of spending fourteen days.
Issues got a R. E. on.
Here's my experts madam chair
members of the committee so when
we pass the domestic violence
for a thrilling Christmas law
back in twenty eighteen under
that protective order that that
offender is no longer allowed is
fine.
Comes and misdemeanor it's
illegal for them they have to
turn the fire on all firearms
into law enforcement if they
have ten if they have twenty
that has to be turned in so
there's already a law on the
books that they cannot possess
any firearms nor can they
purchase any firearms of because
of the backlog that we're seeing
an extra fourteen days for law
enforcement would really help.
Madam chair representative thank
you so with this that and the
new steps to that process for
law enforcement to have to.
Do anything wrong with it is.
Yeah Madam.
Madam chair representative this
is not facts law enforcement.
Thank you madam chair thank
Representative why I guess it
would technically affected since
they would be the ones that are
waiting.
So we don't have any new steps
whether there is space
requirements and ready stats you
madam chair.
I'm sorry we just repeat
apologizing course to catch that
so when they just repeat
whatever is currently in statute
rules and they wouldn't have any
new steps in this and you
background check.
Madam chair representative would
have wouldn't tightened there
are no touch points with law
enforcement some simply waiting
period.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative well you know I
still have concerns the because
if you're desperate enough what
do you want to use up with
anyone else.
I think.
Logically you could
kind.
Device or anything to our
members Madam chair
representative I just don't
think this is a great solution
to this problem I think for
behavioral health care services.
Help for people of domestic
violence people were battling
suicide settling.
Any kind of inclinations we need
to have that support for these
people however forcing people to
wait longer thirty people.
Our madam chair representative
act I would just make the case
that you would just make the
state even more at stake we
already have forty forty minutes
waiting periods for police
officers in Albuquerque those in
September twenty twenty two you
know you can't go waiting around
for these people you need those
are now and that's why madam
chair I just I'm I've hesitation
regarding your bill that thank.
After.
Thank you before we take a
motion on the floor I just like
to add something it's not the
total a real life situation
twenty years ago in January of
January third twenty two
thousand.
my ex sister in law.
Was murdered
I who would friend we just
purchased guns she had had that
fourteen if you have that
fourteen day waiting period.
You might not have committed the
crimes that killed her boss and
Center were placed at that
herself and then a third person
who is a good Samaritan trying
to help.
So these are things that are
really important to.
Protecting not only women and
children but also people who
might be considering suicide.
So with that thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward in terms of the table I
thank you madam.
There's a motion to table the
table.
Sure there is sufficient to
table.
Representative blocked yes the
tape.
Of course yes to table.
Representative Romero no to
table Representative Thompson.
No.
Representative Rubio no to
table.
Representative for are not.
Sure someone please turn that
off.
Thank you.
We have a vote of two to four
to.
Thank you.
The motion to table did not pass
madam chair I move it to pass
second.
Thank you we have a motion to
pass we've place take.
Representative what.
So do past moves and like to
explain my.
Representative Lord no not like
to explain my vote.
Representative awesome let's use
a Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Ferrary yes madam
chair we have a vote of fourteen
to fourteen.
Thank you the past forty two on
house bill one hundred.
and I'm sorry need to explain
about thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative you
know I I'm looking at the
statistics I'm looking at since
nineteen sixty eight with when I
started the.
Waiting periods they have not
been.
Representative I think that we
should we should be legislating
based on fact based on
statistics and not based on
anecdotal may not have or could
not have we need facts and
that's why I am a strong
opponent of this bill madam
chair.
Thank you madam chair my
notebook is basically from when
I stated before I don't think we
should leave.
Formal restraining orders
completely worthless anyways as
it is and in my district I we're
very rural and as much as I love
my work and I know you guys are
very short staffed and nobody
wants going on first there's.
Not only can these people in the
state so I don't want to
statistics so thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members thank you like to go
ahead and present now House
Bill.
So one.
Sure.
I
think it chart.
This message is.
I think that's really.
Questions about the team.
District one.
Yes thank you for your honesty
you have a committee substitute.
Yes.
All of this yeah this.
Do you come in.
We created a.
Others.
This.
This.
This
is a.
That and I I never.
I don't want.
These.
This was.
In the TV.
Because.
She's on.
Okay good.
Need to stand up I want to keep.
It was.
I
This
is.
Is this.
I can go.
So.
Right.
Will apply to.
Is the lower your twenty fourth
do you.
The first one everybody's on
their chance.
Is there any so these are.
Your
the yeah for sure life is.
She
came back yeah.
We're learning as we go.
You want to
know all all over.
One one next to it now yes.
Six hundred.
Is.
Do you want to.
Really.
These servers are.
I thank you Mr.
Thank.
Thank you.
Thank you for getting money so.
And.
Zero.
Ready I am madam chair
representative
This is house bill one on one
this
Essentially is a mass shootings
prevention bill Madam chair
representative when we look at
what we've seen across the
country all I have to do is
state.
Places you all do sandy her.
That said madam chair I could go
on and on and on.
This is the bill to prevent mass
shootings.
this is a bill that we hope to
be able to bring greater safety
to our state since the inception
of the Vietnam War madam chair
representative there's been
an increase in the amount of
these guns being available there
was a federal ban on these
weapons for ten years and that
is why mass shootings were went
down and we're pretty much
nonexistent in this country
since that band expired Madam
chair representative we have
seen an increase in mass
shootings that are unparalleled
in the developed world madam
chair so with that I'll
introduce my expert today this
is Ben Baker with the department
of public safety
Representative yes ma'am.
The substitute I do and I
apologize I would like to move
that for discussion now madam
chair today
A committee substitute for house
bill one on one health secretary
I think she made the motion
thank you.
I I think it's presenter to come
from what we all make the motion
process thank you.
Thank you madam chair so yes
this is the committee substitute
that we're discussing today
again my expert with me today is
that Baker with the department
of public safety if I if we can
madam chair like to him to
introduce himself and and why
he's here today with us.
We could proceed chair.
Yes I think that you're going to
explain correct.
Madam chair would you prefer I
do that right away I'm happy to
talk to accept okay great madam
chair representative different
from the bill that you saw
previously this has a
grandfather clause that we heard
loud and clear from advocates
and folks you know the point of
the matter is not to
felon eyes folks it's to get rid
of weapons of war on the streets
of New Mexico in New Mexico so
that said madam chair
representative the idea here is
to ensure that
that we we have that grandfather
clause in here that's the only
addition madam chair as
representatives otherwise it's
and it's a similar bill.
Would you point out where that
is sure madam chair.
Compared with two side by side.
So there are exceptions madam
chair we go past
Section three.
We talk about the transfer of of
firearms and you talk about the
that section for exceptions for
law enforcement
Section five
So basically after section three
four five six and seven Madam
chair representative R. the new
material that talk about that
grandfathering in and the and
basically who
Can still have access to these
weapons madam chair
representative.
Yes.
Because.
As.
I more sections to the the.
Six more sections to the total
yes chair representative.
all regarding.
All under that umbrella madam
chair representative yes.
Sorry further discussion on the
amendment I mean sorry
committee substitute but during
will be two tests on the
committee substitute.
Okay.
Consent.
Thank you Matt are substantive
thank you for that madam chair
thank you members
So I would like to introduce my
expert now this is been Baker
with department of public safety
if you could just talk about
whites here today and rise and
support this bill as a my
experiment Jr.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Benjamin
Baker I'd like to thank the
committee for inviting me to be
here today and allowing me to
participate and be of service
by way of background on the
twenty six year veteran of the
New Mexico law enforcement I I
grew up here in Santa Fe I want
to capitalize school in the
university of New Mexico.
I currently serve as the deputy
cabinet secretary of the
department of public safety I
have a number of roles there
including the last year being
the interim director of the New
Mexico Law Enforcement Academy.
Contained within that
responsibility is the regulation
licensure discipline
investigation of approximately
eight thousand New Mexico
licensees in our public safety
professions to include law
enforcement officers and public
safety tell communicators.
During my tenure law enforcement
New Mexico I've had the
opportunity and the experience
to investigate testified charge
cases in all of our judicial
districts that is something that
is unique I've been able to work
in almost all of our communities
and the investigative side this
provide me a perspective that
helps you understand the state
of New Mexico in a way that I
think could be of service to
this committee and and your
discussions and debates here
today.
Also would like to add for the
the benefit of this committees
consumption consideration is
that I have survived encounters
with armed personnel during my
tenure as a police officer.
look rearward and want to thank
the constituency of law
enforcement folks that arrived
here today regardless of what
position people take on these
topics there are some men and
women in our audience here today
who have been with me during
times right survive this long to
come want to recognize that
notion because that was a
significant to complement of not
only my life will provide you an
understanding of why I have
taken some of the positions and
offer some of the observations
that I do during my testimony.
I am proud to be able to serve
this committee here this
afternoon I will be able to
answer technical questions
related to the scope that I've
described related to law
enforcement the regulatory world
surrounding law enforcement and
things that a person with twenty
six years experience practicing
this profession within our state
in with our communities should
be able to answer my home we
stand at your service for
questions.
Thank you madam chair and
although he's a jaguar and a
demand of Santa Fe hack
we stand in support with the
governor's office as well I'm
working with them in this
concerted effort and without
supervision center.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience and will go to those in
opposition first.
The one minute please Senator.
Hello my name is Pablo Martinez
I was born in Gallup New Mexico
at born and raised there I'm a
member of the Zuni pueblo and
also a Catholic I stand against
this bill I believe it is
totally unconstitutional it goes
against our segment rights
it would make many people that I
know most of the little felons
this law was passed in
California and.
From what I know I I'm certain
there crime it's a double down
whatsoever part would up so fell
there it's going to fill here
please follow the constitution
and do your duty and do not let
us pass thank you.
Yeah.
Joshua James Lawrence former
candidate Bernalillo county
sheriff's your next governor of
New Mexico the ninth amendment
states that you cannot interpret
the constitution as you please
the tenth amendment delegates
all powers of the federal and
state government the only
delegates those powers and that
are in the constitution your
statutes and codes all rights
guaranteed no matter what any
time you try to even pass a bill
that violates the rights of the
people you're actually
committing an act for which in
turn is treason invasion I leave
it there Cabela's.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is bill fire
ice and and I'm from the sandy a
gun club in Albuquerque I'm
gratified that the bill has been
altered such that there is a
grandfather clause
at Sandia gun club we sponsor
gun safety and competition
courses of this particular
grandfathering clause doesn't go
far enough though.
It will basically prevent us
from transferring or helping out
younger people who would like to
come into the shooting sports
and and of type of competition
and gun safety that we have I
ask you to re examine the
grandfathering clause and make
it available to everyone for
transferring weapons thank you.
Thank you madam chair committee
members carry Romero executive
director in the registered
lobbyists for the New Mexico
council about fighters and
guides we appreciate the sponsor
taking the time to send us the
committee said prior to the
hearing today unfortunately we
do still stand in opposition
primarily due to the definition
of assault weapon including some
some semi automatic shotguns
that are currently used for bird
hunting specifically Turkey
hunting we would encourage the
sponsor to mitigate this by
adding an amendment to the bill
that would exempt anyone engaged
in lawful hunting activities and
that we're also not super crazy
about the fact that in order to
qualify for the grandfather
clause that you are are
essentially have to register
your firearms thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair committee matters my
name's Mike fanning I'm from
white rock New Mexico recent
spring court ruling to overturn
a number of anti gun bills just
Columbus Heller New York state
rifle pistol Association wrist
Bruin and the restraining order
barring enforcement of a new
always gone law.
While others these laws are
similar to the bills currently
being pros New Mexico.
So what do we do about crime
instead of taking the
politically expedient improving
approach an effective approach
banning guns New Mexico
educational consistently ranks
in the bottom five percent so
isn't showing a direct
correlation between
incarceration and literacy and
low literacy.
I believe the state would be
best served if your time and the
state's resources were directed
towards improving our education
system supporting law
enforcement and removing violent
criminals especially repeat
offenders from society criminals
by definition simply do not fall
loss law abiding citizens should
not be you've should be afforded
the best available tools for
self defense yes the farm is a
tool these laws limit the use of
such tools to law abiding
citizens thank you.
The.
Madam chair representative
thanks for allowing me the
opportunity to speak my name is
Nick Sutherland I am a trauma
surgeon here in Santa Fe New
Mexico
I chair the northern New Mexico
regional trauma advisory
committee for a number of years
I worked in New Mexico for my
entire career and taking care of
many many many people who were
injured in this state
rank and file first responders
know that these types of
firearms are used far more often
to protect life and liberty than
they are to hurt people
mass killings remain a very
small proportion of homicides in
this country and if you crunch
the numbers since nineteen sixty
there are about on the same
level as the number of people
killed by lightning strikes.
these are weapons and magazines
that are in common use which is
the brew and standard
the courts have made it clear
that Americans have a right to
possess and use firearms that
are in common use for personal
protection Madam chair
representative of thank you.
You
madam chair representatives my
name's Michael reason I'm the
sheriff of curry county in law
enforcement for about forty
years
I've been a nurse in the
emerging for seventeen years and
all I would simply say is look
objectively at how effective
tougher crime up gun laws in
other places a bit they're not
affected.
It's all thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Jamie
Fraser page I am the vice
president of the New Mexico
shooting sports association and
retired police officer.
This bill will not stand
scrutiny under growing.
This bill is going to former
registry if we desire to keep
the weapons we already own which
is against everything the
tension prime court and the
federal courts have held this
will not yield crime it doesn't
talk about criminals share for
what the county is pretty in
here and mention the fact the
first thing to go in a plea
bargain usually the
entertainment if we do not make
use of a gun criminally a
serious offense and not plea
bargain and ordered the first
chance doing what you people are
trying to do to law abiding gun
owners will not serve your costs
thank you for your time.
Madam chair representative thank
you for giving for allowing me
to be on the floor my name is
one of us is and I am a resident
Sandoval County I'm here to
employ you today to please vote
on H. B. one oh one the Supreme
Court concluded
under districts let me a versus
Heller the preferred Tory Clause
why it should be done a will
regulated militia.
Being being necessary to the
security of a Free State able
equals able bodied men who are
capable of acting in concert for
the common defense a precursor
to the operating cost which is
what must be done the right of
the people to keep and bear arms
shall not be infringed these
bills go against what at what
our second amendment rights are
in our constitution these bills
are unconstitutional and what
the Supreme Court has concluded
with the district of Columbia
versus Heller for this reason I
employ you to please don't know
an H. B. one a one.
My name is Judy Trujillo it I'm
a resident of New Mexico.
And I'm opposed to this bill
number one it's redundant to our
constitution New Mexico has the
strongest constitutional rights
for the second amendment and we
did a poll them we do not a need
to make it harder for citizens
who are law abiding to.
Purchase.
Weapons that are gonna help in
protecting their homes
protecting us from government
that becomes tyrannical that is
our constitutional right and I
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chairman and
representatives but if I can't
I'm from Los Alamos New Mexico
I'm a data analyst and I brought
pictures so this will be
interesting to all I'm in
opposition to this bill want to
one up for two reasons one I'm
very glad the grandfather clause
is not gonna make all of this
bill and accidentally so thank
you very much for that but on
the other hand the question is
will this actually achieve your
objective is your objective to
reduce crime I would ask you
this so these are two guns one
of them will be banned under
this law the other one would not
at the top of the river ten
twenty two pistol at the bottom
is a Glock nine millimeter
handgun inside ask you to really
consider.
Are the crimes that you are
trying to prevent can they not
be done with the guns that
remain legal under this law what
you are trying to do is benefit
of guns that look scary but they
really aren't used for crimes I
would encourage any of you to go
to a range and try them out
there sort of awful for doing
crimes with this is really
something that and not that
personal experience on be clear
but this is something that
should be paid attention to
ensure law likely to achieve
your objective or we keep
passing more more laws like
California.
Shares Representative spine Mr
Krauss mission on a gun store in
Albuquerque I'm a veteran of
public safety for over thirty
three years and also for twenty
four years in the military so I
think I'll have a little bit to
speak to happy to sit down with
any of you would have a
conversation has to find in the
renewable everything that's an
assault weapon what is actually
a modern sporting rifle this but
this will be on the sale and
transfer of nearly every one of
them including the ban on
selling the most popular twenty
two this around for over sixty
years.
As previous assault weapon bans
prove statistically no change in
homicide rates and that's at the
national level more people are
actually killed with handguns
rather than the rifles that
you're after and actually more
than that four people were
killed with hands and feet they
are with guns this is a
government confiscation of
personal property my customers
opposed these bills we will
likely go out of business people
lose their jobs we were are all
voters the U. S. in New Mexico
second amendment states that
those rights shall not be
infringed.
Thank you.
Madam chair committee committee
members thank you for letting me
speak today my name is Tom KA
eleven T. Harris I'm a thirty
three year veteran of the
military and I also work at the
same gun shop is here to just
pop.
I'd like to read to you article
two section six of the New
Mexico constitution No
longshoreman's in order to keep
and bear arms for security in
defense for lawful hunting and
recreational use and other
lawful purposes this bill
tramples that amendment that
limits where people can
transport their firearms at
limits where they can shoot
them.
It takes hunting out with
certain weapons and is
previously stated it prohibits
transferred them new shooters
can't buy new firearms
purchasers can buy additional
firearms total violation of that
amendment thank you.
Chair members the committee.
I'm I don't see it because I'm
from Albuquerque New Mexico what
you're looking at banning is
what's commonly known as a
modern sporting rifle and it's
noted such not just in the
United States but many other
countries like Switzerland
Finland they have these three
gun competitions we run around
with your A. R. fifteen your
pencil in your shot gun and you
go through various obstacle
courses and use those for
sporting purposes right of
further I've never heard anyone
say that the nineteenth
amendment is an absolute the
thirteenth amendment is an
absolute are any of your are the
constitutional rights are
absolute so that we will during
to hear that the second
amendment thank you.
I'm sure members of the
committee thank you very much
again my name is Matthew Lawson.
I agree with all of the other
objections to the bill to me is
my time to focus on whether the
bill repeats over and over a
pistol grip thumb hole stock any
feature capable of functioning
as a protruding grip forwarder
telescoping stock shroud around
the barrel which by the way is
where we test flashlights to
make sure we don't shoot the
wrong person in the dark these
are all safety features that
enhance control the firearm and
they do not increase the
lethality of it keep it from
falling out of your hands to
keep it from.
Jumping out of our hands
accidentally these are features
that reduce accidental shootings
this bills that for New Mexico
let's bring back some of the
other points and talk about
him individually but let's get
rid of this one please thank
you.
It is just like good afternoon
madam chairman my name is
Wilfredo Rivera I am a retired
twenty six year veteran of the
Illinois state police I just
moved out to New Mexico a year
and a half ago I come from a
state with some of the most
stringent gun control laws in
the nation and they've double
got most recently and yet
somehow Chicago it's remained
the murder capital of the world
for decades.
Part of the stuff that you guys
are talking about here with
exclusionary clauses for law
enforcement and that type of
thing has recently been changed
propped and shut down in
Illinois do your research that's
not gonna work the other thing
my final notice the number of
officers police officers those
of us on the front lines that
are in opposition to this type
of legislation doesn't work it
doesn't make you feel safer and
makes our job harder given that
some thought thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee thanks for allowing me
to address you my name's Jerry
Barton on the members your rifle
and pistol club and and and at
S. as thank exceptions I.
As a competitive shooter in a
handicap shooter I had the
seductions almost firearms to
print remain competitive and
recreational this would prevent
me from purchasing any more
firearms and I question does it
violate the Americans with
disabilities act that because of
the handicap shooter I cannot
compete if I don't have four
groups if I don't have pummeled
stocks I cannot remain
competitive against my fellow
shooters thank you for your
time.
Hello I am Chino good to see you
so there is a sense since the
beginning of the year there's
been eight shootings in New
Mexico and we have a population
of two point five right.
I represent fifty two percent of
our population I am Hispanic.
So again the other we'll see
another quarter percent so you
want to make us all criminals
three quarter inch let's say
three quarters of our population
because all criminals for things
that we've had for years which
is fire arms with our combat
capacities as you say.
So you can make three quarters
of our population criminals this
is an armbar bipartisan issue
because I know lots of Democrats
and all lots of independents and
Republicans alike that all of
their firearms love to go
hunting and guess what.
They're all over ten rounds well
how about all that money what's
going to be the pushback
we are a democracy from this
post rural.
And start representing the
people thank you.
A good day bye Madam chair
representative Sarah Johnson
leave us a resident of Sandoval
County up I.
To really want to add on to what
you already heard today but I've
just constitutionality the
numbers don't add up this is a
bad bill for for New Mexico and
I oppose it thank you.
Okay now we'll go to
office of the COVID on the
season.
Very.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee thanks for taking the
time today thanks let me speak
my name's Chris I'm not.
Yes ma'am my apologies of this
Chris I live in Los ranchos I am
not a member of the advocacy
group or a lobbying group or
anything I'm a lifelong New
Mexican I serve the New Mexico
National Guard right literally
literally schedule that's what
tears defense of the state and
country the fact that is being
considered impaired because me
it makes me.
Second guess my decision to have
done that well I do have a
question for the DPS W.
secretary there is going to be
our experts if these are all
weapons of war
why would you let the police
have them why you want the
police to have them
Come on thank you.
Thank.
Next.
You have one minute.
I'm chair under Internal sort
the national shooting sports
foundation and I'm hearing a lot
about what the citizens need for
self defense from DA Bergman and
others we should be reminded
that it is a bill of rights not
the bill needs imagine if we did
the same thing with the first
amendment the government
deciding what people need to say
in order to exercise our first
amendment their first amendment
rights that clearly would not
work they would not be rates at
all the reason is that because
gun control proponents to want
to ban the scary looking guns
and magazines are precisely the
same qualities that make them so
fantastic for self family home
and ran Defense finally there
are more than twenty five
million of these guns in America
today all but a tiny tiny
minority are used responsibly
and peacefully this legislation
punishes all the good citizens
for the acts of those few I
appreciate the time madam chair.
Thank you yeah.
He's got.
Go ahead take that.
Yes can you hear me.
Just one minute yes my name's
Jacob Weber
grew up in Gallup area and
recently moved Albuquerque I'd
like to voice my thoughts uh
opposition to this bill it is
diligently violates both New
Mexico constitution and the
state's section six the thing is
is that it actually hope that
you guys do passage through the
committee because that I hope it
becomes loss we can finally get
it of course it is struck down
permanently and once and for all
that the courts are clear twenty
others as courts rulings of
already ruled against this bill
so see in court.
It's got a nice person.
Hi my name is Taylor my print
answers need her Representative
is a transgender resident in New
Mexico I absolutely opposed to
house bill one oh one victory on
the media and neighboring states
is growing its transform the
likelihood of bigoted finances
increasing please don't take
away our ability to defend
ourselves like most laws this is
far more likely to enforce
against minorities or non
minority populations we safer
fees and complied as written one
of one applies to almost every
rifle in the state this bill
even as an exception for law
enforcement police kill far more
people than mass shooters every
year they don't have a good
track record protecting
minorities are I just read a
will Ferrell we're only non
minority people and police have
these weapons they don't keep us
safe we keep us safe.
Next.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity my name to appear
more registered lobbyists for
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau.
In the last year how New Mexico
for my part point into the
Beckley.
Yes we can hear you now.
Madam chair Wirth.
I'm sorry you're breaking up can
you.
Yeah.
Trying get better reception.
All.
Okay are taking it will have to
go on.
Yes.
You madam chair and that he
dedicate my name is Cynthia
canner and I propose thank you
B. one of one New Mexico has a
crime problem not a gun problem
eighty thousand registered law
abiding thank not eighty
thousand dollars I think that in
New Mexico I hope you agree that
there are more good people than
people what is going on now and
what is the New Mexico stated
number two hi we don't know it's
not unreasonable to think that
there any concurrent maybe three
try number open borders with
trafficking unvetted immigrants
that can make it easier to
requirement Terrence Malaysia
and coordinated attack on
Americans are to bear arms had
not infringing case everyone is
under it would not be and not
what happens when we I ended
highly stressful situations law
enforcement strict we don't have
enough are you quit with the
capacity exceeding ten with
seven that affect that in case
things hit the back I rate this
committee have the discernment
and wisdom and make the right
position thank you eight point
one time thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
One five two.
Go ahead.
Hello my name is important I
spent over twenty one years
working for Albuquerque fire
department.
In all of those years almost
without exception.
Any violence committed one
person against another was gang
related.
The about the only exception to
that was suicide which I saw
suicides committed by any number
of ways that you can think of.
From shootings hangings carbon
monoxide overdose supplication
if somebody wants to kill
themselves they will.
And now that.
The majority of people that are
using guns to commit violence
against somebody else.
Most of those people are already
felons with a violent criminal
past who are not allowed to own
guns after they've been
convicted of the felony.
Andrea.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I would just like to
point out that anyone with the
hard once the carnage to stop
but banning the sale and
possession of rifles used safely
and lawfully by millions of
Americans for hunting recreation
and self defense is a bad
landing at the wrong airport it
won't prevent an attack but it
will put the government on a
slippery slope towards cont the
state station.
Murderers are not deterred by
law any law criminals will find
a way to do that times to
believe that an assault rifle
ban or in red flag laws for
universal background checks will
stop spree killers in their
tracks is delusional to ban an
effective weapon any weapon for
lot lawful self defense is
wrong.
The only way to stop it is to
acknowledge the existence and
persistence of evil redoubt and
persecute and prosecute the
people who are committing the
crimes.
Thank you.
Right now.
The head pharmacist.
Please send you yourself.
Yes thank you I am the co owner
of a small gun store in truth or
consequences I read the
financial impact review for the
bills you're discussing today
and it seems as though the
criminal aspect has been more
than cover but what is missing
is a much greater impact to the
general fund for state the loss
in income gross receipts tax is
completely being overlooked in
your review.
In eighteen months we have sold
five hundred eighty seven guns
and twenty twenty one and nearly
fifteen hundred firearms in
twenty twenty to eighty five
percent of those guns would have
been it illegal with the passage
of today's bills we have grossed
nearly one point five million
dollars and paid nearly one
hundred thousand dollars in gas
in gross receipts tax to the
state for those sales the bills
you look at fan fan and would
greatly affect our store the
bottom line for the state of New
Mexico and is not being
considered in the financial
impact reviews you are what have
before you I ask that you
consider the potential closure
of small businesses the loss of
jobs and the loss of tax dollars
created when you wait today's
bills the loss of the stores and
jobs would be felt across the
state.
For.
I had done.
Hello my name is don more I'm
the owner programs I did conceal
carry active shooter personal
safety self defense classes to
my students my most common
student nowadays are older men
and older women were flat
terrified of living in New
Mexico today they're terrified
due to the number of criminals
on the street and the
willingness those criminals have
to break the laws of New Mexico
your we punishment
accountability the amount of
bullets in a magazine in the
accessories of the farm has does
not make the fire more dangerous
the lack of fear and
accountability does punish the
criminals not law abiding
citizens the fact is if this
passes it doesn't affect the
number of illegal firearms in
the hands of criminals but only
law abiding citizens that choose
to follow the law.
You're taking away our ability
as law abiding citizens to
protect ourselves of average
felony call can wait up to
thirty minutes sometimes for
lawns what law enforcement
response this means that we have
thirty minutes to protect
ourselves and keep ourselves
safe.
And you're taking away our bill
our ability to do so broadly
salt.
Okay that's all for opposition.
What what what we can.
and now we'll go to the audience
for public comment.
What.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Alan so I'm
just on the executive director
of the New Mexicans ships
sometimes in the pursuit for the
common good sacrifice has to be
made we know that many times
that the answer can be like the
gospel or the coming good
countercultural I think a very
point point to point on this
bill is that it doesn't take all
guns away it does leave some
guns in the hands of those who
feel the need to be protected
this does not take all guns we
have to start somewhere in
trying to change our our path
and again as I said before we
bury him we can tell you those
stories and what those grieving
families these are real people
their kids with guns.
Thank you.
Yeah.
And chair members of the
committee on my name's Matt was
school co president of New
Mexicans to provide good bounce
we stand in full support of this
legislation the bullets from
assault weapon travels three
times as fast with twice as much
force the high muzzle velocity
can travel three thousand feet
per second in comparison to a
nine millimeter handgun the
travels between eight hundred to
twelve hundred when the bullet
from an assault weapon
penetrates the body the cavity
that is formed as much bigger
than that of a semi on it then
met handgun or rifle because the
cavity is so large I think it
causes an intense amount of
bleeding destroys soft tissue
organs and pulverized bones
that's why we see that it is the
weapon of choice of mass
shooters in addition to the
cavity created in the body the
fast moving goals create another
another injury which are shock
waves that cause even more
damage to organs and tissues
these are work these are assault
weapons are military weapons
designed to kill as many people
as quickly as possible I do not
belong in our civilian
population thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee and Maxwell with New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
this is also devastating the
lives of our neighbors New
Mexico the expiration of the
assault weapons ban back in two
thousand four led to a rise in
gun homicide rates in many
Mexican cities bordering the US
except for the state of
California which at that time
had a ban on assault weapons the
US is the primary source as you
all know for guns in Mexico and
it is devastating Mexican
communities in contrast
according to the Attorney
General of California recently
saying that California
unbelievably house one of the
lowest rates of gun mortality in
the country forty fourth out of
fiftieth and it has among the
most strictest gun laws in the
nation thank you very much.
I'm chairman members of the
committee my name is Ellen
beater men and I am in support
of this bill is I am part of New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
I've been an educator in New
Mexico for fifty years and have
seen the increased anxiety that
children have when they hear
every time they hear of a mass
shooting with automatic weapons
and it is a proven thing the way
the brain works the way kids
learn that when you're anxious
you cannot learn it's it's
definitely connected the level
of anxiety in our children is
going to really an appropriate
levels and I urge you to yes
this bill.
What else and support.
Okay we'll go to the zoo on to.
Hello.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on Janet Williams
president of Santa Fe national
organization for women and we
stand in strong support of this
bill we do not believe that
there is any reason for these
kinds of magazines and assault
weapons other than mass killing
thank you.
Thank.
Good morning or good afternoon
chairman and members of the
committee.
In favor of this eighty one oh
one thought economic high
capacity magazines were involved
in and deadliest mass shooting
between two thousand nine to
twelve two thousand twenty an
analysis of mass shootings from
the that time period also found
six times that many people are
shot her shooting went with all
weapons are you after the
assault weapons ban was lifted
you back in two thousand and
four the economic
the number of mass shootings
increased they fell during that
period I think we're putting
babies I we're putting guns over
babies I don't care how popular
these weapons are there enough
weapons out there thank you use
those weapons
and we're adults and I've lost I
mainly family members and one.
One of them was to a thought
economic and I would would like
you to pass this bill thank you.
Thank you okay I think that's
all over supporters need to work
okay.
Of the person on the phone and
you yourself.
Person calling in please I'm
here yourself and go ahead and
speak.
This will not have to do.
okay so the next person.
We.
Kathleen.
Good afternoon chair for a
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
my professor and Cleary was
killed in a mass shooting and I
would like to speak in support
of this bill her favorite phrase
was the best the best predictor
of future performance is past
performance there's a great
study from the American Journal
of public health.
Describing a twenty eight year
study.
Showing that.
State to have large capacity
making seen bands
R. it's very effective and those
without bans have twice the
incidence of mass shooting and
three times the dax.
These do support this bill and
pass it thank you so much.
Thank you.
Okay.
Your.
Go ahead and.
I'm I'm actually opposed to this
bill I was in line and I just
wasn't called so please oppose
bill one of one I'm from the
organization of control your
poll workers and control your
crime and
I echo what everybody has said
that opposes this bill it's a
direct
a threat against our second
amendment and what I want to
bring out is this is a bill to
control the people the people
who are working every day and to
take away our our automatic
firearms the reason why me and
my family have one is because in
case of an administration who
does not secure our borders and
invasion happens we have
something to defend our family
and our neighbors so please I
propose a one a one thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else in support.
One one million.
Very good are you in support of
house is.
Are you calling nation yes are
you it's a okay yes
yes madam chair members of the
committee I am speaking in
support of this bill on behalf
of AAUW New Mexico and the legal
women voters and we think the
sponsor for bringing this part I
don't need to repeat what people
have said but I could tell my
own stories from sandy hook
family members I have to say
that they are the argument that
these gun laws do not do
anything is really false and
disrespectful yes they do law
abiding citizens are going to be
prevented from having assault
weapons we don't need assault
weapons for target practice I
think it's very very important
that this bill passed and I hope
that people will respect that
people have rights in addition
to the second amendment that
thank you very much.
Thank you anyone else support.
Okay.
Do you have a closing.
Madam chair of representatives
just back on the to the
substance of this bill but we're
not arguing constitutional law
here today this is a mass
shootings prevention bill as
we've seen these continue to
escalate throughout our country
we want to do everything we can
to protect our communities Madam
chair representative so that's
why we're here today with this
bill.
It will go to the committee.
One more.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so I'm just
reading this bill and I'm trying
to go back and forth from the
previous month.
So this new study we create
three.
Have been grandfathered is that
correct.
That's correct chair
representative.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
So.
I believe this kind of language
also is in California Los
secretary.
Madam chair representative most
recently was in illinois'.
Assault weapons ban.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
So.
Firearms that would be.
Not permitted.
Any that are ten or more rambles
that correct Madam chair
representative.
For your bill.
Can you just we need to where
you were reading from madam
chair representative.
Are you looking at page three.
Yes we were.
Madam chair representative we
were on page three lines twelve
through fifteen this is just
defining what an assault
weapons.
Thank you madam chair so this
looks like on line thirteen page
three so at eleven rounds or
twelve rounds that we do not
edit this bill that's correct
chair representative you just
have to either register if you
currently had that economic or
Madam chair representative.
You
would not be able to do that
type of weapon if this bill is
passed.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative do you know what
the Senate's weapons available
today are over to that team and
round.
After the.
Madam chair representative I
understand that
I I don't have any data to to
tell me what how many of those
are consumed Madam chair
representative.
I'm sure thank you
representative of I believe the
figure is about forty eight
percent Madam chair
representative.
So even though.
Registry chair representative
concerned at how high that
number is.
Because we would have.
Forty six percent of New
Mexico's population centers.
The house of that would be.
Owners of guns that are.
And now with this bill.
And that's about three hundred
and twelve thousand people Madam
chair representative fifty three
hundred twelve thousand people
to not live.
Would they be subject to arrest
and going to prison in the
coming balance your bill does do
that is that correct chair
representative madam chair
representative I'm just to
clarify on that the area this is
a for a very specific type of
firearm that has fixed magazines
so this is only talking about
semi automatic rifles that are
fixed with the magazine itself
so this is what you're talking
about madam chair representative
it's a very small portion of
assault weapons available so the
eighty five percent number that
you're talking about is it
pertinent to this provision.
Okay thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative forty
eight percent rather rather of
how many of these are that
minute numbers to make that turn
no madam chair representative
I'm just saying that you're that
broader topic that you're
talking about about ten or more
this is about fixed magazine
semi automatic rifles not.
Other rifles that had can have
ten or more around so I just
want to focus on the fact that I
wanted to correct myself that
this is just about this type of
weapon chair representative you
so with that not.
This is about semi automatic
rifles madam chair.
Chair thank you Representative.
Okay I'm just a little use could
you point me to the page where
it says only rivals would be and
madam chair.
Madam chair representative
starting on page two line
seventeen all the way through
to.
Page.
I line seven talks about what
assault weapons are.
And then after that on page five
nine eight.
All the way through to line
fifteen on page three talk about
what it does not include.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
I'm reading this and I see here
I don't believe this pandemic.
To.
The representative from all
state
And that's in addition to the
rivals and.
Can you just need to wear your
manager's starting on.
Line nineteen.
That.
And.
What was the question chair so.
The pistol grip or thumbhole
stock is that in addition to
that.
Automatic rifles semi automatic
rifles.
And madam chair.
Taken as a whole Madam chair
representative an assault weapon
as a first definition is my
nineteen all the way through a
line eleven of page three.
So all of those components make
up what an assault weapon is for
that version of semi automatic
rifle we talk about
different versions of fixed
magazines that semi automatic
rifles semi automatic rifles
after that then talk about semi
automatic pistols and the
components that make that an
assault weapon.
So on and so forth until page
five where we talk about what's
not included in the report of
the so is the my automatic
pistols would be included once.
I believe you just said it was
right.
Madam chair representative Page
three line sixteen a semi arctic
mental at semi automatic pistol
that has the capacity to accept
a detachable magazine or that
may be readily modified I can go
on but the definition that is of
your I'm talking I'm on page
three line sixteen Madam chair
representative that's the first
time we mention semi automatic
pistols and the definition that
would be tied to the components
that make that an assault weapon
in which case this would be
bound.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I'm just the
number four
four lines and.
The semi automatic
as the six mags passing the.
To accept more than fifteen
rounds many of these have six
rounds.
That so sixteen round semi
automatic pistol as mine would
be complemented Madam chair
representative and that's
correct so long as it's
not also when that is been in
unserviceable antique or
manually operated.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yeah I see if
what's exams here.
And then the exemptions I
believe it's.
Use this that and has.
Its military personnel Los.
Whether.
I did read madam chair.
So going forward here
I guess you probably don't know
how many individuals would be
not in compliance with this is
that is that where you are right
now manager to know how many
people could be impacted
negatively as.
I I'm not aware that madam chair
representative we don't take
statistics when it comes to
sales on pretty much it's very
difficult to get data when we're
talking about even economic
diversification in the state
chair representative to get
sales related information also
that tends to be proprietary to
business owners so madam chair
representative we don't have
that data here today.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
So folks or grandfather this
bill.
Would not be permitted to
transfer their firearms provided
the grandfather who wants to
that on their child would allow
that chair members and yes madam
chair that is correct it would
just in order for us to get a
handle on exactly what we're
talking about how many of these
weapons are out there you just
have to register it as well
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
This bill does not have any
exemption for folks.
Using it for any sport or
anything like that.
Is there any sense and right now
he's still I have not read your
tires of I do not I've been
trying to read it throughout
this committee.
Madam chair page thirteen lines
twelve through the end of the
page we talk about they were
they don't apply
Madam chair representative so
we're your
Member of the Olympic committee
who is competing in shooting
competitions of madam chair
representative that's one
exemption if you are.
A target shooting coach or
competitor in the Olympics Madam
chair representative here and
here Representative.
if you are a non resident Madam
chair representative who just
got here and we talked about
what happens when folks cross
our borders and miss a lot
happens what they need to do
Madam chair representative
and and for folks that are
manufactures transporting
possessed possessing yourself
selling these depending on what
they
Have stored and secured
And and course we talked about
for other purposes
whether the for props or for
rental for solely purpose madam
chair representative those are
exempt thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so I
believe what I'm reading here
it's only if it's a.
Madam chair representative.
For.
For.
That's correct well for sporting
that's correct madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair I just I
think that's a little
closer may not be qualified and
that type of thing I know that
the shooting one thing is just
part of the.
For instance.
I don't think there's a little
there for those individuals I
would certainly suggest that
chair of the.
And then also on this page
fourteen versus non residents to
transport within hours.
Yes ma'am it's help with rifle
or cartridge Madam chair
representative the radically
there was a.
Extreme sports of that in the
state of New Mexico that
required the.
New Mexicans would not be able
to.
Seven three.
Madam chair representative all
point you out to page nine
aligns nine through twelve for
those that are engaged in the
legal use of the assault weapon
or the attachment for the
caliber rifle cartridge I
probably really licensed firing
Rangers for shooting competition
venue those are allowed.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
I will take another.
So I we heard a little testimony
today from individual said that
the attachments the rifle would
be banned we need those for
eighty purposes Madam chair
representative reason start with
any shows signs of access but
folks who are disabled the the
special accommodations using
fire chair representative Madam
chair representative I
understand there are other.
Access points for that type of
ADA compliance and understanding
that these
Firearms are.
There are many different
versions of this this version of
assault weapon is what we're
exempting and will be consistent
with that across the board chair
representative thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
yeah I.
The new issues there is that
working for the state to.
Plans basis for exclusion of
folks who needed.
For their everyday lives in this
just making sure that they can
have access so they're going
toward.
The the meat of the bill it's.
Meant to stop mass shootings.
With.
Semi automatic firearms.
Were you calling the San.
Right with that is that we
wanted the students to stop.
One hundred percent madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative like to see your
Everytown USA which anti gun.
It says eighty one percent of
mass shootings are involving
handguns and not.
Assault weapons Representative
system we would have eighty one
percent of these mass shootings
occur even yeah we put this bill
on placements or not since you
got the sense.
Madam chair representative and
nineteen percent of mass
shootings would no longer be a
problem in which case we can
tackle the other eighty one
percent.
It with other laws accordingly
if we can.
We now have a of needs to be
able to prevent that other
nineteen percent I'm that's why
we're here today madam chair
representative.
And I think that the person
saved his work but I don't know
if his office is that.
I would actually make the case
manager that.
People susceptible to even more
mass shootings I know of all
homicides total.
One percent one percent is a
mass shooting in the rest of
them are are other crimes that
three homicides chair
representative so I just fear
that what costs are we doing
this legislation how many people
were put in prison.
Getting a systemic cycle of
incarceration for individuals
simply because they want to own
a firearm because the
constitution of the state of New
Mexico section six.
Section two.
Six says very clearly that they
have that right the second
amendment and our constitution
says that as well and I
understand you don't want to
have a constitutional battle
here about constitutional what's
not however madam chair I I
would submit that.
Your rights do not be trampled
upon.
And I would subject suggest that
the second amendment and article
two of the New Mexico house
tuition are absolute would you
agree with that.
Madam chair representative in
the spirit of not arguing
constitutional law we what we're
doing today is proposing a
staff to Madam chair
representative that we know has
this statistical backing to
prevent mass shootings what
we're trying to do today is
clarify what that is ensure that
we're not creating new felons if
you want to keep these types of
weapons you simply need to
register them we do that with a
number of other weapons already
on the books Madam chair
representative so what we're
doing is clarifying that process
ensuring that we can grapple
with the epidemic of gun
violence and mass shootings that
we've seen across the country
and what we're trying to do
today is ensure that we can save
lives by having this in place
Madam chair representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you know I agree
with the point of your bills I
think it's good state lacks and
we all can agree on that but I
think the way that we get that
it is not saying Madam chair
representative ninety three
percent of guns that are used in
crimes are stolen guns according
to the ATF the most recent.
So six percent part sorry about
seven percent sixty seven
percent.
Are ones that are deeply so this
bill would only pertain to that
six percent and I I just hear
this madam chair would create
cycles one cycle on site was a
hundreds of thousands of law
abiding citizens she may not
want to be part of a registry
from the government I frankly
registries the government
historically have been
horrendous this country.
World we see mass.
Baader of humans due to
government's starting these
registries and then targeting
these individuals match so
I apartment regarding that what
that is.
Many law abiding citizens don't
want to have to get permission
from the state New Mexico state
we are are.
Madam chair representative as
with our constitutional rights
no right is absolute so first
and foremost we create laws in
order to ask folks to abide by
them and comply with them and
this is one of those compromises
in a way that we're trying to
prevent mass shootings mass gun
violence from persisting in our
state in our country Madam chair
representative and from the
reasonable compromise on being
able to save lives that's that's
what we're here to discuss Madam
chair representative no I I
disagree with you just that no
no rights are absolute.
That's correct Madam chair
representative the nineteenth
amendment the constitution.
The United States it allows you
to have equal voting axes meet
that's not absolute answers.
We're not arguing constitutional
law the madam chair
representative in this state if
I'm a felon I can't vote so it's
not absolute Madam chair
representative we have the
grapple with each of our
constitutional rights but they
are not absolute Madam chair
representative.
Representative I I find that.
The automatic stance because our
country was founded on laws that
were immediately available that
means that they could not be
trapped by our government I
anyone element one and so madam
chair representative I find that
quite scary to think that my
right to be equal in this
country.
Is not absolute which I find
very.
Regarding this right second
amendment which protects all the
other amendments first.
Really in this country.
Of the press to be able to
assemble madam chair
representative and that is why
absolutely ninety and therefore
I do not support your bill madam
chair thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I'm gonna go
through this because we get a
substitute and there's a whole
bunch of people home or saying
the substitute is not is that
correct and check because they
can't find Madam chair
representative that's correct we
don't have the provision in our
rules currently to be able to
review substitutes something
that we would love to have right
is not in place I'm getting a
lot of tax if they can't find it
so they're very frustrated okay
so let's go through this bill
chair representative so
explain to me what is an assault
weapon.
Your brief and what it I'm sorry
what was expended in big madam
chair my experts.
So madam chair members of the
Representative for reading from
to
This line nineteen a semi
automatic rifle that has the
capacity to accept a microphone.
For me.
Starting on page two line
nineteen and then as discussed
earlier in the previous question
several iterations of
explanations that define
specific configurations this is
the way I would describe them
that would include or exclude
something from being an assault
weapon as defined within the
construct this and then later in
the bill exclusions things that
are not exempt.
I thank you madam chair I'm
gonna get going that side but
that so if I'm reading this
correctly madam chair and
representative is basically just
that X. is that correct it's
just the aesthetics to that
rifle is I don't see anything
other than.
The look how it looks check
ripped some whole stock a
telescope.
Less pressure
sure out so those are all
ecstatic things two arrivals are
correct.
Madam chair representative when
we talk about deadly weapons we
this committee often see
something like that these are
common names for
and successories weapons that we
are are defined in statute I'm
so it's not just in is that I
think unless it's being used
Thomas that perhaps these are
components that are certainly
accessories or actual
assault weapons yeah we're
defining a thank you madam chair
and representative so we're
looking at accessories it's not
changing its not make anything
different everyone of trying to
make sure better stands.
Is that an air fifteen style
rifle is not assault weapon it
is an assault Representative
rifle is a fully automatic
machine gun automatic form that
has been restricted since
nineteen thirty four there are
fifteen or the aesthetic look of
it is looks like military but is
not I want to make sure but I
understand that this is not a
military grade rifles that it's
a reckless would change based on
aesthetics alone so would you
let we go into this definition
on page two which I'm not no
longer stance on weapons and
save this rifle semi automatic
rifle.
Page two to
Would you what what what kind of
weapons which you include al
Qaeda farms with that B. A. R.
A. K. what what was specifically
with the speak with look madam
chair members of the committee
Representative Lord this
proposed legislation is not the
we vibe brand platform or any
other designation it simply
speaks about the descriptors
that are with.
Constructs the committee to and
madam chair why that is is
simply because the
characteristics that we defined
in this bill are those that make
it more advantageous to have
during a mass shooting madam
chair representative.
Okay so Madam chair
representative.
So as I look through these it
has to be all of these
components has to all of them
are just one of them.
Which were you looking at are on
page two where it starts
economic.
so then automatic rifle and has
to the pistol grip could just
have a pistol grip be
considered.
Or does it have to have all
these things madam chair
representative for the first
description on a semi automatic
rifle fire and has to have one
or more of the following week
including all of the definition
prior to that has to have a
pistol grip or anthem Starkel
order of feature capable of
functioning as a protruding grip
so again one or more of the
following okay so technically I
could have a rifle that has a
pistol grip on it that's now
considered an assault weapon is
that correct chair
representative if it was a semi
automatic rifle that has the
capacity to accept a detachable
magazine or that may be readily
modified to accept a detachable
magazine and it had a fiscal
pistol grip yes madam chair
representative that would be an
assault weapon I just want to
make sure this is very specific
to our people with disabilities
and to women because.
These types of weapons are
usually very light weight and
easier to use especially for
people to disable to and I want
to make sure we understand to be
sticky scary pistol grip on
economics it in San economic.
That so madam chair
representative
So we don't want to hear the
start on page two.
And it says nineteen a
semiautomatic rifle that has the
capacity to accept a detachable
magazine.
Okay so magazine.
You guys know the magazine is.
I am on their okay.
Make sure.
Then we go on okay so now we
have a different definition.
Now we have this so it's a semi
automatic rifle it has a fixed
mixing like and and one so.
So that is no different
component correct so we have one
we have the assault weapons said
a semi automatic.
Rifle has a detachable magazine.
And then now we go on to a semi
automatic rifle that has to be
fixed Mexicos is something
completely different.
Correct.
Madam chair representative yes
that would be to provide in on
page three lines twelve through
fifteen I just wanna make sure
because I was getting confused
on that could seem like we were
just talking about that but
that's not we're not talking
about all.
We talk about a lot of different
kinds of rifles now okay so.
Again that we go down madam
chair representative we now go
on to.
Page three.
A semi automatic now we're
moving into yes tolls with the
detachable magazine.
and then if it has a threaded
barrel.
For a second pistol grip so what
you're talking about is like an
air pistols are correct is that
what you're trying to get out
more just the aesthetics to a
manager.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Lord
that would include what you just
described as a a our platform
pistol yes.
I want to make sure I'm trying
to go through this whole since
nobody has is gonna be a lot of
questions on what it is that
we're looking at banning here
okay so now we have the.
Yes on.
Okay
Madam chair representative.
Okay so I want to go back here
and something that you have.
Before I remember correctly the
original bill had a magazine fan
of ten.
But chair resentment of my just
seeing that now on the fixed
magazine now.
That's
that's correct on this bill
madam chair the substitute bill.
Okay and the chair
representative go to.
Page four.
And now one tenth of a semi
automatic pistol that has fixed
magazine with the capacity to
accept more than fifty two now
we went to fifteen be this must
be something different now
that's correct chair
representative correct.
So in this bill because I'm
trying to read this to like
crazy because I didn't know what
to right before this up there
was a substitute to chair
representative is there a
magazine.
Limits on.
The semi automatic rifle that
has a capacity to accept a
detachable magazine or can I
have a hundred round drum.
Is
Committee substitute we didn't
contemplate that the round.
It for for the detachable
version now Madam chair
representative if I had to use
my crystal ball I would probably
seem since that bill's going to
be rolled into that one that's
what we can see okay but we're
not there yet.
Chair representative hold on I
got a lot more questions
But does include
So.
We move on to fifty caliber
rifles how many murders that
happened in New Mexico with the
fifty.
Ground caliber rifle.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure we keep those kinds of
statistics regarding caliber
rifle when it comes to murder in
the state I'm here the reason
I'm asking Madam they're they're
not something maybe that you get
to go to the gun range one time
and see if fifty cal it's not
something you're going to use
them to try to figure out why.
This got put in here because I'm
doing research on here and I
don't see anything worth fifty
cal has been a problem other
than the families really
expensive and that's not
something you're going to use in
any type of mass shooting and
it's that's not something that
is easily accessible use so
madam chair presenters I I white
white was fifty cal from the
Madam chair representative we've
already sort of.
Contemplated this provision and
be
actually would be considered a
friendly amendment for exactly
what you're talking about to
Essentially remove that
definition of fifty caliber
cartridges
And so the and all the
references to the fifty caliber
cartridges
On the fifty caliber rifle
definitions so it's not.
essential to this bill that that
be included per se
and it would be a friendly
amendment I would for this I
would definitely say because
I've you guys to please go watch
video on fifty cal.
Shop okay so madam chair
representative how many A. R.
since we're not specifically
talk or actually this is way
broader than I thought so.
How many A. ours are there in
the United States Air fifty.
I think we have the statistics
here somewhere twenty million.
Okay you know then that is thank
you all the the experiment
so Madam is in as of twenty
twenty there are twenty million
a year fifteen style weapons in
the country this is from the
national shooting sports
foundation so I'm kind of taking
our population based on this FY
had asked me to think you had a
lower number I think mine's more
realistic up more like a half
million people probably have
Harris we have very high gun
ownership and the state very
high it's forty seven point
three percent.
So
so we had.
Half a million people that have
A. R. with these detachable the
way it's described.
how are we enforcing this spans
how are we going to enforce it
houses happening.
Madam chair representative so
we already own these weapons you
would be able to register them.
and we go through a process of
of registration you would get
basically a license for that we
do that with on a basis in this
country already it's is standard
procedure the state would
basically go through a similar
procedure so that said madam
chair representative for those
who wanted to keep them you
could do that we also have a
relinquishment provision in here
for you to be able to give those
firearms to law enforcement they
can
in which they would be able to
lawfully obtain it for you and
that said Madam chair
representative I think if you
other provisions but that
basically is the gist of it
thank you madam chair
representative you can buy a
case it's it's just the fully
autos machine guns.
so when you start talking about
registry
of my family.
Luckily.
Where pessimists and left
Germany that would use.
So you start talking about.
Registration.
Makes it back my here stand up
in nineteen forty one just days
before the pro harbor tech
Congress reaffirms second
amendment right to prohibit gun
registry.
Why.
This is not cease registered got
to take away from the Jews and
that.
Literally.
Makes my hair stand up and I I.
It was a tool to use to take my
family down in Germany so I
don't want to ever see a
registry.
So I do have a question about
that registry
Madam chair and Representative.
How will we protect the list
register again because in New
Mexico department of regulation
license you just said you to
preach of their data.
Madam chair representative I
think the same way we would deal
with.
Any other provision where we
register cars that were other
items madam chair representative
we have many provisions for
cyber security in our state we
work through do it to protect
folks data throughout the state
madam chair representative the
challenges are there on
protecting our data however
chair representative we believe
in the state to be able to to
keep in
store that data effectively
chair representative Madam chair
representative what's our plan
to take care fifteenth and I'm
not picking on any cartel at the
listening southeast of the mouth
of the how do we plan on.
Thank you.
Let's say we find out.
Let's say we find out that
there's a cartel of in a certain
district working women a certain
district and we know that
there's a whole bunch err
fifteens and we suspect that
down the road to re picked up
one person they are registered
are we going to send our law
enforcement in there to have to
go and collect them our house is
working.
Madam chair members the
committee Representative Lord
and hypothetical that you raised
if this law were enacted or if
this bill were enacted became
law you would be dealing with
a fourth degree felony criminal
investigation at that point and
without you know I respect
leading as to what outcomes
could be or could be the
requirements and obviously the
day to day practice of our
hardworking New Mexico law
enforcement officers to follow
leads to continue to investigate
violations of criminal law.
Well what about the concerns
about this chair representative
so I Senator wonderful.
Go and collect these because I
don't think this is going to
turn out the way you're thinking
it's going to you're gonna put
our law enforcement at serious
risk.
so these are chair
representative decent been
grandfathered in.
So how would you know.
because it's going to be the
registered case we have to
resident who.
Hey.
So madam chair and
representative
So the district calmly at the
district of Columbia and Heller.
So the Supreme Court decision
the decision was made that the
second amendment protects arms
in common use at the time.
For lawful purposes like self
defense and arms are typically
possessed by law abiding
citizens for lawful purpose
purposes such arms are chosen by
American society not the
government.
Understanding that there's
twenty million and probably a
half a million how would you
defend that these are not common
user commonly owned.
Madam chair representative we
definitely need to take a note
about what Scotus been doing
with.
These provisions on gun laws
we're keeping a close pulse to
it but Madam chair
representative we don't create
laws here based on what the
supreme court's going to do we
create laws here on the
protection of our citizens and
on the invest interest of the
folks in our state so while
contemplating what that would
look like at the federal level
madam chair representative
that's just not where we are
right now.
Madam chair representative
I would argue that these are
very much common use.
And they are commonly owned and
they're very much out there.
And that also applies for any
type of restriction on magazine.
Fans as well because magazines
Kate capable of holding more
than ten rounds are nearly
universally chosen by tens of
millions of law abiding citizens
and this is an interesting fact
over a hundred thirty three
million standard thirty round
capacity magazines are in
circulation so again we have
something that's in common use.
Madam chair representative one
assist question just tell you so
it's forty six point three
percent of people in this state
owned firearms so it's almost a
million people.
My concern here is that the
great people come speak today a
lot of them were Hispanics.
A lot of reports for the north
and some of my doctors are
Democrats.
And I see this is a huge way of
penalizing because.
Some people are defined in the
not going to want to do this and
I'm trying to figure out the
numbers of how many people are
going to become felons and now
we have this I went to prison
Bill of people who were legal
gun owners and now so like our
because a lot was made.
And I want to remind you
something super important just
remember that with and Frank the
**** were doing what they
thought was the right thing to
do the legal thing to do lost
presented by politicians.
The people that were helping her
and hiding her or the criminals
and I feel we're going down the
same exact path.
Where we're going to ban
something that is in common use
and then say well.
That's okay we made a registry.
And registries are not something
that we want to here in New
Mexico or United States based on
past history.
This bill is hugely problematic
for me on so many levels.
Because the other day we try to
pass bills where we sit drug
traffickers.
Should not have weapons and that
went through and I'm like well I
guess I'm a drug trafficker I
can help one of these guys that
dealer here to keep
your.
Absolutely I'm so.
Madam chair representative
I also somebody made a comment
about fast as bullets.
Two to three required five five
six eight or not the fastest
there's lots more.
So real quick on this bill.
Sometimes when trying to say.
Ninety two percent of violent
crimes America do not call fires
it's big numbers ninety four
percent of mass shootings occur
places where civilians are
banned from having our.
Revenue economic.
The biggest problem that I see
with this is.
This.
So far on the choice for us for
home defense for a lot of
people.
And as problematic when you tell
people you can only have this
but.
We have them we're penalizing
all of us me included as a legal
gun owners who hasn't done
anything with my they are.
And.
The issue of what's happening
with the schools which address
numerous times.
Every time I read a report there
was warning signs mental health
fell through the cracks parents
knew there's all kinds of things
that happened.
And if somebody wants to commit
that sort of crime.
They can just drive over to.
Arizona Texas or anywhere else
the biggest problem I have about
this is the registry in the fact
that my second amendment rights.
Being violated and I'm thinking
about disabled people to think
about this is purely aesthetics
yes Representative I don't know
that doesn't make it scary at
all it just it's a pistol grip
it didn't make it.
Faster or more violent you just
put something on aesthetically
and for that I would definitely
not be supporting this bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you
yes Representative Johnson madam
chair I would do not pass on H.
B. one oh one and that do pass
on C. pack Committee substitute
for H. B. one oh one.
We move to table not.
There's a function and.
Tablebelow.
Representative walked yes to
table.
Representative Lord yes to
table.
Representative Romero no to
table.
Representative Thomson no.
Representative Rubio
Yes no to table.
It's it's cool noted the.
No to table.
And
that it's been a really long
day.
I think it's not.
Okay thanks.
Okay we have a motion to you
have to do yes I'm sorry yes you
have a
But
we
do not take all
madam chair to gavel that the
table did not pass okay thank
you act go back to the tabling
motion did not pass vote of
forty two that we have a motion
a do not pass on the on house
bill one of wine but on I do
pass for committee substitute
I'm.
What what.
Their second yes I second okay
sorry I didn't hear you all
right would you please take will
come.
Representative walked you know.
Representative walked now.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Romero yes.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Ferrary yes madam
chair we have four two two.
Two passed HB.
No one.
Thank.
I'll get it.
Thank you you have.
Do not passed on to make us feel
HB what no one could do pass on
the committee substitute.
And here thank you for thank you
for four eight to sign today
bills and three or email in
boxes and all.
And thank you to yours for
Representative I off the.
Yes.
Okay.
And accidents are and leisure
city for the last bill today
which is house bill one sixty
four.
Thank you.
Thank.
Access your leading quietly
we're moving on to the next
bill.
If you.
More.
Right
thank you.
This
don't.
To.
We do we.
I did that Committee report
without the order.
Is please.
Okay.
Okay that's.
Mr.
Quiet please.
Are you can access.
Representative are you ready I'm
ready.
Right you madam chair and thank
you Representative that today I
am proud to be here long said my
theme co sponsors to introduce
house bill one sixty four
constitutional carry.
Constitutional carry means in
this bill to the permit with
carrying of firearms either
openly or concealed for all New
Mexicans over the age of
eighteen as long as that person
is not prohibited by federal or
state law or court order from
possessing or carrying a
firearm.
This bill does not in the
permitting process if somebody
wishes to pursue a permit
through the department of a
public safety or for insurance
or risk reciprocity purposes
madam chair.
Twenty five other states
currently our constitutional
carry states including those as
rural Maine and Vermont.
Which allow the permit was
carrying of firearms especially
in a rural state responsible gun
ownership is a way of life
especially here in New Mexico.
The state of Vermont which
Bernie Sanders representative at
the U. S. senator and in
Congress is the most gun
friendly state in the nation
with also has constitutional
carry well at the same time
Vermont does the absolute lowest
rate of gun related crime in the
nation.
It also has been a
constitutional carry states
since the beginning of our
public.
New Mexico has the same gun
ownership rate that's forty six
point two percent as its
neighbors but as a significantly
higher homicide rate according
to the rand corporation's annual
survey Texas has a similar forty
five point seven percent
ownership right well Arizona has
a forty six point three percent
ownership right Colorado has a
forty five point one percent
right these two states Arizona
and Texas they rank as some of
the most friendly states for the
second amendment while some very
very safe communities you often
hear the tires statistic that
New Mexico has the seventh
highest firearm mortality rate
in in the country as an attempt
to stigmatize gun ownership with
a twenty two percent twenty two
point seven percent right that
however New Mexico's neighboring
states that do not have
stringent gun laws have much
lower homicide rates The New
Mexico according to the CDC's
recent statistics the CDC
reports that Arizona has a
sixteen point seven percent
right well Texas has a fourteen
point two percent right I will
just reiterate that New Mexico's
is twenty two point.
Seven percent.
So that is Vermont they both
have very low right well Maine
has a very low rate as well and
these are constitutional carry
states these are some of the
safest states in the entire
nation New Mexico is home to
hundreds of thousands of legal
gun owners who must not be
saddled by burdensome red tape
to exercise their constitutional
rights well criminals who do not
follow laws are allowed to run
roughshod over our communities.
You may also hear tired
arguments that say that if the
state doesn't mandate an
application process for
concealed carry of firearms that
there are no one will take these
safety protocols or or make sure
that they are safe with the use
of firearms and that's just not
not true a pew study so that
around seventy percent of done
owning Americans have taken the
form of gun safety course well
nearly all had basic firearm
training safety training either
formally or informally that
means at an actual school or at
home from from parents.
So they're more they're more
firearms training schools
available now than there ever
have been before and this is
making it even more safe to be a
gun on gun owner in the state
this bill will break New
Mexicans free from an
administrative burden of having
to apply for and receive a
concealed Kerry license while
saving the state millions of
dollars and administrative costs
as you can see in the fiscal
impact report.
Forcing a permit to prop a
permit process is not only
another tax on the poor.
With high cost to procure a
concealed carry permits but it
also is time consuming taking
around a month for someone to
obtain one.
Especially in circumstances of
stalking domestic violence or
any other scenario where where
concealed carry is necessary for
bodily protection.
This is a giant hoop to jump
through is an undue burden that
is creating more and more
victims every single day in New
Mexico.
Constitutional carry it makes it
possible for all Americans to
exercise their natural civil and
constitutionally protected right
to keep and bear arms regardless
of their income.
I am proud to sponsor this bill
on behalf of my constituents and
all New Mexicans who believe
protecting our constitutional
right is important and I'm
joined here with my and my
colleagues Representative Tanya
made about million from Leslie
and Representative to me Mason
from Artesia I don't know if
they have anything to say
regarding this bill okay.
I would like to just can you
hear me madam chair.
That committee
I would like just to reiterate.
All the.
Constitutional rights that all
of us in this room have and is I
believe the constitutional
rights or not.
To be in France the US
constitution.
Right the well regulated militia
being necessary to the security
of a Free State the right of the
people to keep and bear arms
shall not be infringed it was
not there are on the list and we
would not be a cut.
We would waste a stated from
reading it every.
I also did not have a weapon.
We would not have an army.
Which could still be under the
suppression.
The British Empire.
Also with the New Mexico
constitution.
Section one.
Declares that the US
constitution.
Is the supreme law of the land
the words.
If it says it in the in the U.
S. constitution we are bound by
the state of New Mexico.
Also says it's inseparable part
of the federal you and the
constitution of the United
States is separating law of the
land.
And I.
I believe that we should all be
able to do.
The exercise our rights and free
speech that is not clear that
all of the all of the rights
given is to the constitution
our.
Are five years.
The the lawless noted that the
laws only the law abiding the.
Thank you.
All right I think that's all the
COVID we have them madam chair
we stand for questions.
Those.
You also get.
Because we are.
It's.
Thank you for letting me speak
today.
my name's Fred bacon I'm a
retired security and firearms
trainer I helped develop the
concealed carry program I spent
thirty three years training New
Mexicans I trained about ten
thousand people including the
security licensees here for the
state and law enforcement.
And train about two hundred
schools in the active shooter
Thirty program I did for them
and after being retired and
reflecting on what I did for the
majority of my adult life I
think I've got a pretty good
grip on the problem here and I'm
definitely a for this law the
reason is is that the conceal
carry and the security training
we're stop gaps in our society
but now I think it's time for us
to move forward to do a more
complete job in protecting our
culture.
And the way to do that is is to
go back to the constitution and
follow this I what I would
suggest highly and everyone in
this room and I truly believe
this is the right answer to the
problems of the violence.
The.
Always at all okay education and
training is the most important
thing in our society and that's
what I think we should focus on
not appropriations.
Not on this bill.
I just spoke on the one on one.
We have.
Well in.
Okay.
Is it on the phone.
I don't support to the
Representative blocks bill and
of.
Should you so I can speak on all
three that registration on that.
This bill that would discuss
security echo Sir Sir you
address the bill this bill out.
What are you so to speak on she
just if you had spoken all three
previously
okay.
There.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you very much my name is
Keith David not like you to vote
for the bill it's very costly
very costly to keep up licensed
friend of mine who's the
military veterans are disabled
he has a hard time coming up
five hundred dollars for years
to pay for the training of
licensing that another two
hundred dollars for additional
training every two years so it's
affected him tremendously
yes go without any protection
most time it is a disabled
person so he's a target from for
a lot of people you can be
easily be taken out because of
that that's for sure thank you.
Is.
As my first priority and when I
go into Albuquerque or wherever
I go I understand that it is my
constitutional right to carry
but also that it is my
responsibility and I think that
that's really what you guys are
missing with all of these bills
we understand our constitutional
rights and we also understand
the personal responsibility of
what it means to own weapons and
what it means to protect
ourselves and to practice
protect our families.
Thank you.
You.
Peter.
Samantha I'm use yourself and
you have one minute please.
Believe that it is not only are
could constitutional right but
it will reduce.
The.
Scott the criminal.
urges.
Knowing that.
Your everyday law abiding
citizens has got weapons around
them but they just don't know
who it is and they're not going
to take a chance on committing a
crime or shooting.
Well we carry concealed this
permit less will not only help
us as individuals of New Mexico
but I think you will see the
crime rate go down as far as not
only your everyday crime but
your mass shootings.
And I believe in the second
amendment pro along with all of
our other minutes of
constitution the bill of rights
that got is given to us in order
to do.
You know a civil society.
And as far as I know I've talked
to several police officers and
they've told me thank you Sir
and my wife.
Thank.
The arguments has already been
presented so urged the committee
to vote in favor the bill thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Local ground.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee thanks for your
call for comments my name is
Logan brown I'm a lifetime
resident of the state of New
Mexico I represent myself my
family and I know that myself
and my wife we have gone through
the process of getting Arkansas
carries
my wife is not renewed hers and
she's a law abiding citizen so
when we go places and if she's
alone she does not Kerry because
she doesn't want to break the
law so our constitution says we
have the right to the right not
a privilege to carry firearms to
be to bear arms so others this
is it's government overreach to
require a permit and a class and
all that the house of going
through all that to exercise a
right we don't have to do that
for anything else and it the
whole you know Dr drivers
license and that type of
argument that's that's a
privilege not a right that's
guaranteed by the constitution
please take note of all the
people that have been speaking.
Second your time is that thank
you.
That means.
Madam chair and committee can
you hear me yes we can't.
Thank you so much for allowing
me to speak with the crime rate
of fifty eight per one thousand
residents Albuquerque has one of
the highest crime rates in
America compared to all
communities of all sizes from
the smallest towns to the very
largest cities one check that
one chance of becoming a victim
of either violent or property
crime here is one in seventeen.
The state constitutional carry
recognize the right of all law
abiding adult to legally allowed
to carry a concealed firearm to
do so without first having to
obtain government permission
this ensures that the citizens
have the right to self defense
without government red tape or
delays additionally this
legislation maintains existing
concealed handgun license system
so citizens you still wish to
obtain a permit may do so I urge
you to past this bill I am in
full support of it and thank you
Representative block for
bringing it forward thank you
madam.
For it
There are other states were
these are registries of
concealed carry permit holders
have been published images made
them a target of.
criminals with the other items.
I think food.
Very best we just would go back
to constitutional carry.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Opposition.
Okay anyone on scene.
Two people okay.
To carry a gun which is a very
deadly weapon thank you.
Thank you.
Just one more.
Of course.
Madam chair members of the
committee hi Representative this
Santa Fe branch of the Indo laci
P. E. and we oppose this bill it
is easy here in many cases to
get a firearm in this state than
it is to get a car or to adopt a
dog and firearms or deadly
weapons therefore they should be
required to be carrying a permit
thank you.
Okay sec.
What what we're trying to do.
In opposition.
Energy I'm a retired group
prevention specialist and used
to work with the state health
department and I stand opposed
to this bill because I think
that it up vote is a great deal
more access to firearms in
public places where we already
have too many that we don't know
that they're there.
And I urge you to vote against
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
The phone okay thank you now.
Representative clock we do it
thank you madam Connor thank you
I don't have any closing
comments in my response and I
forgot Representative Lord is
also co sponsored Representative
have questions that Dixon.
I'm sorry a.
Representative.
Representative Duncan I
apologize not Representative
Dixon yeah thank you.
I wish he was the co sponsoring.
That would be thank you John
okay great
Representative.
Thank you madam chair try to
keep break it is been a very
very long day so as a prop
Mexico sponsored this that want
to add a few things that care to
firearm is right.
Privilege it's very important
there is a lot of studies in the
crime prevention research center
us drive lots more guns less
crime it's a great.
okay and wind
conceal carry permits triple
during the first seven years of
Obama's Representative
presidency the murder drop rate
dropped by sixty percent.
I mean there's more people that
are caring and that usually
leads to less crime.
the.
We move from a state that was
constitution carrier which is
great because you don't have to
get a permit I'm I know a lot of
people that are.
Legislative.
Get so current classes let
anyone it's a good way to make
income but we still make the
income because if you want to
carry you're going to another
state you still have to
reciprocity I hate the two year
thing I sometimes and like all I
completely forgot it's a lot of
money to do that.
Conceal carry permits
Register gun owners and I think
we all made it very parent I
feel about that earlier.
And also it's disproportionately
unfair to those of lower socio
economic status because it is
quite pricey and it does take
time and you have to go all day
and then you got to go back and
do that renewal so I just I just
wanted to bring that up that
there's more reasons of why this
is a great idea and I I firmly
believe on the numbers and the
statistics and the data that
more guns less crime it's been
huge in phenomenal great
research by Dr so thank you I
know my time oh and one more
thing I'm sorry I will be like
Representative trusses.
Search tell me.
What.
I'm gonna go to hell I just
wanna remind everybody on madam
chair that criminals are ready
permit less carry although some
thank you madam chair person.
Anyone else in the committee of
the table I second Kate's move
to table
House bill one sixty four would
you please call.
Representative walked no to
table Representative war no to
table.
Senator Romero yes to table.
Senate of Thomson yes.
Representative Rubio yes to
table.
Representative Ferrary yes sure
we have no to table forced to.
And
The table as with a vote of four
to two.
Table.
Madam.
The state needs.
All forces.
All day thank you all.
