I are to this.
that fires the three forward all
the some questions about
whether.
It's recurring and nonrecurring.
and the sponsor that bill has
experts spending and so usually
what was the role that bill
until Thursday because we can
have that fire are water driving
and I would like to present a
bill and if they present the
bill which probably discussed
the bill while the experts are
available.
And at that point.
Yeah I don't necessarily see the
benefit the following the the
tools there's.
So I know there's been concerns
about the availability of that
fire in the past.
Representative Townsend as
ranking member of the of the the
thoughts on that.
I think that the.
Chairman I think that's the
there are a of there has been
some popular potential.
amendments to the bill so I
think we ought to just discuss
it and see where the system.
What quality early but I of I
would hope that the in.
We have a detailed discussion or
something that out of the.
Sure.
Info related to.
Representative break up as.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert there.
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Scott.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend Here.
I think you're Sarinana.
Chairman clean air you have a
question.
anything else in the the
fourteen.
Five
percent we have lost more in the
funding for.
Representative from.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee for hearing our
memorial today as the chairman
mentioned this is a house
memorial thirty five for our
forests and effectively does
three things on it is number one
creates the forced appreciation
day to create appreciation for
of the biodiversity and
ecological diversity in our for
state information for our world
especially the role of force in
that diversity and it also
encourages the teaching of for
about force and why they're
important for communities and
three also teaches our students
about being good stewards of our
our our forests I decided here
is bill after like many of you I
was approached by some local
fourth graders for my district
and with one of the meeting the
hard asked to if I would carry
this bill yes or no and I had to
answer I would appreciate it but
then also followed by one of
them to just blurted out of
condition could help page that
the force is my joy and so
hopefully they'll be on today as
you know with a snow day today
appeared likely to the point the
state so I don't know how many
will be able to join us before
the go sledding today but I hope
you'll join us and with that I
stand for questions Mr chair.
Okay
is there is there anyone in this
like this I on this.
She was very.
All right good morning Mr chair
members of the committee
endorsed and for most of circle
supports well friends and the
young people who bring the bill
up before you today so often we
forget the Forrest expect Sir
the fourth except when we have
the free time to be in them or
whether they are burning the
state could do to preacher
forest thank you very much.
Thank you anyone else.
It so we're gonna go on in the.
Like to.
This bill please reach your hand
we will recognize the first step
would also apply.
Mr chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes we
can.
Okay I'm also Miley with the
well grants program and I'm here
with two outs and students more
low and I say we up who will be
speaking in support of house
memorial thirty five today.
Mr chairman members of the
committee hello my name is
marlin over gone and I'm from
I'm in fifth grade and I'm from
Emerson elementary school in
Albuquerque force are personally
important to me because I've
lived in the force for my entire
life and I want to keep it
healthy and say I appreciate
additional funding as for many
others this is our chance to
make a difference I hope you
will support house memorial
thirty five for these reasons
thank you.
Mr chair and then many of the.
Members of the committee hello
my name is of the Senate I'm in
fifth grade and families in
elementary school in our fifty
four separate Julie important to
me because the force is a place
where you can get away from
anyone and be yourself we need a
safe space and nature for our
animals so they are not forced
into the during the city where
you help us save our Adams
homes.
I
think they are.
Okay thank you very much.
is there is there anyone else
online would like to speak on
this bill in support or
opposition.
Good to the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you for your memorial.
Interesting the two was a.
Complete lack of reform need to.
A sustainable timber.
Yes.
Could you.
That's an important part of.
Managing force thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative for the question
we actually have the children
lead to that process of
developing what they wanted to
identify as key issues that they
felt were important at the the
forest and so we allowed that to
be the process with this this
objective here is to ensure that
you know there's more education
on the force generally speaking
but not about in particular
industries that might be benefit
from it.
And Mr Chairman representative
during those conversations where
there no conversations about.
Managing forced for.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative the focus on the
sleeve of the students was more
so about what community members
can do to ensure that the that
we are seeing the force but for
myself so when I was talking to
some the students following
those conversations what came up
a lot was littering for example
that was a big piece that they
came up for ensuring that were
you were responsible or
campfires and so from their
perspective it was the
conversation was primarily about
that the pieces that the
community can do individually.
Okay.
It's true line twelve we talk
for in billions of dollars into
the New Mexico economy.
I also.
The one where the other Mr
Chairman representative the
state GDP is about one hundred.
In dollars so this
representation with the two
point one the.
And do you have any
justification for the.
Mr Chairman representative I
think I know where you're going
are you mean I mean we're going
to wait what you mean by that
all I know the outdoor
recreation industry is one of
the hot fastest growing we're
one of the fastest growing
outdoor recreation economy in
the nation and so I believe
that's primarily where that
growth comes from and then and
then again all those
billion dollars surrounding
economic drivers as well.
And then in turn in line fifteen
would discuss.
Mr Chairman representative
should mental wellness as a
consequence of our actions with
forced is do you have anything.
Supporters.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I think those
were all to be fair the feelings
of the students but I will say
you know as many of us often
discuss here to quote that child
the forces are joy and whether
you use it for hunting or
backpacking or camping or hiking
or just getting a breath of
fresh air most of our children
most of children that were
involved in this process felt
but it was it contributed to the
mental illness thank you Mr
chairman thank you for your
answers.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative
Representative from Lee covered
a couple things that jumped off
the to me but one of the things
that jumped off the page was it
says one of Mexico's covered by
forest and have been around the
state.
Quite a bit and that number just
seems a little high
Where do we come up with one
third.
Thank you Mr chairman the
representative this is sue
George was with the wild friends
and she was just a cheap giving
Senate race that includes The
Boston and so that would include
that aspect as well.
It is.
As most couple miles wide long
review of our.
Not much of a consenus of what
would you consider Abbas
creation of
It just seems like a.
Out of thin air the then you
seem to be.
Based on
previous observation of the
State map which shows.
I'm not sure what the.
That was the only thing that
counts.
That jump off the page the in
the billions of dollars to.
I have no objection I just want
to know with those numbers came
from thank you Mr chair the
groups that are happy to follow
up as well to look at those
numbers closing the.
Eight years and I represent.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for presenting
this memorial
Could you tell me about what.
The memorial will do you think
sure thank you Representative
for the question it would a
request that the governor
creates a force appreciation day
overall and increase education
about white what forced you for
communities and also encourage
good stewardship of the source.
Mr chair Representative have you
ever at my side of the mountain.
Apologize and sorry have you
ever read the book my side of
the mountain I have Mister chair
out of member center now okay
well I would highly recommend
that for us.
I questions thank you.
Representative sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
bringing this bill I want to
tell you know as as Montoya not
our military really depend on
going out to need to enforce in
different areas and they have
fishing at the they really
depend on when we come back
specially for Mr Chairman I sent
him back from Afghanistan and
and when you get back to
Albuquerque that's you just
wanna go instantly so Mr
chairman this is very valuable
to especially our military and
our veterans working that really
difficult situations and as far
as Mr chairman Representative it
says Mexico's boards cover
almost twenty five million acres
about a third of the state's
land areas correct so thank you
but thank you for things.
At least.
Thank you very.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Serrato for
bringing this forward although I
Representative Lee County and I
live in Albuquerque I grew up in
northern Mexico and I spent half
of my life in the for.
In.
Eighteen and fishy.
I still do that on occasion when
I have time I just want to thank
you for bringing this forward I
think it's it really brings an
awareness to the fact that you
know we had these fires in
northern New Mexico in the
destroy
a lot of the habitat and I and I
unfortunately fortunately had no
to the trip up to northern New
Mexico to see the burn scars
this past summer and in doing
that I spent some time with a
friend of ours who is one of the
pueblo governors of their and he
has a ranch up there so the for
the fires came very very close
to his to his ranch this PED's
area.
A few years ago Mr chair and
Representative Serrato is
probably back in about well was
in a few years of those back in
the nineties I went up to
Washington and Joe up to see
where you know we had double
canines and the eruption.
And
I was able to see reforestation
that occurred in mount Saint
Helens and I hope you know I I
always in my heart I hope that
this is the kind of thing that
does happen and especially in
northern New Mexico because
those people were so devastated
with those fires and I just very
much appreciate that you are
bringing this forward and bring
it to light because.
I mean whether it's a third or a
quarter or whatever it is I
think the fact that we need to
protect our forests is very very
important so very much
appreciate that you brought this
for Mr chair and representative
select.
Thank you Representative radio.
Seven.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative I actually
think that your moral addresses
maybe something that Scott was
brought up in that if you look
on page two line twenty one.
Just talking about some of the.
That's on the forced but one
twenty one overcrowding trees.
For a lot from the most.
Dr day.
spent a lot of time.
and.
Thank.
Protecting the large trees from
the underbrush so I I think you
know kind of in a round about
way.
Representative I think that this
memorial even addresses dresses
that I think once again I think
muscular or.
Are we needed.
Follow the because they've done
a good job day they also have a
simple little
plan in place about prescribed
burns and one of those is to not
do it in spring.
Federal government could learn
from as well so
I do believe.
In that section right there as
well well rounded brings up that
even concerns of.
Thanks to this thing.
Fitting is a big part of.
Taking out for us thank you Mr
chairman.
You Representative Montoya
it's wrong thank you for that
moral
two one to weigh in on.
Number and that is simply the
not not all fours are all
budgets you know that you can.
Alright
that's of course a deer's ears
New Mexico the producer of the
forces area if you look at the
USGS took graphic map the the
green areas and the wide readers
forces by standing is that the
green areas.
They start doing these maps
were.
Areas of sufficient.
Trees that the military provide
cover.
The type of the trees so that's
the that's a different measure
of force.
It was pricing is.
If you look at the state as a
whole that include different
types of forces you to.
Thank you for that.
Representative Mr chair and
representative.
Recommendation that we.
The best education in the state
is right now is there any
further debate on the committee
yeah.
it for the debate from the
committee.
Is there any objection to the
motion.
I think the Texans you do that
they do have
thank you Mr.
To my witnesses it was their
birthday I just want to mention
that today.
Thank.
Representative.
Yeah yeah.
Bill is House Bill three fifty
oil and gas emissions reduction
tax for the the Townsend Here.
Thank you.
House Bill three fifty is.
of Bill that.
Came the lives we had gone
through the last.
Really three sections.
And it is an effort to
incentivize the reduction of
emissions from all and gas
production facility in New
Mexico.
but it does.
Is it would allow of corporate
income of twelve thousand
dollars for.
Eight operator who installs
Commission facilities.
pursuant
To reducing emissions in order
to try to two of.
Yep an industry and an incentive
to.
the the cry of the people.
And to give longevity to
marginal wells that are in in
the field.
I have been I have become.
Increasingly alarmed over the
last couple of years.
I statements from legislators
and said.
This industry won't last five
years this industry won't last
ten years.
And I.
I look back and start saying
well if this is true.
But we're we the.
But we have no way to balance
our budget.
And so this is just an effort
it's just it's a sizeable
Investment in the industry seven
hundred million Bucks.
and Mr speaker it should be one
time not recurring for sure.
And
And I think it is something that
deserves of the conversation
And but of.
Given industry some lengths of
for the future so the bills
pretty straightforward and Mr
chairman that I stand for
questions.
Okay.
Thank you first.
People are used to speak of this
bill.
Is there.
So let's do
to support for this bill forces
they are not into like to speak.
Want to come up and then use the
money.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Mike Miller
Permian basin petroleum
association.
As the sponsor pointed out we we
feel that to this is a piece of
legislation that will assist in
our smaller producers and
meeting some of the new rules
and regulations
we believe that this will give
them an opportunity to actually
stay in business and keep these
wells alive for the future
instead of maybe because they
cannot
with without this they might not
be able to
meet the meet the regulations
and they may have to shut those
well sandwich that would be
detrimental not only to our
production but also to a revenue
source in the future thank you.
any anyone else in the audience
and support.
To go online and support.
Carlos on that.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Carlos on check
with the New Mexico business
coalition law supporters of the
oil and gas industry and you
know I think that they are very
responsible they always have
been very much of the show their
care for the environment and
they want to do the right thing
we would love to see them
incentivized.
Rather than the policies that we
have been establishing which is.
Unitive and forceful against the
industry this industry provides
many great paying jobs and our
small producers in particular
are important to our economy
into the state so I urge you to
support this bill thank you.
They that online for.
The nine dollars their lowest
opposition.
Good morning Mister chair
members of the committee again
who's gonna with the Serra club
noted the chapter representing
our thirty five thousand members
throughout New Mexico we
strongly oppose this bill this
is a tax break for producers who
install of the per recovery
units and oil storage tanks this
credit is unnecessary NMED found
their ozone precursor role to be
cost effective and the EAB
agreed also this would allow the
oil and gas industry take more
tax dollars for state needs like
education our state is only
beginning to act and its arms
around the methane waste problem
has been around for years and is
wasting millions we should be
fixing fixing that and reason
revenue not letting the industry
off the hook and I think
personally I think it's about
time we stop doing tax cuts and
credits to a dying industry I
thank you very much.
Thank you anyone else in
opposition to this.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee had a breast but for
reasons very heard from my
colleague Louise we also ask you
to propose a bill thank you you
identify yourself and your
organization.
I have been here so many times
I'm any County clean energy
advocate with the PNM thank you.
Does anyone else in opposition
in the road if you would like to
speak if you're all online would
like to raise more of first that
we have Charles good more the.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
Charles good marker speaking on
behalf of both the natural
resources defense council action
fund and the New Mexico voices
for children action fund strong
opposition to this bill It
mounts to a taxpayer bailout or
To to to to an industry that is
wreaking enormous profits also
there's absolutely no need
whatsoever for this tax break
it's a pure giveaway
this State Land Office notes in
the in the F. I. R. which I hope
all that members have a chance
to read
they know that the additional up
front costs to install the B. R.
use safer producers hundreds of
thousands of dollars a year and
pay back in as little as two
months and that's a quote from
the United States environmental
protection agency so while the
yes the yield enormous
environmental benefit and the
required under the state they
also provide the substantial
economic benefits to producers
the state then sell the captured
gas it can be used and the are
you D. R. uses paper reduction
units that the tax credits are
supposed to be for they've been
used by major producers for
years without the tax credit so
we're incentivizing people to do
something that they're required
to do using taxpayer money that
they're going to profit off of
please vote against this bill
thank you.
Thank you that's that we have
each night.
Hi good morning Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Paige knight and I'm a senior
research and policy analyst with
New Mexico voices for children
and we also stand in opposition
to HB three fifty we see it as
valuable taxpayer resources to
subsidize behavior that is
already happening and will
continue to happen since the I
use are beneficial economically
to producers with that fire
pointing out like you just heard
that there is P. back in as
little as two months with the
ability to sell the captured gas
we are use of course have
environmental benefits but in
this bill there's no minimum
amount of emissions reductions
required which we see as
problematic and we don't believe
producers should be able to
receive a tax credit for
something they already have a
financial incentive to use
without it so for these reasons
we stand in opposition thank
you.
Thank you for that
The additional injuries
before the committee or two
thousand you have anything that
but I Mr chairman thank you I
appreciate the comments
some of them might take
exception to that you might
suspect
the R. use can be of and
on wells that have.
Hi missions they may be.
They may have a.
They may be profitable.
But the fact remains that what
I'm after is trying to reduce
the emissions so there are wells
out there that need help there
are small operators that need.
And I think this would
incentivize them and would make
the Representative small size of
job in a couple years a lot
easier if he still had in New
Mexico.
That
are you.
The rest of the.
This is the committee.
sure later.
That number of us to be able to.
Are you waiting a lot of hours
of representative government
over.
So we actually Representative
Dixon although representative
got and then you.
All.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill I am very interested in it
and have
A couple of questions just to
make sure that I get a better
understanding.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
how many of sorry.
Each well requires
at the are you.
each tank batteries that has
each will.
May require of paper Capri it
has a mission typically
associated with bank batteries.
Mr chair and representative so
proximally it up for a small
producer in New Mexico about how
many.
The R. use would a small
producer
I purchase.
Good question Representative in
New Mexico today small
producers.
Well range from
Your family run businesses two
or three well two of.
Maybe a fifteen or twenty
But I think the point did you
are are driving cheap that I
would like.
Help make is.
Is if you look at the FIR.
Look at the cost of these units.
That the compliance if you want
to look at it from that side of
the equation is four to five
times what yes.
tax credit deals so it's a very
burdensome effort it's a recent
that there hasn't been bye bye
in in this.
Try to New Mexico.
It's thank you madam chair and
representative and part of what
I'm trying to have a better
grasp on is of how much money a
small producer would need to
expend to have the our use
And all of their
Well as our tank.
Madam chair in Representative.
The minimum
unit in the FIR is fifty
thousand dollars.
Probably.
I would say maybe a little more
than that on average on the
small producers that you could
you could say I think seventy
five thousand dollars per
location so it take a sixty
thousand dollar payment from the
company basically to go with
this tax credit.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative
Are all will lose.
Chair of created equal so
Holder wells to older wells emit
more greenhouse gas emissions
The New York Wells.
Mr chair and representative it
varies dependent on on the
operator and the equipment when
the well was drilled in the kind
of equipment share the new
medication for their
I think it would be reasonable
to say.
That older wells like older cars
don't have the the
Technology applicable.
Mr Chairman representative would
so is the pay back here is equal
for all wells or is there a
difference depending on those
factors.
Mr Chairman representative Hey
up.
it will be different.
It will be different because of
the amount of gas.
At least.
The make up of that gas.
How much much is recoverable.
And how often it operates.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that
Use the only type of.
machinery and maybe if there's a
better word for that but
that help reduce greenhouse gas
emissions from wells or other
other types of products and
machinery is that.
Do similar things and Mr
Chairman representative my
question is is this bill.
To targeted.
Chair representative there are.
There are number of different
types of the R. use.
You have
Lino absorption you have.
Activated charcoal
Representative catalysts are out
there that are are.
Breaking technology.
but the fact that they are
recovering papers that are
either being admitted and lost
is my target so there.
I'm not trying to target a
specific unit but the reduction.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I'm do you happen
to know are there any
incentives
in the inflation reduction act
or other federal laws that it
been recently passed that do
something similar.
Here Representative not that I'm
aware of.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I don't I don't
know the answer to that I just
wonder you know there are a lot
of incentives across the board
for various industries
new technologies that support
greenhouse gas reduction efforts
and so quite frankly I wouldn't
be surprised if there was
something but I was just
wondering if you
Mr chair
Representative
Do you could you just give me a
range
What is the difference between a
major producer in an independent
producer and there.
How much.
Available capital would be.
One might have versus the other
and very round figures work just
fine the.
So.
Mr chair and representative.
There are huge differences
the majority all companies
international companies with
thousands of employees and.
Multitudes of of different.
Types of embedded.
Activities with their industry
to the small ball and gas
operators in New Mexico is
really nine day of.
That is.
In fact.
One of the ideas that we have
discussed as an amendment to
this bill is to.
Take the large corporate
entities out of the out of this
picture and target those small
businesses in New Mexico that
are desperately in need of the
help and quite frankly.
might have as large of an impact
in the.
Put this in perspective I I the.
This is probably the single.
Most significant.
Effort.
To reduce.
Missions in New Mexico you can't
alright enough cars to details
and this is just a quick
To try to incentivize and
industry to
Help in in the.
Emissions control sorry.
greenhouse gases yet because an
industry to survive and be
profitable so that the state has
been the job of New Mexico have
income for education that's that
are going forward.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I appreciate that
sort of distinction
Do you have.
Potentially it's in one of our.
The FIR or another analysis do
we have a sense of how.
Much emissions could be reduced.
through this bill.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't have that number off the
top.
I.
your
You're calling to your right I
see working this calculator so I
I suspect we're going to get
that answer in just a minute.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
I'm.
I truly am appreciative of you
bringing this bill because I
think
Mr chair representative it for
me one of the big concerns as we
talk about how we reduce
greenhouse gas emissions is
balancing.
Carrots and sticks right our
mandates and incentives and you
know I don't know for me that
this is necessarily the right
approach but I firmly believe
that the state has a role in
helping.
In use in all sectors
reach the goals that the state
is setting and Mr Chairman
representative I don't feel that
it's appropriate for the state
only put forth mandates without
supporting companies
So it's something that I am
certainly interested in
philosophically so thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative thank you.
Thank you thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative.
Try to committee through the
mechanics.
These installations for just.
To.
Here folks right off the.
Some sales.
She
changed everything.
Sure we have to have you all
with.
Change all the way down.
What happens.
Hey rules.
All.
Three thousand five.
Three.
Rules have that federal portion.
Thanks.
I will be able to give to the
church.
And as a consequence.
Whatever you need.
All.
Now.
George.
Which part
was very important PSI.
And
She.
What we have to show.
So we need all.
That is economically.
We do that at least ten years.
This administration.
At appropriations.
Rules
regarding.
Thank you you'll see the.
I don't.
Thank you hello.
Emissions that are otherwise
uneconomic.
Sure.
Option.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Slash.
From hello person sure.
Was
time we.
Okay sure to try to
sure conditions and coal.
You don't see.
Well All.
The
chair or a large.
This
these.
Our.
Representations that.
You can spend fifty thousand
dollars.
One of your.
For each.
Sure all.
Mr Chairman.
Representative believes which
apps just.
Operators would be spending
money no more.
Mr Chairman representative now
they're not unspent money I mean
I can't afford to spend the
money on a low stripper well
with it has three to five MCF a
day and just prepare up to date
they don't have they don't have
a stream of gas that will run
the unit not economically
recoverable and they are the
Yes that was the issue of making
an investment that they have no
possibility for return.
And and so they will prolong
that investment as long as they
can is any business ma'am.
Mr Chairman representative to
contrast.
We know our own development.
With modern.
Reach.
And thousands.
Hey contributing to those.
Contributing to that last.
At which time the question.
How was in charge what should.
The differences of large
operators with high volumes have
the capacity of.
In the in the capacity to make
those investments and they will
right up front and
That is the that's the
difference.
So.
Mr Chairman representative.
They have the.
Option insurers were produced.
In rural.
Actually.
What percentage of that work
actions would be from these what
I would call for you.
What the Los need to arch.
And if you don't know the answer
she.
Well in the Mr Chairman in the
second not argue and go ahead
let me have the number one
fifty.
Twelve to fifteen.
Option is coming from.
Engines.
Thank
economic impact.
Are very encouraging.
Fifty
thousand eight and nine
questions which cover state
costs.
So
right Mr Chairman representative
on the oil conservation division
Mr Roch wants to.
Chair coral to rights so Mister
chairman.
The ex teens.
All of us Senator
two thousand.
We don't know how much.
What
is the average percentage.
What we have.
On state revenues.
On
chairman Representative that
that really is what I'm striving
to bill this as it will have a
significant impact on New Mexico
one that we can avoid with us
with a reasonable investment for
the future.
Mr Chairman representative would
also through this.
Installation of this.
These folks.
Tax.
This will all.
And
perhaps.
Right businesses are.
In other tax credits.
We could develop.
Vehicles are.
So for.
The house that would not be
able.
Mr Chairman representative as as
you.
As you well know and as we have
discussed I think this is eight.
A significant.
And if you describe the most
significant issue that.
In addition to that we could
have.
With respect Mr chairman
The process.
And not to be little the impact.
But this legislature has taken
very progressive steps.
To help industry.
That have.
Either a negative impact.
To our to our general fund in
cases of the steps going forward
for example.
At the same time we have done.
We have a lab
significant.
Benefit to companies and
stopovers and in in this
industrial revenue bonds to
promote an industry.
And.
That thought process is what
brought me to HB three fifty is
what can we do to incentivize.
And because of an Action.
That will create results that we
all.
On a.
Expedited platform.
And because and industry.
To.
Have a longer life.
Give us the tools that we need.
To bridge the gap of technology
for electrical storage all these
other initiatives that we have
on because.
I honestly don't.
State a tool that we have.
Other than increasing taxes to
all.
Taxpayers in New Mexico whether
it be property tax the I. T.
corporate tax that we can we can
even.
Can.
To offset a loss no gas even
eight hundred fifty thousand
barrels a day that you're
discussing.
Mr Chairman representative the
first is that their version is
no substitute.
Mr chairman and Representative
not that I'm aware of.
Last question Mr chairman all
with somebody else.
In the the also fair to say.
That these mandates are going to
cost.
Billions of dollars.
That may.
Probably not the the
economically recover.
And that burden will fall.
Substantial.
On the company's chief operators
that can least afford there is.
Mr Chairman representative very
first.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr
Mitchell.
Thank you.
All.
Thank you Mr chair before
question I did detection com Jim
Winchester with you well it was
sort of New Mexico to wanted me
to express strong support for
this.
That said.
Mr Chairman representative.
Following up on
the gentleman from Lee County.
I too am very concerned with
the.
A lot of money.
Local companies.
Are in essence faced with the
dilemma.
And that is.
Having to make this investment.
We are you units.
All there was.
For
awhile.
Every decision that's made.
Us is based based on economics
and so Mr chair and
representative.
Yes these.
Vapor recovery units which.
Provided the pay out some of the
people expressed in the comment
period.
What the operator make the
decision to put those recovering
units if they got a two month or
four months.
Mr Chairman representative if
they had those payouts they will
are you done this any
responsible operator I don't
care if you're selling shoes are
going all those if you find a
way to have a two month return
on your investment.
You go to and they would have
done I did want to I up
Representative Scott the.
Fifty thousand barrels a day
that's about four hundred
eighteen million dollars a year
staff.
Mr Chairman representative.
Everybody in this room would
want to deal with pays out up
one through four months even
couple years of the but that's
not occurring so.
My constituents of people that
are in the business that working
seventy stripper wells.
They're having to face the fact
that.
If they do this fifty thousand
dollar investment thirty five
thousand whatever it costs.
If they're not willing to
recover.
That in a reasonable period of
time they were left with only
one alternative as they tell me.
And that is to plug abandoned
well is that your understanding.
Mr Chairman representative I
think that so.
Unfortunately through I mean if
you are a small operator and you
have made.
You have made eleven
With those with production if
you have and you realize that
the next investment you're gonna
make.
We'll be will right here
operating expenses if you have
more equipment on the well side.
Major operate.
It's going to not increase your
bottom line.
I mean there's a time that you
decide you need sales shoe store
just get out of business and the
easiest way to get out of this
with yes.
It's either try to sell it to
someone that might I add or you
go through a P. N. ace a process
where you plug in the band and
then get them off the books and
try to take the tax breaks of
that.
Mr chair representative about
Preciado you're doing the
calculation of how much that
might be worked through the
state of New Mexico so follow up
question is how much does the
state of New Mexico receive from
a well but it's plugged in and
then.
Mr chairman Representative not a
done.
And so Mr Chairman
representative.
Seems to me that the decision
before us is.
We either.
Try to assist the stripper wells
operators.
Through a partial tax breaks to
encourage them to reduce
emissions and continue to do so
well.
Or they're going to be faced
with having to plug and abandon
that well.
Just continue that operation.
And.
We as a state are going to lose
our revenue with the state or
going to lose some production
may not be
huge number in terms of total
production in New Mexico but we
stand to lose you know a
significant amount of money that
Mr Chairman representative the
most years before the advent of
this was all really and
you know the the tremendous
quantities of what we're
producing today.
Most production in the state of
New Mexico is from stripper
wells low volume low quantities
of producing wells in these are
the very wells this is status
for for decades so Mr chair
representative you bring forth
this
It's certainly not the.
Yes it does allow some incentive
for these stripper well
operators to continue to
operate some of these wells are
still will be some that are what
that this will provide some
incentives and not.
Mr Chairman representative it
doesn't I would just remind the
committee accepting that I
didn't know until a few months
ago.
Hello and I were having dinner
one night with the lady that's
responsible for our America
provided the largest.
Producers.
in the nation.
And she told us that the
technology today from our own
building.
As the is as much as it exploits
the ability.
To produce that as
some that we're currently only
getting ten to fifteen percent
of the recovered oil out of that
rock today.
So we're we're just one step
away.
From developing the technology.
That will maybe double or triple
our current production levels
from existing force.
And if you want to get excited
about what can change New Mexico
think about that income stream.
Think about what you could do
that you could change the Mexico
and yes.
Bill is just one.
Rick toward building that rich
toward not only newer
technologies around energy.
whether it's in electrical
energy the nuclear energy
whatever it may be this brings
another break to the bridge I'll
get you to more sustainability
of New Mexico board for.
Mr chair representative the
state was made that this was to
benefit smaller producers
Could you show me.
Where.
The smaller ones are provided.
Your.
Mr madam chair and
representative they're just
included did did not.
With.
Some discussion.
about whether we should limit it
to only small but they're in the
builder is nothing.
Sure Representative thank you.
Thank you very much chair thank
you Representative Madam chair
representative the I think a few
of the the points have been
brought up chair representative
there's no sense that currently
in this legislation.
There is no sense that
Mr chairman and madam chair.
but I would
eagerly at even a two year
sunset to because I think it
would be that much buying on and
have in the revert to the
general fund that was used okay
that thank you madam chair thank
you Representative and madam
chair representative is there
any way currently in the
legislation to sort of insured
that the trapped vapor is then
utilized is
not emitted down the road that
is there an enforcement and a
clawback mechanism in the bill.
Madam chair I do there I I think
the oil and gas.
regulations would prohibit.
and operator from turning off
equipment that had been
In the stall and increase
emissions I mean certainly.
it least of my.
Process.
That would not be sent date that
in the responsible operator
would even.
I believe would be a response
that occurred thank thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative
And and enter I I and I know
there's there's obviously a lot
of conversation and there's some
disagreement around the some of
the rules that been promulgated
by the administration
But this
this is not this is sort of
across the board whether folks
are coming to an end to
compliance with the rules
there's also no federal rules
going in with inflation
reduction act that is my
understanding will sort of
increase over time regarding
methane reducing methane
emissions.
So this is sort of across the
board folks to come into
compliance or not this is just
the straight tax credit which is
fair with its what you said
Madam chair representative
The sense that some of these
other provisions are for tax
policy Madam chair
representative though I think
the volume question as
especially as it relates to
state finances is incredibly
important one
and madam chair representative.
We you know historically New
Mexico state average two hundred
thousand barrels a month
somewhere in there for extended
period of time.
Years ago that is correct okay
and thank you madam chair thank
representative really.
And to the.
Two thousand.
You know prior to twenty ten
twenty eleven especially twenty
twelve.
And that was a flat line madam
chair representative
going back into the early
eighties it's remarkably
remarkably flat remarkably
static.
Madam chair representative were
at one point seven million.
Eros per day now it.
So I think
I want to make sure and get the
numbers right.
Madam chair representative
Were estimated.
And these are by sort of
international research entities
Rystad energy our own consensus
revenue estimating group
estimates will top out between
two million and two point one.
There's uncertainty there Madam
chair representative you pointed
to some of the additional work
that's going on.
I may
Chairman representative I think
it's important to realize that
fifteen years ago.
I mean was that there.
What what was it like.
Hello future.
Only because.
technology.
And innovation and
entrepreneurship we have a
Permian to date it has been
That is capable of such
wonderful.
Members of one point seven.
Million barrels Mason thank you
manager thank you Representative
I I agree I would point out
chair representative two
thousand fourteen I think the
United States lifts its embargo
upon exporting petroleum up
until that point is in place
under president Obama and with
sort of a divided Congress of
bargain was struck that lifted
the embargo on exporting oil
which correlates pretty closely
to that very extensive wrap up
as well
That could lead to a a large so
so chair representative I think
the I'm less concerned volume
one is an revenue wise Madam
chair representative and then
then.
Then you might be in terms of
bring this legislation I
appreciate the comments about.
Sort of in a technology neutral
space.
Looking at all ways to to work
as uniformly as possible and
greenhouse gas reductions
there are specific parts of this
that that I won't be able to
support madam chair and
representative but I do
appreciate the conversation very
much thank you madam chair.
The next
Thank you madam chair
Representative Townsend
The.
Technology.
Your use.
We are all well as
but.
I think.
Ciation
So stripper wells as workers
just on.
And sure well still counts.
Fifteen percent of.
that.
The action
Two large.
The large municipalities
chevrons on.
They invest heavily is for
everyone.
Madam chair representative.
Of course almost every company
has.
Wells
this is spectrum but typically
those large producers those
of large corporate.
entities are the entities that
are.
Developing deals and technology
and the state.
Historically so those smaller
wells that large companies with
large overheads cannot.
Affectively operate and they
sell it to smaller companies
with smaller overheads they can
see their way through the
profitability.
Until now.
So the mandates that.
After seeing.
Our.
To
handle the mandate better.
Mr Chairman madam chair.
Yeah Representative that's.
What we see I have a lot of
independent producers gas
producers San Juan basin.
And
I think typically that's why C..
Some of the larger ones agreeing
to.
Representative mandates or
trying to it's easier for that
hi by the.
Some smaller companies.
they push back once just so much
harder for them to justify this
I I believe there there was a
stable couple states.
Made by a couple of the kids
that you know that this pays
itself off in two months I
believe that's probably.
Our state for some large
producers at all out of.
In the well hi production range
on eight could you could you
just describe briefly
transaction coach.
New well versus where we are the
struggles are just reduce.
production.
Chairman representative of.
Easily documented that means
that new production
What we typically call flesh
production that that production
that follows stimulation of the
new.
So this is the primo production
and that production decline is
relatively steep and usually
falls off
You know in in.
And for the eight months
depending on where you're at but
it falls off pretty steeply and
So anything that you do and that
those in with new equipment on
new well we'll show the benefits
of the higher productions.
Thank you.
She.
Representative Townsend do you
need.
What is it.
Williams.
I think that the definition
Madam chair representative the
definition is fifty thousand
that are less stripper wells and
New Mexico.
So
So we must have a lot of
stripper wells of their it's
fifteen percent.
Transaction.
I believe that is to provide
that to great extent.
Stirs.
That.
vast majority of those
struggles.
The.
There has been.
Legislation that's passed this
committee.
Thanks tried to put in place.
idea financial insurance.
And.
Literal insurance
companies because of the fear of
the pandemic.
Levels.
yeah we we use of the term
abandoned couple different ways
one is that cap on.
Well in an abandoned the
production of the.
but that some companies are.
Really small can yeah then maybe
don't have the.
The where with all to comply.
There there was concern about
them being corrupted maybe
literally standing.
This possibility.
Of the state.
and that I believe that's what
has driven some that.
legislation.
But in reality.
it's those new wells which are
making production early in.
Hello like you to like I believe
you stated earlier in testimony
that.
just like new cars and wells and
new technology.
And a lot of that captures want
to take place on wheels forward.
Where we see the abandonment
Wells.
That the state then the counter
spots for.
It's no longer that they're just
not using now there's a cost to
the state if there's well they
have to go challenge.
And do whatever.
Just take place.
so madam chair it appears to be
the problem here is.
Is this.
Is water stripper wells.
And.
Necessarily yes on.
Stated this is a giveaway to
large these
Sure Representative Johnson
which.
We'll take just a stripper wells
and we can't do that here today
but have not just to stripper
wells in reality it's fifteen
percent.
Representative action.
What ality those those are the
walls we're just not economic.
For those producers users so I
don't.
Madam chair representative as I
mentioned early on.
Nineteen us to.
To a number of things for New
Mexico.
Reduce emissions.
To increase state revenue in the
longevity of an industry.
To create jobs.
And
I would be more than willing to
limit this to all.
producers.
in an effort to get it through I
just think it's main I think all
and gas is going to be around
here for years and years.
it's an investment that's equal
to.
Many other things that we do in
New Mexico to New Hampshire
Industries and technologies.
And I mean I sit here at the
will of the committee and be
more than happy to do that
I'm sure
yes I I believe if if if if the
stripper wells
the the the.
The dollars.
Chair representative.
This.
And this year.
Why.
To.
Well will that change.
M. S. I. R..
Because I'm looking at I I did
some math as well.
Representative spots on the top.
And I was like at that time you
know what you're saying that for
eighteen million dollars what
that hundred fifteen bills.
Weights is the equivalent of
twenty two budget.
If we invested that.
Taking out over the next two
years state of New Mexico.
Those dollars in a short period
of time as well.
We would cost two things we
reduce emissions.
Do.
Coffers long term and something
that I personally aware of talk.
So for.
For.
Renewables are.
We are giving subsidies to some
folks for the house.
Allergy.
To.
I see.
Wells are just not.
Yes if that's what you would
like to be able to do all that.
Madam chair representative be
happy to Madam chair of that.
If you would allow me to do
that.
I would do that bring something
back to the committee.
Right.
Sponsored.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you.
Well.
I will not leave madam chair
give me your best shot.
I would be interested I I'm
serious I would be interested.
All right so we.
I mean this.
As already seen many billion
dollars.
seventy six.
Million dollars in direct.
Yes.
I guess I understand.
Having issues making billions of
dollars.
The this.
I also this is just part of
the worst the landed Mexico's.
Yeah yes.
That.
No I I appreciate that I really
do and I think part of what we
do here today and in the
committee yes we exchange.
Ideas and thoughts that cause us
to sometimes change our our
opinions of thing I would tell
you that this industry does.
Receive.
Tax credits.
I don't know the magnitude of
what you're talking about but
significant it is this there's
no bones about but you also have
to realize that this industry
but I billion dollars into the
state coffers every year and has
a couple of hundred thousand
jobs at
it has a value.
It has value in it employees.
At the time of New Mexico so our
investments like that worth
investing in for the future I'd
say yes I think you and I buy a
stock on the stock market today
if it pays a good dividend we
buy more of it.
That's just the way the system
works but.
I think we have to change the
mentality that all and gas is
bad for New Mexico.
All and gas is not bad for New
Mexico.
All and gas is that a good
industry.
It has done.
Wonders for this day.
I think we have to look at the
do that and the positive and try
to say well we wish they would
do this different we wish that
did this different and I'm
trying to afford that I'm not
trying to pay.
One side I'm I'm trying to I was
following
Representative Dixon is thought
that you know sometimes it care
will get you more than the
state.
And if you can cost in the
industry.
Should be more in tune with
your.
with your ideals and you reap
the benefits of fiber tune or we
have a new technology that can
get more.
All out of the rock in a better
way I mean there's no into this
it could be great.
The need to.
You know.
Thank you madam in the so what
we're making.
I want to make a change in the
whole world.
So yes there's there's there's
formal world.
And.
I was thinking about my kids my
grandkids what this bill
ultimately what we
get a lot what is going to be
basically it was twenty degrees
outside I don't want that to
happen here so thank you.
Affinity on on.
Thanks for the whole world.
So those are things we.
Thank.
I appreciate it and.
I might go.
My goal is to make sure when I'm
finished thank you for thank you
madam.
It is also interim.
Okay.
Senator.
Share your.
The Senate.
We have.
Senator right here.
Yeah.
And then Cherry over here.
After hearing sorry.
Sure sure it's going to come
together yes I have been seeing
doctor sherry better care.
You know what they are the yeah.
This is the latest FY are.
Right.
This.
The updated.
Appreciate it.
Thank you.
I'm gonna go ahead and can you
hear me.
Can you hear me through this
all.
good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I am the of.
Here to present House Bill three
sixty five.
With me today I have Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino who is present at
the Senate bill eight the Senate
side which is also the same bill
that we're presenting today.
And for your information madam
chair.
And members of the committee
this morning the new FIR came
out earlier this morning on the
this bill and I might note that
all of the amendments that were
made in the Senate bill eight.
As it was coming over have
already been incorporated in
house bill three sixty five
that's an important note so I'm
here to put introduce.
Before I go on let me introduce
the expert witnesses that are
here today we have Mister Tom
Solomon who is a retired
engineer and he actually
facilitated that yields are
working group we also have here.
Jerry Scheller sherry Kelly who
is a geophysicist with the New
Mexico technical institute and I
want to just thank her for being
here because it was a long drive
and I'm sure it was
Representative one and also it's
going to yeah Mr Solomon for
being here and this snowy
morning so House Bill three
sixty five is an act relating to
geothermal resources adding a
center of excellence for
geothermal resources at the New
Mexico institute of mining and
technology and really creating
the geothermal projects
development fund authorizing
grants and creating the
geothermal project revolving
loan fund.
And so why are we presenting
geothermal heat energy and
electricity bills
madam chair and members of the
committee because it's a clean
zero emission source of heat and
electricity.
And also for your information
New Mexico with six in the
nation in geothermal potential
for twenty four seven power
source as a power source.
And also it's a sustainable
economic development will.
Ninety one tool that.
It's actually system will
sustain economic development in
the future and madam chair and
members of the committee I'd
like to turn this over to
Senator Ortiz to set few words.
It Ortiz Y. Pino.
Okay this is yes.
Thank you representative madam
chairman and and members of the
committee it I wanted to mention
a couple things first of about
four or five years ago I believe
Representative Townsend and
Senator Griggs sponsored the
first of our geo thermal bills
opening the door to a geothermal
development in the state
The.
Take up has been a little slow
in that we only have one quarter
time person currently working on
geo thermal in the energy
minerals and natural resources
department and with that level
of of it investment we really
haven't been able to fully
capitalize on the opportunities
what we've done in this bill is
tried to put together a number
of things that we think will
help further what is a very
exciting prospect the reality is
it wind doesn't blow all the
time send is in China all the
time that the heat of the earth
is always there and so this
could be if we can if we and and
the technology is developing to
the point where very soon we
believe it will be possible to
generate electricity from any
number of spots in New Mexico
not just those that have hot
water.
But from those that have hot
rocks which is if you're willing
to go deep enough literally
everywhere but in New Mexico
there are many places that are
close enough to the surface that
you don't have to go down to
depths that we're are beyond our
technological advances we can
rely on the drilling potential.
That has been developed in the
oil and gas industry to reach
those rocks and hello.
Mr Solomon and and and Dr Kelly
to give you the details but it
really does create the
possibility of doing so the bill
does four things it opens up the
energy minerals natural
resources capacity by adding
some if need to to their
capacity second thing is it
creates that New Mexico tech a
center of excellence comparable
to some of the other service
centers of excellence so we have
around the state in other
fields.
and and New Mexico state is also
did a lot of work in this field
but they're willing to allow of
the center of excellence to be
at the Mexico tech but fully
will collaborate with the.
Then we create the third thing
we do is we create a fund that
would be available to
make grants to universities and
other departments of government
grants would go to governmental
entities who may needed as
matching money for federal funds
and there there are a lot of
federal funds Mr Solomon we'll
talk about that the possibility
of the if there's a match
require that thought that grant
Fund would be available for
that.
Or for the purchase of equipment
or some special needs that would
make it possible for the center
of excellence or for some other
university in the state to carry
on the kind of research or even
send you lapse or or the Los
Alamos lab any of the research
facilities the fourth thing is a
fund it's created to provide
a revolving loan fund would be
available to companies private
businesses that are interested
in getting started and this
might be the incentive to get
some over the first hurdle and
so that revolving loan fund
would replenish itself as a
loans are repaid and we continue
our ongoing basis so that in the
chill is what's in the bill and
all that the Mr Solomon speak
about some of the technical
issues.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Okay I think it's working
working.
my name is Tom Solomon and I've
had the pleasure of facilitating
this working group for the last
year and we've learned a lot
about the opportunities for
geothermal development in the
state
as it's been said we have some
of it developed but the real
exciting prospect I think that
we see is to assist some of the
new technology companies that
are coming online some of which
that we have worked with.
To develop that their technology
in the state and one of the
examples is a company called
ever who actually drilled a test
well down to eighteen thousand
feet in New Mexico in the Animas
valley right next to the
existing lightning dock
geothermal facility to PNM
electric plant that generates
about fifteen megawatts of
geothermal energy today adjacent
to that the drill this new yes
well going down as I said
eighteen thousand feet into the
hard rock that is available
relatively close to the surface
there and they reach
temperatures of like two hundred
and fifty degrees Celsius which
is plenty hot enough to generate
geothermal electricity and.
Well what is that in to fair and
I the.
I think it's so in excess of
four hundred and fifty about at.
It's very hot it's well it's
like double the boiling point of
water.
And what their technology will
allow them to do is to
build a power plant a steam
generating power plant on the
surface and then with these well
borders drilling down deep into
the earth they drill a series of
essential the radiators that
would allow a closed loop of
fluid coming from the service
where would be cold.
Injected deep underground in
these circulating right
radiators absorb the heat from
depth at as we said about two
hundred fifty degrees Celsius
bring that heat back up to the
surface in a closed loop and
then just run a binary steam
generating power plant at the
surface and generating for
example two hundred megawatts
each of clean renewable
electricity with no missions of
the service and one of the
advantages that we see the areas
that is a way for
the workers in the oil and gas
industry to be provided the just
transition path as we transition
into this clean energy
revolution we will be able to re
use the equipment the drilling
rigs in the work force on the
oil and gas industry to drill
these wells into hard rock then
producing clean renewable
electricity and that well that
yes well from ever was very
successful so successful in fact
that they got a contract to
build a small skilled next
generation power plants
unfortunately in Nevada not in
New Mexico but they're gonna
demonstrate the technology over
the next couple years and we
foresee the capability through
the you know the next decade to
really develop that technology
solves some of the final
technical hurdles and then have
a clean renewable electricity
resource they could find that
last ten percent of the clean
energy transition augmenting the
more intermittent sources of
wind and solar.
Thank you madam chair now I'd
like to turn it over to go.
I'm mainly here just answer
questions.
Attended a nice job of
explaining where the state of
geothermal in New Mexico.
Madam chair we're eager to get
to questions and answers so you
can turn.
We're gonna go first I.
Thank you for this.
Twenty.
But first.
It was going to go for.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee the
skater with the circle we're
gonna chapter for the third time
today
we strongly support this bill
are thirty five thousand members
and supporters US support this
bill geothermal energy the firm
clean energy resource answers
tourism effective back up for
solar and wind power of
development of energy represents
a just transition opportunity
for workers in the oil industry
but also for jobs throughout the
state including disadvantaged
communities so we are urging
that you will vote yesterday
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee and see any cap on
the Clemente energy advocate
with conservation voters Mexico
and our mission is to achieve a
just and equitable transition
away from oil and gas and I
think B. Sanchez and be expected
a really comprehensive overview
of how this bill will help
achieve that for those reasons
we ask you to support the bill
thank you very much.
All right we're gonna go in line
we're support please raise your
hand.
First that Charles could not.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Charles good
mockers speaking to you on
behalf of the natural resources
defense council and urge your
support for this bill as
previously stated this year
thermal technology is developing
incredibly fast
New Mexico is well poised to
take advantage of it
it's should be noted you know
they were general statements
about this will be good for oil
and gas workers as well as
specifically just a R. clarify
that the the drilling rigs are
the exactly the same whether
they're drilling for oil and gas
referred you in either one so
that's really good news for New
Mexico and as well as of course
replacing or creating more
renewable energy so we urge your
support for this bill thank you.
The doctor said he.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Abbas Akhil and I'm speaking
in strong support HB three sixty
five and want to thank the
sponsors for bringing a bill to
create a forming energy source
for the balance of the new the
media but any of the resources
as as being said it for by the
sponsors and the experts this
would be a source of renewable
energy that we're probably
displays the natural gas that
you would otherwise have to but
to balance of eighty but
resources to achieve the goals
of the Energy transitioned Act
in twenty forty five so that
that and for that reason and the
reason stated about crossover to
qualities from the oil and gas
industry the creation of jobs I
strongly support this bill and
urged a unanimous do pass by the
committee thank you madam chair.
You go to the audience get
anyone position of them.
Have
an online is there anyone in
opposition of the bill region.
Go back to Sanchez.
When you click it to mention one
thing that I'm chairman and that
is among the co sponsors of this
measure in the in the Senate are
Senators woods and creeks and so
we do this is an absolutely
bipartisan initiative to try to
capitalize on a great natural
resources New Mexico has
available.
And madam chair I would just
like to add that in sitting
through on the discussions.
Previous discussion to have this
morning I think that this is a
great opportunity as has been
mentioned to be able to use the
same drilling rig with devices
that we've been talking about
previously and then I would be
miss if I didn't mention that it
is
what someone mention a
tremendous back up for solar and
wind energy that is.
Where we're headed that's our
future in answer to the concerns
about our future generations I
think this is this is a great
way since the earth is natural
and anything emitting from
Mother Earth is natural and
healthy and healing and most
importantly that's what our
environment I believe needs at
this time so thank you madam
chair of the US stand for
questions from the committee.
Thank.
Now we're going to committee in
the first will be
Representative.
Madam chair could I ask a favor
before the glare is real bad on
my knees right now sure that on
the back of my head.
Well I want to focus on you.
It happened not be hampered by
the thank you thank you very
much that helps a thank you.
thank you madam chair
Representative.
Do you have a an estimate of the
cost
Production what what does that
kill o'clock.
Cost coming out of this type of.
The seventy.
Percent.
Share.
Madam chair representative
What I can tell you is the cost
of existing geothermal
electricity plants are well
known and published and they are
comparable to the cost of a
combined cycle gas fired power
plant maybe just a little bit
higher the levelized cost of
energy is about I think quoted
at about seventy five dollars
per megawatt hour verses about
sixty dollars per megawatt hour
levelized cost of energy for
combined cycle.
So it it just to put that in
perspective that it is
significantly cheaper than
nuclear not quite as cheap as
solar and wind.
Thank you.
Share but it is dispatchable is
that the.
Madam chair representative yes
it is fully dispatchable it as
the this they operate
geothermal a elector power
plants today run at about a
ninety percent plus capacity
factors so of fully as reliable
as a coal fired nuclear powered
of.
Our plan not only are the
dispatchable but they can
actually find some amount of
storage so one of the
opportunities you have with
geothermal especially a plan of
the nature that I described.
Is you can generate electricity
on a regular basis at as those
fluid is circulating in a steady
state fashion but if you were
just turned off the circulation
for a period of time say it's in
the middle of the summer day
when you've just got so much
solar energy being generated you
don't need it you could turn
that off and then what happened
so that fluid underground is
that it gets hotter and hotter
and hotter and when you turn the
circulation back on you actually
get a surge of extra electricity
generation over and above the
steady state
power production and so in that
sense you could think of that
storage that you could find that
surge of energy to provide you
know the the surge in demand
that occurs when people come
home from work you know I six
o'clock in the evening in New
Mexico but it's called the
docker.
At the chair and the.
Representative.
That.
That's cool staff I mean that so
and I will take a representative
it doesn't provide a back up for
wind and solar it makes wind and
solar viable because wind and
solar network twenty four seven
what he's but he is bringing
which bring forth today is that
this back to full power.
That is
Your own mission
madam chair which is this Madam
it's not as quiet as economical
as combined cycle natural gas
but it's plus and it is
dispatchable and we desperately
need so just that.
A question.
What type of volume of
recirculation do you have to
have and you have to keep in
order to bring to presentation
to that are megawatts of power.
Madam chair.
Okay
In the in the case of for
example the ever well we're
they're they're trying to fill
up these these radiators and so
on it's a it's a pretty
significant volume of water but
it doesn't need to be fresh
water.
And so the the way the.
At general power plants work is
you have cooled water and it
okay park laid it down into the
into the staff in the into these
radiators in the natural heat of
the earth heats the water comes
back up.
And
Dealt with a problem that used
to happen with conventional
power plants is if you if you
take that water and it's got
some hot water to typically
coming out of the ground it's
got issue got resolved which
heroes in it.
If that in the back in the early
days that.
Hot water with anthology TV hi
got developed and.
Is this all leads in it
Interacted with the turbine it
would precipitate out and clog
up everything so a big
development that happened in the
nineties is the development of
binary power plant where you
have to separate loops that the
geothermal water never.
It is
Loses pressure and never
interacts with the atmosphere so
it just keeps going round and
round schools are you extract he
put it back down on the ground
and and bring it back out at the
service you have a different
loop that's got a an organic
compound in it that has a
boiling point less than water
and that is what boils and
drives a turban and doesn't
interfere with the mechanism.
And I appreciate that madam
chair I I'm I know how they work
I would just wanted what's the
volume of water I mean it's
pretty amazing what the mother
nature's he'd seen yes.
Then how much how much heat that
much water use circulating
through this heat state could
generate.
That you need to.
On the start I I do not have a
phone number.
You.
It seems like it would depend on
how deep the well as and and if
you if you've got a well down
eighteen thousand feet like the
one at I am us it's going to
take a lot more
than the current lightning dock
which is only how to how deep is
that will Tom of the.
I think it's what fifty thousand
is about twelve thousand so it
that's the and also the number
radiators that are that you that
to get the company is employing
that is the that kind of
horizontal
pieces of the well.
Well
madam chair it's scientists the
new technology of.
This dispatchable.
And almost as cheap as natural
gas thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Right right.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative and all up to you
thank you for bringing this
forward this is really wonderful
and really looking more at the
loan fund and grants and I saw
that there's a cap on the
requests
but I was kind of.
Wondering about the loan fund
itself.
And just FY I used to the
minister of million dollar
revolving loan funds for
environmental cleanup
I don't see
a cap on what somebody by our
and I just wondered if you guys
had thought about that madam
chair and representatives
what like if I was a company
hypothetically and I was coming
in to do what it needs what
would be the first the
requirements for the company and
secondly I'm hoping that it'll
be one or two percent interest
rate but I don't know I don't
see that in here so I'm just
curious and it says lowest legal
legally permissive interest rate
Sen here Representative would
you just point us to where you
are I'm sorry I'm on page ten
and I'm right in the middle of
the page okay thank you and
senator and madam chairman
Representative but yes thank you
for the question the the but
when we went around around on
how much detail to include in
the bill we're leaving it up to
the Energy minerals and natural
resources to come up with
regulations that would implement
that loan fund but I would I
would think you know if the
intention is definitely to make
it low enough low interest rate
on the loan that it would be
attractive.
Thank you.
You.
Staffing and that is
incentivized as much as possible
and make it affordable on to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and Representative
I when we administered the
environmental loan fund from the
fence the million dollar
revolving loan fund it was at
two percent so I just want to
offer that because the thought
process
and it was taking advantage
Madam chair of representatives
for the railroad clean up and
also Senator private individuals
for different projects in the
downtown
the other thing that I don't see
in here which I guess and I
don't know enough about how the
state administers their probe
programs but I certainly madam
chair and representatives would
like to know a little bit more
and it doesn't have to be today
but
What the requirements for a
company would be
and I'm sure that there would be
some stipulations about how long
they've been in business and who
works with them and eccentric
etcetera what they're
you know I mean this is really.
Involved involving as.
Representative Townsend said
students at a whole new industry
a whole I mean it's it's it's
really forging followers in a
whole new of ways but I think it
would be important to know
Representative madam chair and
and Representative.
Who would be eligible for these
funds so and what sort of
company you were looking for and
I think we do that a lot with
the RFP process
at least at the city in the
state the county but I would
like to have a little bit of
information about that maybe it
doesn't necessarily have to be
in the bills but I think that
it's important that we have some
information about who would be
eligible so thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
for reading this forward Madam
chair and representative of the
revolving loan fund is what
makes this really attractive.
In the larger picture so thank
you for your questions and
Representative Senator.
If thank you madam chairman and
and Representative the.
There's a list in the in a video
presentation or.
of a weapon are they did Tom put
together for the work group that
identified about a dozen
companies that are actively
working on the research and
development in this field in the
in the United States right now
and a couple of them ever for
one that wanted I am us but of
course you and fervor.
will testified in Clovis with
our committee the the woman from
for what was here it's pretty
clear that there are a number of
companies that are either as
ever is doing in Nevada
referable is doing in in
California and is into they're
all interested in New Mexico
because of our need geologic
the configuration we're we're
attractive for this kind of
thing and I think it's the issue
is going to be.
Which of these many people that
need to be a little bit of start
up money to get going on a
project how to decide how to how
to choose among them how to
decide which of them to to to
finance that's going to be have
to be up to the Energy minerals
that to resources geo thermal
office that we set up that they
decide which is the one that has
the highest potential for pay
off and in the state in terms of
the jobs in the and the
economic benefit to the state
madam chair if I may just to
follow up and Representative are
there other places in the
country that are already doing
and it taught me may know this.
Shared connection.
Yes there are other places in at
that have have for many years
had a general
power plants California is had
and has several Nevada has
Senator now they are of of of
the older generation and
the one thing that I think is is
missing here in New Mexico is
this and in an economic
incentive we have the resources
but we just haven't had people
explore because they don't have
the incentives that the senator
is proposing.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative send your guests
and I know Tom and I know he
does a great job the.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you madam chair.
Forty five years ago the
department of energy have.
The staff at least one floor of
a building in the.
To study thermal energy in New
Mexico.
I did a lot of research on that
four inch wrote a couple papers
but
It involves the Baca location
which is now the busco bureau
of.
Whatever the national national
our reserves and and that
certainly was an area that was
subject to some exploration in
fact I have the ability to
represent to the people that
that did that exploration over
the years
And then The Addams ballet maybe
but.
Secora only one other reason the
state would be interviews of
prospective geothermal
development.
Madam chairman and
Representative
There's there's we've been
focusing a lot on electricity
electric production but there's
also a lot of low temperature
geothermal resources that have
been developed in our state and
there are other places that
those kinds of things can happen
fairly economically so one
example is down by and rating
springs near Los crucis
there is a twenty acre
greenhouse there that is totally
heated by geothermal and the
owner of date of that
greenhouse says it it Education
ninety three percent of his
energy cost so that's that's
what and Avenue that we all are
also proposing to explore
there's a tilapia farms down in
the in this valley and
So you know it when you look at
a map of New Mexico there's a
geologic feature that runs at
that bisects the state is called
the Rio Grande draft where the
earth's crust is is stretching
and thinning and bringing heat
up closer to the surface and so
there's many areas especially
down in the Los crucis area that
are are very perspective but all
along the Rio Grande river are
are good places to to look and
and further develop if we can
get industry coming in with
incentives.
Madam chair representative.
You are need of thermal energy
is is been around for for some
time and I think has always had
great potential and and some of
it the I don't think was ever
fully developed there's
complications with geothermal
which you don't see in other
areas
our mission because of the
nature of the fluids that come
up to the surface but but I do
think that this is an Avenue
that we we need to export
probably needed to explore
sooner than two thousand twenty
three that that but
it is.
Interesting to to see that our
state I was.
Relatively recent volcanic
activity and in several areas of
course that is evidence of the
thank you to at exist under this
crust and so I am certainly
happy to see just maybe look at
that be interesting to see what
the.
The United States department of
energy came up with for most
studies back in the in the
seventies maybe even into the
early eighties
Because I know there's a lot of
money Mexico looking at this
very issues of that research is
probably available and would be
interesting to see what the
results were thank you madam
just a comment on that Madam
chairman and and Representative
never a bus that killed of
course part of that project and
so he was part of our workgroup
and brought us lots of
information about that as as
were people at New Mexico tech
so yep that you're you're
absolutely right to.
The the research that was done
then should not be allowed to go
to waste.
Representative.
Thank you.
Chair.
Representative.
Dollars the proposed
legislation.
All.
There's a lot to this issue.
To do much with.
Cultures acting.
And madam chairman and and and
Representative Scott at I mean I
think you're right that there's
not enough money in a fifteen
million dollar revolving loan
fund to finance the development
of a of a utility scale project
however the the idea of that
loan fund is to try to leverage
it with other incentives or with
the private investment and we're
really counting heavily on the
private sector to be able to
take an initial amount of money
from the state that might pay
for the
maybe the exploration maybe the
purchase of of certain
permitting or or or rights to to
to private land or wherever it's
located whatever it would take
to get the project going and
then the the the drilling.
But then beyond that we would
rely on the private sector and I
think Tom has some you want to
respond to that to sell before
he can just let me just mention
that I did some research on
Medicare representatives and the
department of energy department
of commerce under this new
administration and SBA are
offering really wonderful
friends and
They want to grants to the
states but also loan requests
combination and other types of
requests for proposals it's
really exciting to see that
they've come together to see how
we can incentivize Madam chair
representative the clean energy
and and now incentivize.
Projects such as these that will
further along Energy.
Looking at renewable energies in
the clean energy is in order so
I just get that little bit of
research so.
What the Senator had to say
about leveraging is very
important because private sector
actually is being asked in these
requests for proposals to step
up and also joining in these
projects so that the more you
have at the table you can
leverage the more money you can
get from the federal government
and all that kind of time and to
that.
So thank you chairman and
Representative.
I was going to add something
very related to that which is
that through the course of our
research and working with
the governor's infrastructures
are of former mayor Marty Chavez
he helped us find and through
other research located up quite
a number of sources of federal
dollars that can be leveraged
here over six hundred million
dollars and of federal programs
for development of geothermal
that can be developed and that
was one of the reasons one of
the reasons why us there were to
see Pino structure the probation
as he did some of that grant
money is matching dollars that
could leverage federal dollars
that are available and so
through the combination of you
know state dollars leveraging
hundreds of millions and and
federal dollars and then ends
prop providing that is and some
incentives for private companies
who quite frankly would be
building power plants that would
make money and you know be a
source of revenue and jobs all
comes together in our vision to
develop that resource and
sustainable economy in New
Mexico thank you.
The.
Homes this is the.
Years passed.
All right each.
In the state for okay.
Madam chair and representative I
yes to go back in
A little early to get twenty
channels Obama administration
was very interested in general
and all of the state in the
United States bills geothermal
databases so yes we have a
budget or will database in the
state of New Mexico some of that
information is on the your New
Mexico I work for the New Mexico
bureau of geology and it's on
the bureau's web page if you are
interested in seeing the hot
spots in New Mexico.
Hello.
Chair.
The.
Not all rockets.
So.
The question on page one.
Economics.
So Manson whose knowledge.
She can be focused on.
Jushin.
Cost right.
All the sales commercial model.
Madam chair and representative
yes I mean
The.
The big thing that's kind of
getting making us all excited is
at the fact that
The department of energy has
come to understand that drilling
technology and needs to be
improved.
Are we there were some comments
earlier that yes indeed that the
well that was drilled down to
eighteen thousand feet in the
analysts valley was at a
standard oil rig.
But.
To keep the bill from melting
or report disintegrating they
had to use a really advanced
cooling technology to keep to
that cool so that they could
could drill
the other thing that is
happening there's a place out in
Utah
that's called the four page it's
a it's a site where there were
department of energy in
conjunction with the university
of Utah are developing new
drilling.
That's just different ways of
billing drilling wells so that
is kind of we're the general and
industry is going and the
understanding and and another
thing that that happened in.
I will the mid two thousands two
thousand six there was a group
of general experts I got
together and M. I. T. and they
put together a report looking at
the United States overall.
And they develop these maps of
what the temperatures like at
three kilometers which is kind
of where oil and gas can go
right and I and so on and they
came to realize that if you
drill deep enough you can get
the temperatures need to
get electricity so that was
actually so something kind of a
shift in paradigm.
A loan deal thermal folks and
that's where in the department
of energy really started
focusing on improving drilling
and child so it we're still in
that transition we're not.
Only through it but we are
encouraged by the the ever
results.
I recently saw.
We recently saw a Madam chairman
and senators Representative
Scott we recently saw a video
that the Tom posted from another
company that is using laser
technology to drill so this this
is a feel for the where the
innovation is exploding right
now and and lots of ideas going
on we just what New Mexico to be
in a position to take advantage
of of of of emerging energy
source that has tremendous
potential.
So madam chair of chance to.
It would be.
Painting the the.
Major.
All of the.
Expended in support of.
Technology.
Or.
To inform all of which.
Well Madam chairman and and
Representative Scott
I think the key thing for that
for us is to get the energy
minerals and natural resources
to put the department.
Capacity developed and then the
as well as a center of
excellence for the research can
begin being focused and then the
funds would be available for the
yep actually I I would agree
with you they are going to
finance the construction of the
the electric of
A power plant but as with
lightning dock.
We think public utilities
illustrious owned utilities
Rural electric coops might very
well be willing to build the
power plant once it's clear that
there is a well it's been
drilled there.
That can produce a heat that
would generate the emissions
free electricity our around the
clock basically and that they
would then be willing to invest
in what would be the pretty much
the same kind of turbine
generation that they use for
Kohler or natural gas or
anything else there's no great
innovation needed there it's the
getting down to the to the hot
rocks that's the trick.
To help with these programs.
This program.
Technologies down change.
Representative H. shell projects
of their.
Basically need to New York.
Madam chair representative
you're absolutely correct that's
why it's important to have the
center and at the forefront of
all of this some of the center
of excellence so yes you're
absolutely right thank you thank
you all for the rich.
Thank you sentences.
Very quickly Madam chair
representative in New Mexico law
is the ownership of the heat
sink the rock identified.
Then I got cold chills thinking
about another poor space problem
and.
I.
Do we know who owns the heat New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Madam chair and in addition
Representative there there is a
a bill that was developed in the
yes your bills.
That it calls he calls he mining
at its divide it is defined as
mining
At I don't remember there being
any questions about public space
okay and most of the rock that
is being that was drilled in day
ever well let's uh crystalline
basement rocks.
With that very little was the
she gets down there The New
Mexico law does it say who owns
that he.
I mean it does it does but I
can't remember exactly I have to
look it up I will it might even
well I yeah you have to look I
sorry I don't have that one
memorized.
I think madam chairman what was
confusing me was in
Representative Townsend and
Senator Griggs bill it kind of
defined twitch department at the
state government was responsible
and what that what that there
would temperature temperature at
what temperature to and so it's
two fifty and and so we we
amended our bill because we
wanted to be clear that energy
minerals and natural resources
would would be the ones
responsible.
Just a thought on ownership.
As a.
It really isn't.
on.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator.
This is.
just a couple of questions.
It's.
geothermal plants or.
Those were opportunities.
Pop Water Street near the
services.
So I don't I don't know it's
completely fair to.
To.
Characterize them.
Price range I mean I I heard
several pieces to this that are
going to.
Make this.
slightly more expensive.
Really helpful.
Yes we know from one gas on.
I don't know how many.
tools need to be filled.
To.
At least two okay.
plus it.
Also appeared that part of
presentation madam chair was
that.
Control the hot rocks you may
remain on the water and then you
have to.
Find a water source.
Whether it's brackish water not
seems like there's water rights.
All somewhere along the way.
And how far as water to they
just seem like there's a lot.
But in this process which is the
hard rock would be have to be
the number one.
I can't imagine.
To be too far away from the
office for some questions.
Madam chair Mr some.
Up Madam chair representative
Montoya.
the unique feature of advanced
your thermal which is kind of
what we've been talking about is
that what it is a closed loop
circulatory system and of the
fluid that transfers the heat is
actually provided from the
service so it could be that
could be produced water.
it doesn't have to be fresh
water indeed is once it charges
the you know the well bore that
you drilled deep underground
into those radiators it's it's
full and then it is not used up
during the course of production
because it's a closed loop that
just circulate so
you know you would need to find
that fluid
at the beginning to charge and
fill up those radiators and that
circulation loop but once you've
done that it doesn't get used up
so I don't know that
no water law.
But you know that you would you
would find a source of water and
quite frankly when we drill
wells deep underground there is
a lot of there is a lot of fluid
under ground that probably could
be use for circulation in fact
the test will that ever drilled
to the end of this valley
encountered a lot of flu it's
not under.
One other addition at Mr
chairman and Representative
Montoya that video of the Tom
recently sent us about the the
company this using lasers to
drill their intention is to use
molten salt as the as the.
Circulating fluid
so they wouldn't be using much
of any water at all.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
I did just that
A final.
Plant
it's it's doing too many full
time employees.
To work on a plan.
Speculate.
Because of the.
Madam chair representative
Montoya the planet the surface I
think would look very much like
a gas fired power plant the the
operation of the state and it
would take to run the turbaned
would be very similar so I you
know I don't think those are
very labor intensive Tanzer of a
few dozens of employees probably
something on that order.
Mr chair.
Senator I actually think this
answer.
I don't.
Resources.
By the way that we have wastes.
As we speak.
Some assistance storing waste so
but.
In this process he can this
process scratching.
I agree this does answer I
don't.
That restored
offline.
Or and and.
I don't know if that's the way
to present this.
I don't know that next year.
Each.
Sure sure.
Or
It's very.
Yes.
Yes dispatchable.
Yes.
Use.
I would this could be our
answer.
To make so actually.
For for.
Yes.
Madam chair Mr chair your
Representative you're absolutely
correct and that's what makes
this a very exciting because of
the potential that you just
outlined and I don't know if
this Kelly Dr Kelly
yes
Madam chair and representative
Mr chair is back charge.
It's just this past week a paper
came at a journal scientific
journal paper came out that
highlighted some very
interesting ideas about re
purposing oil wells that you
could take fluid out front edge
heated by solar.
And or some sort of industrial
heat.
And place it down in the level
well until you need it.
At night or or something like
that so that it was a an
experiment that was run by the
university of Illinois and they
were able to successfully.
Extortionate and then that they
were trying to verify a
numerical model which they
didn't do very well but but but
it but they did actually have a
demonstration project so that is
a another Avenue to explore with
some of these requests and and
other possibilities thank you Mr
chair just one last comment.
The.
They're they're still another
equipment to industrial.
ring technology and that is you
still have to line.
Where is this for the battery
technology this seems pretty
straightforward.
Here is if we would be.
This material teacher for two.
Same or other pieces of.
So so that reciprocation and
take care of their but
From the standpoint of
dispatchable energy.
as as we're seeing dispatchable
energy client we're seeing.
Utility rates.
And actually go up and I think
invest in this matter to help.
A lot of poor people in New
Mexico right now for some time
thank you for the right
are increasing.
Range.
Level if you're going this if we
can make this work I think the
sensors Senator problems we have
as was mentioned several times
presenters and knowing.
Panel up here the members of
this committee that that we have
a lot of a lot of.
Around here in New Mexico so
once again I I think this.
We would not also have to rely
on these other things.
Other countries we can all of
this state Mexico workers.
Your several advantages to this
I was looking for The
presentation because.
As I stated I think there's some
some difficulties here but I
think the answers as.
L. way to do these.
Thank you Mr chairman.
thank you so much area apologize
for my absence I was getting my
**** kicked in the.
You know you're playing.
region Sariñana.
Mr Chairman.
Defense of the three.
There's.
Second second representative in
further discussion
two thirds Representative break
up.
I'm sorry say that again.
Representative Dixon
Representative Garcia.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend Here.
I sure Sarinana.
Chairman claim yes.
Nine zero.
you Senator zero thank you very
much members of the committee
and chair thank you for.
I.
