Representative Brego.
Present.
Representative Romero.
Representative Doo.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Vice Chair Lata.
Here.
de la Cruz.
Here
Therefore, I'm
Thank you so much.
Representative Hoffman V Hill,
Whip, are you ready? I'm ready,
Mr. Chairman. I don't know if I
was called for a role, but I'm
obviously here. Oh, we forgot
we're just going to write you
down as excused.
I only have one bill to do
Please proceed. Thank you. House
Bill 146, um, it's actually
build title is a perfect
description doing here, um, so
we are enacting the railway
Safety Act, which mandates the
use of wayside detector systems.
It requires reporting of railway
safety violations, retaliatory
action, um, related there too,
and it also provides
administrative penalties for
railway safety violations, um.
To my left, Mr. Chairman, is
Clem Harris. He, uh, represents
the Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and training.
Almost there, almost got it.
And uh with that, I'm gonna let
him make an opening statement if
he
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um,
first, I want to thank our
representative and House
Majority Whip Day Hoffman V Hill
for her guidance and leadership
through this process we've
worked extensively with her and
followed her guidance.
House Bill 146 has two major
components, one being the
requirement to utilize wayside
detectors systems to ensure the
safe operation of trains with
concise expected results from
the railroads and the second
component being a prohibition of
reporting safety violations
without fear of retaliatory
action.
I do want to make it abundantly
clear that we have made every
reasonable effort, uh, to work
with the railroads ahead of
presenting this legislation.
We've given up a lot in this
process.
Uh, but have yet to receive
anything in return is how, as to
how we can work together. They
go to responses we will sue you
because federal preemption says
that you cannot regulate us.
Federal law is currently silent
on wayside detectors and it's
noted as such in the FIR FIR,
uh, notes that wayside detectors
are often left to the discretion
of state legislators.
When there are 2 and 3 mile long
trains, who is watching what we
cannot see.
Uh, as the train is snaked
around many curves in the, in
the train, uh, the, the tracks
traverse. Wayside detector
technology is already in use
wayside detectors are the eyes
of the railroad. They watch for
hot and failing uh wheel
bearings on rail equipment. They
watch for sticking brakes. They
watch for a host of other
issues.
As we saw from the East
Palestine derailment, not paying
attention to the existing
technology can have cataclysmic
results. The fiery derailment
that occurred uh was simply
because the railroad wanted to
keep moving. The overall cost to
clean up the community has
exceeded 1 billion.
And that's B billion.
And in an untold amount in the
disruption of the lives of that
community. I don't want to see a
similar disaster here.
The ability to report safety
issues without repercussion is
critical in a safety sensitive
environment. The Federal
Railroad Administration
conducted safety culture audits
on all of the Class One
railroads this past year.
Uh, within 2 weeks into the
FRA's audit into the Union
Pacific, the agency was forced.
Um
To discontinue its assessment
due to Union Pacific's actions
to undermine the integrity of
the assessment process, Union
Pacific contends this was an
attempt uh to be helpful by its
management employees. They were
so helpful that Washington State
Senator Maria Cantwell initiated
an investigation into how
employees were being coached on
how to respond to FRA safety
questions.
And that they were told to
report interactions to company
leadership, a sitting US senator
does not initiate an
investigation for trivial
matters like management
employees being helpful.
Senator Cantwell wrote the
following, specifically the FRA
found that employees
company-wide regardless of craft
or employment location across 23
states had been coached to
provide specific responses to
the FRA safety inspector surveys
and report their interactions
they had with FRA inspectors to
their supervisors.
The message to the rail industry
is clear. I address the outlying
safety concerns and work
proactively with state and local
governments to protect the
safety of their residents and
communities. We respectfully
request your support for House
Bill 146.
That we stand for questions, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in support of this
bill.
If you're in support and wish to
speak, please line up behind the
presenters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. Uh, we stand in very
strong support of this
legislation. Thank the sponsor
for for bringing this up and
working with our uh brothers and
sisters on this. Uh, we
represent, uh, as you all know,
over 40,000 workers throughout
the state in both the private
and public sector. And as I
said, we stand united uh on this
measure, primarily because it
deals with safety. And one thing
that we believe that all workers
deserve in the workplace is a
safe workplace. That is a key
fundamental right for all of our
workers. If our uh train men say
that this is necessary to keep
them safe and alive, then we
urge your support to support
them. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you. Do we have
anybody else in support?
In the audience. OK, do we have
anybody online in support of the
Bill
No, Mister Chair.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
the audience in opposition to
the bill.
And if you're in opposition,
please raise your hand, and if
you wish to speak line up behind
the presenters.
OK.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Raque Espinoza, and I am the
public affairs director for
Union Pacific Railroad.
The ideal distance between
wayside detectors is 15 miles.
And that is according to a study
that looked at the wayside
detector distances in previous
derailments.
Union Pacific's wayside
detectors are about 17 miles
apart today.
By the end of the year, they
will be 15 miles apart.
We spend $10 million a day.
On our infrastructure and
technology.
And wayside detectors have been
game changers, but any
technology, they're evolving.
And
We need to make sure that we
allow us to innovate and get
even better, more refined
technology. In this case, these
sensors will very soon probably
be on the rail cars themselves.
So we urge you to vote no so
that we can continue to innovate
and look forward and find better
solutions that keep us safe.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Robert Romero,
registered lobbyist for being a
safe railroad.
Weside detectors right now are
not mandated to be used by the
FRA, although BNSF does use
them.
They're, they're critical in
providing for safety, but there
isn't, there hasn't been any
studies that we're aware of that
say that 10 mile distance is the
correct distance. Also,
Also, the um there's there's
language in the bill that talks
about
Railroad employees being able to
call to report safety
violations. That's already
available through the FRA.
People can call right now. So
this is another bill that again
isn't mandated by the FRA if it
was it should be mandated across
the country. We feel that this
bill is not required. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My
name is JD Bullington. I'm the
registered lobbyist in New
Mexico for Union Pacific
Railroad.
Um, I think
The most important thing to
emphasize for you all while
you're looking at this bill.
is a consideration that you
would have on any piece of
legislation that tries to put in
statute and mandate a certain
type of technology.
What's mandated in this bill is
the use of infrared technology,
that's incorporated into wayside
detectors on the side of the
tracks.
The technology is evolving.
We are eventually going to have
these sensors directly on the
wheels. They're not going to use
infrared technology. They're
going to use a different type of
technology that can pick up on
the changing vibrations and the
acoustics that are made by these
bearings when they start to wear
down, way, way in advance of
failure, and, and this is a
common issue that you see in any
legislation where you're trying
to mandate a certain type of
technology. We're going to go to
a new technology soon. It's
already being tested out in
their pilot projects already. So
that's the
major consideration, I think,
for this type of legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone in
opposition to this bill online.
No, Mister Chair.
Thank you. With that, we'll go
to the member questions.
We have questions.
Representative Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um,
So, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
Cody,
Why are these already in use? if
no one's, is it mandated
federally but not at the state
level. I didn't know what the.
Man uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I would defer to
Clem. Clem.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Doo, uh, currently the Federal
Railroad Administration, the
Federal regulatory agency that
oversees railroads, uh, does not
have a mandate, uh, for, um,
Wayside detectors and it's also
a noted in the fiscal impact
report that uh the use of this
this technology is left to the
best discretion of state uh
legislators. Thank you, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Representative.
Thanks, Clem. And so,
They're already in use. They're
just voluntarily in use because
it's best practice.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
uh, that is correct. There are
currently already in use. Uh, it
is currently up to the railroad
to establish uh where they
believe what they believe the
correct distances and in many
cases, uh, the technology that's
in, in use, uh, predates, uh,
in, in, in a lot of cases
predates uh several mergers and
acquisitions of smaller
railroads as they've combined
and a lot of that technology is
25 and 30 years old and needs to
be updated to impact.
to show that we're now running 2
and 3 mile long trains.
Mr. Chair and Clem
representative and Clem, are
So that the, the technology that
you're suggesting become law is
outdated.
Mr. Chair Representative Dow,
uh, no, ma'am, that, that's not
correct. The, the, the existing
technology that is currently
part of the physical plant of
the railroad in some cases is is
outdated and needs to be updated
uh with this, with this existing
technology you have um many
types of detectors available,
anything that can, can show like
dragging equipment, there's,
there's paddles in the rail, but
if you have uh like a chain
under a car dragging, it'll hit
that paddle and knock it down
and then it sends a message.
Uh, this infrared technology
that was that's referred to uh
scans the temperature of, of the
whale or the journal bearing as
it as it goes by, uh, to see if
it's close to a state of
failure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative McClin. So
they're at 17 ft and you want
them at 10. They referenced a
study that showed that 17 ft is
the, um, is acceptable. Why do
you have a study or how, how
would we know that it needs to
be 10 instead of 17 if they're
already spending 10 billion $10
million a day. I'm assuming that
would have an increased cost.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo, I,
I am not aware of any study that
shows what it, what a proper
distance is and we, in light of
the length of current trains, 10
miles was felt to be a kind of a
reasonable compromise of, of a
distance between all of this,
um, and, and it and it is a
They're looking at that being uh
10 miles apart, and each
railroad and BNSF's case, uh,
they'd earlier testified in
house labor that their distance
was 25 miles, uh, between
detectors and, and now, uh,
Union Pacific is saying that
they're approximately, they're
on their railroad, they're
approximately 17 miles apart.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. Um, you referenced the
incident that happened that's
in, in another state and you
said that they just wanted to
keep going.
Whose role would it have, whose
role was it to stop the train?
And who mandated that it keep
rolling.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
um, because many times the
detector information is not
broadcast in an audible fashion
over the railroad operating
radio to the train crews. We are
unaware that there's a problem
in the back of the train. And in
this particular case, it's been
uh documented repeatedly that
they uh that the wayside
detectors at Norfolk Southern
had saw that this detector, uh,
that this wheel was trending hot
and that it kept going by and it
ultimately culminated.
into that ring camera video
where you see a train wheel
going by and and it's on fire.
One failed wheel bearing on that
train.
Caused over a billion dollars in
damage to that, uh, to the
community of East Palestine.
Yes, yes, Mr. Chair, and
represent. We don't want that to
happen. But who's, where was the
failure at cause you, you've
testified that they had the
wayside detectors in place, and
someone refused to stop even
though the indicator was there.
Who made that call? Mr. Chair
Representative Doo, I'm, I'm
sorry for not answering,
um, the railroad ultimate
ultimately made that call
through, through the use of, uh,
they, you have a a department in
the railroad that oversees uh
wayside uh uh the information
that's received from these
wayside.
detectors and then they
communicate that information to
the train dispatcher and
internally at Norfolk Southern's
headquarters, they ultimately
made that decision to choose to
keep that train moving without
informing the train crew what,
what had happened,
Mr. Speaker, I mean, Mr. Chair,
Representative, and Clem, what
I'm, what I'm trying to get at
was they had the technology in
place.
The technology alerted the
error.
And, and gave the warning that
something was going catastrophic
was going to happen and a human
failed to act.
Is that, I mean, that's what I'm
hearing. But what this is doing
is mandating that we go from
1517, whatever, go to 10.
But that, but why is the bill
not mandating that the human
act.
When, when the sensors go off,
regardless of the type of
technology, because maybe this
becomes outdated. Why isn't the
bill creating a mandate that
action be taking when, when
certain triggers are reached.
Miss, Mr. Chairman
Representative Dow, that, that
is incorporated in the bill
where where the bill discusses
that the, the railroad equipment
in question can only be moved at
a at a certain speed and then
has to be either repaired on
spot or set out at the, at the
first uh available location uh
that the equipment can be set
out. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank yous representative. And
who is liable? Who becomes
liable if these safety standards
aren't met. Is it the operator?
Is it the crew? Is it the
company?
Mr. Chairman Representative Dow,
uh, is my understanding based on
the the the events of East
Palestine is at Norfolk Southern
and ultimately the railroads
would be responsible, uh, for
any, any catastrophic
derailment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. So I'm
wondering why they would oppose
something that protects them
from becoming liable for an
incident or
Having a, a cause of injury or,
or for their employees as well.
OK, so, um,
To
I
I think that's all for me, Mr.
Chen. Thank you.
Representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, Representative,
and your guest for bringing this
bill forward. I do have uh
questions um regarding the bill
itself and um.
Whether there's any room for um.
Adding language that would talk
about trans transition for new
technology so that if the in the
event.
That new technology is
implemented, then there's room
for DOT and the railroad to sort
of work together. I, you know,
it, it concerns me some that we
just set bills that.
Especially when new technology
is starting to become available,
um, that we just set bills that
say, OK, this is the way it's
done, instead of saying that.
Um, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative.
Possibly working with the the
folks that spoke against it.
Um
To have some language in here
that when new technology does
become available or the railroad
decides that they want to
implement that new technology,
there's an avenue for that.
Um
You know, that transition, and
I'm just wondering if that's
something that you all would
maybe consider.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Rego, um, yeah, I think that's,
um.
Wordsmith the bill so that it
includes.
Not, not just current types of
safetyisms, um, I don't know.
Enough about.
The technology myself to achieve
that, but um, I think generally
it's a good idea, um, not just
require mandate,
um, yes, ma'am, I do believe
that they're, uh, that that's,
that's reasonable and as an
example, um, I would give uh
from
My time at uh New Mexico Rail
Runner Express, uh, passenger
equipment that the state owns
has what, what, what are called
stink bombs in the journals, and
there are, they're a small
capsule that's filled uh with um
a sulfur material and so when
that capsule gets to a certain
point, it melts.
And when it melts, now you have
this horrible obnoxious smell
that shows you that the journal
that that wheel bearing is is
failing.
That's useful on passenger
equipment because you have
people in every car. The crew is
able to get through every car.
Um, that is currently the only
technology that I'm aware of,
uh, Amtrak has uh individual
sensors, uh, at each axle, but
that's a short train. That's a,
that's a little bit more
reasonable that you can get a
readout on, on an 8 or 10 car
train or or have these stink
bombs, we would certainly
welcome any uh language that
could.
incorporate future technology,
but at this time, I don't know
what that technology would be.
And thank you, thank you for
that, um, and, and being willing
to to look at that because I
think that Mr. Chair and and
representatives that I think
that.
Some simple wordsmithing, maybe
just a a paragraph or or a
couple of sentences that talk
about, you know, um, as the new
technology becomes available and
I'm not, I don't want to do it
on the on the podium, but I
think.
This is something that could
easily be worked out, um, to
talk about.
phasing in the new technology as
it becomes available and um and
I think if you're all open to
that, then, Mr. Chair, I think
that we could maybe consider
having this bill come back to us
with with some new language that
incorporates that sort of.
Transition, because I think that
not just with the railroad, but
with a lot of things that were
dealing with these days and as
technology as a representative
Lundstrom said one day,
technology changes every single
day.
And um it's sometimes it's hard
to keep up with that, but at
least if we create those avenues
for phasing that in. I think
that it, you know, it would
actually make for a better, a
better situation, so.
I don't know if you would
consider maybe rolling the bill
or, you know, and going back and
then maybe coming back very
soon, um, with some new language
that might be something to
consider. Uh, why don't we have
all the questions first and then
we can consider that.
Uh, Representative Hernandez.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
The uh recent.
Train derailment that occurred
in Gallop.
What was the cause of that? Was,
was it?
But what a wayside protector
prevent something like that,
yellow, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, uh
Representative,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Hernandez, um, are, are you, are
you asking about uh the
derailment that occurred at the
state line last April.
So I, so I understand which,
which derailment you're asking
about. Yes, yes, Mr. Chairman,
representative.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
yes, the, uh, cause of that
derailment uh was ultimately
deemed track condition that
caused uh the train to derail
and had there been proximity to
one of these wayside detectors
it could have been, uh,
potentially caught quicker.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, um.
What's the distance between
Axle axle.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Hernandez, that, that varies by,
by the type of equipment and
depending on what its use is.
It's a, it's a fairly broad
question that I, I can't give a,
a real precise answer to at this
moment.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
I'm trying to understand like.
Want to bring it down to 10 ft.
Um, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
the the distance uh proposed in
the legislation is 10 miles, uh,
between, between these wayside
detectors, um, that would, would
scan the train as it goes by.
Thank you for that
clarification.
Represented by.
Thank you, Representative Lara.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I have, I have a
few questions. I know I was
looking at the FRR.
And I know that I saw that the
cost.
DOT was indeterminate minimal.
But I don't see any response
from DOT in regards if they were
on board with this.
So it, it, did you have any
conversations with the DOT
regarding this?
Mr. Chair Representative.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair
Laura, um, no, I have had
conversations with them as
generally, however, um, we are
anticipating having a.
Thank you.
And actually, um.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chair
appears my expert has spoken.
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman, uh,
I, I did make an appointment and
did meet uh with Mr. Cerna and
Mr. Harris of NMDOT to discuss
our legislation as uh courtesy
to say hey we're, we're working
on something that could
potentially impact you, um,
there wasn't, uh, there wasn't
any particular read which
direction they were interested
in going at that and, and our
official uh request in that
conversation was if anything,
uh, we would ask that you remain
neutral.
If nothing else, just to make
sure that we can hopefully find
something that works for
everybody and not having uh an
extra uh
An extra voice in the
discussion.
Thank, thank you for that, um,
Mr. Chair, and, and so I, I also
serve on the education
committee.
And we're always talking about
unfunded mandates.
So if this legislation were to
pass, would that be an unfunded
mandate for DOT to implement
this.
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman, uh
currently as it's written, yes
sir, it is, it is an unfunded
mandate. Um, one of the
potential ideas at the railroads
actually sat down and had a
reasonable discussion with us
would would have been to include
a much longer phase-in period,
uh, to alleviate uh the unfunded
mandate portion of that on their
end.
Thank you for that. It's just
that uh
Yeah, it, it really um
It concerns me that we didn't
have any feedback from DOT
officially, especially in the
analysis.
I would have really liked to
see.
Uh
What they thought of this, or
even if they had a neutral
stats, at least let us know they
had a neutral stance on it.
Um, Mr. Chair, let me see what
else do I have here. Um.
How many, and, and I'm talking
about New Mexico and in
particular Union Pacific and
even if uh and even um
Um
I, I want to ask how many
derailments in New Mexico, even,
even or be or or UPA doesn't
matter which one or both, Mr.
Chair, uh, how many derailments
have been prevented.
By the wayside detectors in New
Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman, um,
currently, um, I'm not aware of
any that have been prevented.
Um, usually that prevention
comes as the train crew has seen
it, and usually the we've been
very fortunate that these
derailments when they have
occurred, they've either either
been seen by the train crew,
they've been so catastrophic
that the emergency brakes were
activated, such as the
derailment, uh, that we, I spoke
with with Representative
Hernandez, uh, just a moment ago
where
The train was abruptly brought
to a stop because the train line
was, the, the air brakes were
parted and you had a
catastrophic explosion.
Thank, thank you for that, Mr.
Harris, but uh, but that
couldn't have been prevented by
a wave like detector.
Right, Mr. Chairman
Representative Laura, I, I
believe in that particular case
because that was a track
condition, uh, that, that caused
that derailment of that uh
wayside detector could have,
could have been helpful in, in
preventing, in preventing that
or alerting the crew quicker.
OK.
Thank, thank you for that, uh,
Mr. Harris. I had um.
So I have Sato Teresa in my, in
my legislative district and
Union Pacific has made a
significant investment in, in,
in my legislative district.
But I also have a short line
railroad.
And the short line railroad
would also be impacted by this,
in my opinion. Have you had any
conversation with any short
lines regarding this, this
legislation?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative.
Mr. Chairman Vice Chairman
Laura, uh no, sir, we, I, I have
not had any discussion with a,
with a short line on, on this.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Harris,
you know, I, I, I figured it
would have been part of the
conversation since they, they
would, if they have the, the
length of track that would apply
to this, you know, I think there
there would have been a critical
stakeholder in this process.
Uh, because they, you know, they
do move freight and they do have
employees and uh they would also
be infected by this, and, and I
think that I think we kind of
missed the mark on not including
them in this, uh, Mr. Chair, I
think, uh,
I, I think that's all I had. I
just, I have, I, I still have a
lot of questions but uh for the,
for the most part, Mr. Cha, I
think I, I, I think I'm, I'm
good for now. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chair ranking
member Brown.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
The Parkland B Hill and um
Harris.
You know, I
I'm a little bit um hesitant to
vote in favor of this bill.
Um, I feel like there's a lot
more here that I need to.
I, I guess the initial question
I have, Mr. Chair rep, is why
are we
Specifying now it's currently
under the status quo every 17
miles these wayside detectors.
And the bill would specify um,
Mr. Chairman, represent why not
every 5 months.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Brown.
The 10 miles was felt to be kind
of a good intermediate point
because
I mean, you could put these
detectors 1 every mile if you
want, but then that, that you,
you start talking about a fairly
substantial investment.
And uh in this technology and 10
miles was felt to be a
reasonable, uh, reasonable
asking this based on observed
train links that are, that are
in New Mexico now.
Thank you for that.
rep, so.
Um, tell us a little bit if you
would about.
Mm
Let's say you have existing
track and you have one of these
detectors every 17 miles, and
now you have to do if this bill
passes every 10.
On a I, I guess we could specify
on a rail line from point A to
point B.
You would, it's almost
Not quite every doubling the the
required detectors.
What is the do you have any
information about that?
Mr. Chairman Representative
Brown, um, currently, uh, the
railroad does not publicly
release the data on how much
these uh wayside detector
installations costs or the
equipment, uh, that's deemed a
trade secret, uh amongst the
railroads.
Mr. Chair, Mr.
Rep and Mr. Harris, um, so.
To me this is kind of an
important question.
It is an unfunded mandate and
would drive up costs I think of
all the rail line we have.
Uh, it would drive up the cost
considerably and so I, I, you
know, can you have any guess
what one of these detectors
would cost, Mr. Chairman
Representative Brown,
that question, uh, could be
answered a couple of different
ways if it's a new installation,
um, the, the installation on
that I would anticipate to be
somewhere in the range of $5000
to $100,000 as as as an educated
guess if they were to uh upgrade
an existing location, it would
be just a matter of adding.
Uh, the new sensors and that
would significantly reduce the
cost on, on an installation for
for one of these wayside
detectors.
Mr. Chairman, I, you know, I
find myself agreeing with
Representative Brego about
In my opinion, the need to roll
this bill and get more
information.
Uh, the, um, rip or vice chair,
um,
What
hear you.
what DOT about all the
legislation we have that and I,
I know we can't really force the
department to weigh in on this
Mr. Cha, but honestly, I'd like
to get their opinion on.
Mr. Chair, I, I look at, um,
The onboard technology in my car
and the cars I've owned over the
years.
Uh, it does change so quickly. I
remember when the safety
equipment breaks and blinkers.
And uh now it's um, you know,
lane change alerts and, uh, you
know, the backup, uh.
System that, you know, there's
something in your way, it, it
stops the car, and there's just
so many.
Other safety features that are
that are there now.
I believe we're gonna see some
pretty massive um
Uh, innovation here as well. I
know, Mr. Chair, for the, uh,
for the trucks that transport uh
transuranic waste to the whip
project, they monitor, um, they
have satellite monitoring.
And so, um, first on the, on the
trucks that that do the
carrying, they have all the
safety equipment as well, but at
any one time, they could see the
whole system.
And um what's happening on those
trucks. So I, I have a feeling
we're headed into that
territory.
with if we're going to be
monitoring uh.
Oh
Things that that might be
happening on the trains.
So, um
Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm also
concerned a little bit about
the, the short line railroads.
They're not the BNSF's of the
world.
And if this, and I, I understood
the answer to the question was
it probably does apply to short
line, is that correct?
Representative Brown, yes,
ma'am, that, that's correct. It
does apply to the short line
railroads. However, uh, the
short line railroads in question
are all on lease agreements from
either BNSF or or Union Pacific
Railroad. And so ultimately that
property still belongs to
And these major these major
railroads.
And then I think just a final
comment, Mr. Chairman, I, um,
I've been on this committee now
for a long time.
And it seems like we're
increasingly seeing legislation
relating to railroads.
Um
Uh, people coming to ask us to
mandate something.
And I'd really rather not do
that or I believe we've got.
Uh, room to, uh.
Uh, find out more, and I believe
we have.
A lot of us really like.
Thank you, ranking member. I,
uh, don't see any other members
with questions. I do have some
questions.
Back to Representative
Hernandez.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, uh, I, uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
Um, representative, who, who put
the 17 mile.
I
Where did that come
Mr. Chairman Representative
Hernandez, uh, that's currently,
there is no guideline that
requires the railroads to set
these at any specific interval,
they've done that based on what
they think is, is the best.
Uh, for, for their operation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's my
Thank you. Uh.
Whip uh
Representative Hochman v. Hill.
Did you have an opportunity to
talk to the
Rail operators BNSF, Mr.
Chairman, um, yes, we actually
did have a sit down meeting with
them, um, 2 hours long, there
was another portion of this bill
that used to be a part of it,
um, requiring, well, it's now a
study to um look at the amount
of time on crossings because we
know we've had an issue,
especially in rural New Mexico
with folks being stuck at
crossings for several.
And it's, um, while these longer
trains, um, you know, move, and
it is creating several issues,
including safety issues, so that
used to be part of this uh in
good faith, took that out of the
bill so that we could um study
that and then move forward on
these issues, which we felt did
need to be addressed
immediately, um, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh,
this is one of those issues I
feel like.
If we, if I had had the time to
conduct several more hours of
meetings, um, we probably could
have continued to move forward
on this, but you know, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee.
What, how much is enough, you
know, I mean, I'm just one
legislator, Mr. Harris has a
full time job, um, you know,
the, the represented the uh
representation from the
railroads, I mean, this is what
they do for a living, so they
can continue to have these
meetings and so, you know, with
the time constraints I have, we
have in mind. This was the
result of the best compromise
that we could come up with at
the time, um, you know this, Mr.
Chairman, you, you've been a, a,
a policy maker for a long time.
We can talk about these issues
until we're blue in the face and
continue to try and compromise
and make the bill better, but I
call and you have to bring, you
have to bring the issue.
As you have it.
To where we are today, so, um, a
very long winded way of saying,
Mr. Chairman, yes, we've
attempted at length to um meet
with the two.
Talk it out as you say, but, um,
you know, that's kind of all we
were able to do I went out and
then go forward.
forward with the rest.
Thank you for that answer. uh,
Mr. Harris, you said.
That you had.
Given up a lot.
I'm not sure what that meant.
Could you expand on that? You've
given up a lot.
Mr. Chairman
The, uh, when, when I had
mentioned that we feel like
we've given up a lot, goes to
our Representative Hoffman B.
Hill's comments just a moment
ago that this bill started out
significantly larger to include
a uh
Mandate against trains over 8500
ft in length and Union Pacific's
opening response.
Wasn't a negotiating position.
It was to say if you pass this
legislation, we will sue the
state of New Mexico. That's a
threat.
And Representative Hoffman V.
Hill, um, in, in that process,
so you know, hey, wait a second,
let's figure this out. Let's
start working through this
process a little bit and
figuring out what works for
everybody. And so this bill has
been pared down to, to the two
components that you see today
and that that was the purpose
of, of that comment, sir.
Thank you. I was curious, so.
Picking up on the line of
questioning from my colleagues.
I, I think this is
Really important.
Because we know there's
economics around.
These devices that detect.
Uh
Conditions on the, on the train
or on its wheels.
So
They, the rail company has
elected to go every 17 miles.
Your recommending 10 miles. Is
there any science around that?
Let me just be clear for the
members, is there science around
that? or is it arbitrary on both
parties parts, or did the rail
company do a study and you did
or didn't.
Mr. Chairman, that's a, that's a
good question. Um, currently,
uh, the railroads can set that
distance between these wayside
detectors as they see best,
there is not a federal oversight
on, on that, um, I know that the
opposition testified that
they're, that there's a study on
that.
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm not aware
of that. Um, that's not to say
that it doesn't exist, that's
simply to say that I'm simply
not aware of it. I am fairly
well read on, on a lot of this
because I, I, I'm literally a
life, a lifelong railroad. I've
been at this for almost 29
years. Um, I've fed my family,
I've paid my bills with this for
a long time, so there's, while
there's not.
A federal mandate, the fiscal
impact report does note very
specifically that this this
issue is left to the discretion
of, of, of a state legislator.
And
I could add um the the wayside
detector is just one element of
the spill, I think two other
incredibly need to be reiterated
is that this also establishment
establishes a requirement for,
you know, the reporting of these
violations. It also puts in, um,
because, you know, we have seen
some instances in which you know
these.
There is no specific process
mandated in law that um if these
protections, if someone observes
that these protections aren't
being followed or these
protocols aren't being followed,
um, you know, they could, they
could.
be uh retaliated against if that
were the case, and so it's also
very important part of this
legislation to state that, you
know, we are putting it in
statute that, um, you know,
these violations have to be
reported, whistleblower
protections are, um, a part of
that mandated reporting and that
there are penalties, um, for the
safety violations. Right now
that's, there's nothing in law.
Thank you. So
Representative Mr. Harris said
that
There, he believes that there is
a study talking about the
distancing of those sensors.
You, if you're willing, you
might want to see if you can get
that from the companies or a
company that's done that perhaps
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, yes, absolutely, and,
and just to to go to process for
um a minute, I know that
Representative Barrago had
suggested that we um roll the
bill to look at uh.
Potential wordsmithing to.
Take into account future
technologies, um, whereas I
think that's a good idea. I also
want to kind of let the
committee know where we are in
the process of this bill, we
have another committee, we have
judiciary next, absolutely give
us an opportunity to do further
wordsmithing and to get
additional information as
topics, so I think there's an a
bit, I think we definitely have
the ability to make these
improvements to the bill without
um So representative are you
requesting to roll the bill?
Um
Mr. Chairman, I will, do you
have any more questions or we
kind of at that time. So
Uh, let me defer to
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
actually the talk of like
research had piqued my interest,
so there actually is a study I
was looking at the detection
system, but it's from the US
Department of Transportation,
federal railroad Administration
about the effectiveness of
wayside detector technology and
basically the conclusion was, is
that they're very effective at
preventing train derailments,
um, I didn't see anything about
the distance posted, but it did
pique my interest as far as not
having a standard and what's
happening with our federal
government now that they're the
sole, um, uh, regulators of our
trained and our train system and
train safety um gives me real
concern and it makes it for me
incumbent that we as a state
legislature start setting that
tone, um, especially with me, I
have in the district that I
represent, many of the train
lines that run right through the
district that I represent with
lots of um concern about the
material.
s that um are transported along
those lines in the district that
I represent, so I find this sort
of um safety since it's in our
hands at the state level, um,
given what's going on in the
federal government. I was
reading about 57,000 jobs in
federal transportation
department. Um, being
potentially cut, um, gives me
real cause for concern that we
have less than 30 days to go.
We're talking about uh train
safety that's very much in our
hands.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
along those same lines as it's
been years.
The federal government has been
in charge and hasn't taken
action on mandate.
these on the railroads.
The railroads are taking this
action upon themselves to do it
every 17 miles.
The other thing is, why wouldn't
the FRA, which I think is the
federal Railroad Association.
Why wouldn't they have already
taken a stand to mandate this.
And I, I also, Mr. Chairman,
have a concern about the short
lines, which I have in my
district as well, not being
brought to the table to talk
about this. These are some of
these are companies.
Uh, that produce a product.
Um, it could, this could be
detrimental to economic
development in my district.
Where I have a short line.
They may not be able to, uh,
since we have no no idea of how
much they cost.
It's a trade secret.
What is this going to cost my
short line that is a part of
economic development in my small
district.
So that that's a real concern to
me. Of course, I want safety. I
think there's not a person in
this room that doesn't want
safety.
But we also have to look at Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
what is the impact and, and I
think you said, um, uh.
That
You just picked 10 miles.
They're already every 17.
Uh, representative Brown, why
not 5?
I mean, who's picking that
number and why? They're already
in place at every 17 miles.
So just my concern, uh, Mr.
Chairman, for my short line and
that this could be detrimental
in my district.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you before I
That Representative Borego
speak.
I actually had the floor.
Uh, I, I have a whole.
Host of questions. I agree that
safety is paramount.
And I agree that there may be a
situation where state in in
Mexico has to take a lead
regarding safety.
So I have no, no problem with
that notion at all.
Representative my my issues at
this moment is that the
questions that I have and I
have, like I said, a whole host
of them.
Have not been answered.
And I, I just, I really feel.
That your bill
Isn't ready at this moment, not
that it can't be quickly, not
that we can't.
You know, within a short span of
time, do something with the
bill. I just, just personally
don't feel that it's ready. I
want to be able to uh.
Meet the standard that or or or
the ideas that represent Romero
had.
Along the ideas of safety
because we that that that kind
of that conflict of what's going
to happen at the federal level,
how are we going to keep our
people safe in New Mexico, that
matters.
But it, but we've got to get
this right, or we will have an
impacted.
A whole bunch of things that we
might not want to hurt, and that
also includes economic
development.
Would you like to respond to
that representative?
Mr. Chairman, yes, um, I agree
with you, so we are going to
roll the bill with our specific
marching instructions of we're
going to get additional
information on these studies.
Uh, we're gonna substantiate our
uh every 10 mile uh requirement.
We are going to speak to the
short lines that would be
impacted, and we're also um
shored up all that information
for you and check the boxes, we
will bring it back.
Thank you members as builders
roll for now. Thank you.
Next we have HB 474 Trail Life
use license plate represents
amo, are you here in the room?
There he is.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Good morning, Representative,
please proceed.
See everybody here.
Mr. Chair, I may have to run out
about 5 till.
will be excused Representative.
Mr. Chairman, are we ready?
We are indeed.
Please proceed
for the go.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, today I'm
bringing House Bill 474 to you
relating to license plates,
creating a trail life USA
special registration plate.
Allowing for the uh sensation
of, of a special license
issuance under certain
conditions making an
appropriation.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I had a young man.
Out of Los Alamos come to me.
He's actually a real close
friend of uh
My LA
Yeah
This is kind of unusual that we
carry a bill for
That isn't really in our, in our
district.
It's really representative
Chandler's district and she
supports this bill.
Uh
We work as legislators I believe
we worked for the whole state.
We don't just work for our
district and sometimes we find
ourselves on uh working on
issues on on other parts of the
state.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
Uh, trail life started in 2013
as a faith-based scouting
organization for boys, what
started as a small group has
grown into an organization of
over 45,000 members, 1000 troops
across the United States.
In New Mexico, White Rock.
Has uh 5
Troop New Mexico.
1412 started with 15 boys and
now has grown to 46 boys.
And
New Mexico has 7 troops.
Which are uh are larger than
White Rock, approximately 70 and
uh I mean, approximately 350
boys in New Mexico, Mr.
Chairman.
Trolli has a focus of boy
leadership with boys choosing to
lead in variety.
Uh, services, service project
fund fundraisers and adventures.
In the troop service projects
range from helping the elderly
doing backyard work, shoveling
snow.
Maintenance of church buildings.
This year the boys want to get
involved in hiking trail
maintenance.
Adventures range from local
hikes to a long week, uh, canoe
trips and dog sledding. Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you. Before I, uh, go to
questions, are there any members
or any, anybody in the audience
in favor of this bill. Raise
your hand.
Anybody online in favor of this
bill.
No, Mister Chair, anybody in
opposition.
With this bill in the audience
or online.
Mister Chair
Thank you. Before I
Go to member questions. I want
to preempt by asking a question.
You started representative uh
that this was a faith-based
organization? Are you saying
that this organization is no
longer a faith-based because we
looked online and still is.
Um, I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I,
I must have, must have misread.
Questions from the members.
Ranking member Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sentative Zamora.
Uh, this is kind of a hard bill
for me.
I, for one thing, I, I very much
value faith-based.
Is more
And I love the fact that it's uh
the the extra revenue from the
charge for this plate, um, so it
says here, Mr. Chair dollars,
and that would have to be, there
would have to be an annual, so
it's a specialty plate.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, I, um,
I've been here a long time and
we've heard so many requests for
specialty license plates, and I
know when I go to my office, and
I look, you know, which plate do
you want? I look on the wall and
there's just this huge
collection of plates to choose
from. Some of them are standard
and they have a much lower uh
ee.
And then there were all the
specialty ones and.
After a while, the legislature a
couple years ago said, you know
what, we've got to get a handle
these bills on plates.
And so they, they put in a
clause that said you really need
to have a minimum buy of them.
And if, um, you know, over, over
some time, um MVD can actually
just remove that from the
choices that we have.
And um
So it kind of pains me to say
this, Mr. Chair and and
Representative, but I.
I think we have several other
bills, this session for, for
license plates and
Again, it's nothing against uh.
The, the organization and those
who would, you know.
I like to have one of these on a
car or vehicle.
But I, I just think we're at a
saturation.
We have some members of our
legislature who vote against
every single license plate bill.
It's just a matter of principle
or stubbornness, I'm not sure
which it is.
Um
So I, I, again, Mr. Chair, I
really appreciate.
Intent here, but I'm just
thinking we've.
We've got a lot of plates.
And I'm, I'm really
Doubting that we'll have the
volume of sales here.
So, um, the chair. Uh, Mr. Chair
and, and Representative Brown.
You know, I share the same
concerns that you but my heart
goes out to this.
Young man that came up to me.
And his kids
And
That's why I'm sitting here in
front of you carrying the bill
today.
And
I don't want to be labored the
debate or anything, but I wanted
to make an effort for this group
and this, these young kids and
That are trying to do
And are doing good things in
their community.
And that's why I'm I'm in front
of you guys today and, and I
know we're all busy this time of
the session and
I understand where you're coming
from.
I'm doing it from the heart, Mr.
Chair and members.
Representative De.
Chair and representative, I just
want to make sure, I, I, I mean,
we, we do have a lot of plates
and the Department of Motor
Vehicle Public Safety and other
organizations have commented on
how complicated it is to keep up
these plates, know if they're in
New Mexico plate. And it seems
to be something that.
I don't know if it's student led
or if it's organizer led, you
know, folks who are working with
these organizations that often
bring, you know, youth with a
plate. And so it, it is
absolutely nothing to do with
the organization being faith
based, and I'm actually kind of
offended at the significant
issues that I've been put in
here by the FIR because I
absolutely support faith-based.
I, our religion and our
religious beliefs are protected
class like every other
protective class that we
recognize in the state. So my
decision to vote against this is
about a choice that I made.
every time I vote for a bill,
the practicality of application,
the cost to taxpayers, that sort
of issue. But I want it to be
clear that I am a supporter of
every nonprofit organization
that choose to organize because
their parents choose the clubs
for their kids. And I think this
is a great organization. And I
understand that you represented
us from the heart.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for
those comments down.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Turin. Um, so
I've been on this committee for
a minute now and um unlike some
of those that represent Brown
spoke.
Um, or I'm one of the members
that always votes for license
plates. Um, I'm an automatic yes
on all of them. I think the more
the merrier. I appreciate that
designs I've mentioned to the
committee before, um, as
somebody who is adamantly
against putting a bumper sticker
on my car. This is a great way
to advertise and try to help
some of the organizations, um,
That we see fit and be able to
to support them in a in a in a
different way. So, um, I
appreciate you bringing this
forward. I know it's a lot of
different organizations that
come and bring license plates,
and we'll probably see a couple
of more before um we end here
but um I appreciate you bringing
this forward. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Miss,
Mr. Chair,
go ahead,
Mr. Chair.
You know
I look at these little
organizations that are getting
started like this.
And now that you're the chair of
of transportation.
Maybe in the future, somehow we
could put some kind of a
Of a uh
I don't want to say a fund, but
some kind of a of a of
Some money to department of
transportation.
To maybe help these small little
organizations like this.
Come up
With, with some help to do these
small projects like this and
maybe issue them.
License plates
To their members.
Directly instead of running it.
Does that make sense?
Have, have, have some money set
aside.
So that we can fund them some
plates so that they can maybe
get started in, in that
direction, Mr. Chair,
represented one of the
The ideas have been tossed
around, I think has merit is the
state actually having a sticker
that goes on your plate that
denotes some type of of entity
organization that you're part
of. I, I think that has my, I
think we probably need to
explore that and maybe as a
committee we do that and, and it
wouldn't matter if it was faith
based or not. I personally, I am
unabashed Christian.
And as a child in the LDS faith,
one of the things that we were
very, very heavily involved.
the Boy Scouts.
And so I appreciate what these
young people are doing. I'm the
first one to appreciate it. The
only fear that I have and the
reason I brought up what I
brought up at the very beginning
and preempted the discussion was
only because
There are a lot of faith that
might wanna play or organization
that are faith based that might
want to play, and I think we
head down a bit of a slippery
slope, and that's, that's a
reason. But if we were to change
tactics and do a sticker that
you can buy and pay for, and you
say, hey, I'm a proud whatever.
I think that has a lot of merit.
So
What is the will of, of
Oh, Brown to speak again.
Mr. Chairman, thank you,
Representative Zamora. So.
I was actually going to bring up
the point that we did study this
a couple years ago, we thought
it was actually a really good
idea. I just don't think there
was any follow up, but you know,
to have a kind of a standard
issue plate that law enforcement
can read very readily, but then
have a place where a sticker
could be applied at much less
cost, by the way, uh, to give
groups like this a chance to
express their affiliation.
So I, I think maybe it's time
for us to take a look at that
again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since
we did have a little bit of
time, the committee indulged me
and represent Brown remembers uh
we did have the study and it
was, I think, representative for
Hardo that brought an overhaul
and kind of the sticker idea
along with a specialty sticker
for an organization. I forget
who.
The funny part was, is that the
committee saw so many problems
with the sticker idea and what
about this, that and the other,
that it ended up becoming a
specialty plate bill of which I
couldn't help myself to point
out the irony to the committee
about we try to end it, but we
ended up just with another one.
So I'm just a little bit of
historical context for this
discussion. Um, still very much
in favor of specialty license
plates. Thank you,
Mrs. this is a smarter bunch,
Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I just wanted
to, um, thank you for the
comment and in yours as well.
And note that this great faith
based organization was not
seeking money for themselves.
They were seeking money for the
state parks, which I absolutely
support having elephant Butte
and Cavallo in my district and
knowing how primitive it is and
how few resources they have. I,
I support where the dollars are
going and the organization.
Now now, Representative Romero
makes me want to vote with him.
I, I, I don't get that
opportunity very often. So I
might just change my vote to
yes, just so I can vote with
Representative Romero on a bill.
Would you, Mr. Chairman.
I'll
second
pass from
member of Substitute motion to
table. Substitute motion to
table.
OK,
substitute motion.
The substitute first.
substitute, um Representative
Armstrong.
Yes
Representative Borego.
Representative Brown.
Representative Doo, yes to
table.
Representative Hernandez.
note table.
Representative Ackman.
Representative Jones.
Yes, to table.
Representatives from.
Representative Romero.
Noted table.
Vice chair a lotta.
Yes to table.
Cruz, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, if I may,
might make a statement, and I
understand the economics of
making a few plates and, and uh
I think that's the issue here
today.
And I know that, that
everybody's in support of these
groups and, and kids and what
they do in in the state of New
Mexico. We all work to strive
for that in the in the
legislature. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee. Thank you,
members. Thank you
representative.
See no further business we
adjourned.
