The aviation the last forty
years in that aviation and I
talk about the piston power.
Not the jets not the Germans
they run on jet fuel jet a but
this is what is considered now
ask guests which is hundred low
that gas and for forty five
years they've been talking about
we need to switch to unleaded
gas most people think we got all
of the late out of
transportation tools back in the
eighties we did it in still
excuse and in the United States
it's about four hundred tons of
the lead get spread out over the
country from the Asian airlines
hundred low that is the only
fuel is typically available at
any airport.
Well listen I'm one of them when
I can I carry unleaded auto gas
that has no I'll call sometimes
called native accent your plan
because that are familiar plate
was designed for that but
airports typically it's only
hundred level at they call it
low that it actually has five
times as much checked out the
lead as we have in the car.
In order to boost the opting for
the high performance aviation
engines.
The EPA is on the verge of
coming out with the this year
maybe next year but with.
requirements that the Asian we
must change to unleaded fuel the
goal right now is twenty thirty.
But it is coming all of the and
gas the hundred low that that is
sold is sold by some of the big
oil companies but they are not
the ones that are working on the
transition but if you there are
a few of them available now that
there are problems with scaling
it out this bill is to get ahead
of it over the next couple of
years.
To to help to incentivise and
ensure that the airports around
New Mexico start transitioning
to allow unleaded fuels again
currently the big oil companies
have a market on the hundred led
the Afghans and they've got no
incentive to switch over.
This make sure the company comes
in and wants to play unleaded
aviation fuel that is that all
of the requirements that they
are not excluded because of
exclusive contracts with the
lapse or shell or one of the big
oil companies usually but if you
and so this really is to get
ahead of that in starting the
transition to unleaded aviation
fuel again it's a very short
bill I can tell you way more
than one of those yes that's the
issue
stockings and how it actually
makes most aviation airplanes
were dangerous because of the
credit in the lead in their if
you want to get is all that I I
can fill your mind with lots of
technical aviation things this
is just to prevent.
The airport from not allowing
someone to come in with a claim
unleaded aviation.
Wonderful thank you senator with
that let's go to the public we
have some folks waiting no
economic are to speak on the
bill and they're working on
right now so while we're working
on that let's take public
testimony here is there anybody
here and support the bill Sir
yeah good morning and Services.
The sheriff of programs after
standing in support for thirty
five thousand members we support
this legislation let if you'll
is that for quality the largest
a medal emitter of lead in the
air and so we support this bill
to a lab on that if you will to
be available in here thank you
thank you anybody else.
Is anybody here in opposition to
the bill.
Now.
And now not there yet.
Okay let me take this
opportunity well versed
Committee public testimony
online I wanted to I want to
thank Dan so he's sitting
outside this one here prove pro
provide the food and the coffee
for us twice I believe he also
did the first Canadian dinner so
we really so appreciative Dan
and then I wanted to thank you
have a whole list here.
The.
What we call then we should yes.
Thank you for providing donuts
and coffee twice in the
committee and we know that you
you care very much about
transportation and and we
appreciate you and everything
you've done for us this session
thank you and I was also saying
that you paid for the first
committee dinner which I was
unable to attend because I have
the COVID but thank you very
much I heard it was a rocking
good time and then I wanted to
thank Sanchez for the second
committee dinner Joe Thompson
beyond the Ted is a market
dollars into career table
intended to candidates Antanas
are holding back Patrick Gillen
I also spent Debbie my assistant
manager here we can Martinez
days weeks roadshows layer and
Kerry wonder in archery Senator
Charlie markets regained the
Chavis leading food Jennifer
summers all part John Thompson
and my husband Jackie did the
second but I also was not
really.
But yeah I've just I'm so
appreciative for everything that
everyone has done for me as a
new chair this year and I it's
just been a wonderful experience
so thank you to those of you who
have been here I want to thank
my vice chair haters in on this
committee a very long time and
he kind of shepherded me through
the experience was anything
thank you madam chair I do not
know there's a lot of people are
not here the need thanks
representative will welcome you
know he's been there we and this
committee since two thousand
sixteen you really appreciate
your that you never have should
all be very FY what's happening
I really appreciate working
committee.
The committee and appreciate the
way you do I'm sorry for that
and that is transportation rules
is which is the best thing that
we can do for New Mexico right
now and you're doing that and I
appreciate the call of a lot of
people throughout the state or
economy will benefit DOT is
always.
Right our department so the
secretary the secretary and
everybody has been wanting to do
the best they can for New Mexico
here there's more here the one
that make this happen so thank
you for your friendship all you
the state is very much thank you
that I want to do I call you
guys the crew because you roll
call hard you guys are always.
Thanks to you creating secretary
srna
Mr da da who else is here is.
Thank you.
Through raise your hand thank
you guys thank you for your
patience with me thank you for
teaching us showing up every
committee meeting it really
matters I learned a lot from you
and I look forward to learning
even more retention so are you
ready.
Cash.
Share the love all of that
transportation thank you very
much which again thank you I
would just resend the reputation
the rest of the one of pretty
well the dollar the good pools
Mexico all the rules and the
rules.
With the end of this session but
pulled strings use the next time
around so we can keep improving
our roads and infrastructure in
the state of New Mexico thank.
Don't think of ourselves here we
have a lot to do over the in
terms of.
That I think.
And that thank you you're
welcome thank you Mr.
Look at look at Terry second.
Is.
Read that part of the session
folks.
It that.
Cool.
We want to start.
Start.
We we can start for okay we're
gonna start I'm not sure which
side these folks arrive but
let's just let him talk just one
is the other one okay.
Hi there are you there.
In that.
Good morning are you guys good
morning we're good thank you.
I'm so please go ahead and begin
your testimony.
Yes
I would say that Office bill
we've kind of been hearing about
it for the last year or so with
having on regulated our gas
sales at the airport would
potentially cause havoc I would
say on there's no regulation on
it and if somebody happens to
bring in their own gas and takes
off and crashes there is no way
for us to know.
Who did it how they got it where
it was brought in from and also.
To store it the potential of
storing it on our air filter
and bringing in more tanks and
a.
Having more environmental.
Protections on that on something
that should is not even FAA
approved for airplanes and
knowing which aircraft goes in
it by have line guys are like oh
Hey we're going to put some fuel
in this no it takes down leaded.
Regular field we there's no
standard on that.
And that's where I see the
potential for.
Disaster ultimately.
Okay thank you very much we
appreciate you coming to speak
this morning next we have.
Shoshana versions here to
analyze what.
Hello Ronaldsay there.
Muted you are muted.
On this.
Now the.
As you know you're a pilot as
well is part of pilot training
is you learn how to win their
plane by themselves the
responsible for the few who goes
in the ear
and so some of the concerns
about that I think are unfounded
and we're talking about people
putting out aware of how it is
able to put the appropriate fuel
my letter playing is this your
every time I have to put under
low light is it is not designed
for that it makes your point
more dangers besides the
environmental impact that I put
on there and so is somebody
working with and all guests the
auto gas that has no alcohol in
it in their played that fuel you
can get the S. T. C. a special
type certificate for it to use
that fuel in the airplane but
ultimately it is the hi that is
responsible for making sure that
they're playing is fuel
appropriately a few years ago
there was a.
There's one of the things Santa
Clara California has banned all
sales of but if you will at work
and the one point out to a
certainly
Get to another airport and
that's being blamed as the fact
that they didn't have the leaded
fuel available that's a pilot a
co owner was the.
There
is also of but if you'll at work
since different out the.
That was the.
With only about ten you'll.
What.
Interesting already.
So keep going Senator.
That's all is just
the budget is ultimately
responsible to make sure that it
was the appropriate people was
with the to the airplane and
while FBOs have some
responsibility they don't have a
responsibility somebody as I
often carry I don't jobs out of
the vehicle for into my plate or
would be in any of the new fuels
that are coming out at the swift
fuels is one of them the racing
as a budget you'll that has a
high enough off the for the
majority of the the aviation we
and so this is more as we are
transitioning as the transition
is coming that is not sold by
the airport that says we've got
exclusive project we're not
doing.
The great thank you senator so
does anybody committee members
you have any questions actually
let's try on we're trying to
Thorson for a third time.
Committee so there are no rules.
We know that he could em here
because we heard the webcast.
We're sorry all right we're
gonna move on officers in the
center of Madam.
We've been there for from
selling here feel that the goal
of this.
Madam chair representative of
this would allow at this point
either one to be sold so we need
to start the transition EPA is
going to come in with a hard
deadline that.
This.
At this point.
Well but this is not prevent
somebody at this point from
still selling the avgas low at
but if somebody comes in with
one of these new companies and
there's one out of Albuquerque
V. and the tools that they be
allowed to sell fuel at the
airport
Madam chair another word with
this bill is doing just allowing
other people to sell different
fuel at the airport if they're
both wants to write it.
The airport would not be allowed
to prevent it right they can't
say we've got exclusive contract
with Phillips you get so you're
fuel here we need to provide a
mechanism for the transition
because otherwise yes you're not
going to shut one down in the
the other one's going to spring
up full force this is gonna
happen she said transition.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you.
Many questions for you senator
so so essentially this is just
attempting to this piece of
legislation is attempting to
connect jumpstart.
The transition and fuels that we
already knows to be happening is
that the point of this.
Sure yes is to and just started
set up by and for these
companies to be able to come
here that are going to have to
clean fuels and that they're not
prevented from the companies
that have
lots of money.
Okay so
and and in terms of regulation
where are we with guidelines
from the FAA on the steps of I
want you I can tell you we want
you want to which is best I'm
here for early.
Of.
In Europe for the last twenty
years they have unleaded
alternative that has been
certified in Europe for the
legends and Lycoming engines
which are probably ninety
percent of the general aviation
history the and is survived
there is been functioning
without incident for twenty
years
There are several fuels that are
in the process again he is one
of them and I know they've got a
pretty in the Albuquerque area
that has a fuel that has been
highly tested in white coming in
continental engines they
currently are going where they
require pilots to have an S. T.
C. a special rate certificate to
use those tools that's part of
how they're paying back their
development costs the racing has
a fuel that I believe they're
the ninety four opportunity
unleaded which works for the
majority of the general aviation
we of the.
Racing is developing a hundred
opportunity unleaded fuel.
The the the and you know you do
with the F. A. on a regular
basis your practice is very slow
to make the changes and the
industry is not going to move
without government regulation
for forty years they've
continued to have leaded fuel
the dump US four hundred times a
year or so nation wide on our
communities is going to say you
cannot do this anymore
again following the European
model most of the agents have
already at years and years and
years of testing with the fuel
that they got over there without
incident thank you and we
finally have the same effect so
we are actually we have the zip
faced so we're gonna try for the
third and final stage fright try
are you there Mr Padilla.
Yes can you hear me we.
Thank you.
I'm sorry I'm not there person I
I've I was feeling ill as we're
just trying to be there in
person so I apologize for that
but thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
property I am owner and operator
of dissenters Santa Fe although
I think unleaded fuels are are a
great thing for the industry and
I'm I'm happy to see that.
People are starting to look at
unleaded fuel for aviation we're
just not there yet you know and
I understand what Senator souls
is the trying to do and I
appreciate that we at at the
airport in Santa Fe I know that
there's several operators to
bring in on the fuel you know
there there are some challenges
with bringing in your own
unleaded fuel.
when it comes the unleaded fuel
pull it from the gas station put
it in a in a red container
blaming it and putting it in
your plane you know it doesn't
go through the same strict
stringent of quality control
processes that we have here at
the airport you know we are
bound by a certain rules with
the aviation fuels we have
certain obligations that we have
to do something testing us to
grab the task that we have to do
to make sure that the bill is up
to par for aviation making sure
that it's safe for the airplane
we skip all that by going to the
gas station and put it in the
airplane so by skipping it it
leaves a lot of a liability
whether it's on the airport
whether it's on the
FBO and even ultimately the
pilot if it is if there's water
in the in the field if there's
ethanol in the fuel that that is
not compatible with the fuel
lines mediation you know all of
these things need to be vetted
they need to be looked at to
make sure that we're doing it
safely you know there's not a
lot of fuel stations that have
no of ethanol free fuel to put
in their place so you've got to
go look for if we leave it up to
without the strict regulations
that are in place in the
aviation industry we're opening
up ourselves for liability for
crashes for infants for
accidents I think it was handled
correctly if we are doing this
strict up
quality control to make sure
that it's safe I would agree
that that is a process that that
should be looked at on I'm not a
huge fan of the lead if you I
don't think that we need to be
polluting our errors with leaded
fuel however we need to be
Hello we need to be face we need
to make sure that we're doing
the right things with with
respect to the field
I
I guess that's all I have to say
we want to make sure that we're
doing everything correctly thank
you Mr video you can share your
testimony.
Thank you.
The response of these comments
also is similar to what I said
before is that certainly easy
should association of forty
years ago is yes with the
weather of all of gas called gas
and.
Clearly show there are not been
any additional incidents of
aviation crashes as a result of
that related you'll actually
thousand plus those battles and
has because the number of
accidents because of the lead
did you leave your low
compression engines like mine
that are directly related to the
left that's it and so to say
that it's less thank you it is
not the leaded fuel in a small
engine low compression engine
but is less safe than the other
most of this bill is not talking
about an individual carrying out
like like fuel cans but actually
having it available in the lot
costs lots of the rest of the
country most gas is available at
many airports and again it's
always on the pilot know whether
their airplane is certified
thank you manage on that point
to particular compression issues
this bill really is dealing with
individuals like me carry my own
now but it's more setting up
potentially a self serve pump
that has the most gas in it and
for seventy five percent of the
aviation we get run better on
that and more safely on that the
the little that but this really
is more about as we transition
with the new tools that as those
come on the line that may be
allowed to set up at airports
we're doing the transition from
the loan that Afghans to the new
unleaded fuels thank you senator
so I'm.
Is it that I mean can these
airplanes take both the low lead
and let it fuel flared across
which is yours do they have that
capability in just one well it
will perform better for instance
someone to fuel the juror of the
fuels makes wonderfully there is
a problem that you have to clean
up to do for you but the other
one the and so when I fly when I
can I leave Los crucis in my
airplane I tried with the other
guests in because it is better
for my engine that the act yes
it's for lack when I was your
Santa Fe the only thing
available to me is to put in the
address that I I hear out and
again I have to be extra careful
with leading particularly on the
ground that it's at low RPM's to
make sure that's when plugged
Dowling and other kinds of
dangers is far by airplane works
but I always feel that isn't
taking often I'm spreading lead
over the community of Santa Fe
and over Albuquerque's I fly
over Albuquerque it's dispersed
more there but that that all
goes into the house.
Thank you senator I'm and and
I'm gonna ask you to speak on
something I think you seem to
probably be educated on it but
if this is beyond you're running
up but yes I'll make something.
all politicians.
so talk to me a little bit about
storage what what was this mean
for our FBOs like if we pass
this legislation today what
would they have to tomorrow.
Madam that's a great question
they don't have to do anything.
If one of these new companies
comes in and says we are ready
to offer the ninety four octane
unleaded fuel slide down the
aisle.
The the the ones that made that
G. A. M. on I don't remember
what the acronym stands for
but if they want to come in and
say we want to set up and start
selling the unleaded gas here in
room in Albuquerque so that
group now we have an option of
putting the level that is for
putting in your if that works
for their.
And what about.
Why not just wait for FY eight
regulates this.
The.
What
is we forty five years not that.
they now have a mandate and as I
said the EDD could come in and
say you got one here this page
over and you cannot sell
unleaded fuel.
They do that and then
everybody's going to scramble
this is trying to encourage the
free market ahead of that to
start making that transition
whether companies that are ready
to start providing the but if
you.
Thank you Senator just a little
kick in the **** I see at from a
state setting up for the
transition at this point the the
the EPA will come in some time
I'm guessing within the next two
or three years and said our
deadline and then everyone's
gonna scramble.
Deadlines create urgency and
people will shift over and would
be more expensive and more
disruptive at that point and so
we get ahead of it that's what
and that leads me to my last
question Senator and in terms of
I mean are we gonna happen so
all we have to install different
takes a different FBOs immunity
in from an infrastructure
capital investment perspective
what are we asking of our
freedoms the past this law
that's still to be determined of
as the the fuels are no longer
going to be available either
takes will need to be install or
they'll need to be some serious
cleaning because the lead the
positive thing gathering at the
bottom of those chains for many
years and they will.
To turn off the microphone.
Second level very friendly
right.
Mexico is that level is.
Okay so
Senator you.
So we would have I would require
installation of additional tanks
or additional capital
expenditures with this if we're
past this piece of legislation
what it require thorough
promulgation of rules by the
mediation division.
Madam chair I feel.
at this point what this does is
it enables a property to come in
and put their own chain and set
up to be able to sell unleaded
fuel of it doesn't require
anyone to do anything this
suggests.
Stops preemption of the the
current eight you.
saying.
Only we can sell our letter
you'll you can't come in with a
clear view.
That includes my questions
unless okay Representative.
Thank you madam chair been
laying here.
I was so close to hers.
For the last.
Senator you actually Madam chair
Senator your actually said what
I was going to ask senator for
clarification on making repeated
again if this is not advocating
for every positive shop with a
couple of gas a gas and fill up
there playing.
Madam chair representative not.
madam chair what Senator Ortiz
and senator Representative that
in my short time here at the
legislature's after people
change it's like everything's
fine why you bother and and I
think that's a little
disappointing I mean clearly
we've got to start with this
needle in a wide array of areas
so that we can have that
requirement that approaches all
around so
Madam I'm gonna be supporting
this I think we got to start on
this ball down the field they
think are presented that to buy
shares in thank you madam chair
Senator you mentioned that you
for the comment about gas that
is bad for you to follow the
process of for for.
If in their sins which started
Hall why change now it is that
food reduction.
Madam chair representative that
for the engines that were not
designed to run on that need the
high performance fuel
Once more to cut me off of your
plate that I've got the most
hours in the Cessna one fifty
has a hundred point power for
cylinder engine it was designed
to run on octane you the octane
rating is the.
The web if you remember old
colleges where we had worry
about gnocchi if you got low
quality fuel and they would not
want and so in order to control
the gnocchi in higher
compression engines which is the
pre that nation they would have
to apple let me in to boost the
octane which prevents the
knocking my engine was designed
to run on very low walk T. fuel
eighty opted back in the
eighty eight seventies eighties
the aviation fuel suppliers
there used to be three grades of
aviation fuel hundred thirty Oct
eight hundred low that in eighty
opting and and then that ended
at all they said we're not gonna
find all three and more we're
only gonna find one these on the
hundred local that fuel.
It just barely has enough often
for the high compression turban
turbocharged engines and it's
got way too much lead provider
point and so lightly I have to
be extra careful that when I do
my warm ups that as I checked
the the mags that if I get that
I'm getting a little technical
you probably know what I'm
talking about that watching for
at our P. and propped it shows
that I got one of my colleagues
that style with LED deposits on
and so there are several
accidents each year that are
caused directly by let deposit
on support funds the other
places on the valves that the
lead tends to gather and in the
Val States open because of the
deposit then my course so
interagency council three
cylinder engine which means it
will not climb at the ought to
do this and.
And causes problems and here
there are several accidents
some fatal due to let Dowling up
funds and engine failures as a
result of that.
The state thank you madam chair
you know
I've been a mechanic all my life
hello it is working and what I
Maggie was in full force
additional my question is it's
been there forever no present
changes and like my concerns are
that want to get into it you'll
have to mandated reports to do
anything because you're smaller
airports are going to be wiped
off you know thank you more for
my own.
I believe you have changed tax
and for somebody to come in and
do this and that.
It's not a fair assumption for
them and you know we really need
to be careful of what we're
doing here you know I understand
over the rules changes coming
but there is not a very long
time and you know all no concern
about that for the reason of
being all of the best on this I
don't know what when will the.
But you know I've been in this
committee first since two
thousand sixteen and a beta
Revenue thousand sixteen
committee chair seeing that
we're.
Thank you but it doesn't.
And then that's committed thank
you thank you Mr
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I have the same
question Senator the pace for
this.
Madam chair and representative.
There isn't any cost way the
the.
Because the EDD is going to
regulate or is going to require
it my guess is next couple of
years is going to.
Disallow use of leaded fuel in
the shin across country.
Of this is to get ahead of that
the company's coming in that
want to would you unleaded fuel
for airports and airplanes that
they're allowed to this doesn't
require anyone to change at this
point when it does come out with
its regulations the F. A. A. is
going to.
The time frame and I don't know
whether it'll be a hard deadline
you two years or whether it's
gonna be a phased in over
several years to eliminate the
use of lead and that will be
that that point mandate this
particular bill I think is
working on trying to do a
transition so that we don't have
a very short time line to get
rid of it all.
Okay madam chair that's not
years rates in the fiscal impact
report he says this bill goes
into effect on because it
doesn't have an effective date
we would go into effect on June
sixteenth twenty twenty three.
So my question is this goes into
effect
and the airports are up and
running for have had someone
install the new storage and
dispensing systems.
Monitors that and is there some
kind of
A liability them to that airport
if they don't find.
Madam chair representative this
particular one is not mandated
by the.
Change over.
You just proved this therefore.
It doesn't allow someone to not
come yet it's enabling somebody
wants to come in and sell it if
you.
You
madam chair if it's not if it's
an airport that has been doing
it and things have to be
retrofitted who pays for that.
Here Representative that's not
this bill
that.
And and that's going to be part
of the of the.
With.
The FBOs as to how they're going
to manage that transition this
is much more of a company comes
in and wants to put in their own
fuel tank and set up to be able
to sell unleaded aviation fuel
that they are allowed to do
that.
I don't know where to go on the
soother madam chairman
comfortable with saying.
That.
This breeding F. R..
That we talk about what the
estimated cost of installing the
systems would be.
At and maybe it is on this
private business I'm I'm not
sure if that's the plan as it
would go to a private individual
or business that wants this kind
of fuel added airport that there
still the coordination with that
local government that airport
authority with who ever at and
is there something now that
prevents this from happening I
guess I'm trying to understand
madam chair what is the age
we're trying to scratch.
Madam chair representative of
across the country there have
been there reports that it said
we're the only ones that so few
here nobody else is allowed to
sell any shares Senator is there
some airport in New Mexico that
says that.
Madam chair representative
I don't know that there is a one
that specifically says that some
of the airports are owned by the
community by the local
government they sometimes set up
contracts with Phillips sixty
six to be an exclusive seller of
fuel for.
Madam chair in Gallup decides
because that is a municipal
airport in that city council and
mayor decides but I think the
way they are and a provider says
but no I want to come in and I
want to have this opportunity
what happens this bill that
someone else would come in and
so it allows for
Competition if you will to come
in and start selling unleaded
fuels that are polluting the
atmosphere in the community okay
that's not my concern madam
chair about pollution my concern
is is we tend to push for local
control on everything.
the matter what is always local
control we just have the
downturn we praise local
control.
This case if the minister for
for.
Run by a local government Santa
Fe is the same thing gallons
Clovis I don't know about
anybody else but those are three
that I'm familiar with decides
that they live in Offaly a life
cell and gas where it is
I don't know I I think I've
talked myself into not
supporting thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Mr
Carson apparently has fixes his
laptop woes and he's ready to
sign.
Are you there Mr Thorson.
Are you able to.
To go.
I just want to mirror some of
the comments that Troy Padilla
made earlier.
on one of his associates with
their job center and that is the
way a I look at this is that
this is known as prohibiting the
sale right now I don't think
it's necessary to even bring the
subject up because it's a more
economics in addition to safety
which is the primary driver it's
a matter of economics additional
cost an FBO but cautioned that
the up to a million dollars to
convert their current systems to
be able to handle on what if you
all and if there's no or very
little demand there should be
nothing on the docket that
should force of that if the to
be able to find it if they don't
want to.
We travel across the country by
error and experience many
airports do not sell jet fuel or
do not sell one form of well let
it fuel at the current time and
as a pilot we have an option to
over fly that airports and get
our fuel where where it's
available and so we're living in
a free trade society at this
time and it's a matter of supply
and demand when the airport and
the community is ready to accept
on leaded fuels I believe that
they will and you don't need a
law to prohibit the restriction
of unleaded fuels at this time
it's just too broad and it's not
necessary that's the only
comment that I.
Thank you Mr parson.
Okay Senator at this point I
apologize we I don't know
everybody is what I can offer
you we need to get going to the
restaurant and it was which was
been for eleven so I'll text one
of you once we get a quorum and
thank you very much for
presentational did thank you all
the report that this transition
for our kids every day thank you
thank you.
Yes
Representative.
Jack.
Thank you so much for your
grateful for the time up to this
presentation of a dropped a bill
on the Senate side
doctor similar bill on the house
side district on attention to
something were great for the two
years to be as well you could
The.
The top members of New Jersey is
the D. O. T. up.
The districts.
District three years Bernalillo
county but also appropriate.
Of growing part of Santa Fe
County Santa Fe County and of
course Valencia County is
growing by leaps and bounds so
even though it's not.
One is not the obligated by the
by the penny to these various
districts of money that does
going to district three goes too
much larger projects bigger
projects for example I twenty
five Comanche program
interchange down south I twenty
five of
real Bravo then in the north
west quarry that so that the
north elementary rainfall you
got I I. forty interchange with
interest coaches of our so when
you look at the map on the
bottom you see the corporate
areas all over again.
And then you see the beautiful
south valley which has forty
thousand roughly forty thousand
people roughly the size of
almost the size of holes that
bigger than Hobbs almost the
size of the Rossell a bigger
that Clovis there's only four
cities that are larger
significant margin of the self
out of the south valley does not
have the taxis of municipal G.
R. T..
does not have a.
Does not have advantage of the
of the Albuquerque's you know
transition production and and
there is it doesn't have a city
organised polity also for
nobody's fault it in my opinion
I got short changed on
infrastructure road projects and
with that I'll turn it over to.
Thank you senator thank you
madam chair members are I was
provided some L. is being a
villager tell us those are town
actually by a corporation and
the the effort that we're
describing this morning for
districts is actually for the
entire San Valley this although
it has parts of the two hundred
thirty three miles square miles
of paved road.
And just as a server described
the manager for a large area in
fact it's about a third of the
season.
Just give you description.
So here's the demarcation
roughly madam chair members.
From the City of Albuquerque all
know the Central Avenue which
opened sixty six that would be
the northern boundary the self
alley and it would also be.
West of the river all the way to
slow Representative lo and I'm
twenty five so that's the area
that were described so it's
fairly sizeable your is in the
area or sell regionally by
tribal people either in the
sixteen hundreds Senator Wirth
some villages are reception fact
these religions were status for
those in the city
and they were the Legisla- of
the US are you going to report
the school and they're still
recognizes religious even though
they're not separated by space
they're all continue just this
one also through this area you
have the old.
This is a local from Mexico and
went right to the heart of South
Valley to later it became up
route sixty six three nineteen
thirty seven and then later it
became highway eighty five and
then.
The fire was replaced by twenty
five some other towns around the
country it just kind with their
to some extent a lot of
businesses one household council
tells excerpt and
the server is a mixed use area
it's it's it's not a high income
area the national median family
income is also seventy one
thousand dollars itself at eight
forty so despite the long
history of this service
community where are the home for
groundwater pollution street
lighting and were rules we're
obligated to bring awareness to
this committee is one of the
things I'm here costs and we can
see the community here a few
months ago was Bernalillo
county.
Our role in nineteen seventy and
never came back.
And we're trying to change that
trump who wrote a large bedroom
community members and share and
so roll matter because people
are commuting in and out all of
the time and just to let you
know how serious are you to we
have four five million
appropriated for us as
representatives I put a million
to a of that money I would
rather have used it for
something else I have a lot of
review is but I just felt it was
important sure this point just a
Senator has something to adhere
stuff which thank you Mr bridge
thank you very much fascinating
I have no idea I think we're is
there any this isn't a this is
an informal presentation so
we're just gonna slow Mr
somebody you have anything to
say.
Madam chair members of the.
Senator Representative is
perfect right the cell that we.
Right in the middle of the
bridge to the north as as a lot
has happened on the west side of
the business development also on
the side a lot also in the south
is let us live at the scene of
rebel and all that so.
And the north valley two very
important share.
Trucks are not allowed east and
west traffic so more and more
traffic is shifted to that to
the south K. five forty R.
twenty five that human beings
are using Senator I is very very
important because of the money
money's being to approve or make
that infrastructure possible
because of our points have these
to the economy itself.
The ride will refuse never never
concentrated and soft on the and
this is really critical.
Do you think about that and to
which you can Madam chair and
committee members I think the
amendment for bringing to
school.
Thank you Mr so anyone else.
You're gonna go to the committee
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I guess my first
question is gentleman richer MPO
on this.
The MPO is run by Mr call that's
metropolitan planning
organization transportation.
It would seem to me that the
reason that the largest and
longest standing MTO stated in
Mexico's Albuquerque.
They have their own construction
money their own planning money
they have a.
Transportation improvement
committee made up of Albuquerque
and Bernalillo county people and
whatever so my question is madam
chair worship PO on all this
Sen.
So.
Here Representative as far would
transcribe your we are is
largely left out of a lot of the
plan and efforts and this is
this is the beginning of an
effort that we're we're making
and so I think you're gonna see
more of that specially now that
I'm here senator Morris is
focused on this issue we're
disappointed that were often the
only use a separate simple City
of Albuquerque also which is not
pharmacy this is an incorporated
they don't pay attention there
for us but we use a some of the
techniques of more clear the
triple a officer agent efforts
in the City of Albuquerque on
one by the City of Albuquerque
the completely about the order
that we in the plan efforts even
though technically they're
responsible for all planning
efforts.
Corporate area.
We're not on their radar we have
got to find we start reading San
Juan to the reader this is just
the beginning and yes I actually
spoke to doing cable
procuratorate and so they're
hearing a lot more from so madam
chair what I would recommend is
that a letter come from this
committee that asks the MTO is
to create a special subset.
For the south valley in their
planning efforts and if it comes
from this committee your
signature and explains how the
south valley has been ignored by
the MPO planning process
guarantee you get back on.
Because of it would not only go
to the MTO chairman.
Go to do K. me to go to that
entire transportation oversight
and I guarantee you that there's
going to be so the focus of what
you're gonna have to understand
needs based.
Sempill planning process so
there's needs in the southern
part of Albuquerque I'm sure and
Bernalillo county so madam chair
I would I would move that we
had left a letter be trapped in
with your signature coming from
this committee on the many that
goes to that MPO.
And says we want to subset for
the south valley.
In other words you're ready to
succeed you know you're ready to
say I'm done we're gonna set up
our own MPO I need just ten
thousand more people than MTO
can be set up with fifty
thousand people and I think that
would bring these guys to the
table that's my suggestion with
them for promotion if there's a
we second I'd like to second not
sure what we're in for
presentations not touched a
piece of legislation but I hear
all of you and I'm ready to take
this action today.
Now I think that we can come
from the committee we also
finance I think it's even more
powerful so you know that my
committee first we're gonna go
to Representative Romero
that represents the thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Lundstrom for
years I think it is great but I
would just Sanchez to fortunate
with all of the area legislators
on because you know we have road
infrastructure needs that I've
been working on since I started
as a legislator in have very
little help on in terms of
capital I remember asking
present Lundstrom anytime we got
to money can this go to
supplement our existing
infrastructure.
District because most of it was
his level of our I've talked
about here Representative of the
cruise we talked about revival
but then there are other
projects in the area the Mountie
community that has multiple
brownfield sites
they lack if you've ever driven
in that area they have zero
drainage so pools of water
collecting in the community
center all.
Tracks in hefty bid million
dollars again this year my
capital money want to finishing
that project because it's
difficult when it's me and we
have a Senator in the area to
try to bridge the gap in funding
and it takes a long time that
projects in the works for five
years now probably finish this
here locally because it's low
dollar but certainly a
coordinating with all the
efforts going on getting our
local officials on board with
these projects because they're
also stream for the finances and
be able to help contribute into
these projects because they're
so numerous all over one other
thing is working with the.
Water utility authority one of
the things about the south
valley in the district I
represent in that number you
community is that is the only
water treatment facility in
Albuquerque.
So all of no no I'm just.
I believe.
Please please please all of the
effort with the entire city of
Albuquerque is set to the song
this route.
In.
Yeah so that water once it's
treated flows right into the
river and heads to the slight
problem down
so certainly the the water
utility authority has made great
strides in mitigating their than
smells for years it's built as
as county commissioner
representative of the cruise you
you understood that on you've
worked really well in mitigating
that and then kind of the issues
of you know treated water going
into the river all but those if
issues continue
as well as water projects in the
area of my predecessor
represents a major thank you so
much money to pool to set up
water systems in south valley
however three or four of those
stones went on funded until.
The past few years when myself
and senator yes start putting
money back into that system and
worked with the the water
utility authority to get water
back into that area so then
needs are rates all state that
the south families needs are
very great and that sorry say we
sympathize with the loss of
rural New Mexico because south
valley blacks tons of
infrastructure has widespread
pollution in the area that.
They're very much in need in the
area of those those projects but
with that thank you all for your
efforts thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative
Lundstrom three suggestion.
Thank you letter sure to say
that the legislators from that
area would petition the federal
DOT for designation of a new and
preowned in the absence of you
know in the absence of their
support another and I think it's
appropriate comes from the local
legislators we need to send a
letter but in a letter to me you
guys could passing the bill next
year that basically says we what
we want the south valley removed
from that MPO and set up our
own.
And you can get a unified
planning areas that goes outside
of our the economy maybe I think
you've got some Pueblo stuff
down there that might want to be
part of it that and the supposed
to be all over the county.
Doesn't sound like it chair
representative that's perfect
because half of those.
The county or the blue rose from
the Salisbury area legislators
we serve that area so there are
two levels of all see you guys
can build that makes the DOT
Marcus right now to think that
you're I mean I could see it may
make them nervous because they
work closely with the Sam PO's
but you're not getting the
service and it's not really like
the rest of Albuquerque more
like us.
That's an issue.
Madam.
Garcia you're a matter of fact
we set up with my district and
also level managers both the
more my district school budget
popular left.
So yeah I mean it sounds like we
have a lot of work to do I think
we start with the letter then
gentleman from if you wouldn't
mind sticking around and helping
us Smith sure that would be
awesome we'll start with the
letter and then sounds like
there's work to do in terms of
legislation possibly next year
to.
Thank you madam chair automobile
we're gonna of their after the
twenty day study period will
reach out and reconnect with the
governor's office with the
leadership at DOT the local
store costs as well as the
county government the board of
visiting with Representative
about oceans dealing with these
issues for for many many years
and
And hopefully we can identify
some projects that will increase
and come back next year with up
with a package that that the
chief executive will be
supportive of the when we spend
tens of millions of dollars in
the colonial other areas serving
for your people here to our well
here here's forty thousand
people with one of the lack of
infrastructure visited a lady I
got with representative Garcia
because now we share similar
constituents and I'm is it
without with the neighbors
there's like six houses and
Senator road from their house
and I stood on the road as as
who owns this property right now
this is what I do.
These for five to six other
landlocked and they they have a
mutual easement across each
other's property which they
maintain their burial road on
their private property.
I was freaking out I look
through the trees are C. central
all of our civilization which
was like maybe a hundred yards
away and I was literally like
back in the nineteen forties
with an eight eight eight
hundred yards of of Iraq of
route sixty six so those are
just some examples of the of the
lack of resources instruction
on.
An incredulous right now I can't
believe I'm not sure you want to
see thank you madam chair
Senator by this.
This is.
These is perfect citing we had
our quarterly and he'll be the
day before yesterday which was
Hughes day one of the topics of
conversation was resetting the
alignment and the borders around
urban and rural
areas that will be affected like
children lesson talk about from
a formulate funding perspective
and and so we will be working on
that would be a PO and so would
be encouraging to get involved
in from our representatives on
those a lack of boundaries to
make sure what we get right the
executive director over Planning
were overseeing the FPO and we
work very closely with Steve and
his team make sure that we
support Tyrone.
Your voice does matter we want
to be sure losing us with any
efforts that we can be part of
this the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
they want taxes as talking about
like the premier county water
utility authority and certainly
