Dear freshman.
Rookies before I closed roll
call, please come to the
chambers for your freshman
picture.
Also known as your prom picture.
Wear your corsage.
Freshman, please come to the
chambers. Picture time.
Is almost here.
That includes you,
Representative Bill Hall.
And Representative Doo.
And de la Cruz.
insisting on.
to
That is us.
Rod Montoya.
Rod Montoya who?
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum, please rise for today's
invocation led by the Eskimado
representante from Bernalillo
Representative Miguel Garcia.
As the speaker.
ones.
I offer these words of wisdom.
By Mother Teresa.
As a prayer for the day.
Sanmen.
And then the father of the Son
and the Holy Spirit.
People are often
Unreasonable
Illogical
And self-centered
Forgive them anyway.
If you are kind
People may accuse you of
selfish.
Ulterior motives.
A kind anyway.
If you are successful,
You will win some false friends
and some true enemies.
Succeed
Anyway
But you spend years building.
Someone could destroy overnight.
Build
Anyway,
If you find serenity and
happiness.
They may be jealous.
Be happy anyway.
The good you do today.
People often forget.
Tomorrow
Do good anyway.
Give the world the best you
have.
And then they never be enough.
Give your best
Henry
You see, in the final analysis.
It is between you and God.
It never was between you and
them.
Anyway
With this we pray.
in.
gentleman from Chavez, Eddie and
Otero Representative Henry with
a pledge of allegiance.
lady from Berlio representative
Little with the pledge the New
Mexico flag.
Play
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker.
Good afternoon, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business, announcements
and miscellaneous business
Good afternoon members.
Happy legislative day.
You know what? We're not gonna
do this anymore. Happy
legislative day 57.
How's that? 58, even better, um,
I'm gonna come back to
announcements from the floor,
uh, but at this point we're
gonna go read, um, a message
from the Senate and then we're
gonna go into concurrence on the
tax package and on the budget
and then we'll come back to
announcements to honor our
esteemed guest and to hear from
all of you.
Um, lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
ordered clerk to read messages
from the Senate, Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
taxation and revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill 14 as
amended by the Senate, House
Bill 71 as amended by the House
and further amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments, respectfully
submitted Sherry de Luhansson, a
chief clerk. will be entered.
Gentlemen from Sandoval, San
Juan.
And Rio Riba, Representative
Blente.
Mr. Speaker,
On concurrence.
I moved at the house not concur
with the Senate amendments.
To the to the taxation.
And revenue Committee substitute
to House Bill 14.
The gentleman to explain the
amendments.
Mr. Speaker, and and body the
amendments in the Senate were
were many in the uh Senate
committee, Senate Tax Committee,
they added a number of
initiatives and I'll read off a
few of them, uh, volunteer EMT
firefighter income tax credit,
local journalist employment tax
credit, local news printer tax
credit.
Quantum basility infrastructure
tax credit.
A
Republican initiative uh to
increase taxation on liquor.
As well as a disaster area
gaming tax exemption and just
this morning, Mr. Speaker and
body, they also stripped the way
that we would uh under their
Senate floor amendment stripped
the way in which we would pay
for this, uh, tax package. So
for those reasons, Mr. Speaker,
I again ask that the House not
concur with the Senate
amendments to the committee
substitute on House Bill 14. We
have a motion not to concur with
Senate amendments to House
Taxation and Revenue Committee,
substitute for house with 14,
although
in favor of the motion to not
concur signify by seeing I.
Oppose me.
The eyes have it. The house
fails to concur on Senate
amendments to how taxation and
revenue Committee substitute for
1.
The gentleman from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I moved that
the house uh concur with the
Senate amendments to House bills
2 and 3.
The gentlemen to explain the
amendments. Thank you Speaker,
our Senate colleagues did some,
uh, good work, uh, Mr. Speaker,
with Senate, with House Bill 2
and 3, I want to go through the
good parts of the product, Mr.
Speaker, body, they increased
funding for secondary education
completing the recurring
increase for 7th grade, Mr.
Speaker, and body, uh, we came
in with the LFC only increasing
6th grade.
Mr. Speaker, uh, body, they
worked closely on a number of
other areas, uh, but stayed
within our 6% recurring spending
target. So Mr. Speaker, uh,
we're still at that 6% recurring
spending, um, the increase in
recurring spending for the uh
secondary factor for our, uh,
7th graders here in the state
was offset by uh no longer
needing to do some other
secondary investment.
that we had made in secondary
education, uh, and reworking,
utilizing more, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and body for uh Medicaid from
other state funds in general
funds that had come from us. Mr.
Speaker, body, I'm also pleased
to report to that we're at 30%
reserves in, uh, what the, the
Senate sent back to us, um.
Even as they uh moved uh in some
different areas. However, I want
to report that our housing
investments stayed very strong.
Our investments in public
safety, uh, and, um, other
investments including in uh
water, which we came in at $200
million that stayed, uh,
completely intact, Mr. Speaker.
So, uh, that's a quick summary,
Mr. Speaker of the Senate bills
of House Bill 2 and 3. There is
a debate.
on the motion to concur, the
gentle lady from McKinley
represented Lindstrom. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield, Mr. Speaker, I
gladly yield to the gentle lady
from McKinley. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen. I do have
one question. I like everything
that you've said, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think it's great,
glad that you all could come
come to consensus, but I am the
longest serving member of the
New Mexico legislature
representing McKinley County,
and I would like to know, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen,
gentle lady, for that question,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady in the
Senate, uh, the, uh, majority of
the budget for that district 2
has been allocated to District
one, Mr. Speaker, and body, uh,
that is meant to cover the
attorneys that are uh meant to
be prosecuting crimes, uh, and
looking out for public safety.
Mr. Speaker, body in
consultation both uh watching
the Senate also doing my own.
research, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the case load in
the District 2 is the highest in
the state at one point, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady, well
over 1000 cases per attorney in
large part, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady, uh, because it
appears the uh the current
sitting district attorney has
been unable or unwilling to hire
uh assistant district attorneys.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um,
the intention from the Senate is
moving those funds to District
one, with a district Attorney
Fortner in order to uh perhaps
have a one year period, uh, to
catch up on cases because Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, there's a
number of cases that are going
not prosecuted.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
understand that and I've, I've
heard some of that, uh, but I
want, I want it the body to know
that I think that is the wrong
approach. I'm, I'm gonna vote
for the budget, but I want the
speaker and all the members to
know this is an independent
elected official.
And should have um a different
process occurred that may have
led up to this, I think it'd be
a little easier to swallow, but,
uh, I'm very disappointed that
that approach was taken. I think
you have to protect the autonomy
of these independently elected
officials, um, and use a
different process, but I
appreciate your, uh, explaining
it to me. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
the debate on the motion to
concur, gentlemen from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a
gentleman from Donana, uh,
yield. Mr. Speaker, I gladly
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
So Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, uh, just wondering,
uh.
In order to make the changes
that were made on the Senate
side, uh.
Are we taking a higher
percentage.
Out of reserves than what House
Bill 2 did before it went over
to the Senate.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, we
sent the House Bill 2 and 3 over
to the Senate with 31.2%
reserves, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, that was with the
understanding that, that 1.2%,
well, you know, over $120
million would be allocated on
that side, similar to what we
did on our end, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. And so while the
reserves decreased from 31.2%.
They stayed and are at 30%.
So thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen in dollar figures,
what is the increase amount?
Uh, that came back on House Bill
2 from the Senate. What's the
increased dollar amount?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
I'm joined by Director Sale,
budget director, uh, Amanda
Briding, uh, the recurring
increase, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, is $23 million very
similar to the recurring amount
that we allocated on the house
side.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
All right, we are on a motion to
concur with Senate amendments to
House bills 2 and 3, all those
in favor signified by saying I.
Of the supposed name.
The eyes have it, the house
that's concurred with Senate
amendments to House Bills 2 and
3.
And a lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. It is ordered members,
uh, as was the case earlier with
our house, not
Concurring with Senate
amendments to house taxation and
Revenue Committee substitute to
House Bill 14.
If they don't recede from their
amendments, I will appoint a
committee of 3 to a conference
committee comprised of the
gentleman from Re Riba Sandoval,
San Juan Representative Valente,
the gentle lady from Berlin
representative Parajon and the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan, it is
ordered.
Gentlemen from Berli.
Thank you, as the speaker, uh,
up on the rostrum, but before I
recognize him, Eimmao speaker,
uh,
As tomorrow's speaker at this
juncture in our session.
Um, we have a certificate of
condolences.
As the speaker, um,
For the late Representative Elio
Lealcon.
And I just want to say this to
my speaker that uh
was.
fortitude and courage in this
chamber.
And that I'm honored to uh bring
forth this certificate of
condolences for Representative
Eli Alcor honoring.
And celebrating his life and at
the same time as the speaker.
Offering our condolences to the
family.
Mr. Speaker, um, I'd like to,
uh, recognize the family, and
I'd like for you to hold your
applause until I've introduced
all of them, um.
We have, uh, as the speaker on
the rostrum.
The distinguished wife of Elior,
Darlene Alcon, can you rise, uh,
Darlene, thank you.
Uh
Uh, we also have, uh, a son,
David Arcon.
Can you rise, David? Thank you.
And uh and the spouse of David
Arcon.
Uh, Amanda Kincaid, help me
welcome this great family to
this chamber.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
You said that
also as the speaker uh Anne
Alcon, uh, the daughter of Elio
uh was unable to join us. She's
a uh teacher at one of the, uh,
early childhood centers there in
Milan and also grandkids are
Amaret, uh, Glen and Kanet were
also not able to join us this
morning, Ms. Dema speaker.
And um uh also uh David has a, a
really significant plaque that
he wants to show us, uh,
And this black Ema speaker is a
signature of House Bill 47
signed by the governor and all
the sponsors of House Bill 47,
House 47 was the last piece of
legislation that that
representative Valcorn
introduced and passed them to
law and went on the ballot in
the 2024 November election that
basically similar speaker, um.
Which, uh, deal with uh veterans
property tax exemption.
For different categories of of
of disability as the speaker.
Uh, before that, our property
tax exemption for veterans was
locked in at 100%, but due to
Representative Marcon's piece of
legislation, we were able to,
uh also um do a different
categories of disabilities in
terms of the exemption 90, 80,
70, 60, 50, 40, etc. and Estima
speaker with that, uh, uh, I'm
gonna have the um
The clerk read.
The certificate and as the last
speaker after the certificate is
read, I'd like to, uh, uh, also
have the uh speaker um Estema
speakeran acknowledge some of
the members of the body that
would like to reflect on
accons uh.
Uh, life and tenure in this
chamber.
Uh, Madam Clark,
Will you please uh read the
certificate.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico
remembers Elio Lee Alcon.
Whereas on January 13, 2025, the
world lost representative Elio
Lee Alcon.
And whereas Elio leaves behind
his traditional native New
Mexican Hispanic family.
Darlene, his wife of 50 years
too, Elio every day with Darlene
was like being on their
honeymoon.
Son David and his wife Amanda
Elio's election victories were
due in large part to David's
coordination and know-how in
running political campaigns.
And daughter Annette.
Who was spoiled silly by Elio
for being the baby of the
family.
And whereas life was not fair to
Elio and Darle, whose two oldest
sons, John and Paul, were taken
by God in the prime of their
lives, dying 7 years apart, John
at age 33 and Paul at age 26.
And whereas God gave Elio and
Darlene 3 earthly angels.
Their grandchildren Amaret
Paul's daughter, aged 25, a
prison guard at the Women's
Correctional Facility and
grants.
And Colette Garcia Annette's
daughter, aged 19, to whom Elio
was a father figure.
Collette is in her first year of
college with the goal of
becoming a forensic investigator
for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
And he said Alyo's dream was to
see her graduate.
Right.
From the Federal Bureau of
Investigation Academy in
Quantico, Virginia, and great
grandson Quinn, Emirate's son,
aged 9, who is still trying to
grasp why Grandpa, great Grandpa
has not picked him up for their
weekly Walmart shopping spree.
And whereas Elio was born on
January 28, 1950 in Pueblo,
Colorado.
And whereas when Ely was 4, his
parents abruptly passed away,
and his grandfather Fermin Alcon
of Lucero near Mora took in the
mococito.
And whereas from that time on,
Elyo was immersed in the values,
morals, customs, and traditions
of living in a traditional
land-based New Mexican Chicano
community.
And whereas Elio had not even
learned to tie his shoelaces
when Grandpa Fermine and his and
his participate and had him
participating.
In the annual Limpia de la
Secchia, the centuries old
communal custom of cleaning out
the assea with its
Parentes and.
And pin
oh pion in order to usher in the
season's first irrigation to the
community's crops, orchards,
gardens, and pastures.
And whereas Elio graduated from
More High School in 1967, and
David recalls that Elio was the
top of his class.
And whereas Elio's favorite
saying was you can take the kid
out of Mora, but you can't take
the mora out of the kid.
And he would mention this during
every legislative session in
debates and committee
discussions.
And whereas in 1968, Elio was
drafted into the United States
Army and went off to fight in
the jungles of Vietnam serving
as a combat medic.
And whereas Elio was historic at
his post witnessing the uh the
horrors of war and the
mutilation and destruction of
the human body going above and
beyond the call of duty to
attend his wounded wounded or
dying comrades.
And whereas Elio's service and
bravery in Vietnam went
unacknowledged for 50 years
until United States Senator
Martin.
Excuse me, Heinrich saw fit to
present Elio with a Bronze Star
medal for bravery and valor in
combat.
The United States Army
Commendation Medal, the United
States Army Good Conduct Medal
in the United States Army
Veterans Service Medal with 3
bronze stars.
And whereas soon after returning
to New Mexico from Vietnam and
the sale briefly attended New
Mexico Highlands University,
then worked as a bartender in
the Rainesville community in the
Mora Valley.
And whereas in 1974, Elio and
Darlene tied the knot at Saint
Gertrude, the great Catholic
Church in Mora and in 2024 they
celebrated their 50th wedding
anniversary.
And whereas in 1975 Elio and
Darlene moved to Santa Fe, where
Elio worked as a prison guard at
the Penitentiary of New Mexico.
And whereas Elio and Darlene
later moved to Milan, where Elio
was immediately hired as a minor
at the Kerrie uranium mine in
the vicinity vicinity of San
Mateo just north of Milan.
And whereas Ely worked at the
mine for 9 years before being
laid off as Kerr McGee faced
national scrutiny for blatant
contamination at its work sites
and facilities.
And whereas while working in the
mine, Elio achieved the rank of
shop steward for the oil,
chemical, and atomic Workers
International Union, handling
grievances, resolving conflicts
between employees and management
and monitoring employer actions
to ensure conformity with the
labor laws and the unions'
collective bargaining agreement.
And whereas Elio's experience as
a shop steward provided a useful
base of knowledge when he was
appointed chair of the House
Labor's veterans and Military
Affairs Committee in 2019.
And whereas after leaving Kerr
McGee, Eliseo went to work as a
car salesman for Corley's Auto
sales and grants.
A car dealership.
Headed by one of New Mexico's
best known African American
entrepreneurs at Corley.
And whereas after his successful
time at Corley's Auto sales.
Elio was elected municipal judge
for the town of Milan, serving
for 4 years.
And whereas Alio then served 4
years as a magistrate judge for
Cibala County.
And whereas during his judicial
tenure, Elio's stern yet
compassionate decisions and
sentences helped turn around the
lives of many young adults who
otherwise may have gone down the
dark road of lawlessness.
And whereas in 2008, Eliseo was
elected state representative for
District 6, and he served
valiantly until December 2024.
And whereas in Elio's first year
as a representative, he was
assigned to the House business
and Industry Committee and House
Judiciary Committee.
And he also chose to be on his 3
favorite interim committees.
The Indian Affairs Committee,
land grant committee and
military and Veterans Affairs
Committee, serving on the
interim committees throughout
his sixteen-year tenure.
Whereas from 2013 to 2018, Elyo
served as the chair of the
Consumer and Public Affairs
Committee.
And whereas during Ely's later
years as chair, he fought to
defuse the onslaught of attacks
from national extremist
organizations determined to
dismantle the reproductive
rights of New Mexico's women in
continuing the committee's
tradition.
Of upholding and expanding
reproductive rights.
And whereas in 2019, Elia was
appointed.
A chair of the House Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee and in his first year,
he laid the foundation for the
streamlining and passage of the
historic state minimum wage
increase from $7.50 per hour to
$12 per hour.
And whereas the six-hour debate
over the issue did not sway Elio
from the three fundamental
elements of the bill, holding
strong to $12 per hour.
Trying the index.
Tying the index to inflation and
applying the state minimum wage
to tipped employees.
And whereas in his work as a
representative.
Elio worked tirelessly.
To to enrich the lives of New
Mexican children and sponsored
legislation to better the lives
of military members and veterans
and their families.
Including the November 2024
ballot measure to expand the
property tax exemption to
veterans with categorized
disabilities of less than 100%.
And whereas Elio was not your
typical liberal Democrat, but a
very humble traditional
land-based and rural Chicano
progressive.
Honed by the values, beliefs,
and customs and traditions of
his Hispanic culture.
And whereas Alio was one of the
staunchest advocates for the
cultural preservation and
enhancement of the native New
Mexican land-based Spanish land
grant.
And aseia communities and was
just as steadfast in upholding
the sovereign rights of the
indigenous nations, tribes, and
pueblos.
And whereas Alyo always
demonstrated a patient and
respectful demeanor, but there
was one circumstance where he
could be very obnoxious.
Whenever a bill came up, whether
sponsored by a Democrat or a
Republican if at least they all
felt it had some rough edges and
was not fully cooked.
He would weed out those
deficiencies in an in your face
style debate.
Hammering away sometimes for an
hour or more, a tactic that made
even more hilarious when another
obnoxious debater from Wata
County Representative Thomas
Garcia we're joined in this
comedy of errors debate leading
Representative Miguel P. Garcia
to refer to this tag team as the
obnoxious caucus.
And whereas fortunately for
Eliio, about 75% of the bills
attacked by the obnoxious caucus
failed to pass in the House of
Representatives or resulted in
Speaker Ben Luhan asking the
traumatized sponsor to pull the
bill from 3rd reading and send
it back to committee for brain
surgery.
And whereas Alyo's favorite
saying, you can take the kid out
of Mora, but you can't take the
Mora out of the kid, spoke to
the cultural integrity of his
being, his existence, and his
person, and those who knew him
will always remember Elio for
that saying.
And for being a trusted, caring
and dedicated friend.
And whereas all who knew Eliel
will remember him most for being
a loving, dedicated, caring, and
committed father to his kids.
For being a loving, dedicated,
caring, and committed grandpa
and great grandpa.
And for being a loving,
dedicated, caring, and committed
24/7 beacon to Darlene.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
condolence be extended to the
family and friends of Elio
Leacon.
A loving and devoted New Mexican
and that his colleagues in the
New Mexico House of
Representatives hereby joined
together to stand with his
family during these most
difficult times to celebrate his
valiant life as a true servant
of the people of New Mexico.
Signed and sealed at the Capitol
in the city of Santa Fe.
Gent lady from Berlio
Representative Real Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
And um thank you to.
Darlene, David, and Amanda.
And all of the family. I had the
um.
The pleasure.
In honor of um knowing the
family.
And as I have recounted.
On many occasions recently far
too many than I.
Wish to recount um.
My relationship with um Cheal
Cohen my chair Alcon.
Dates all the way back to uh
when I first met.
Cheeralcon as a magistrate judge
and um.
In Milan and Grants and Cibola
County when I was.
Um
Recruited to work as economic
development director for the
counties.
And uh
I met a lot of people.
And um the first few months that
I was there.
But I tell the story because
it's very reflective of who my
chair Alcon was.
I met a lot of individuals and
he was the only individual.
That said,
That whatever I needed.
Whenever I needed it.
That he was there to assist me
and not to be afraid.
To ask for help.
Mr. Speaker, and that said a lot
about his character because um
we worked together um there the
years that I was in service, uh,
to those counties.
But the very significant point
that I want to make about his
role as magistrate judge.
Was that um
My son
Uh, went to high school there.
And
I don't know how many of you
understand what goes on in a
small rural high school.
It's all about sports.
And sports and sports.
But sports is associated with
good grades and good behavior.
And too often, um, the young
people get sidetracked and my
son and his friends got
sidetracked.
And lo and behold, Mr. Speaker,
they were called in.
Um, to the courts.
And they had to appear before.
Judge Alon Alcon.
The parents were notified.
However, during their conference
with Judge Alcon we were not
allowed in.
We were kept out of.
The room. In fact, we were asked
to wait outside.
It was a very long conversation
he had with them.
They came out.
And I can tell you Mr. Speaker
and my colleagues.
That um
They were the best behaved young
men.
For the rest of their few years
in that high school.
And all I know is that they did
not want to face Judge Alcons.
Lectures
Any more and so amongst
themselves they they kept each
other's backs.
I tell that story because many
of you associated me with my
chair. I've gone here in the
legislature.
But our life spanned uh a great.
I have 20 something years of a
relationship.
When I was elected, um.
I was assigned.
Uh, appointed to vice chair of
consumer and public affairs.
And Cheracon was the chair.
So that began our relationship
in 2013, Mr. Speaker, as chair
and vice chair.
We remained chair and vice
chair.
Until his passing.
I moved on with him, uh, on this
what he called, he called me and
said, Have you heard that
there're creating a new
committee.
And he gave me the name of the
committee and he says.
How do you feel about
Being the vice chair of that
committee with me.
And I let him call the shots. I
said, you know, it's, it's
entirely up to you. It sounds
like a really good committee
labor veterans and military
affairs and Mr. Speaker, we have
a whole lot more in common, the
two of us because we came from
labor veterans and military
affairs background.
I had great admiration for
Chealcon for my chair Alcon.
Um, because my father being a
combat veteran.
Told me many, many times that
the bravest.
Individuals.
On the front lines were not.
Necessarily engaged in combat.
But we're the brave medics?
that put their lives.
First and foremost on the line.
In order to take care of those
that were wounded or those that
were dying even if it meant
holding their hand.
Patting their heads.
For just a few minutes before
they passed or taking messages
from them, so for me.
Sitting alongside my chair
Alcon.
It was an honor, a privilege.
And I had a great deal of
respect for him.
Not just because.
Of what my father taught me to
respect in terms of medics.
But because he demonstrated.
That every day in his life.
He truly cared for everyone.
And he showed that care, Mr.
Speaker.
On a regular basis to everybody
he would come down this aisle.
Giving us all the knuckle.
The handshake
And that big old smile.
So, um, Mr. Speaker, and, and,
um.
And family.
Darlene, David, and Amanda.
I remain yours forever.
Um
Your friend, your ally, your
family.
And I wanna thank you for
sharing.
Um
I'll go on with all of us.
Uh, for opening up your home.
For your hospitality always.
We visited he was his home was
his pride and joy all of his.
Christmas decorations during the
holidays and then all of that
the playground that he set up
for his children and
grandchildren.
Um, thank you.
Thank you and thank you.
It has been an honor.
A great honor of mine in my
lifetime and I will do
everything that I can to
continue to honor my chair Alcon
as I continue to serve now in my
capacity.
As chair
Of the house labor veterans and
military affairs. I'm not doing
his shoes because I cannot fill
his boots.
But I certainly can't stand.
And uphold what he stood for.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you, Familia Alcon.
There's further
Debate further announcement,
further commemoration of our
esteemed colleague
Representative Alcon, Chairman
Alcon. I'll go next to the
gentleman from Grant, Hidalgo
and Catrin, Representative
Terasas. Thank you Mr. Speaker.
I first want to start with uh
giving my condolences to the
family again. I, I wanna say
that uh today was a great day,
uh, I was there and happy to be
there at the governor's office
when we saw the actual signing
of the two bills.
And when the governor asked if
we'd like to see something.
I first and foremost 1st 1st
said we need to uh.
Recognize
Representative Alcon for all his
work.
Um, I think he, he deserves that
he worked very, very hard to uh.
To get this accomplished so I, I
wanted to make sure we knew
that, but you know, um.
Mr. Speaker, those park passes,
the veterans property tax
exemptions will definitely help
many, many, many veterans
throughout New Mexico and uh.
I just, I think that's great
that they'll have a place of
refuge in our parks.
And um
I think it's great to see our
legislators come together and
work on that.
Um, on another note, Mr.
Speaker, it was um you know in
that in in that committee, uh,
the chairman and I sometimes.
would have some colorful
debates.
And he would sometimes even roll
his eyes at what I had to say,
Mr. Speaker.
Um, but we became when as the
more sessions we we worked
through.
We actually became friends and
um we would, we would, I'd sit
in his office beforehand and we,
we had had a conversation that
basically.
He knew I had, I wanted to say
what I needed to say and he'd
say what he needed to say, but I
would, I would have before
before committee we would sit
there and uh I get one of the,
the, he always had fruit there
so eat a banana or or a.
An apple or an orange and we
talk about his grandkids.
Talk about his his grandkids
being in soccer. He had pictures
of his kids there and then he
was he was uh my Uber, believe
it or not, when we'd go to an
interim for MFA we'd have our
meetings in in Albuquerque.
And he would be in my Uber. He'd
give me a ride back to the
airport because I fly in and fly
out.
And um we talk about cars. We
talk about Lincoln's elect Fords
all the way and so um it was
neat to I'm glad that I was a
part of that of the military and
veterans affairs Committee. I'm
glad to have known him, um, his
other big word that he used when
you were going to present a bill
is welcome to the hot seat and
so I'll remember that Mr.
Speaker. May God bless him. I, I
want to thank um Mrs. Alcon.
I found out he was, he was
leading the legislature, um, for
his illness.
Um, she was gracious enough. I
called.
Uh, and, um, we had a nice
conversation.
Uh, shortly after that, so I was
very honored to be able to talk
to him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
for this, the, the moment to
speak. Thank you.
lady from Ailly represented.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I
also wanted to to extend my con
condolences to the family, Mr.
Speaker and members, um, just
wanted to say a few things that
uh representative Alcon
represented the small community
I grew up in and, and that's the
village of Milan and there's a
couple of things about him that
maybe the body doesn't know he
and his wife were very active
members along with my mother the
same of Saint Vivian's Catholic
Church.
As a matter of fact, I know that
they said a pew apart, uh,
Darlene and my mother, um, but
what's interesting is I don't
know that everybody knows that
Lee was the bingo caller when
we'd have the uh bazaars and
fundraisers. Lee was the guy
that would always call the
bingo.
And the rest of us were doing
all kinds of other things to, to
raise money, um, I also, uh, got
to experience because uh my
nephews and his grandkids all
went to are still going to
Grant's High, I think it was a
year ago or maybe 2 that his
granddaughter was elected
homecoming queen.
And you should have seen the
smile on his face.
You could not see a prouder
person than when his uh
granddaughter was elected
homecoming queen for the Grant's
pirates.
So there's um a couple of things
that are outside of the New
Mexico legislature when you
really get to know the family
and you get to know um a person.
So I just want to to let all of
you know that he had a lot of
fun in his life also.
You know, there are some things
about the military that aren't
necessarily pleasant and we all
recognize that and we and we
thank him for his work, but he
had a lot of fun as a bingo
caller. He had a lot of fun
going to Grant's Pirate games
and I think it was most proud of
that granddaughter because she's
very successful kid. I think she
graduated Val Victorian of that
class. So that's a big deal.
So welcome and Darlene, glad to
see you and might see you next
Sunday. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady from Berlin, Senator
Chavez.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, I do
want to offer my deepest
condolences to the family.
I want you all to know.
That I am thankful for you
letting you sharing him with us
and I want you to know that he
is very deeply missed.
I first met Realcon in 2009 when
we were both first elected.
Uh, we didn't serve on any
committees.
Um, but I do remember the time
that he voted against one of my
bills and I was like, why did
you do that?
Um, and he had a good reason.
Um, I also
When I came back, um, this time
around, I had the honor of
serving with him on the labor
committee.
And I got to know him a little
bit more, um, since I did serve
on that committee with him and I
found him to be uh a humble,
unassuming man.
Who cared very deeply for his
community and cared about the
legislation that was coming
through that committee and
wanted to make sure that it was
the best legislation possible
and that it would help the
people of New Mexico and I think
he really did succeed in that.
When I went to visit with um
Representative Garcia, um.
Representative Falcon shortly
before he passed.
I learned a little bit more
about him.
I learned how very proud he was
of his family.
I learned that he had a very
work career and also a community
career, but I was especially
proud to learn about his
involvement with OCA, the union
that represented the miners
where he worked and was
especially proud to know that he
was a union steward.
I
I believe that Representative
Alcon is looking down on all of
us.
And that he is very proud of his
family.
Of his grandchildren especially.
And he will always be in our
hearts, and I want again, once
again thank you for sharing him
with us and for the joy that he
brought us and for the joy that
he brought all of you as well.
Thank you.
The leader from Achilles and
Juan Presentative Johnson.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I too would like to offer my
deepest condolences.
I said I didn't want a blubber.
But once upon a time.
I had a good neighbor to the
east of me from Galdo.
He was from Milan.
Representative Elkhon and I, we
always acknowledged each other
as good neighbors.
And once upon a time in this
house.
I would stop
visit him on my way to my desk.
And we would talk about the day.
Was it about a bill?
Or I would seek his advice.
Or just talk about family and
back home.
And most of the time he made me
laugh.
And other times he made me
ponder about the purpose.
Of our duty as legislators.
And through my tenure.
I don't think he missed one
single Indian Affairs Committee
meeting.
Either at Hickoryia, Muscaleo,
Navajo or any of the pueblos.
He was very well respected in
those communities.
As a representative and as a
veteran.
Are now Navajo leadership.
are Navajo man.
They gave him a Navajo name.
No.
And he's so proudly answered to
his name.
It means little Mexican with a
big heart.
And he loved my mom's lamb and
vegetable stew.
When he could, he requested that
meal.
And so I miss.
Representative Alone, my good
friend, my good neighbor, my
good mentor.
He's the one who suggested I
should serve on labor veterans
and military affairs Committee.
He said, you know, you have a
lot of veterans.
And you're in Navajo
communities.
And so I serve in that committee
now.
And so,
Representative O Conn.
is resting in peace.
Where the city is made of gold.
And the roses never fade.
Thank you.
And a lady from Ri Riba San
Juan.
Rerebus on the Santa Fe to
represent Vrera.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I
too.
Rise to recognize really what a
great, great talent we had in
this house and how much he is
deeply missed.
And although Darlene and David
and Amanda, although I don't
know you well. I feel like I do
because on land grant
committees, we would, I would
always hook up with um Elicio
because he would teach me so
much and he had such great
stories. He is kind of one of
the best storytellers I've ever
known, and you have to know that
about him, and he was so much
fun and I remember, I remember
we would, we would go on these
roads together in land.
committees and I'd always hook
up with the judge, as we called
him. I'd always hook up with the
judge because not only was he a
really great legislator. He was
kind of a botanist. I mean, I
mean, he really knew every
single plant on the side of the
road and we'd walk along these
trails on land grant committees
and he'd he'd point out this
plant and he knew the Spanish
name, the English name he also
knew the scientific name of this
plant and we'd be walking along
and I'd see what I thought was a
dead.
branch, you know, and he'd say,
I need a little good choke
cherry tree like this, and he
always carried a bucket and uh a
pitcher of water and uh another
box because he would find all
these plants that he wanted to
see if he could grow in his own
garden. I can hardly wait to see
that someday, and he would talk
about that and then he would
talk about stories about his
family, and I remember this
story he told me when he was 12
years old. He loved his
grandfather. His grandfather
taught him so much.
And he said, Susan, when I was
12 years old, my grandfather
gave me 20 acres and said this
is yours to farm.
Go at it. This is what you need
to do and he said he spent that
whole summer farming 20 acres
and at the end of that summer in
Milan they got an old pickup
truck. He said it could barely
work and they loaded all the
fruits and vegetables they got
every box they could, they
loaded it all up and then they
took all of that produce around
every family in Milan.
That's what he did. That was his
life. It was a life of constant
service. It was pretty amazing
and I want to tell you as a
legislator and as a freshman
legislator, he really taught me
an important lesson. we were
debating a census bill and we,
you know, needed a good census
in uh in uh 1990 and we're all
working on it and, and I had
worked on a census committee and
so I stood up and I was talking
about, you know, how, how they
work and what we needed to do.
yada yada yada and of course the
debate went on for half an hour,
and he came up to me after that
session.
And I'd like to share this with
all my freshman colleagues in
the house, and he said, did you
think you did a pretty good job
on that? I said, yeah, I did. I
thought, I thought people needed
to know a lot, he said, uh,
well, did you think, uh,
everybody was listening? I said,
yeah, I thought everybody was
participating. I thought it was
a pretty good a pretty good
session, he said, well, it
wasn't.
He said, watch the clock, the
most precious thing we have.
In this body is time.
And you just took a half an hour
that we didn't need.
He said, if you were to watch
that clock, you would have seen
that nobody pressed a button
until you got up and started
talking.
He said you had a clear shot to
a vote and you didn't take it. I
said, oh, I didn't know that. He
said, yeah, well now you know.
So, he was such a valuable
colleague in that way, and I
loved him for it. Everybody
loved him. Thank you for sharing
him with us. He is well loved
and well missed. Thank you.
Members take note of that one.
And on that note, general leader
from Santa Fe of Romero.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
You all right? All right, um.
You know, uh, Representative
Alcon was my, is my primo, um,
he let me know that my very
first day in the chamber with my
grandmother who was with me that
day, and he was like, yeah, no,
we're related, and he knew right
away about our family in Moira
that we got to share about, you
know, all of our ancestral lands
and, you know, my family, uh, I
grew up going to Mora every
summer, um, with, with my big
boisterous family which.
We know very, very well as big
and boisterous and loud and love
being out in Mora playing in, in
the gorgeous lands out there,
um, but he was immediately just
took me under his wing as, you
know, his liberal prima from
Santa Fe. He was so funny to me
all the time, telling me how to
do things um and how not to do
things which I still hear and um
my very first poker game, Mr.
Speaker, um, was in the lounge
with him. We were playing for
Sugar.
packets and um he won, so we'll
let him have it, but, uh, you
know, uh, my primo, um.
And our family has had such a
brilliant legacy in in the Mora
area and for everything that um
that he gave and gave his heart
and his life to our family
really cherishes and continues
to cherish in in Santa Fe and
beyond, right, our big, big
family, um, and he treated
everyone like family, truly, not
just me, but everybody, um, and
that was just such a special
bond that we got to have even
though I didn't know my long
lost primo until I got here, um,
we know that.
in his memory all that he gave
and will continue to give in his
legacy, we will continue to
cherish and I love to see you
all. It's great to see me, me,
Familia here. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
lady from Santa Fe Blujan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um.
I want to extend my condolences
to the family.
And just um reflect on.
You're our um representative
Alcon on you a little sad.
But
He's always said you always, you
will always remember how people
treat you and so.
He always treated me with the
utmost respect and kindness.
And
sat right here behind me and
I always watched out for him and
he watched out for me because I
Check on him and say.
How much sugar have you had
today?
And we wanted to put that that
candy away or not, maybe not
take that and um.
It's just a little
Check in with him and my first
memory of him, Mr. Speaker, was
when I very first started in
2020.
And where everything was online
and I went to my first um
Online uh committee and he
showed up and he's he's at home
and he had his, his little
grandson with him and he
conducted himself just like, you
know, a professional with his
with his little grandson there
and so proud of him and, and
that just.
Showed me what um.
And who he was about.
And then um my last memory of
him was this this summer and we
were um.
We're at a conference and um
I was running around and, and
doing a lot of things and
Um,
Had to meet with the with
different people and whatnot,
and I hadn't um I was having a
terrible headache, I think a
migraine, and he
He called me over to the table.
He was sitting out with David
and he just said, come over here
and I said,
He's like, you haven't eaten
anything, and he cut his
breakfast sandwich and he shared
it with me and
Um, I was like, how did you
know? Like he didn't say
anything, he just
Let me sit down and he cut his
sandwich and he gave me
something and that was exactly
what I needed to because I
needed to take some medicine
myself and I just
It was just he was just a
It was just just a sweet and
wonderful man and
And
One thing I read today when we
were with the governor as a
veteran um.
She remembered him and she
brought him to the meeting with
us in her the card today because
she wanted.
Uh, Dorothy Seaton, uh, was our
veteran today who brought with
her um to the governor's office,
a picture of of representative
Alcon to say he's here with us,
he's ever present with us and
Well always be respected and she
in the back of the card, um.
It read that he said miss me.
But let me go and it was a whole
poem, but we're gonna miss him.
We're gonna let him go.
But we're never going to forget
him. and thank you for sharing
him with us all these, all these
years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
The lady from Berlin
representativegurola.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um, the
sorescom is condolencia tambien
uh, rep Charles Kong was a
mentor. He welcomed me from day
one to the committee. I was very
proud to serve there and I look
up to him and question when I
have any doubts in any bills
that I was learning was a roller
coaster that first year and the
first day that I walked into the
committee, he talked to me in
Spanish he even questioned if we
could have a comedian in
Spanish.
was really making me feel at
home and his support went beyond
the committee and I think um
everybody in this house could
look up to him as a person with
integrity, he will not um in the
way that I saw him, he will
know, uh, go against whatever he
believe in his votes, even if he
was against most of the people
in this place.
Um, it was a great example to
follow and I'm very grateful for
you to have shared him his life
with us. Thank you.
And it's an honor for me to be
in this place where I will
always remember he was sitting
here for my 1st 2 years. Thank
you folks, if you want to speak,
please raise your mic because
I'm on purpose going to the lady
from uh District 6 last because
that is the seat she took over,
um, so if you guys can get my
attention first, otherwise she's
been standing a long time,
gentle lady from Berlin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and um.
It's hard, it's hard. I sat next
to him for 2 years.
Um
I still remember the day that I
met him.
That is sad.
And we laughed.
And I opened my drawer, my side
drawer, because I keep food and
I keep my food down here, guys,
and uh he was making fun of my
food. He was like, well, we know
where to go if we need food and
um.
You know, sitting next to him
for 2 years, um, I felt like he
took me under his wing.
Um, I felt like he was a mentor.
Um, he allowed me to, uh, sign
on to his veterans bill because
I told him about my, my father.
And about my my ex-husband's
story in the military.
Um
But one of the things that we
talked about was uh Chimoyo
because my grandfather and my
grandma lived up there and he
said, you know, I think we're
related, so representative uh
Romero, I think everybody from
Northern New Mexico is related,
but he actually followed some of
the bloodline, um, and convinced
me that we were related, um.
And I went home and told my mom
about it and.
The other thing that really was
funny was when I first got here,
he kept telling me to push that
button on our little box over
here, and I said Icon.
That thing doesn't work.
It's not, you know, I thought he
was joking actually and he would
tell me sign inborego sign in.
And I told him that thing
doesn't work. And he said, no, I
said, it's really outdated,
isn't it? And he says, no,
that's what you do, you push
that button.
Anyway, um,
So I learned from him a lot of,
a lot of little intricacies
about um decorum.
In, in the house, um.
I also wanted to share with you
guys that um.
And this was really hard for me
because
He was on the housing.
Committee in the interim. He was
our vice chair and um.
He was great. I mean, he came to
every meeting and he drove that
beautiful truck and he parked
very proudly in his truck.
Um
you know, helped, um, run that
meeting.
But what was interesting is
there was a time when I noticed
that he was kind of falling
asleep at the meeting and I kind
of nudged him. I said, oh come
on, you know.
And he
kind of woke up a little bit.
But in December,
I had heard that he was ill, so
I called him.
And this was in December.
Right before Christmas.
I guess it was early December,
and he answered the phone and I
could tell in his voice that he
wasn't gonna be around for a
while.
He, but he still answered the
phone and he still spoke to me.
And
When I hung up.
There was something that I just
knew.
You know, the
Something was really, really
wrong.
Um, I'm really sorry that I
wasn't able to attend the
funeral.
I really wanted to.
But, but I do remember about
him.
He was, he was a very humble.
Uh, very dignified man.
He was very proud of being a
judge.
That's what he talked, we talked
about his when he was a judge.
He kind of reminded me a little
bit of my father.
In that
He wasn't a man of many words.
But when he did speak, everyone
listened.
And I will tell you that I just
hope that right now he's flying
with the angels and um God bless
you all for being here today.
gentle lady from Sibula
McKinley, the gentle lady from
District 6, Representative
Garcia.
I can't
thank you Mr. Speaker and uh
members of uh.
The House chamber here.
And darlene David Amanda.
You're here today as you listen
to.
His colleagues speaking of what
they knew of him.
I too would like to remember him
and honor him because he was
very respectful and was a
respectful member of this of
this house for for a long time.
I started working with, uh, Mr.
Ecom, our representative Alone.
Uh, when he first ran for this
position and he won.
And I lost
Mm
But ever since then we started
working together. We worked
together on uh.
Capital outlay.
Are we work together, uh, on
getting him to be re-elected.
My family, my friends, we all
got together every election,
whether it was primary or
general election, I don't know
how many 5 breads we flipped.
And make Navajo tacos, so he
could get reelected and lately
we call it the red dog.
We made its white bread with hot
dogs and chili beans in between,
so that's what we did for him
and he got reelected every time
and not just because, uh, people
really came to the election just
to get food but because they
knew him.
He did a lot of things for
District 6, there's 8 chapters
that are under district 6 and uh
he visit every chapter.
And one of the things that I
know of him was, as you talk
about, he always had food with
him, not for himself to these
long meetings if you ever been
to a chapter meetings, they're
like 678 hours long.
We almost made that the other
day here, but, uh, Eastern
Agency council meeting he always
came with something, use the
pastry as we sit there, drink
coffee and have pastry, and he
would give his report, but he
didn't leave he would sit there
and listen to the concern of the
constituents and he did a lot
and we sincerely appreciate that
he truly cared for the people
that he represented whether it
was uh Native Americans are not.
Native Americans, but he was out
there he didn't look at who is
who and what was what, but he
made sure that everybody uh
could benefit from what he was
doing and how he worked, uh, the
bills up here and the capital
outlays, we all benefited from
that and we sincerely appreciate
that and by him doing that
coming closer to us and being
part of us, he became family to
many of us out there we could.
Speak to him and uh talk with
him and he would truly listened
to us and that's how he was with
with us and we were truly miss
him for, uh, how he conduct
himself and, and it's very rare
to see that uh some uh a
representative constantly
checking on you and seeing what
your needs are and where uh
where you're at with it and I uh
we sincerely appreciate that.
And then, um,
Ever since saw he saw I noticed
that there are still bills that
are in the process here that he
had introduced and that makes it
so much easier for me to say
this one is gonna go through
this one we need to make sure
that it's being used out there
because he already laid the
groundwork and uh so that's all
I have to do, uh, currently
right now is to see his work
continue and, and when those are
completed, then uh then it means
that you'll be.
Up to me to start, uh, what he
had left behind for for all of
us and I sincerely appreciate uh
the fact that he's helped so
many people, not only uh out in
District 6, but everywhere else
and especially to his colleagues
how much they've learned from
him. He was a very unselfish,
uh, person. He's a very kind. He
was, uh, very helpful and uh.
And treat you like you were his
best friends and that's what we
were to him, so, uh, today, uh,
sincerely, uh, from the bottom
of my heart say thank you to the
family for sharing him for being
there with him. I remember
Darlene always being there and
she would be there handing me
posters of him. In fact, we
still have
a huge poster sitting in our
community yet. Um, I'm not
going.
Take it down until I feel like,
OK, I guess I better put my
poster up there now, but uh we
learned to love him and because
he in turn cared and loved us.
Thank you.
Thank you. So I, I'd like to add
just a couple of words, um.
Not too many though, because I
think you all have stated it all
very well, but
Um, Alcon and I were good
buddies, and I don't think we
ever had a legitimately serious
conversation because he was
always one joke after the other,
so I'm gonna honor him with um,
not even stories because I
shouldn't tell the full story,
but I will tell you that uh we
may, we may or may not have uh
dipped on the floor of the
house, uh, some chewing tobacco
every once in a while, um.
Statute of limitations has run,
so, uh, we may or may not have
drank a little moonshine at some
point somewhere.
Perhaps in the building, um.
There were a couple of years
when his capital that way was
completely vetoed by by the
prior governor, I think it was 2
years in a row. He did not get
any capital outlay because he
got all vetoed.
Um, and then probably one of my
favorite memories, although it
costs a little havoc on the
floor was we were on the floor,
I think it was last year, and we
were here till like 3 in the
morning.
And then he got on the mic
during an announcements and
Miscellaneous and announced that
the labor veterans Moss
Committee would meet 15 minutes
after the floor session.
Which was incredibly, incredibly
crazy, um, but that's, uh, that
I think defined his spirit, a
fighter through and through.
Sense of humor, like I said,
never, never a serious
conversation that I can
remember, uh, even when things
got tough, there was always some
sort of joke.
Somewhere that either of us
would, would, would break out
and make each other laugh, um,
and even though he was a lot
older than me, um, in a lot
shorter than me.
One time I rolled into the house
with a brand new suit from
Dillard's.
And I look over there.
And there's a corn in the exact
same suit.
So there's a picture somewhere,
I'll try to find it and maybe
give it to the family, uh, it
was like that movie twins,
remember? Schwarzenegger and
then Danny DeVito.
Uh, with that, um, I'll go back
to you gentlemen from Leo to to
wrap us up but thank you to to
Amanda, David, and Darlene,
thank you for sharing.
Eliso Alcorn with the people of
the city of New Mexico.
Thank you, as the speaker.
Estima speaker, uh.
This brings a conclusion to the
celebration of life of one of
our courageous, uh, pillars of
42 encouraged in this chamber.
And I just want to state that uh
This, uh, event, uh, we just
experienced is a testimony to
the fact that um Ely always
brought out the best in people.
As was exemplified by a lot of
our colleagues.
And I want to say to the family
that um
This is event uh.
Darlene and David and uh Amanda
is medicine.
To you
To help heal the hurt that
you're still experiencing to
this day.
So I hope that medicine was
given in thousands of dosages.
To you all this day. God bless
you all. Gras this speaker,
ladies and gentlemen in the
house. Thank you and
Farewell to our esteemed brother
Elio Alcon.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, and if we go to
that or business committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 31 as
amended has had it under
consideration report in with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended, respectfully
submitted Nathan's small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.or
report for Senate Bill 31 as
amended. All those in favor
signified by say 9.
who's name, the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate and Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Conservation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33
has had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass respectfully
submitted. Nathan Small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Conservation.
For me some super Center Bill 33
of those in favor of C5 but say
9.
' s name, the IAA report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 92 has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan's here. Mr.
Speaker, adoption favorable
report for Senate Bill 92. All
those in favor, Senator say 9.
Bo's name, the SAA committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 133 as
amended has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Nathan
Small chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption for Senate Bill 133 as
amended. All those in favor 859.
Bosnia, the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to him has
been referred Senate Bill 170 as
amended has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Nathan's
small chair. Mr.
Speaker, adoption report for
Senate Bill 170 as amended. All
those in favor of 59.
Po's name. Yes, I have a
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your appropriations
and Finance Committee to has
been referred Senate Bill 343
has had it under consideration
reports with recommendation that
it do pass respectfully
submitted Nathan small chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption 343.
All those in favor of 9.
I suppose name, the ISI
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs Committee to
him has been referred House
Memorial 62 has had it under
consideration report same as the
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Linda
Serrato chair, uh, speaker of
adoption.
We adoption of favor community
pro House Memorial 62. All those
in favor signified by C9.
Oppose name the report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your consumer and
public affairs Committee to him
has been referred Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 18 has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that it do
pass and then referred to the
judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joan J. Ferrari,
chair.
Mr. Speaker, moved to adopt.
We're an adoption of farewell
report for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Sent
Bill 18 of those in favor of
would say no.
post name, the committee report
adopted.
Mr.
Mr. Speaker, you're rolling and
grossing committee to has been
referred House consumer, house
commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10, House Bill
155, House Bill 181, House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191, House Bill 233 as
amended House Bill 298, House
Bill 532, House Bill 571 has had
them under consideration and
reports the same have been duly.
in a gross preparatory designing
by the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Anita
Gonzalez, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption.
We're an adoption of Favill
report for House commerce in the
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10, House Bill
155, House Bill 181, House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
191.
Housesville 233 as amended House
Bill 298 House Bill through
House Bill 532 and House Bill
571, all those in favor of C and
I.
I suppose name
The committee report adopted.
That the direct reflected the
duly enrolled in gross copies of
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10, House Bill
155, House Bill 181, House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee substit with 191,
House Bill 233 as amended. House
Bill 298 House Bill 532, and
House Bill 571 were signed by
the officers of the house in
open session.
And a lady from Borneo, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business,
announcements and miscellaneous
business lady from Donanara
Socorro down my apologies. I
skipped over that part of my
notes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
just stand to welcome our guests
on the rostrum. I believe that
you have a little bit about each
of them. They are veterans that
were here today to be part of
the bill signing for not only
for the tax deduction on
property tax, but also for the
annual camping passes, which is
a great place for us to have bi
barter support. I'm proud to say
that these bills have passed
unanimously uh through both
chambers and all committees, so
I'll let you introduce them.
Thank you gentle lady. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna introduce our
esteemed guest.
here to my left, uh, when, when
I call your name, please rise,
and then we'll, we'll all
recognize you. First, we've got
Jerry El Martinez, Chief Warrant
officer, uh, 3 Vietnam Veterans
of America 26 years of active
duty, most proud to be part of
the effort to complete the
replica of the Vietnam Memorial
Wall in Angel Fire, New Mexico.
Welcome to the house, Jerry
Martinez.
Jerry is my primo.
Somewhere down the road, I'm
sure. We also have Corporal
Jonathan Sanchez, who's a native
of Santa Fe, Afghanistan compact
uh combat veteran served in the
Marines from 2008 to 2012, being
in the outdoors is his therapy.
He loves being one with nature,
is an avid hunter, prefers to
hunt elk when he draws out.
Welcome to the house, Corporal
Jonathan Sanchez.
Last but certainly not least,
we've got Dorothy G. Eaton,
who's a retired Army Major
advocacy chair of the Veterans
Military Families Caucus. She is
from here in Santa Fe. She and
her family love going to state
parks. They enjoy camping and
wants to say thank you to the
legislature for supporting our
veteranos. Thank you and welcome
to the house.
Wonderful to have you join us
here today and I'm, I'm glad
that you were able to be a part
of the bill signing ceremony for
those two very important bills,
um, more announcements we've got
the gentleman from San Miguel.
Colfax Morarearrivatas
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to
ask you to introduce our guests
in the gallery from uh Raton
Intermediate Schools hopefully
they're still here.
Platon intermediate schools so
you're in the gallery.
I don't see you, but let's give
him a big round of applause.
They can watch the webcast a
little later.
Gentlemen from.
Lee, Representative Pettigrew.
Mr. Speaker, I did not plan on
doing this today, but, um, based
on the celebration we had with
Representative Alone. I thought
it was important.
Um, yesterday morning,
And for the, those of you that
know me, if I see you and I look
in your eyes and there's
something different about you. I
ask you if there, if
everything's OK, and I ask you
if there's something I can pray
for you about.
Mr. Speaker and body yesterday
morning, I, I saw our soon to be
confirmed Secretary of Economic
Development in the rotunda and
you could see in his eyes he
wasn't there.
And I asked him, I said, um,
secretary, and he said, not yet.
Um
So, is there something I can
pray for you about, and he let
me know that yesterday morning
his mom, Cheryl Black, at the
age of 92, passed away.
Mr. Speaker, embody the
importance of of that event at
the same time going through
confirmation yesterday. I would
just ask somebody, lift him up
in prayer, lift the family up in
prayer.
Thank you very much.
Thank you gentlemen, gentlemen
from Otero and Lincoln,
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I was gonna say, Pettigrew,
don't ever look in my eyes. He
hadn't asked me that at all.
Mr. Chair, uh, I wanted to let
the body know that, um, I'm
gonna be given some hunts away.
And um if anyone in this body.
We're going to pick a D.
We're going to pick an R.
And we're also gonna pick a
staffer. So if you've served in
this body, if you've served any
time as a staffer, if you'll go
to the leadership office, the
minority office and, and put
your name on the list. I'm going
to take you on a barbary hunt.
Barbie she pot on a ranch that
you won't ever see another
person on. We'll, we'll have the
whole ranch to ourselves. We're
gonna put you up in the hunting
lodge, and we'll feed you
breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
And there will be, we'll make
sure you have, um,
We'll feed you, we'll water you,
we'll do all that kind of stuff.
So you'll have a great time. And
Mr. Speaker,
You will be responsible for your
own hunting license through New
Mexico Game and Fish because
we're all law-abiding citizens.
And if you do not have a weapon,
I've got one for you.
And if you'll go see Debbie.
I'm gonna see if I can get you,
we'll get one of the sergeant of
arms to draw for it, and you can
announce it tomorrow and the
hunt dates are gonna be October
10th through the 16th, so you
can pick whatever days in there
that you want to go, it'll be 2
days and
I can't wait to drive around
with you guys for a couple of
days and hunt.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, very generous.
Round of applause for the
gentleman from Lincoln Otero.
Gentlemen, do I get an automatic
bid because of, you know,
I'm kind of hoping you're one of
the winners, Mr. Speaker. I'm
not gonna lie.
Mm, wink wink, got you, lady
from Berley or Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a
reminder that Representative
Serana is having the funeral for
her mother today. So if you can
think of her, thank you. Thank
you gentle prayers go out to
representative Seana in this
time of loss.
Gentle lady from Ber of Borego.
Mr. Speaker, um, please join me
in
uh
announcing my uh guests up in
the gallery from the New Mexico
search and rescue, and I think
you have a script in front of
you to read their names.
And these are all volunteers,
Mr. Speaker search and rescue.
We've got the folks up in the
gallery who are wearing orange
shirts in the gallery, they
serve their communities as
search and rescue emergency
responsers responders there are
approximately 1000 highly
trained and dedicated volunteers
serving every community and
wilderness area throughout the
state of New Mexico, please help
us welcome Bob Rodriguez, Brad
Berry, Tal Harbin, and Jean
Burgess. Welcome to the house.
Mel Smith, your lady from Ber I
put on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I wanted to recognize today my
shadow, Elise Warren, although
she has been, uh, with our young
interns group for several weeks
now and has been preparing
committee analysis, learning how
the process works, um, at least,
if you could stand, she's a
junior at the Santa Fe High
Indian School and a member of
Santa Clara Pueblo. She's
interested in environmental in
environmental and social
justice, and she hopes to study
political science in college and
bring back positive change to
her community.
Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Thank you.
Welcome to the house.
All right, we've got guests of
Representative Mar Marta Garcia
up in the gallery, famous Rama
Navajo school board and staff,
Pine Hill Schools K-12, Sarah
Atake Caroline.
Carolyn Coho, Brenda Jimson,
Germanson Jake Alvin Rafaelitto
David Ness, and Wyle Clawson.
Welcome to the house.
Any other announcements, lady
from San Mi Tours.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
I did have a shadow today, but
we went a little bit extra long
in getting started, so they had
to go and catch the bus, but if
they are watching later, um, the
seniors from Moriarity High
School have been in in the
legislature, um, a couple days
ago and also today, uh, my
shadow was gonna be Juli Atria
senior at Moriority High School.
Um, we got a chance to visit
with with her this morning, but
they didn't need to catch their
bus to get back. So if you are
watching, um, thank you
Moriarity High School for
visiting the house.
Welcome to the house.
The lady from Cibola McKinley
Val Valencia Socorro Berlio, San
Juan.
Representative Abita thank you
Mr. Speaker, and I would like to
introduce my two children, the
Abeta children are on spring
break this week, and they are
around the roundhouse
volunteering. I have my daughter
Haley Abada, an 8th grader, and
my son Miles Zubaida, a 6th
grader, joining us for the rest
of the session. All right.
Welcome to the house to the
Abeta kids.
Are they not shadowing you?
They're shadowing, Mr. Speaker.
We've got a, we had a really
good debate this morning in
House Judiciary about uh rooster
fighting. It was awesome.
I thought it was legal.
Apparently it's not quite there
yet.
Members take note who wants to
play some bets.
Gentlemen from San Juan,
announcements?
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Lek to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 197.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 425
with the emergency clause Senate
Bill 426 and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry de
Luhansson a chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
Clerk Reed.
Senate Bill 197, introduced by
Senator Campos, an act relating
to local governments, allowing
money in the emergency medical
services fund to be redirected
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority to make loans to
purchase equipment for emergency
medical services system
improvement project for which
funding has been granted
pursuant to the emergency
medical Services Fund Act,
repealing laws 2019, chapter
210, Section 1 to reconcile
multiple amendments to a
section.
of law, making an appropriation.
Senate Bill 197.
Senate Bill 197 have been read
to us by toddlers referred to
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 425,
an act relating to capital
expenditures, reauthorizing or
re-appropriating balances,
expanding or changing purposes,
extending expenditure periods,
changing agencies and
establishing conditions for the
reversion or transfer uh or
transfer of unexpected,
unexpended balances of
appropriations made by the
legislature in prior years,
declaring an emergency. Senate
Finance.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 425.
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate bill.
425 haven't been written by
title, is referred to the House
taxation and Revenue Committee.
Senate Bill 426, introduced by
Senator Lopez, an act repealing
Section 22-14-20 NMSA 1978 being
laws 1971, chapter 324, Section
5, as amended.
As an obsolete provision
transferring functions of the
New Mexico School for the
visually handicapped to the
blind administrative unit of the
vocational rehabilitation
division of the Department of
Education, Senate Bill 426 426
by title is referred to the
House Education Committee.
Gentlemen from Donana.
Mr. Speaker, I move that next
order of business. 3rd reading
of legislation is generally from
Taos, are you ready on item
number?
46
I am Mr. Speaker. Can you get me
to that point?
for place in 83 as Amanda on
final passage has been taken and
it is subject to debate
amendment or substitution
related to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um.
New Mexico State agencies must
be equipped to tackle the
challenges of a changing
climate.
Support clean energy development
and protect our land, our air
and our water. This bow.
Invest in the in the uh invest
in the expertise workforce and
resources needed to ensure that
our state is leading, not
lagging on climate resilience
and economic innovation, uh,
this, there is money in the
budget for this bill, uh, it
goes to strengthen agency
capacity, modernizes
infrastructure planning, creates
pathways for new sustainable
industries by investing in our
state's ability to lead, we are
securing a stronger, more
prepared, and more prosperous
future for all New Mexicans
without a stand for questions.
There is a debate, gentlemen,
from Otero representative block.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Speaker, with a kind gentle lady
from Taos, please yield. Mr.
Speaker, I will, uh, yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. So my first question is,
how is this bill different than
the bill we passed last night
when it comes, or maybe it was
yesterday, I don't know what
time of the day it is usually
around here. So yesterday we
passed a bill that was similar
to this when it comes to these
funds and how is this different
from the previous funds that we
passed for climate. I think it
was 210 million we passed in
that bill. This bill.
What is this one?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the
funding that is in the budget
and what this bill does is it
goes to state agencies, uh,
different state agencies, uh,
that will, you know, develop
strategic plans that will hire
experts, um, that's the main
difference is that it goes
straight to agencies for um, you
know, for the hiring of staff
that can help us, um.
Do this good work.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies. So don't they already go
to the agencies, don't they
currently have the ability to
hire based upon these metrics.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
yes, they could, but this money
is very specific for um.
You know, for the development of
their master plans to increase
the energy, um, the agencies'
capacity related specifically to
climate and climate resiliency.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, do they not have master
plans currently?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
I, I don't know the answer to
that question.
But I, I don't believe that they
do.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I'm just kind of
wondering because can you just
tell me which agency then would
this directly be going to then?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there are a number of agencies
that will uh get this funding it
first goes to DFA and then uh
New Mexican Environment
Department, uh.
Economic development, state land
office, the PRC, uh, also get
some funding, uh, Department of
Workforce Solutions Workforce
solutions Department of
Transportation, uh, MED and
General Services. I'll get some
part of this funding.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies so and is all the
funding directly tied to climate
change alleviation.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
it's, it's focused on how to get
net zero emissions to implement
sustainable economic policies,
uh to uh develop the in-house
expertise to apply for grants
from, you know, from the federal
government or from other
foundations related to uh
climate resiliency and climate
change and uh to really sort of
understand what some of the
barriers are to um being able to
get some of this funding and
climate change.
policy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So are these funds
exclusively for planning
purposes.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, no,
it is not for the, the, you can
also, there are also hiring
experts to um support some of
the policy work as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because what I'm
reading from the bill, it, I
believe it says to create master
plans and increase agency
capacity. So I'm wondering if
that's all inclusive when it
comes to all those other things
that we want when it comes to
action, right? Like when we're
talking about actually
implementing policies where in
the bill does it say that it
would go to those kinds of
operations.
Mr. Speaker, I think when we say
that uh the money can be used
for increasing capacity. It
means, uh, it can be a variety
of things, so.
You know, I think it, it is
flexible funding to
prepare our agencies and for our
state for um.
The climate emergencies that we
have coming ahead of us, uh, to
develop plans for that but also
to develop that in-house
expertise so that we can, um,
leverage other funding that may
exist.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
pardon the interruption. There's
been a request for the gentlemen
to remove their jackets if no
objection, so please continue to
amend my apologies. No, you're
fine, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for
that. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm wondering what is a
sustainable economic policy.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
um, the economic development
department, uh, is already
working on something like this
and, uh, which would, I think we
have sustainable sustainable
economy task force, um, so that.
Could be done at other agencies
as well.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So is that
currently something that is in
rural.
Where can I find what a
sustainable economic policy
means when it comes to, for
example, the Department of
Transportation. How would that
department have a sustainable.
Economic policy.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the depart the economic
development department
sustainable, uh, economics task
force was something that was
created by statute um for other
agencies like Department of
Transportation that is not a
statute, but it, um, this
funding would allow DOT, um,
which it's important for the
body to know, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, emissions from
vehicles, you know, are big
contributors to um you to
emissions and
climate change, so it'd be
really fantastic for the
Department of Transportation to
be able to have, you know, some,
uh, folks in-house that can help
them develop a strategy, uh,
for, you know, looking at
looking at roads, looking at,
um, transportation issues, so
that's what this funding could
be used for.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I was wondering
about that because I know when
it comes to paving a road takes
a lot of petroleum products to
pave a road with asphalt, so Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, when we're
trying to talk about achieving
that zero, implementing
sustainable economic policies,
providing technical support for
entities applying for grants.
I'm just wondering how that
department would do that in
practice, not just in planning
when it comes to the roads, for
example, is there any kind of
road that we could build in the
state.
That would not use petroleum
products to help hit some net
zero emissions standards.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I don't
know the answer to that, but
that is what this funding could
be used for is for the agency to
determine what kinds of.
Um, research that they would
have to do um in-house expertise
to look at something like that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that helped me on
that. So I'm wondering how will
we know when we've achieved net
zero emissions per each
department.
Speaker, gentlemen, that's not
really the, the goal of.
Of of this bill, um.
That's something that um.
That each of the agencies will
be looking at when they develop
policies, but we're not
requiring, you know, a like
Certain parameter of, you know,
before 2005 emissions, that's
not at all part of this bill,
um, but it is important to know,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that
there are reporting requirements
for each of the agencies, um, as
they do their hiring and develop
their plans for how they're
going to use this funding to to
meet some of the some of those
um.
Some of the guidelines that
we're trying to, that we're
setting with this, you know,
achieving net zero. They're,
they'll, they'll be reporting
requirements, but
We're not saying that you have
to reach this level.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So we said that
there are reporting
requirements, but then we also
said there are guidelines. So is
this bill very specific to each
agency on what policies that
they must shall.
Follow when it comes to specific
policies and then what are the
guidelines then when it comes to
the non-requirement portion of
that.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um.
Really it's just the reporting
requirements that those agencies
have in spending that money.
That's, that's what's in this
bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So it's just
regarding spending the money,
not tracking the money being
spent to ensure that there are
indeed zero emissions by 2035,
etc.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no.
OK, sounds good, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. Well, I don't know
if it sounds good, but it sounds
interesting because I want to
make sure that we track these
dollars to make sure that
there's a result, right? If
we're going to do something, I
want to see results based upon,
I think the term that we usually
use is evidence-based
approaches. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is there going to
be a requirement for these funds
to have evidence-based
approaches in everything that we
invest in regarding these new
funding mechanisms for these
departments, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'll refer you to
page.
3,
Part D
And it, it
Explains the type of reporting
that we're requiring from the
agencies, um, which includes,
um,
How they're going to change
their programs and a
justification for that, um,
what, what, what the master plan
looks like and how they're going
to spend that money.
Thank you Mr. Speaker General,
and I see that I, and I read
that actually and I was
wondering because it says
justification of any proposed
changes to the program doesn't
say required based upon
statistics or evidence, and then
it says if an agency has
received an appropriate.
Appropriation from the
government that results in
opportunity program funds. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
just, I question whether these
are actually going to be
tracked. Because for example, if
I worked at DOT.
There are many different factors
that go into the Department of
Transportation, such as roads,
such as guard rail repairs,
things such as that, and I'm
just wondering how we would
track based upon the goals which
I've heard earlier was based
upon hitting these climate goals
by 2035, 2050, how do we track
that in the actual work of the
department when it comes to
these grants, these funds that
they would apply for.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, this
bill is to give agencies the
funding that they need to do the
work that um that will be part
of their master plans, right, so
they'll be developing their
master plans and that's really
like is the baseline document,
um, that we'll be using to
measure the success of the
agencies.
OK, Mr. Speaker, General ladies,
these funds are.
Entirely contingent upon the
master plan? Is that the way I
understand it, and that's based
upon each agency promulgating
that, is that correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no that
that's not the case. They're not
promulgating a master plan
they're just developing one.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm just wondering if this
document is something that
They're held to, I guess maybe
the better wording would be, are
they held to it once they create
a master plan, how do we track
that they get from point A to
point B.
If all of their master plans are
based upon in-house requests or
in-house policies that they have
put forward inside the
department. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you know, if
those agencies uh don't do the
work that they say that they're
going to do, um, in the master
plan, uh, then they likely will
not get additional funding.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then I see on
page 2.
I believe that's where it is,
says implement, enable or
reduce.
The barriers to implementing
climate change policy, can you
tell me what exactly is included
under climate change policy
then.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I
think that the purpose of this
is to really help those agencies
understand um.
What is the barrier in um
reducing emissions.
OK, and thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so would policy
include
Executive orders.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
generally, but let's just say.
Theoretically, I'm just gonna go
into theoreticals because it's
fun, why not? What if there's a
governor who gets elected, maybe
a Democrat or Republican,
doesn't matter. Maybe doesn't
have a party and they believe
that they should have no climate
change policies whatsoever.
And so when it comes to this, if
that individual is elected and
they say no climate change
policies, let's just mix the
entire program, anything
regarding climate change, would
this fund be able to be utilized
by those departments because the
way I read it is it's based
solely upon the discretion of
the department to
Apply and get these grants for
the department. So
theoretically, if this bill gets
passed, could it just be
nullified if a governor decides
to not have any climate change
policies at all. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think lots of laws
will probably be repealed if
there's a change in the
administration that does not
agree with what was previously
passed.
OK, Mr. Speaker if we're
hypotheticals. Speaker,
gentlemen, you know.
Sure, Mr. Speaker, generally,
I'm just trying to figure it out
because I know we could repeal
it as a legislative branch, but
that would still require the
governor's signature, and this
governor could be against
whatever the policy is that we
pass in the legislature. So I'm,
I'm just wondering, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, would, could that
theoretically happen? Let's just
say the next governor doesn't
believe in any of these sorts of
policies requires departments
not to even apply for the
grants, what happens in that
case?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
they're likely just wouldn't be
any money in the budget for
those agencies to do this work.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. OK, so I just,
that's OK.
I mean, they might actually, I
might actually support this
after that. No, I'm just
kidding. Uh, but I think that
that's a very good thing that it
doesn't have any teeth to it. I
really like that actually. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Continuing on here.
I'm wondering when it comes to
the appropriation, what is the
current amount that we're
putting in the bill?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, I
understand that there is a $13.5
million allocation to um to DFA.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker
Generalleti. So with DFA then
have to create rules for how
this.
Grant funding goes to the other
departments or how does DFA dole
it out in an equal or equitable
fashion to the departments. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, DFA does
not have to have a, you know,
rulemaking process for this, um,
they will be uh allocating uh
the funding to various
departments, the departments
that I listed before, um, in the
following allocations. I will
give those to you.
Uh
GST will get a million.
Uh, EDD will get 1 million.
SLO will go to a million PRC.
a million
DWSM and DOT a million MR 2.5
million and NMED 5 million.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm uh
sorry to interrupt, um, but this
is all in the budget.
Perfect. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so thanks
for breaking it down for me. OK,
so.
When it comes to the PRC, they
regulate lots of stuff, so.
Does it specify that these have
to go specifically toward
regulation of utilities like New
Mexico Gas Company or P&M and is
it in any way tied directly to
those kinds of things or can
they use it for water, for
example.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's not
for regulation, it's for
innovation within that agency,
higher to hire staff that can.
Help them develop policies and.
Have that in in-house
understanding of what kind of
policies we need.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so.
I see. So this goes to all these
agencies to create innovation
within the agencies, how do we
ensure that we're not
reinventing wheels from one
agency to another agency because
I would hate to spend money in
one agency where where they
create a policy that's pretty
much very similar in most ways
to a different agency's policies
and how do we ensure that we're
not duplicating efforts, so to
speak.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, as I
understand it, this, um, there
is a task force, uh, that is led
by uh M nerd and New Mexico
Environment Department and
these um these agencies are part
of that task force, so this
funding will help them work
together, um, share ideas, make
sure that they're not
duplicating efforts from
department to department.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies, so shall they
be required to consult with the
task force before creating any
kind of.
Guidelines in the departments.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
uh, they're, they're on the task
force, um.
So they'll be working together
to develop their plans.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So theoretically
they could have the same plan in
every department if it's working
together as a task force. Is
that the way I understand
Speaker, gentlemen, not
necessarily, but I think that
they will be developing their
master plans for each of the
agencies, um, based on the
conversations they're having
within the task force and um Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the
executive order, um, related to
this, um, does state all state
agencies.
That are part of the uh climate
change task force.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. So in Section D of
the bill.
And I forget the page number. I
just had it.
But I wrote down a note here and
it states that the recipient
agency or department, it'll
submit a report showing how the
funds will be used, and I'm just
wondering, is there a report
that's required following it,
showing how they were used.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, each
year they will, they will make
that report which will include
um how the funds will be used
and how they have been used.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and then when it
comes to the planning
mechanisms, what kinds of energy
sources or energy that are they
going to be looking at for
hitting these pardon me, these
net zero emission standards.
Will it be all of the above,
including oil, gas, coal,
nuclear, geothermal, etc. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, it's
technology neutral, so it could
be all those things.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle ladies. So this
theoretically could be used for
A coal-fired power plant, even
though I don't believe we have
anymore because they've all been
shuttered, but if we did, it
could theoretically be used for
that if they had carbon capture
technology, etc. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, coal-fired power
plants don't reduce emissions.
They increase emissions, so that
is likely not part of this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Do we also consider the
building of the entities for
these kinds of other so-called
renewable energy sources that do
also use.
Things that are not technically
renewable, so such as the
building, like I said the other
day, the building of a power
plant that is energy generating.
Are we gonna look at every
single step of that power plant
and see, OK, every single thing
has to be neutral when it comes
to carbon emissions. How do we
look from each different entity
or project to see that they are
indeed hitting benchmarks that
have been set forward by
executive order or by state law.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
think what you're asking is, is
exactly why we're giving
We're appropriating this money
to those agencies so they can
determine for themselves what
the step by step, um, action
plans are as they develop their
master plans and policies that
go along to reduce.
And uh reduce uh greenhouse gas
emissions.
So I can't, I'm not being
prescriptive. This bill isn't
being prescriptive, uh, the
agencies will determine based on
the expertise that they have
already and that they will be
able to hire uh to develop these
master plans.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I guess what I'm
trying to get at is I want to
know if we have a paper trail on
how the funding is used, and
then if there is a net positive
or negative effect on the state
following the expending of those
funds and how do we ensure that
they're tracked other than
whatever the, the very vague and
very simplistic reporting
requirements are that are
outlined in the bill currently
in my opinion.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
we disagree on, um, the
simplicity of uh of the plans
that reports they'll be writing
reports they will be detailing
how they will spend the money,
how they spend the money, how
they have met, um, or plan to
achieve some of these goals that
we've outlined.
Here.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I would love to, I
mean, I don't have an amendment
ready, but I would love to
ensure that those funds that we
say how it will be used in
section.
One D. I would love for it to
say instead of just
Uh, how, how it'll be used. I
want to say how it will be used
effectively because I'd like to
know how effective it is,
because if it is ineffective, we
should not be re-appropriating
money a million dollars to all
these departments and then 2.5
to M nerd and the energy or the
environment department, I would
rather have data driven
information on this. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, can you
point to me in the bill if maybe
I've missed it, there's another
requirement that ensures that it
is used effectively, not.
used.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
subparagraphs 1 and 2.
After the existing language
that's part of
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
the accountability in government
Act.
So it's robust.
And
It pretty clearly defines how
they're going to do their
reporting requirements.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I guess that's kind of
what I was saying earlier, what
I found to be quite vague
because on one, it said just as
justification of any proposed
changes to the agency's program
structure pursuant to Section
6384 NMSA 1978. And then it also
says any approval or denial of
the changes pursuant to that
section as well as the
justification for the decision.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
how do we know what the
justification means when it
talks about efficiency of the
use of those funds rather than
just what the appropriation is
because on number 2, I see it
says from government results and
opportunity program fund for
master plan that's talking about
a different fund. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering how we ensure
effectiveness when we do have
reports every June 30th of each
year. Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
this language again is something
that we, it really is part of
every appropriation, um, and if
you look at the accountability
in government Act, uh, there's
very structured and robust
language.
Around, um, what the agencies
can and cannot do, um, I'm, I'm
happy to share my little
document here if you'd like to
look at it, but it goes into
pretty clear detail, uh, about
efficiency, about how they're
achieving their um their
results, um, the importance of
flexibility in using these
resources but also uh being able
to demonstrate um how.
There, how this funding and what
they're doing is um.
is effective and efficient, um,
and serves the best interests of
the state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I agree with you that
the government accountability
Act, it.
It does do that, but it also is
based upon whatever we're trying
to measure.
Next to. So we're trying to
measure it next to the
standards, the bill requires. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, for
example, I'm just gonna start on
page 4, we talk about the
addition of new jobs statewide
and the replacement of jobs that
rely on extraction or
development of natural
resources. I'm just wondering,
do you believe in that the
reduction of all of our state's
oil and mining jobs will lead to
more jobs overall? Is that what
we're projecting?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I am
this bill is saying that we need
to invest in diversification of
our economy, and that's what the
money will be used for to look
at, you know, the, what the
possibilities are for that, um,
and creating new jobs as a
result of diversification.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, but I don't see creating
jobs here. I just say see
replacing of jobs that rely on
the extraction or development of
natural resources and then it
says diversifying the state's
revenue sources, so Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, do you believe that
with the diversification of
revenue sources that this could
Lead to the reduction of jobs in
the state because we cannot just
replace apples to apples when it
comes to an oil and gas job
versus a solar wind, other kind
of renewable job.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I
will, I'm pointing out, uh.
Part 3A, the addition of new
jobs statewide, so I believe
that this bill, uh, will.
Lead to new jobs around the
state.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Is there a sunset on this
bill that by the time that the
sunsets, we will know whether we
have created jobs or lost jobs.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I guess that's kind
of my concern when it comes to
this bill because we're saying
we want to create jobs, we're
putting them in statute, but
then later on in the bill, it
says the addition of new jobs
statewide and replacement of
those jobs that rely on the
extraction and development of
natural resources. So Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I'm just
wondering how will we replace.
them. How, how do we expect to
replace them with these new
funds.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
these sons will help the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, you know, develop
programs, um.
And of course, could, you know,
they would be working with other
agencies like potentially AED to
develop training programs for,
uh, new additional jobs.
So that's what that's what this
bill does. It provides funding
for agencies to be think really
creatively about how we can both
be.
Climate resilient, but also, you
know, um, really address the
effects of, of climate change
and prevent uh further job
losses, um.
Things like that.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, so I just don't
want to be putting into a bill,
something that could
Shift away, good paying jobs
from people across our state
because it does say the
replacement of those jobs that
rely on extraction and
development because I know
there's a lot of jobs in the oil
patch. There's a lot of other
jobs that are
tied to those jobs in the oil
patch. So it's a very much a big
deal when it comes to many parts
of our state where there are a
lot of jobs contingent upon
those other jobs. So, Mr.
Speaker, generally, I just would
caution.
Any kind of replacement of those
jobs since they do account for,
I believe, 40% of our state's
budget and things such as that
which are very important to me
as someone who likes to keep the
lights on in the city of New
Mexico and not have to dig
through coffers because we don't
have money. So when we're
talking about diversification,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady. I'm
wondering when I think in the
bill it talks about
non-renewable, or I'm sorry, it
talks about natural resources,
is this specifically about
non-renewable natural resources.
How do we define
that in the bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, natural
resources not defined in this
bill.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, because I see that
when we're talking about
development of natural
resources, what kinds of
development would that entail
potentially?
And I'm sorry, I'm on page 4.
Amendments in context about
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
sorry, can you, I sort of got
lost in, in this. Can you please
repeat your question? Of course
phrase it.
You bet. So, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm on page for a, it's
under.
Yeah, for A says the addition of
new jobs statewide, which we
were talking about previously,
replacement of those jobs on the
reliance of extraction or
development of natural
resources. I'm wondering what
natural resources are we talking
about developing.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
gentlemen, um, this language is
from the sustainable Economy
Task Force definitions.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Do we have that definition
of what natural resources means,
new natural resources
development.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
don't think we do. OK. Well,
that's the problem I have, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I would
like that to be defined,
especially if we're putting it
in statute and then going to a
task force's non-legal binding
definition is, it's kind of hard
for anybody to be able to
understand what that might mean.
So then, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I believe to
230,700 New Mexicans are
employed in natural resources it
might be higher than that, way
higher than that, but that's
just specifically based upon
that you mentioned that the
Department of Workforce
Solutions will be able to.
Find alternative employment for
these individuals, can the
department of Workforce
Solutions find a way to
alternatively employ all of
these hardworking New Mexicans.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, what
the bill does is it capacitates
the Department of Workforce
Solutions to really take a
sector by sector approach, uh,
on, you know, what new
opportunities, job opportunities
might exist, what kind of
training they might need, so
that's what this bill does for
the Department of Workforce
Solutions.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, but it's not saying
if you had a, let's just say an
oil job that was.
No longer here in the state and
they are looking for a job in
the state of New Mexico. How can
we help find an equivalent job
through the Department of
Workforce Solutions for that
person who has lost their good
paying job and find another one
that's specifically targeted to
their skill sets, etc.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
that this bill.
Could allow that to happen with
DWS.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I hope so. I do hope
so. And a lot of the time I, I
say I hope because you never
know what's going to happen when
it comes to how this actually
gets implemented, but I do want
to make sure that we're not just
going to be wiping out these
jobs because it says replacement
of these jobs, so 30,000 people
almost and then I want to make
sure that we do have something
to replace it because it's not
just the job in the oil patch,
it's all the other services that
surround it, restaurants, all
kinds of different people.
who live in the community as
spouses, etc. So I'm just
wondering how we can replace
those jobs as well, specifically
in that same community and will
Department of Workforce
Solutions help not just consider
it, but actually ensure that
those jobs stay in those
communities so that we're not
ripping these people out of the
community to get another job
that may not be in the sector
they want, how do we ensure
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that is
the whole purpose of the bill so
that DWS uh can help um all.
All kinds of employees find
other jobs as needed, uh, in any
sector.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. Do we believe that a
million dollars is enough to do
that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, I
don't think it's enough. I think
it's a really good start for
this agency to start developing
that in-house expertise.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and then do we know if
other states have done similar
mechanisms regarding these state
agencies to help these workers
when it comes to losing a job
and then how do we
How did we find how to write
this in the bill to copy paste
it, so to speak, or bring it
from another state to New Mexico
to be tailored to us.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
are a number of states that have
similar, um, programs and
funding for state agencies to um
innovate uh some of those states
include, uh, New Jersey,
Colorado.
New York, Washington state.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, and I, I get that
maybe, maybe it works in some of
these states. I don't know and I
haven't seen that data, but I do
want to make sure that we're not
erasing jobs where we could be
using these people and I don't
want to push people to other
states as well, because Mr.
Speaker, General Lydia, it can
be very easy for somebody who is
a good paying job in New Mexico.
Let's just see the oil and gas
is wiped out by 2035, 2050
because of net zero
requirements, they can just move
to Texas, and how do we ensure
that these folks who
may be native New Mexicans are
staying in the state.
And how do we continue to keep
them here if those good paying
oil and gas jobs are indeed no
longer here.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the
purpose of this bill is not to
shut down and or take away those
oil and gas jobs. The purpose of
the bill is to, uh, indeed do
what what you're asking, which
is making sure that we're not,
um, driving New Mexicans out of
the state and so that we can
keep New Mexicans here, um, and.
Train for new potential jobs um.
New for new industries.
Um, we're, we're not intending
to drive people out of the state
with this bill.
OK, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
but then why would we need this
bill at all if we're not driving
people out of the state.
Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, I did not hear that.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
I'm wondering why would we need
this bill at all if we're not
driving people out of the state
already with our policies. this
bill, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
that we can have our state
agencies develop the resources
they need to um help us tackle
climate change, um, whether it's
looking at new policies,
developing plans that are uh
interrelated with other
agencies, um, to develop new
jobs, really look at it sector
by sector economy.
um, to really, you know,
innovate each of those agencies
to not only tackle climate
change but to build resilient
communities. That's what this
funding will do. It helps
agencies expand.
Develop their capacity in house.
Thank you Mr. Speaker.
gentle lady, so we talked about
resilient communities. I don't
see that phrasing in the bill,
and I know we're talking about
tackling climate change. I'm
wondering, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, how will we know that we
will effectively have tackled
this climate change monster.
Bypassing this bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um.
I hear what you're saying you've
been, you've been saying it
quite a bit. This is not a
climate change bill that reduces
emissions, you know, that was to
some standard that we've set,
um, that's not what this bill
is. This bill is to give
agencies the tools and I think
that's probably on a bingo card
somewhere, uh, but the tools in
house and the expertise in-house
to leverage federal dollars to
leverage foundation dollars to
help, you know, help develop,
develop plans within each of
those agencies working together.
To
Move the needle on climate
change and climate resiliency.
That's what this bill does.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and I understand that, but
I guess my predicament in this
situation is when we pass
legislation.
Previously, let's just say the
energy transition Act, for
example, for number one.
The reason that we're hitting
these goals.
Now we're coming back.
To
has policies to help alleviate
the effects of those bills that
we've passed and then the
question I have is, OK, if 40%
of the state budget gets wiped
out because oil and gas is no
longer here.
Then how do we continue to pay
for the policy to help.
keep these communities whole or
at least find these other ways
to make a living if we don't
even have the money to do that.
That's my big concern, and I'm
wondering how we can replace
these funds with something else
because I know that the oil and
gas industry is not heavily
subsidized like the solar and
wind industries, which requires
state funds to bring these
communities, these projects. So
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
just wondering how, how do we
pay for this?
When oil and gas is no longer
here, and I hope it's not, I
hope it's not any, it's, it
doesn't leave our state, but if
it does, because these policies,
how do we ensure that we can
keep funding this to alleviate
those remnants from those policy
making decisions.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
we'll be.
Looking for ways to fund this,
should that happen, and
everything else in the budget.
So
That's really the only thing I
can tell you about that. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I appreciate the answers and
I guess I just have similar
concerns with other bills that
we've, that we've talked about
you and me and a few other
people have talked about.
It's just really difficult for
me to vote for a bill that I
don't know much about when it
comes to what the reporting
requirements are, and it does
indeed scare me. It does scare
me. I, and we are legislating
out of fear right now cause I'm
scared, apparently, because I
don't want these jobs to die. I
don't want these jobs to go
away. I don't want these people
to have to leave for Texas or
for Colorado or somewhere else.
So of course we're legislating
out of fear because we're fear,
we're fearful of the climate,
apparently. And so it just
really triggers me, and I'll say
it does.
trigger me that we are
continuing, and that's probably
on a bingo card, that's why I
threw it out there.
But it, it, you know, these jobs
matter to these communities, and
I just don't wanna be here after
the fact.
Trying to piece together a
budget with all these funds that
were attempting to find from all
these different pots, because
there's no longer a surplus of
oil money.
And I know that the finance
committee has been working hard
to put reserves in there and get
interest, etc. but I also don't
know how sustainable that can be
in the long term. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
respectfully cannot support your
bill. I think that's also on a
bingo card somewhere. I, I
cannot support the bill, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, I
appreciate the answers and at
least the thoughtful discussion
that we had today. So thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady from Taos.
There is for the debate, the
gentle lady from Berna Leo and
Torrance Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady.
From
Mr. Speaker, yes, I yield.
I didn't even have to say it. It
was like magical.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
do have some questions on this.
Hold up one second because I
have to pull up.
Mr. Speaker, may I interrupt
quickly? I believe I did get
bingo with the representative
from Otero's summits.
Mr. Speakerility, I was looking
for all the words that I could
use right now. I want to make
sure I just said for the record.
And um.
I have a few words I can
actually add in there. So, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, uh, I
am looking at this, so help me
walk through this so we have
this Senate bill that is going
to have people and they're going
to create a master plan. Do we
have any?
Guidelines or guardrails and
what that is because I actually
looked, I believe it's Taiwan
includes happiness because I was
trying to actually Google this
to learn what master plans are.
So could you expand a little bit
more about what maybe the um the
master plan might look for or
having it that will implement
climate change policy, Mr.
Speaker and Joe lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, if
only we could add happiness as
uh a goal in the master plan. It
might be hard to achieve, um.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
again I'd like to point to the
accountability in Government Act
so as they're developing their
plans they're gonna be looking
at how to use their resources in
the best possible way, efficient
delivery of goods and services.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
with the, with the goals um that
are stated in um on page two.
So the, you know, the, the
agencies will um.
be looking at achieving net zero
emissions, implementing the
sustainable economic policies
providing technical support um
for additional funding, um, and
implementing and enabling or
reducing the barriers to
implementing climate change
policy.
Those are, those are the guard
rails or the.
Requirements as they developed
those master plans.
OK, so Mr. Speaker and.
Gentle lady.
Uh, will they, is there anything
in here that says there are
other states have done this
successfully instead of
reinventing the wheel, maybe go
back and look at theirs when you
develop this plan or they
started from complete scratch,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, we, we
aren't starting from scratch. We
already have a climate change
task force, which is made up of
um all the agencies, but there's
nothing in this bill that says
you have to look at another
state, um, I think we.
can all agree, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, that what we create
in New Mexico is good for New
Mexico and it needs to be born
here and.
Um
You know, implemented here.
Mr. Speaker Delay, I agree with
you on that because we're a very
unique state with, with some
definite things that maybe are
applicable to New Mexico but not
other states.
So what happens, Mr. Speaker
Deli, just say a master plan
comes up and let's say people on
the Democrat side there or
somebody doesn't agree with it,
we're looking at that, we're
like, wait, we don't feel you
captured everything or we don't
think this is applicable to any
of us here as legislators have
any oversight over this master
plan, Mr. Speaker and General
Lenny.
Mr Speaker, uh, gentle lady, um,
all those concerns are really
addressed, I think by the
accountability and Government
Act, which of course we passed
through this legislature.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies,
so when these people all come up
with this master plan. Can you
explain to me then how it has an
effect on New Mexico. Is it
going to become they're gonna
make rules is it become, um, is
it gonna come back to us as a
bill for us to vote on, how does
this become we go from master
plan to we think we need to do
X, Y, and Z according to the
master plan. How does that take
effect on New Mexico.
I'm just trying to figure out if
they're going to make the rules
and the rules of the rules, or
it's gonna come back to us to
then make bills to support what
they came up with, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think there's no
requirement to do either of
those things, but that might be
something that happens that, you
know, they've done the research
they've employed um experts and
they have found that um.
And if we do this policy, it
will have this impact that
could, and that's what agencies
do now, but we're giving these
agencies additional tools to um
help us understand how we can
better, um.
manage climate change.
OK, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so they could, because I, I.
I'm trying to make the leap from
this to New Mexico.
In practical terms. So Mr.
Speaker Duley, it's not like
they're really task force, but
I'm gonna assume that they're
gonna go through the state and
say, uh, these are issues.
And they're not just gonna say
these are issues, they're gonna
say we need to do something
about it. Is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
Sure, it is correct.
But this is not prescriptive.
We're not saying you have to do
that, um, we're given the
agencies the tools to determine
how to.
be more
Sustainable to, uh, reach, um,
You know, net zero emissions,
uh, so it's really up to the
agency to determine how they're
going to do that.
That's what the point of this
bill is. OK, Mr. Sakdale, that's
why I was trying to make the
leap because you're, you're, you
drafted this, you took the time
to do that, or sorry.
Yes, you are in their
co-sponsor, so you guys took the
time to do this, that the
endgame, Mr. Speaker Delaney, is
to say, OK, this is what we
want. We want net zero. Is there
a definition of net zero in
here, Mr. Speer and later, can
you explain to me a little bit
more about what you think is net
zero.
Mr. Speaker, generally, that is
defined.
Net zero emissions means
allowable direct emissions of
greenhouse gasses that are fully
offset.
So Mr. Speaker and young ladies,
so we're looking at greenhouse
gas produced versus removal from
atmosphere, is that correct, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, generally, it could
also be removal.
So Deli, so we're, so the, so I
look, it's like a scale, right?
So there's greenhouse gasses and
we want to figure out a way to
clean up the atmosphere so
there's less, is that how I'm
understanding that, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
sorry, can you repeat that?
Miss speaking July, I'm trying
to make it make sense in my head
because I, I did look it up and
I saw that greenhouse gas
produced versus a removal from
atmosphere.
So, uh, it's almost like a
scale. There's this much, but we
want to reduce it so that
there's more removed from the
atmosphere. Is that what I'm
understanding the definition of
mean, Mr. Speaker and gent lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I'm
sorry. I, it's, it was a long
night last night. I'm so tired.
Can you just maybe rephrase the
question so I can better
understand it.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
totally understand we have just
a short time, everyone's been up
late and everybody's tired. Too
much bingo, Mr. Speaker,
generally, yeah, do you want me
to just say all the bingo words,
Mr. Speaker and July so we get
this over with then we can
scream bingo. Yes, everybody's
on their head. So it Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
So I, I'm trying to make it make
sense, so we have so many
greenhouse gasses and the end
because I know we can never get
to net zero. That's one thing I
did in the research. I learned
that, but we're trying to, I
guess just reduce.
The amount a greenhouse gas
either produced.
Or somehow sequester that CO2.
Is that correct? Is that what
we're looking at, Mr. Speaker
Deli? Does that make sense at
all? I'm hoping I'm making
sense. I'm so tired I may not.
We want to reduce greenhouse
gasses in a variety of ways
which could we go thank you Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, because I
thought maybe I'm not speaking
correctly and making my question
make any sense because there's
always that too.
Um, so if we're looking for.
Removal from the atmosphere.
And we want to remove the CO2.
How are, what are we going to do
because I just learned in
Farmington that they have
monitors to check and their COT
comes from Los Angeles.
So Mr. Speaker De Lady, how are
and, and I also learned that on
the border, the COT is is coming
from Juarez. So Mr. Speaker, how
are we going to make a
difference in a state or nation
that is noncompliant.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
we're really focused on what we
can control right here in New
Mexico.
I was speaking Delaney, I, I
understand what you're saying,
but
If let's say Las Cruces is
having a huge impact.
How are we going to, uh, they're
the ones being hit the hardest.
How are we gonna make a
difference if we can't make the
other country be compliant, then
what would the endgame be for
that particular area, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, I think we need to sort of
focus on what the purpose of
this bill is, which is to really
empower the agencies to innovate
within themselves to figure out
how to
Reach some of these policies and
I think that that the question
that you're asking is the kind
of thing that um we want experts
to.
We want experts in each of those
agencies to
Be able to um to look at those
things.
Right, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's, that's because we always
talk about, you know, a clean up
because we have some histories
of things that do need to be
cleaned up. There's always
change that can be made, but
we're looking at big drastic
changes, Mr. Speaker and De
Lady, and I guess what I can't
figure out because I know these
people are going to have to look
at that and, and I think that's
going to become a a a moot point
on this because we don't have
any way to make Mexico compliant
and we don't have any way to
make Los Angeles compliant, so
we're still.
going to have these things in
the atmosphere, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, so I don't know
it's gonna be a very interesting
question of because we can't
mandate them.
How do you, if, if it's like a
spaghetti strainer, we're saying
everyone has to electric car in
Las Cruces and and all these
things and solar power and the
same time the CO2 is just
blowing right over, Mr. Spielli,
it doesn't make any change for
certain areas, so I think some
some places are gonna be left
out on this. So Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um,
Can you explain to me because I
know that we're trying to
It's gonna have an effect on oil
and gas, and I know it's an
interesting thing in New Mexico
because we have this love hate
relationship with oil and gas,
right? We love the money, we
definitely love the money, but
we have problems with it with
CO2 and other things, so Mr.
Speaker Deini, if this master
plan comes up, how are you going
to make sure
And this is where I get a little
nervous like in the block was
that there aren't these
Oh my gosh, I can't wait till
Saturday at noon.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, these
draconian laws that might have a
big impact on our oil and gas
industry. What if that happens,
then how does this plan play out
and what can we do if we all
don't feel that if we start to
lose money and people moving
out, how is that going to be
addressed, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, with these people that are
making the rules with the master
plan.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, generally, um,
completely understand that
concern, um, I think that's why
it's so important that these
agencies are working together.
They're all part of the climate
change task force, so economic
development is, you know,
working with, um, MED which is
working with NMED and Workforce
Solutions and state land office,
they're all working together to
um ensure that, you know, we're
developing policies that don't,
um, that don't break the bank.
And don't break New Mexico. So
I, I think that's, that's
something that um.
You should be keeping in mind as
you're asking the agencies to
innovate doesn't mean that we're
asking an industry to um to not
be here anymore. That's not what
this bill does.
And thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady for uh uh agreeing
with me on that. I think
everyone does because we, we do
get a tremendous amount of money
that we're able to do a lot of
policies and plans and mental
health in our schools and
everything that come from oil
and gas, and I know
unfortunately we didn't pass
sequestering of CO2, that would
have been nice to have. I don't
know why that didn't happen.
That should, that one should
have gone through. It seemed
like kind of a no-brainer.
But that one didn't. I just
wanna assure that our 35,000
people that are working directly
for the oil industry and the
100,000 that are indirectly
work, uh, don't get impacted.
Um, and the other thing too that
is.
Also concerning is uh the last
Canadian fire. I couldn't find
the New Mexico one dumped 1.5
billion tons of CO2, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. So I would hope
because I sent a letter off to
the Fed saying, I really want
you guys to clean up our forest
because we have a huge issue
with that, and I'm hoping that
if this bill does go through,
which I, I.
I have some issues with it, but
I, I do hope that they take it
seriously about our forest
because my district is a
tinderbox. We're having more
fire fire starting all the time.
And I would like them to take
incineration because now you
have a, a double-edged sword,
right? The most.
One of the ways to clean up CO2
is with trees and the most
popular tree is the poplar that
absorbs uh.
I think a metric ton of CO2, so
we want more trees, especially
poplars down by the river, but
at the same time, we also need
to clean up our forest, so
because volcanoes and wildfires
emit huge amounts of CO2, and
then comes the other problem if
now if it starts blowing our
way. I mean, there's so many
factors, and I'm gonna say this,
Mr. Speaker, because we're not
in a bubble, right? We do not
live in a bubble. There isn't a
bubble, there isn't a shield
over New Mexico, so I think
there's going to be issues with
trying to come up with this
master plan and then
deal with all these other things
and try to come up with balance,
but also importantly I wanna
make sure that our people that
are here and working in New
Mexico don't get driven out and
then we don't have ways to
replace them and our and it has
affected our economy, uh, Mr.
Speaker, and generally, uh,
thank you for your time. That's
all the questions I have.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Donana
Representative small.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Would the gentle lady from Taos
yield. Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Don.
Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady,
and uh thanks for really great
conversation, uh, Mr. Speaker,
and gentle lady, um,
The, uh, the funds that we
talked about here first, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've
established that these are in
the budget that we just
concurred with today.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes. And
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, would
you say that, uh, as we're some
of these investments are
representing sort of both a
mitigation but also uh are some
of these investments focused on
making New Mexico more
competitive?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, uh,
absolutely, and, and I think
that's why this, this funding is
so important, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, because it will allow
our agencies to um think of ways
um to utilize their own the
expertise that exists right now
in their agencies, but to reach
out and get more expertise, uh,
to help us figure out how to
You know, how to sort of deal
with this crisis and how to be
creative and how to look for New
Mexico grown ways to, um, to
address climate change.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that sounds great to me and it
really, as I look through the
list, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
of the agencies, uh, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, hearing
your confirmation, uh, on the
investments in the budget. I
wanted to go through some of
those agencies and sort of talk
through uh what and asked Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if, uh,
some things that those agencies
might be doing or might be able
to do now with the funding and
the, the legislation and the
authorization.
that you're bringing. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
starting with the New Mexico
Environment Department. I think
we've had a number of
conversations in here, but Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the
Environment Department could
deploy some of this funding, for
instance, with, uh, landfills,
perhaps. And Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, working to make those
landfills and the uh greenhouse
gasses, particularly the methane
that they emit, could they, uh,
could the environment department
look at actually repurposing
that waste methane, uh, into,
uh, energy for those, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, yes,
absolutely, and there we have
someone in the gallery who is
cheering for that, and that is
the secretary that's yes, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
think we well know, and we know,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that
the Environment secretary spends
as much of the, we here, at
least I hear about Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, the Environment
secretary spending a great deal
of time in very rural parts of
the state, both on cleanup.
And also, Mister Speaker, gentle
lady, really fighting for that
economic opportunity and to
increase the competitiveness
that Mr. Speaker, John lady, in
the case of say a landfill to
take something that may be, um,
a challenge for our community,
right? Uh, visually in other
ways and turn that, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady into a competitive
edge and a competitive resource
because if you're able, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, to
co-locate new industry, uh, and
because the
energy from that landfill
amongst other sources is
allowing that. That seems like
it would give us a competitive
edge. Would you agree, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady? Speaker,
gentlemen, uh, absolutely it
would, and that's why this money
is so important for an agency
like NMED to, you know, come up
with another purpose for um for
emissions and and that waste um
like methane, but it, it's also
really great for other agencies,
you know, the state land office
is managing something like I
think 7.
1700 orphan wells and so this
kind of funding could help them
develop a plan for every purpose
of those wells, and that's,
that's the kind of.
Uh, innovation that we need to
be doing, uh, and this bill puts
those agencies in a good place
to uh to think about how um how
we can repurpose some of our,
you know, neglected and
abandoned sites. Some of these
orphan wells, um.
Yeah, that's why this I think
this funding is so important,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, that's
great to hear, actually just
today, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
when I was reading uh about
abandoned oil wells in the
Permian. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, and, and obviously a great
deal of the, the vast majority
of the Permian is in Texas, uh,
the most productive portion of
the Permian, the Delaware Basin,
uh, is thankfully in New Mexico,
but Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
was reading about how, uh, the
Texas rail.
Railroad commission is
requesting $100 million from the
Texas legislature to deal with
abandoned oil wells, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and
reading through examples of
where, uh, one, is, uh, it's
like a 200 ft deep, uh,
sinkhole, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, it seems like the
funding that's, as you were
talking about, that's going to
the energy, minerals and natural
resources, uh, department,
perhaps repurposing well, so,
you know, obviously plugging
some.
Repurposing some, I know, uh,
the gentle lady to your right
there has worked on some really
innovative legislation there.
The money again, it seems like
it's going to energy, minerals
and natural resources is dual
purpose. We're reducing
emissions while at the same time
increasing competitive
competitiveness here in the
state of New Mexico. Mr.
Speaker, General lady, just on
that really quickly, uh, I see
also that it has to do with some
of the conservation programs at
at Energy.
Minerals and natural resources
department are some of those
programs would, you know, for
instance, would those be in
forestry, uh, and other things,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, yes,
absolutely, and you know, um.
Energy, minerals, natural
resources is getting $2.5
million and so they have a lot
of different programs that they,
uh, manage, uh, including state
forestry, of course, and so this
in response to, uh, the gentle
lady from Torrance and Bernard
Leo's concern about forest
fires, which I completely share
living in a forest myself, um,
this could provide this would
provide funding for state
forestry to look at some
innovative practices on our, our
state forestry land, um, that's,
that's something that um.
That this money could be used
for as well, um, natural
resource management in the
restoration economy, how can we,
you know, potentially, and we're
not prescribing this, but this
is really up to the agency but
potentially they could be
looking at, um, you know,
programs, uh, to invest in the
restoration economy, which we
know in, in a lot of places
actually, those are good jobs.
They're good paying jobs, so
that could be something that
this um funding goes towards as
they develop their master plans.
Um thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
And I think that, uh, your
description of the restoration
economy is pretty exciting to me
because Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, we've provided some strong
and sustainable sources of
funding for that. The land of
enchantment Legacy Fund, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. And so now
it seems like with the funding
that's going to MEd in
particular here, it's gonna help
us unlock the benefits from the
trust fund money, uh, sort of
today's dollars or this case
yesterday's dollars for the
future, Mr Speaker, gentle lady
in that, in my mind, you know,
you start to talk about, uh,
being able to bring back
different trout species or make
sure, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, that, uh, things like the
gila trout are your um
recovering a population that
you're restoring a watershed
which is more water, whether
that's for agriculture, for the
environment, obviously for the
aquatic species, is that what
you mean, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, when you talk about sort
of a restoration economy.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
absolutely riparian habitat, um,
improving wetlands, which is,
you know, great for our water
quality, of course, and for um
the aquatic species, uh, but
also you know those are.
As somebody, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, who was in charge
of raising something like
$800,000 to restore wetland in
my own community. I that
$100,000 went to many, many
jobs.
Many, many jobs for at least 3
years. So those are the kinds of
things I think that we, you
know, our agencies can be, you
know, can take a look at it and
finally like, take a breath and
hire some new folks to help
them, you know, think through,
um, how we can.
Increase we can increase the
number of jobs in our, in our
community as well tackling
climate change.
Mr. Speaker, John lady, that's
great. And actually, uh, that
really you have in this bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
sort of a direct connection to
the job training. Is that right?
You're, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, actually sending money to
the Department of Workforce
Solutions. It seems like there,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
workforce solutions is doing
more partnership with uh adult
education, so folks who maybe
don't have their, uh, their,
their, maybe don't yet have
their high school diploma,
right?
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, for
different reasons, uh, could
this funding help, uh, unlocked
doors for some of those New
Mexicans to find well-paying
jobs in some of these careers
that you're describing?
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, workforce Solutions
has done an incredible job, um,
with, you know, with the
resources that they have, but
they need more resources to
really look at this like sector
by sector approach to, you know,
how do we build
these jobs, how do we develop
the training programs? How do we
work with other agencies to make
sure that we've got a workforce
that can meet these needs, um,
and I think this funding really
helps them do that and they can
continue to work with HED uh to
uh to develop that, um, trading
through adult ed programs.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that's, that's really good to
hear, and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, it makes me think about
how sort of this uh legislature
in really in a bipartisan
fashion is investing in career
technical education, investing
in adult education, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady is highlighting the
wider workforce participation as
one of our key goals, and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we know
that New Mexicans love being
outside. We know, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady that New Mexican.
s deeply value our state in our
environment. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, the idea
of, of, of supporting, uh,
expanding in innovative ways and
then helping connect people to
careers and that is super
exciting and Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, for me and perhaps for
others, it takes me back to
stories from my grandfather who
worked in the CCC and there are
roads and places, uh, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady in the
Sabola National Forest that um.
Uh, while he was alive and we
would go out there, his
connection to that landscape
which you're helping promote
here was incredibly meaningful,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
I wanna go briefly through a few
other areas, uh, it seems like
with the state land office, the
investment there, could we see
that yielding even more return
for the beneficiaries from the
state land office for how to
maximize the value for
sustainable energy development.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh,
absolutely, uh, not only through
the sort of redevelopment of
some of those orphan wells, but
as we, you know, as our state
invest even more in renewable
energy, you know, the
SLO, the state land Office is
dealing with transmission lines
and things like that, but they
really need more capacity to um
to do the work more quickly,
right? So that we can get, um,
renewable energy ramped up as
well. So I think that it within
the state land officers I think
lots of opportunities for, um,
for job growth, for repurposing,
um, and that, um, means more
money for our children.
That's great to hear, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and great
because state land, uh, in
addition to sort of their
constitutional um foundation
generating revenue for the
state, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
they happen to be amazing
recreational areas as well, uh,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, in
addition to cultural areas and
many other things, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, we've
talked through the economic
development department. It seems
like the funding here combined
with the new investments that uh
we've made.
through House Bill 2, would you
say, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
that New Mexico, this is really
an area we're work, we're
working to hone our
competitiveness to be that place
where the cleanest oil and the
cleanest national natural gas
are produced, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, additional sort
of decarbonization efforts,
growing an economy, creating
jobs, while also decarbonizing
that economy, will the
investment in economic
development department help aid
that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm, I'm
glad that you mentioned them.
You know, they were tasking them
with a lot. We're tasking them
with helping us, you know,
develop new economies, diversify
our economy, figure out how to,
you know, work with other
agencies to um to get that
workforce that we need there,
um, and, and we've supported
them quite a bit but this
additional funding will um will
allow them to bring in more
capacity to um to work on these
uh the strategic planning
activities that we've we've
already tasked them with that
they've already completed um but
they.
To implement that and we and
this funding allows them to
implement that incredible work
that they've already done to
expand and diversify our
economy, Mr. Speaker, that's
great to hear and to me, I think
particularly as we look forward
into the interim, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, I think it really
reaffirms that uh we can go out
and say your private sector
idea, your idea to create more
value, more wealth, more energy
that has a home here.
in New Mexico and uh ideally,
that's a homegrown idea. But Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, from
all over the country and all
over the world, uh, I think
you'd agree we want to be the
destination for uh a growing
economy and also economy, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, that
lowers emissions, uh, would you
agree?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I agree.
Excellent. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
I wanna, uh, just sort of wrap
up, um, again as we look into
the interim, it seems like
within this bill, there are
multiple reporting mechanisms.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, we can look forward to, uh,
reports that are on every dollar
that it goes into this fund
through the various agencies,
will we be able to track each
one of those dollars, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, absolutely
that is, you know.
we have the guardrails for that
within the accountability and
Government Act, um, that
language is within this bill.
That's great. And Mr. Speaker
generally, I know you went over
that. I wanna thank you for
that. I wanna, uh, appreciate,
uh, very much the conversation,
uh, today, uh, and wanna say
that I support this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, at a time
where we have good.
Uh, financial ability to invest
in our state that doing this
sort of basic work means a great
deal, so thank you very much Mr.
Speaker. Thank you gentle
ladies.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Chavez,
Representative Murphy.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker or
the gentle lady from uh Tal
Shield.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Chavez.
Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.
Um, I need to correct a couple
of things, um, I believe it was
mentioned that there were 7,
1700 orphan wells, um, being
managed by the OCD, um, lady,
uh, do you recall that
statement? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I did not say that
they were from the that they
were from the OCD. This is the
state land office. Oh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentle lady, thank
you. I, I had, um, been told
that those were actually on
federal lands. Is that not your
understanding?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
referring to the state-owned
lands and the state land office.
I'm, that's what the 1700 wells,
orphan wells are in reference
to.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady. I had understood
those to be on federal lands and
that the ones that uh were
actually being um addressed or
looked at or concerned about or
something on the order of 350,
but, um, Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, um, I too have an affinity
like my friend, uh, represented
small for oil price.com and saw
the same article regarding Texas
and the $100 million that
they're looking at, uh, for
plugging and reclamation, um,
Mr. Speaker, uh
lady, um, I note that, uh, uh,
there has been a bill going
through this body, House Bill
403 that would generate about
$130 million a year for that
type of activity. Are you aware
of that, um, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, I am aware of other
bills, yes, but this bill is not
about that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I, I understand that. I,
uh, um, understand that this
bill is really for two purposes.
Creating master plans and
increasing agency capacity, and
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady is, uh,
that affair summary. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes, it is.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady. I also understand there's
about $10 million for a one time
non-recurring, uh, amount. Do I
have that correct, uh.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it was
originally a $10 million
appropriation request, but that
number is now 13.5 million.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, thank
you for that. I, um, I note
that, um, many of our agencies
are short staffed and I don't
recall the exact number and OCD,
the state land Office, or, um,
in the Energy department, but my
question is this, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, if we
can't attract the talent needed
to do some of the things that
these agencies need to do at
this point. How can we
realistically expect to give the
money and have them, um, sort of
gear up, so to speak, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think there are some examples of
agencies that have been able to
gear up quite effectively and
quickly, including the New
Mexico Environment Department,
so I anticipate that this money
will be spent, um, by the
various agencies to develop
that, uh, expertise that they
need.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I believe that they
have adequate funding. It's just
that they simply cannot find the
personnel or recruit the
personnel, um, and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I don't see how
more money actually helps this
problem. Can you explain that to
me?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I, I don't agree with your
assessment, um, but I will say
that I, I know for a fact that
New Mexico Environment
Department has something like a
2.6% vacancy rate, which is very
low, so they've done the work,
other agencies are doing the
work to uh attract folks to
those jobs, um, in state
government, and I, um.
I anticipate that they will
continue to do that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. I, I, let's take, let's
assume for a moment that they um
cannot find direct hires, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady. Would
you then anticipate that they
would contract for this workout
to NGOs.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
agencies will be able to hire
contractors, but I, you know, I
don't think that necessarily
would hire from NGOs, but they
will be able to hire
contractors, um, and there are
of course, uh, hundreds if not
thousands of federal workers in
New Mexico who will be looking
for jobs.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, um, so some of this
could actually uh go to
non-governmental employees. Is
that correct, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, some
of this may go to contractors.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. That's what I assumed. Um,
I want to return a little bit to
some of the line of questioning
from the, the previous folks,
and that is the sort of a
discussion of metrics and um
could you, um,
Explain to me once again, um,
how, um, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, you will measure success.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
that each agency that gets the
funding is going to submit a
report in the budget.
That details how they they spent
the money and how they will
spend the money and that um that
report is really guided by um.
By the accountability and
government Acts, um, which.
You know, it's, it's, you know,
you can, you can probably read
that if you'd like, um, and that
gives us a pretty good.
Pretty strong guardrails about
how um the agencies have to act
and how they're going to be
reporting out.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, are
you saying then that the metric
success is defined by spending
the money.
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, can you repeat that?
are you saying that we define
success by the money is spent.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm,
I'm not saying that, um, but you
know, all agencies really are,
are also bound by, um,
legislative Finance Committee,
um, performance measures, so
there are numerous ways that we
understand the efficacy and
success of these programs.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, um,
The
Perhaps you can clear up some
confusion for me because once
again, um, my understanding is
that, and I believe you
confirmed this, it was creating
master plans and increasing
agency capacity, but we also
heard previously, um, in the
with uh that it could be used,
it could be deployed into
landfills for methane capture.
Um, would that be consistent
with this bill,
the terms of this, of this bill,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm not sure
what you mean by deployed in
landfills.
Um
Mr. Speaker, General Lee, I
apologize if I talked over you.
Um, no, I, I believe, uh, in
your your conversation with
Representative Small, there was
a hypothetical mention about
capturing methane from a
landfill, yet, um the bill seems
to say that it's supposed to be
creating master plans and
increasing agency capacity, so
I'm sort of I'm confused.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, we
could bring in an expert to NMED
who could look at the um the
plans and proposals to capture
methane from a landfill and you
know develop a policy or you
know or guidance around that,
that's how it could be. It's, I
don't see this as a um I don't,
I don't know like putting a
digester in a landfill. I don't
think that that's what this is
about gentle lady, OK, um, so it
wouldn't really, if I understand
And I think of, of the, of the
creating master plans and the
agency action or capacity,
excuse me, as being sort of an
administrative planning internal
in-house function.
Um,
yet, I see.
Deploying this, these funds for
an operational facility in a
landfill as being something very
different. So are you saying
that that type of thing would,
would not happen. It would be
really, as I would think of it,
more administrative.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
yeah, we're not gonna be
operating a landfill here, but
we could, you know, the agency
could decide if they wanna
develop a plan for, I don't
know, best practices, working
with agency with industry
experts that could happen. I'm,
I'm not gonna put um I'm not
gonna prescribe a program to
NMED. They're gonna determine
what they best need and how they
would best use this funding for
um for meeting the stated goals
of the of the bill.
I'm done, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Thank you Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, um,
There's a recent, um,
Department of Energy study, um,
Regarding it called entitled
Energy Economic and
Environmental Assessment of US
liquefied natural gas exports.
And it noted that the economic
benefits to both the US and our
key allies are extensive and the
environmental impacts are
essentially nitro,
um, are you aware, are, are, Mr.
Speaker, General, are you aware
of that report and is that
something that these agencies
might be able to use in their
planning and.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
haven't read that report. I, uh,
disagree with your um.
With how you view that report, I
think there are some
significant, um, uh,
dilleterious effects from LNG,
uh, but that's not what this
bill is about, I imagine, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, that the
agencies will look at a uh a
body of information and data and
reports in helping to develop
these master plans
and gentle lady, and this report
was done during the Biden
administration by the United
States Department of Energy.
And uh it would seem to be
directly on point, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, as, as a
tool that, uh, the Environment
Department and some of these
other agencies would, do you not
see it that way, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I'm not
debating the um the benefits or
the disadvantages of LNG, uh, I
imagine that the agencies will
use all of the available data
and reports to develop plans.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
and I'm not debating it either.
Um, I'm just asking if you're
aware of the report and if it
might be something that could be
used. I'll move on to my next
question, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, um, SB 83 appears to be
related to SB 48 and 49.
Can you take me through, um,
each of these 33 bills, I'll
call them 3 elements and tell me
how they differ and what they do
and how they work together, Mr.
Speaker, we debated SB 48 for
three hours yesterday, so I'm
not gonna do that. I will focus
on uh the details that you're
looking for, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen Mr. Speaker, lady, um,
my understanding, um, just, you
know, while we may have debated
Senate Bill 48, but I don't
believe we did debate was how
these bills all connect.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, SB
48 is really for community.
Uh, programs and plans and
processes and this is for
agencies.
So SB 83 is related to state
agencies, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, SB 48 is related to
residential planning, I assume,
um, Mr. Speaker, General Le now
and residential, I'll leave it
that. So what about SB 49, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, SB
49 is the allocation of the
funds.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, General
Lee, I think I understand that.
Now I want to go to the bill if
we could.
I'll be referring to section 3
under appropriations and just
uh, uh, it looks to me, Miss
Speaker and gentle lady, you
have $2.5 million going to the
Environment Department.
In the energy and the same going
the energy natural energy,
minerals and natural resources
department and 1 million each to
5 other departments, um,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
presume, is it safe to presume,
gentle lady, that, um, you've
given more to the two
departments that are most
directly, um, oversee, uh,
energy policies, would that be a
fair statement, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that is a fair
statement, and I want to correct
you on the numbers of 5 million
to New Mexico Environment
Department and 2.5 to MA.
Thank you. I'm, I think I'm
looking at the old bill, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. So, uh,
that's right. We've now gone
from 10 to 13, as you stated.
Thank you.
I also want to draw your
attention.
Um, still on page 4.
Um, lines 5 through 7.
Um, Senator, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, when this bill was
discussed in energy.
There was a lot of discussion
about this particular feature.
Um
And mainly it's, it's the
portion on, on, uh, lines 6 and
7 regarding the replacement of
jobs that rely on the extraction
and development of natural
resources. And one of the things
I recall from the testimony that
day was that, um, I don't
believe if it was the presenter
or the or the expert said that
in his or her opinion, the um
The, uh, the jobs related to the
oil and gas industry will not go
away. Do you disagree with that,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady?
Speaker, gentlemen, I, that,
that's really not part of this
bill. I wasn't in that.
Uh, committee hearing didn't,
didn't hear the context of that,
so I really can't answer you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady then, um, can you explain
to me how this bill will, I
guess it would be promote the
replacement of jobs that rely on
the extraction or development of
natural resources, those
industries.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there,
there is funding for workforce
solutions and you know who are
taking a sector by sector
approach to looking at how to
create more jobs in the training
that's needed.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so, so these funds will
not be used, Mr. Speaker and
gentle Lee.
To develop a plan to do away
with uh extracting jobs. Is that
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, this
bill, this bill doesn't, um,
isn't focused on doing all these
jobs. It's about creating jobs.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I, I just find the word
replacement as being
interesting, um, I believe that.
Includes my statements or
questions. Thank you very much.
further debate.
The gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I gladly yield to
my friend from Otero in Lincoln
County.
Thank you gentle lady. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
I just had a, I had a few
questions and out of these 7
agencies,
How do they apply in distribute.
The money.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
are 8 agencies, uh, and they get
the allocation from Department
of Finance and they are not, um,
they're not allocating this
money outside of the agency.
They're using the money
internally.
To build capacity.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
And one of my other questions
was, will the funding be a one
time allocation or does it keep
on coming back? How does that
work, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it is a
one time allocation over 2
years.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So if these 8
agencies are applying for this
funding.
The main purpose of this is for
them to do this study, put it,
put together a master plan and
then give that information to, I
guess, the legislature for us to
study or look at, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I just, I want
to, um.
Correct, that they're not using,
they're not, uh, applying for
the funding. They're allocated
the funding and that funding
will go to develop in-house
expertise, uh, around, you know,
how to.
How to direct the agencies to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and such also to develop the
master plan. So they're not
applying for the funding, the,
the funding is allocated to them
through the, through HB 2.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle ladies. So they get all
this information, all this data
they put together a master plan
and then it's kind of exhausted
from there. Uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, they, they are
reporting to the legislature
every year. So we'll learn, uh,
about the details of those plans
which could include policy
recommendations.
Things like that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
How will this help New Mexico
prepare for climate-related
changes. How, how does that
look?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
the whole purpose of the bill
for each of the agencies that
are getting this funding to um
to look at planning within their
own departments, how to work
together to meet the goals that
we state in this, um,
legislation which is to
diversify our economy, um,
develop some, you know, sustain
sustainable practices achieve
net zero emissions. They'll be
working together, um, as part of
the climate change task force
which already exists, uh, and.
they'll be developing their own,
their own plans for each of the
agencies.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Will there be a focus on
specific renewable energies like
solar wind and geothermal.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
there's nothing in the bill that
says that there must be. There's
nothing in the bill that says
that there can't be.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but will
they be focused on that?
direction.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, not
necessarily.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Will this bill provide job
training and education for
transitioning into clean energy
for
The workforce.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
it could, uh, the Department of
Workforce Solutions will be
looking at, you know, each of
the uh industry sectors and
looking at what job training is
necessary and um you know what
that looks like and how to
implement that job training.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady. So have we ever done
things like that for oil and
gas? Have we ever
You know, offered money to get
them training and send people to
the patch, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
don't, I don't know the answer
to that question.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
The thing that that
I know that everybody's bills
always have good intent, but,
you know, I, I look at a place,
I go to Artesia quite a bit.
I've got a son that lives there,
and I go and I see that art is a
pretty booming little town.
But there's not a whole lot of
places to eat. There's not a
whole lot of restaurants and
stuff there, and I was asking
one of the.
One of the people that, that,
um, served that area. That's
part of their district. And one
of the reasons
It is because.
A lot of people went to the oil,
the oil fields, you know,
because the, the money's better
out there. And if we start
sending people, and I, I think
it needs to be, I don't, I guess
it's gonna be disproportionately
different, but when we start
sending people in that
direction, is that going to
affect
possibly oil fields, especially
if they are, you know, paying a
lot of the same wages.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill does not take away oil and
gas jobs.
OK. Thank you, gentle lady, and
I think that's uh.
All my questions. 011 last
question.
So
Is there not private industry
that does a lot of this kind of
work and why do we really need
to enact government whenever
there, there might be a private
sector that could do a lot of
this and have, you know, like a
free enterprise type position.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I,
I, I believe private uh industry
does a lot of really great
research and I think that this
bill allows uh for the agencies
to contract with those, um, to
make contracts with folks who
have the expertise. We wanna
bring this expertise in-house.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Does a
gentle lady from Task County
Yield?
Mr. Speaker, I gladly Mr.
Speaker, I, I apologize. OK, Mr.
Speaker, you are I yield to you.
Thank you, uh, gentle lady, um,
As you know, in, in the Four
Corners region and, and I do see
here of, of the agencies, um, it
looks like two of the agencies
actually have had some
meaningful impact in the four
corners around the uh
implementation of the energy
transition Act.
And uh Mr. Speaker, um, general
lady, my, my question is,
um, we.
As uh as those agencies, uh, um,
utilize our
Uh, help the, the impacted
communities, um, uh, from the
energy transition Act, uh, that,
that, that money is one time
money that was appropriated
will, um, the money or planning,
uh, you know, with, with, with
those, whether it's the
workforce solutions or the
economic development department,
um.
Those agencies have already done
some really awesome uh community
engagement, community planning,
um, you know, where, uh,
stakeholders have, have, uh,
come together to convene, um,
you know, on, on what uh a
transition economy for the Four
Corners should be, and um, uh,
which Mr. Speaker, general lady,
um, how, how can, uh, uh, you
know, the, the planning here
help with the existing.
Energy Transition Act, uh, uh.
funds that, that's, that's
either available or or or that's
ready to be used again, um, I'm,
I'm uh just trying to, trying to
connect what, what, what's
happening in the Four Corners
and, and with what's written in
this in this law, how we can,
you know, not, um, recreate the
world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I
think, thank you for that
question. I think the experience
is the some of the challenges,
the lessons learned.
learned from the implementation
of of the ETA in Four Corners
really um serve as a basis for
this, um, we wanna fix what we
didn't get quite right, um, and
that's the purpose of, of this
legislation as well to really
empower the agencies, multi
agencies because it's gonna take
lots of these agencies working
together, uh, with the same goal
to um meet some of those needs
that, um, that came out of of
the ETA, so, um, it's, it's a
really.
important, um, the experiences
there, um, really, uh, color and
drive this legislation here and
we can continue to do that good
work.
Mr. Speaker, generally I'm
really glad to to hear that. I
know that there's been, um, you
know, just from, from the, uh,
process of, you know, like uh
seeing multiple.
Uh, uh, community projects being
being, uh, developed, I, I
believe Mr. Speaker, generally
the largest uh construction
project in the in the Salon
County was actually um it, it,
it, it, uh, recently was the San
Juan Solar Project, which
employed over 1100 workers, uh,
uh, put $500 million of
investment into the community
just just to get the project
build out and um and I know
that.
Because of that project, there's
more projects in the pipeline in
uh through the uh.
Through the uh uh integrated
resource planning that P&M is
putting in, they're going to be
putting 2 more projects within
the school district, so I'm
really glad to to hear that, uh,
that, that the, that the
planning here will, will be
continuing on, um, there are
institutions like Dine College,
which started a solo technician
program, Navajo Technical
University has an existing
two-year photovoltaic wind
generation.
A program for students, um,
will, will those institutions
benefit from some of this master
planning. Speaker, gentlemen, I
think maybe we should just
switch roles and you can go
ahead and present this bill
because I think you're giving
the you're giving the arguments
for it, absolutely, um.
And what central to all of that,
what's key to um bringing these
kinds of big uh projects which
not only, you know, hire people,
but bring, you know, GRT to
these communities is is planning
right? and the master plan that
we're asking for that will
happen with this funding really
makes sure that all the agencies
are involved and we're we're
hitting on all of those things,
right? We're hitting on
workforce solutions, you know,
developing the, the, the
training programs along
with, you know, with other
agencies, um, we're looking at
economic development and finding
um finding the funding and, and
bringing in those investors. You
need a good plan and you need
everybody involved to develop
some this kind of very complex,
uh, very community oriented, uh,
uh, project that brings a lot of
jobs and a lot of money. You
need the plan planning essential
to that and that's what this
bill does.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and
general lady, um, when, uh, this
bill came to my committee, um,
uh, Mr. Speaker, I, I did, uh,
general, I did speak about, um,
you know, the impacts of climate
change that has happened, uh, in
the shippro community back in
September when we had a
devastating flood that left over
40 people, 40 families homeless
because of of the of the of the
flooding, uh, and as you know,
there's been major
impact to our state when it
comes uh uh from climate change
has any of the agencies measured
these costs, uh, uh, to our
state, um, Mr. Speaker, general
lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
don't know if they have, um, I,
I imagine that M nerd um is
looking at an an NMED, you know,
is looking at the economic
impacts of, you know, flooding
and natural disasters on local
communities, um, but this bill
can provide the funding to hire
the expertise if we don't have
it in-house or develop that
expertise so that we can make
sure we're giving, we're getting
up to the minute, um, data and
best practices to, you know,
manage these.
kinds of things in the future um
and how to deal with something
that's happening right now.
That's what this funding could
absolutely go for.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. One of those
expertise that I always like,
I'm, I'm starting to like uh
reach out to. It's actually the
the climate change bureau, uh,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, which
is through Mexico Environment
Department, uh, will the funding
here, uh, help, uh, uh, the
climate change bureau, let's
say, uh, measure some of our
greenhouse gas emissions in the
state.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
uh, it, it could be used for
that, yes.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, General
lady, um, I wanna, uh, look at,
you know, some of the existing
conditions when it comes to our
state and
uh, and looking at, uh, uh, some
of the funds that we're gonna be
getting with, you know, when it
comes to like federal funds, uh,
uh, as you know, Mr. Speaker,
general lady, uh, you know,
there's um when it comes to the
federal funds, uh, that, that
we're there is a risk of federal
of some of those federal
agencies, uh, as we're hearing
in day to day news that they're
gonna be pulling away, uh,
funding, uh, to
to our you know pulling my
funding uh when it comes to
protecting our, our, our
environment, uh, will, will this
bill give our agencies better
tools to protect our
communities, uh, Mr. Speaker,
general lady.
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I really
hope that we don't lose those
funds, uh, at the federal level.
I have some fear as well that
that will, will happen um but I
know that this bill will give
our agencies, um, the sort of
mechanisms and.
capacity um to look for other
funding as well, um, and, and of
course to, to, to leverage
funding that still exists at the
federal level, but there's other
funding sources also, um, that
this money will allow the
agencies to, you know, sort of
go after some of those, uh,
grants that might exist, uh,
within, you know, the
philanthropic sector, for
instance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, my, my last question
is, um, I know that uh 11 thing
I always keep, uh, uh, as soon
as I found out about it, it was
the uh the solar for all funding
that is being housed in uh
environment, natural resource,
uh.
apartment
uh, uh, I'm gonna use the
acronym MED if you're familiar
with that, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady I am Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. And so um it, it, I,
I think it's, it's really
amazing that we have this uh
separate uh funding source
specifically to help bring a
clean electricity uh to uh many
communities, especially our
rural and tribal communities,
um, we like the master planning
that's being done here help um.
This agency, um, you know,
maybe, uh, make sure that
underserved, um, rural
communities are accessing uh
this type of funding, Mr.
Speaker, General lady, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, absolutely,
and I think tribal consultation
and um uh you know, working
together is, is essential to
this.
They give Mr. Speaker, General,
that concludes my questions. I,
I, I yield the floor back, Mr.
Speaker.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
represented Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentle lady yield?
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
I'm a speaker and gentle lady,
um.
Listening to this debate, I'm
not sure why we didn't pass this
bill before. It's only what?
$10 million to the fund, is that
right? Or am I missing my
number's incorrect.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it's
13.5 million. That's part of the
budget right now.
So thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady just uh listening to
this bill. It's amazing what
this bill can do and for a
fraction of the cost that
What we've been spending.
Um, I heard that this could help
with 1,700 uh 1700.
Abandon
Uh, oil wells that we've not
been able to take care of even
though we have a reclamation
fund that's supposed to go to
that. I heard, uh, uranium mines
that could be cleaned up.
Um, I heard that this could
help.
The ETA potentially work where
frankly, it has been completely
uh has not even come close to
the promises that were made and
uh for, I mean, for $13.5
million sounds like a
This is a utopian bill. We need
to rename it, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yeah, it, it's
magical.
It sounds that way, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, um, and I guess
the good thing is we can come
back next year and all of these
problems will be gone.
And we won't have to debate this
anymore. I mean, if I would have
been told that at the beginning
of this, I would have been, I
would have been jumping up for
joy because we wouldn't have to
be spending.
Uh, the money we could, we could
close down the reclamation fund
that we are taking from oil and
gas every year to to put into
the uh to the uh general fund,
as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, that, that
reclamation fund.
Should be funded to the tune of
about $120 million a year,
approximately or that at least
that's what it would be this
year. And, uh, but now we're,
we're only taking $20 million of
that dollars into that fund.
This is less than this is 13.5.
A million dollars, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and somehow
this will take care of 1700
abandoned wells. I mean, I, I
mean, maybe I misheard, but
during the debate, I heard that
this could do that. This would
also be money, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that could.
Uh, take care of a master plan.
Even though the money is going
to be dispersed all over the
place somehow a master plan is
gonna come out of that.
Uh, to, to get us to net zero.
I'm just trying to figure out
how such a small amount of
money, 13.5.
million dollars of of uh one
time appropriation or or an
appropriation over 2 years.
We'll be able to do that, maybe
you could help me understand
just a little bit better how,
how this bill is going to be
able to do all of that.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I am
happy to um disavow you of some
of the, um, I think things that
you that you believe about this
bill that you just stated, um,
this bill is not intended to
clean up the 1700 orphan wells,
um.
That SLO is dealing with the
state land office, uh, this bill
would help state land office to
develop the capacity to address,
to figure out how to address
those walls and it could be that
it, you know,
That those walls could be used
for other purposes. That's what
the bill does is to help the
agencies sort of think
innovatively about some of the
problems that we have and how we
can solve them. It does not, it
is not a replacement for the
reclamation fund by any stretch
or any stretch of the
imagination that's not a that's
not at all what this bill does.
It gives the agencies the tools
to sort of repurpose and
rethink, um, and imagine what we
can do with um
The problems that we have today.
That's what the bill does, and
the master plan that you speak
of, um, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen
is um it's, it's a master plan
within each of the agencies.
To figure out what how we can
manage these problems. Speaker,
generally, so it's not a master
plan. It is money dispersed all
over the place and it's mini
master plans in about 10
different locations.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, there
are 8, agencies that will
receive part of the $13.5
million allocation in each of
those agencies will be
developing uh a master plan and
will be developing, uh,
expertise and capacity within
each of those agencies, but they
will be working together as part
of the climate change task
force.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I could save, uh, you did, I
hear you say 5 million was going
to Mner.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no, uh,
5 million is going to New Mexico
Environment Department.
OK, Mr. Speaker, to the
Environment Department. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I think
as far as the uh 1700 abandoned
wells, I could save any master
plan.
Uh, there's no reason for us to
spend money on developing a
master plan, all we have to do
is take the money that's
supposed to be going to uh the
reclamation fund.
That we just start allowing that
money to go to the reclamation
fund and then we as a
legislature, we just have to
have a little bit of discipline
and not spend all of the money
and reappropriate it for other
things. Um, I know.
That's probably more difficult
to do.
Uh, seeing how we actually had a
bill, uh, that we introduced and
uh Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
a bill that we then try to amend
into a bill here on the floor
that would have just
Allowed more money to flow into
that, into that reclamation
fund. Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, I also heard you talk
about uh abandoned wells.
Abandon your, I'm sorry, not
abandon Wells, abandon uranium
mines.
I'm a speaker and gentle lady,
uh, are you aware that we uh
have
A fund that we set up a few
years ago.
Called the uh uranium, the
abandoned uranium mine
reclamation fund.
Um, we put $250,000 into that
fund.
And I believe we, it was in
there for 3 years.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, and
we didn't spend any of it and it
reverted back into the budget.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
We actually then this year,
We've funded $50 million into a
different fund that part of that
will go towards abandoning
uranium mines. I believe 20
million is gonna go towards
abandoned uranium mines. The
rest of it will go towards other
projects, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, such as the clean up of,
uh, I believe there are 1000.
dry, uh, uh, abandoned dry
cleaning.
Uh, shops across the state that
money can go to clean that up,
and Mr. Speaker and general
lady, I believe the total amount
that we were told that that
would take to clean up all of
those.
Uh, all of those, uh, dry
cleaners, uh, was about $500
million so we're not even kind
of a drop in the bucket for that
as well. But Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady,
I I'm sitting here and I wasn't
going to debate this, but
frankly, my frustration level
got very high.
And the reason is, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady,
We can fix these problems.
We have had funds in place that
if we would have just put the
money into those funds or if we
would have just allowed those
funds to remain solvent, we
wouldn't have.
These issues, but Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I'm
It's, I'm starting to become of
the opinion that we don't want
to fix these problems so that we
can continue to point to the
problems so we can spend more
money.
Supposedly to fix the problems,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
My frustration with this year,
we will be nearing the, the very
end of 60 days.
And we have kicked the can down
the road on virtually all of our
problems.
The drug problems.
The homeless problems, the crime
problems.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
now we're talking again today
about how we need to do
something about the abandoned
oil wells. We need to do
something about the abandoned
uranium mines and Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, I think it's
just a way to fleece industry. I
think Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, that what we are doing can
because we in my in the
committee, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady that I sit on in
energy, we had, uh, at least 25
bills that came through.
that in one way or the other
we're going to take money from
the oil and gas industry.
And Mr. Speaker and general
lady, virtually every time.
What I hear about is the
abandoned oil wells.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
if we had just left the money in
place in that.
Uh, in the fund that's there,
the reclamation fund, Mr.
Speaker, and gentle lady, we
wouldn't have an abandoned well
issue and Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, the abandoned uranium
mines that goes back to the 40s
and 50s.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
And
What, what I've heard today is
this.
When we heard House Bill 48
yesterday.
We're talking almost about the
same issues again.
Gentlemen, if we could please
stick to the bill, please.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr.
Speaker, I am sticking to the
bill because these are the same
issues.
If you read, if you read 48
Senate Bill 48 and you will, and
you read Senate Bill 83.
It is almost the same issues.
Mr. Speaker, and, and, and I
cannot see.
How
Just piling one.
Fund on top of another fund on
top of another bill on top of
another royalty, on top of
another tax. It just appears
it's an excuse for us to spend
money wherever we want to.
And Mr. Speaker and, and, and,
and gentle lady.
Quite frankly, uh,
I'm, I'm frustrated.
Because I have to play this game
as if each individual box.
Somehow was not related to the
other and that if we just do
this one more thing, we'll fix
the problem, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I don't think we
want to fix the problem, and I
don't see how $13.5 million is
going to fix the problem. We're
gonna, we're talking, the
speaker about
A
A universal plan.
Yet we're dividing it into 8
agencies and there is no nothing
in this bill that says how one
agency will work with the other
agency.
What I see here is.
We're creating little slush
funds for each agency to spend
however they want to.
And the speaker and gentle lady,
they're already able to do that
because, because what we've
seen, Mr. Speaker, is over the
last 6 years, our budget has
almost doubled.
And year over year we have
record.
Uh, dollars that have been
coming in to the legislature for
us to spend.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
All of a sudden, even though
6 years ago, this governor put
in place an executive order to
do these things.
And every year we've seen
Agencies come in and increase
their budget year over year over
year over year and their
requests year over year.
All of a sudden now we need to
create a master plan.
Because
I guess over the last 6 years,
no department took the governor
serious.
No department actually believed.
That we were gonna, I don't know
why we wouldn't have put a
master plan 6 years ago. There's
one governor over all the
agencies.
And so we're today once again.
We have created.
Two funds and we have heard them
on the floor in, in back to back
days.
That once again are talking
about the same issues we've been
talking about.
For 6 years.
And I
I, I just can't see her in play
pretend anymore.
I can't sit here and say that,
OK, now we're serious about it
and this $13.5 million is going
to take care of the problem.
Or that that $210 million is
going to take care of the
problem, Mr. Speaker.
What I heard, what I heard in
committee because I've heard
both of these bills.
And in both of the bills I heard
about and I heard even on this
floor today about $7 million to
go to.
A local community uh a college
in San Juan County to create a,
a program, Mr. Speaker, for
Renewable energy to to help
create a program for solar
energy technicians, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, right after the
ETA.
took place and we were gonna try
and find jobs for folks in San
Juan County who are being
displaced by the ETA.
San Juan College created a
solar, solar technician program.
Mr. Speaker, generally, there
were no jobs at the end of that.
The program got shut down. We
didn't need to take.
Money appropriated like this to
go and put into a new program at
San Juan College. San Jung
College.
Uh, created the program because
we were told that's the way
we're going to go and the 18,
but Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
what's happened is we've lost.
Approximately 2000 jobs in San
Juan County and we've replaced
them with 10 so far, 10.
So Mr. Speaker, generally there
is no economy in this new green
energy economy.
There are no jobs after the
construction, Mr. Speaker, and
gentle lady of the jobs to build
windmills to build solar panels
or to put solar panels, uh,
solar farms in place. After
that, it takes 2 or 3 people to
maintain them.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
as I read this bill.
It says that we
Uh, the wording here says,
To implement to to reduce to to
to create jobs in the green
energy or renewable energy
sector.
To replace jobs from fossil
fuels.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady.
There are no recurring jobs to
replace fossil fuel jobs. They
don't exist.
They do not exist after the
construction phase, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady.
There are no jobs, so Mr.
Speaker.
This master plan.
It's going, and by the way,
those jobs when we do create
wind and solar because there is
no severance.
There is nothing to tax.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
we are, uh, we all of us are
gonna have to get to a point
where we stop playing pretend
that somehow
There are jobs.
In the renewable energy sector.
The only jobs that exist in the
renewable energy sector are
during construction and most of
those people are brought experts
are brought from out of state
into our state, and then we
can't even find a way to tax the
industry.
So Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I, I just can't vote for any of
these bills because
I don't even need a calculator.
This is simple math in my head
that I can do. I'm not Larry
Scott, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady.
But
To sit here
Once again and see us.
Waste money.
On
A fairy tale, Mr. Speaker, and
of, of jobs that don't exist, an
economy that can't be created a
tax base that will never
materialize.
To replace
Well over half of our economy.
At some point,
The people we represent.
We are going to realize we're
trying to kill the golden goose
or the goose that lays the
golden eggs.
For the emperor's new clothes.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I think we need to reintroduce
that fairy tale all over again.
Uh, to, to kids.
In in our, in, in the education
system because what we keep on
saying, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady and I'll, I'll end with
this.
I am unwilling to pretend the
emperor's new clothes.
are beautiful, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Those new clothes don't even
exist.
And I'm, and I'm tired of trying
to act as if
Uh, this somehow is gonna be
ever a reality.
Unless we embrace nuclear, which
we can't embrace because it also
is equally as unpopular as oil
and gas, Mr. Speaker.
And I, and I
I, I just can't do it anymore.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
There is for the debate, the
childrenman from Charles Eri and
Otero, Representative Henry.
Thank you Mr. Speaker to the
gentle lady from Tas Guild. Uh,
yes, Mr. Speaker, I, I yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Just got a
couple of really quick questions
I don't want to beat it to
death. The master plan, what,
what, what we're trying to
create here is a master plan to
get us, uh, to net zero, and to
help understand how to fight the
climate crisis. Is that correct,
uh, Mr. Speaker, General Lee.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
funding in this bill will go to
agencies to develop those plans
and develop, uh, in-house
expertise.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do we
not have a master plan right
now?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um.
I believe that the agencies have
lots of plans, um, and they are
required to under the
accountability accountability in
Government Act, but this fund
will this money will go
specifically to each of those
agencies to develop a master
plan that is focused on these
goals, which is achieving net
zero emissions, implementing a
sustainable economic policies.
Uh, providing
Technical support for these, for
these agencies to apply for
funding and, um.
Implementing, enabling, or
reducing the barriers to
implementing climate change
policy. That's, that's what the
master plan is focused on. It's,
uh, as is delineated in this
bill.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so
what I'm hearing though is we
have lots of plans to combat
those, but we don't have a
master plan.
Um, so the agencies right now
have plans. We're now going to
create a master plan. It, I just
wanna make sure I'm correct on
that.
And Mr. Speaker, I guess let,
let me help dig into what I
understand is a master planner
tell me when I'm wrong. So as a
property developer, when we go
to develop, say 200 acres before
we're allowed to develop, we
have to have a master plan.
And the master plan gets
approved by the city to make
sure that it makes sense,
because if that master plan
doesn't make sense, they don't
let us spend any money.
To actually do the plan. So, uh,
what my question, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, do we not
have a master plan right now.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I
believe I've already answered
that question. Um, there are
various plans that agencies
have, um, this bill focuses on a
master plan with regard to these
4 goals that are that are in
The bill
That I've already stated. Mr.
Speaker Eddy, so we have lots of
plans. We don't have a master
plan, um, that's what this bill
is going to create is a master
plan. So as a developer with the
city approved my development if
I had lots of little plans so
maybe I had a a utility plan,
but I had no idea where I was
going to put the roads. That's
what the important of a master
plan is, right? I, I'm just
trying to understand that
because in my world master plan
means something very different
so I wanna understand what
master plan means.
in the climate crisis world.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
there is, um, an executive
order, um, that was um brought
forth many, you know, several
years ago, um, that said that
two agencies, MERD and uh NMED
develops uh.
statewide enforceable regulatory
framework, um, that relates to
reducing emissions, and now what
we're asking
The agencies to do is to use the
funding that's allocated through
this bill to develop those
master plans within each of
those agencies that will, you
know, in those agencies.
Already have, you know,
conversations to reduce to, you
know, to duplicability or
this bill that they are
developing those plans that do.
What I've stated several times
already.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady thank you for
setting it several times. I
still don't understand it
because if you talk about master
plans, we're talking two
different worlds, but I'll move
on from that because the next
question I have is yes, you're
right, there, there was an
executive order. I believe it
was 6 years ago. I think that
what what was stated earlier, so
in the last 6 years.
We have plans, but we've yet to
develop in the 6 years since the
executive order, we've yet to
have a master plan.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
bill helps an agency develop a
master plan that has the 4
points listed here. Master plans
differ from industry to
industry, sector to sector.
Agency to agency, we're asking
with this bill for agencies who
are getting this funding to
develop a master plan um with
those four stated goals.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just, I
would like the body to know, I'd
like anybody online listening
that over the last 5 years,
basically since the executive
order has been cast, I can find
about $500 million that this
legislation has given out and we
don't have a master plan yet. We
have plans, but we've yet to
have a master plan. I'll move on
from that. I just have two other
really quick questions in the
bill because I did see this in
energy and I had the same
question you've sort of answered
it, but I wanna make sure I'm
clear on it on.
age
For
Oh no, on a.
It basically
When we say uh on 4A, the
addition of new jobs statewide
and replacement of jobs that
rely on the extraction or
development of natural
resources, so in that statement
I was asked, I asked the sponsor
in in energy. What does
replacement mean?
Are are you asking me that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
yes, I think I, I, I don't know
who else I could answer Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you, you
were talking about the
committee. I understood that you
asked the sponsor of this
legislation in that committee,
that question, I wasn't in that
committee, um, this bill is is
focused on developing plans that
focus on the diversification of
economy and uh if.
If there are jobs that are lost,
what does it look like, uh, for
new jobs, um, that's what this
bill.
Is focused on Mr. Speaker, lady
in the in the actual legislation
when it says replacement of
jobs, what it maybe should have
said is if there's jobs lost, we
hope to create new jobs. Uh, Mr.
Speaker, yes.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
really appreciate that answer
because that's not what I got in
committee and replacement to me,
I actually looked it up because
I wanted to make sure I still
understood it. It meant to take
the place of something so this
legislation when it says
replacement of jobs that rely on
the extraction and development
which I believe means oil and
gas industry that that that's
not actually what this is doing,
so I wish we would have had
amendment to take that out
because it sounds like that's
not actually what this, uh,
bill's doing now in B.
When it says a diversifying the
state's revenue sources to
replace.
The revenues generated from the
natural resources or the
extraction sector again,
replacing that is once again
used in B to take the place of
something and it's to take the
place of the resources
extraction sector. Does that
sound right, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
please repeat that? Absolutely,
and let her B, it says
diversifying the state's revenue
sources to replace the revenue
generated from national, natural
resources extraction sector. So
once again that word replace is
used replace means to take the
place of something so to take
the place of the revenue
generated from natural resources
is uh the, the natural resources
extraction sector which is oil
and gas, so again this bill.
Even though that's what it says
is not to replace the oil and
gas sector. This bill is not
intended, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, to, um.
To kill oil and gas, we need to
diversify our economy period and
this bill provides the funding
to the agencies to look to
continue to look for ways to do
to do that.
So Mr. Speaker, general lady in
B, why did we not just say
diverse diversifying the state's
revenue.
But instead we went on with an
entire paragraph and in the
paragraph it says replace the
revenues generated from natural
resources extraction sector.
That's where I think I have an
issue. That's why I had an issue
in committee. We keep saying
it's not to replace those, and
yet the words that y'all chose
to use in this legislation that
we're debating right now in both
instances say replace.
So if that's not what we meant,
I wish we would have picked
different words or or or really
vetted this a little better to
make sure what we meant in the
legislation is actually what
this legislation is doing with
that, Mr. Speaker, I yield.
There is for the debate, the
gentleman from San Juan,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Wilma,
the gentle lady yield.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I gladly yield
to my friend from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady. Um, I think I heard
a while ago when we, when I was
listening to a debate that you
had mentioned policy.
And uh so I understand the 13
million you're gonna, you're
gonna put that into work and
you're going to create policies.
So, let me tell you about
policy.
And I hope my colleague from San
Juan that's sitting next to you,
will, will, uh, um.
Understand this, and I'm sure he
does.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
policy was put into play a few
years ago in my neck of the
woods.
Bad policy was put into play in
my neck of the woods.
We lost the coal mine. We lost
the power plant. We lost about
1500 jobs.
And I, for one, am not willing
to go back to my county and say,
guess what, we're getting ready
to lose another power plant.
We're getting ready to lose
another, uh, mine, let's lose
another 1000 jobs in our
community because of policy that
failed my community.
Miserably
And there are no jobs. The jobs
you were promised have not
materialized and they're not
going to come. This is a wish.
And for that reason, I will not
be voting for this because I
don't want any other community
in this state.
To look at a failed miserable
policy.
And have to go through what we
went through.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady.
Seeing no further debate, gentle
lady to close. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I move that Senate Bill
83 estimated do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 83 as amended.
The vote
is now open.
I
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 31, the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. Senate Bill 83 as
amended, has duly passed this
house.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of Business Committee
reports.
Mr. Speaker,
Your judiciary Committee to him
has been referred Senate Bill 16
as amended, has had it under
consideration report, same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption for Senate Bill 16
as amended. All those in favor
259.
Oppose me. Yes, it can be report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to who has been
referred. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Rules Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 42 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendation that it do pass
as amended. Speaker, adoption of
favorable committee report for
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Rules
Committee substitute Senate Bill
42.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
Propose nay
It's a good deal.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 53 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Speaker,
adoption.
We are for Senate Bill 53. All
those in favor.
Seeing if I say no.
I'll suppose name.
After viewing the replay, the
ISR the committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 66 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler, chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption. of committee
report for Senate Bill 66. All
those in favor of Xho but I.
Iso's name.
Yeah, I saw that committee
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
to Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 159
as amended, has had it under
consideration report with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We are an adoption of Fall
committee for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 159 as amended. All those
in favor of seeing for a 9.
I
Bosne.
Yeah, I reported up.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee team has been referred
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee's
substitute for Senate Bill 168
has had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption for
Senate transportation business.
No, Senate tax business
transposition Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 168.
All those in favor of say I.
All the supposed name
You guys have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 221 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption report for Senate Bill
221 as amended. All those in
favor say say I.
Also suppose name the have it be
report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee team has been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267.
Has had it under consideration
report same with the
recommendation that it do pass,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption adoption of a
favorable report for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 267. All those
in favor of C59.
What was supposed.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to him has been
referred Senate Bill 274 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report and with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption.
We report for Senate Bill 274 as
amended. All those in favor see
it 5 by say 9.
All the supposed name.
The ISI committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
to Senate Bill 302 has had it
under consideration report same
with the recommendation that it
do pass respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption adoption
of favor committee report for
Senate Bill 302 all those in
favor of say I.
I was a supposed name. Yes
committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 303 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption. We are an adoption of
a favorable committee report for
Senate Bill 303 as amended.
All those in favor signified by
say I.
Opposney
The ISI committee reported.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 as
amended, has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler. Mr. Speaker, adoption.
Yeah
We are an adoption of favorable
community report for Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 70 as amended.
All those in favor of Xenophona.
Allbosna.
Yeah I have it we report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 155 as amended has
had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair. Mr. Speaker, move
adoption adoption of favorable
report for Senate Bill 155 is
amended. All those in favor of
seeing 59.
Opposed.
The committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Bill 318 as amended, has
had it under consideration
report with recommendation that
it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Mr. Speaker,
move adoption report for Senate
Bill 318 is amended. All those
in favor of say aye.
How was Nate.
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee to has been referred
Senate Bill 364 has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
report for Senate Bill 364. All
those in favor of saying no.
I
Yeah, I have a committee report
adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
to Senate Bill 375 has had it
under consideration report, same
with recommendation that it do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Gentle
Christine Chandler chair. Mr.
Speaker, move adoption adoption
of a favorable committee report
for Senate Bill 375. All those
in favor signified by say I.
Or Paul's name.
ISA committee report adopted.
Mr. Speaker, your judiciary
Committee team has been referred
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 507
has had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it do pass as amended,
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair. Speaker,
adoption. We are adoption of a
favorable committee report for
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 507.
All those in favor say aye.
Opposing a.
The I have it be report adopted.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages.
Clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm I'm directed to
inform the House that the duly
enrolled and engrossed copies of
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10.
House Bill 155, House Bill 181,
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 191.
House Bill 233 as amended. House
Bill 298, House Bill 532, House
Bill 571 have been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
return same herewith,
respectfully submitted Sherry D.
Lohansson and chief clerk will
be entered Message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled in
grossed copy of Senate Bill 47
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhansson a chief
clerk.
will be entered. Message from
the Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled and
engross copy of Senate Bill 57
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house, respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhansson,
the chief clerk. Message will be
entered from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and engrossed copy of Senate
Education Committee Substitute
for Senate Bill 19 as amended
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and request.
The signatures of the officers
of the house respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhan,
Senate chief clerk
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House taxation Revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 450 and return same
herewith, respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhansson,
a chief clerk will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 99 as amended
by the House, House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 120, House Bill 2
19 as amended by the House.
House Bill 281 as amended by the
House. House Bill 340 as amended
by the House. House Bill 487 and
return same herewith,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Lou Hansen, a chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Energy, Environment, Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 212 and return
same herewith respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhansson, a
chief clerk.
Me to be entered from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled and
engross copy of Senate Bill 36
as amended has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Lujan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled in a
gross copy of Senate Bill 39 as
amended has been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
request the signatures of the
officers of the house
respectfully submitted Sherry D.
Luhansson, a chief clerk
will be from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
in a ross copy of Senate Bill 7
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the House to respectfully
submitted. Sherry Dean.
Hanson a chief clerk will be
entered. Message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
Bill 91 as amended by the House
and returns same herewith.
The message will be entered.
Respectfully submitted.
Um, let's see, messages from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 510
and requests the concurrence of
the house, respectfully
submitted Sherry De Gohan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered.
House Executive message number
4. Honorable Speaker Martinez
and members of the House, I have
this day signed. House taxation
and Revenue Committee substitute
for House government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 47
with emergency clause enacted by
the fifty-seventh legislature
first session 2025, respectfully
yours, Michelle Lujan Grisham,
Governor.
House executive message number
5.
Honorable Speaker Martinez and
members of the house pursuant to
my authority under Article 4
Section 22 of the New Mexico
Constitution. I have signed
House Bill 161 acted and acted
by the fifty-seventh legislature
for session 2025. I
wholeheartedly support our
veterans and welcome the idea of
removing economic barriers that
prevent them from enjoying our
beautiful state parks.
However, this legislation is an
unfunded mandate and will cost
the energy, minerals and natural
resources department, hundreds
of thousands if not millions of
dollars in lost revenue each
year. The legislature must
provide sufficient funding to
ensure that our state parks
remain open to veterans and the
public at large.
It is important important that
we do not promise the public
program programs that we cannot
guarantee we can continue in the
future. I urges the sponsors of
this legislation to commit to
obtaining this funding at the
next legislative session,
respectfully yours, Michelle
Luan Grisham, Governor.
Message will be entered.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation.
clerk to read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 510,
an act relating to public
safety, providing a definition
for harm to self and harm to
others in the mental health and
developmental disabilities code
and the assisted outpatient
Treatment Act, Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 510. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 510 haven't been read to us
by title is referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation. It is so
ordered.
Gentlemen from Santa Fe and
Sandoval represented McQueen.
Are you ready on item number 35
on the regular calendar. Mr.
Speaker, will you get me to that
point?
that all action necessary for
place in Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23 on final passage has
been taken, and it is subject to
debate amendments or
substitutions, gentlemen to
explain the bill.
Mr. Speaker, Bill 23 raises the
maximum royalty rate on the best
tracks in the premium basin to
25% and without state well let
me tell you a little bit more
about the bill, Mr. Speaker.
I was about to say, you know,
the debate to close, but go
ahead and explain the bill and
I'm sure people will want to get
on the board.
So Mr. Speaker, members of the
body.
Um
I want to tell you a little
story to illustrate a point.
Imagine that.
I got tired of being a lawyer,
which is easy to imagine.
And I decided to
Open a series of hardware
stores.
In New Mexico
Because I love a good hardware
store. You can always get good
stuff at the hardware store.
And I decided to open, to start
off my chain by opening 4 stores
in New Mexico.
One in each quadrant of the
state.
And to do this, the first thing
I'm gonna do is look for a
location, right? Because we know
in real estate,
Its location, location,
location.
So I started looking for
locations in each of the four
quadrants of the state.
And I find some pretty good
locations in each quadrant.
And I find landlords that are
willing to lease me a location
at a fair market price.
And so I'm really pretty much
good to go and
In the southeast quadrant of the
state.
I find a really good location.
Just a primo location where I
know my store is gonna be a
success.
And yeah, I got paid a little
more for this location.
But the landlords still willing
to lease it to me for a fair
market price.
So I'm ready to open 4 stores in
New Mexico.
But then I find out.
Someone tells me that the
landlord in the southeast part
of the state.
happens to be the state of New
Mexico.
And when I find that out, I, I
kind of, I get really upset.
And I see that's not fair. The
taxes are too high.
But it's not fair that they're
charging me that much.
The taxes are too high and my
accountant comes to me and he
says, Matthew.
Those, those are, those aren't
taxes.
Those are lease payments.
That's the cost of doing
business.
That's the same cost that you
would, you would pay to a
Private landowner.
In the southeast part of the
state or if you want to move
across the state line, it's the
same.
The price you would pay to the
state of Texas.
And Mr. Speaker, members of the
body, what I'm trying to point
out is
What House Bill 23 does is it
raises a royalty rate.
It's not a tax.
It's not a fee.
And it's not a regulation.
We're trying to charge.
A fair market price.
For something we own.
And when I say we own that, I
kind of uh.
I kind of undersell it.
Because we
Ownership's different.
There's, you know, there's such
thing as state land, but then
there's also state trust land.
This is state trust land.
We hold this land in trust.
For the bad fisheries of the
land grant Permanent Fund.
We have a legal duty.
To maximize the return on these
assets.
The state land commissioner has
a legal duty to maximize the
return.
On these assets.
What we're talking about.
is increasing our royalty rate
to make it comparable to what
the private party in this area
could charge?
And make it comparable to what
the state of Texas charges.
Just across the state line, 25%.
This is the best of the best and
mostly affects Eddie and Lee
counties, although there's parts
of Chavez and Roosevelt.
It would result in increased
revenue to the land grant
permanent fund.
Of approximately $50 million a
year.
And as much as a billion
dollars.
Over the life of the bill.
It only affects future leases.
So it doesn't change the rate in
any existing lease.
And as I said, it only applies
to the best tracks.
The bill also
Specifies reasons for canceling
a lease if that ever happens.
It requires the state land
office to publish ranking
criteria for how they identify.
Uh, the merits of the property
before they put it up for lease.
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I
will stand for questions. There
is debate, gentlemen from
Chavez, Representative Murphy.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, um.
Will the gentleman, um, from,
uh,
From Santa Fe and Torrent Hill.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Santa Fe
and Sandoval. Santa Fe and I'm
sorry, Representative McQueen,
Mr. Speaker.
Speaker, um,
Representative, I'm reminded,
um, as we look at this bill, um,
That, uh, I too, uh, like a good
hardware store.
Um, and, uh, there's certainly a
variety of locations for those.
But I'm also reminded.
That, um,
That the
State of the industry.
Um, has, is very dynamic as, as
you well know.
And I'm also reminded that.
We've had 5 very good years of
record production and very high
prices.
But we're also starting to see,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
some disturbing trends and some
information, um, that, uh, that
I think we all need to take into
account as we consider this
legislation.
Um, I'm gonna, uh, so the state
of the industry, Mr. Speaker,
and gentlemen,
Um, is such that we've gone from
roughly $80 a barrel.
And, uh, around the 15th of
January just shortly before we
came in to approximately 68.
That's about $12 a barrel of
loss. My understanding the
consensus is, is that for every
$1 the state loses dollar
reduction, the state loses about
60 million a year.
So if this trend continues, um,
The we could very well have a
budget shortfall of some 700
our, our budget, excuse me,
we'll have about $700 million
less next year.
And so I guess I would ask, uh,
Mr. Speaker, and, um, gentlemen.
What do you, uh, what will the
price of oil be one year from
now?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I don't
know. I don't control that and
this bill does not affect that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I, I agree with that.
However, it could impact, this
bill could dramatically impact
state revenues. According to,
um,
The future's price in March of
26th, and I would note that no
predictor is perfect in terms
of, of, of these types of
things, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. But I also note that
some of the best predictors are
market indicators, the stock
market for one, tells us things
about the general economy.
The futures price of oil tells
us something about where um
industry believes the prices
will be.
And the price in March of 26 is
$63 per barrel.
That's $5 a barrel less than
where we are today and that
added another 300 million to the
deficit.
Um, I'd also note, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, um, that we, and
this is according to LFC.
That we've seen a general trend.
Um
And uh in in production.
And in 2014, about 53%.
Of
Our production, the state's
production was coming from
federal lands.
Currently, the most recent
numbers I've seen in 2024, about
68%.
So an increase of about 15%.
Conversely, we've seen in 2014.
Um, production from state lands
was about 36%.
And now it's about 24%.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
what is your understanding of
the royalty rates on federal
lands.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
royalty rate on BOM land is
currently 16.67% in 2032, this
this rate will become a minimum.
And there will be no cap.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, and
actually many of the leases that
are currently producing, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen are a much
lower rate. Uh, is that not
correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, many of
the leases on state trust land
are at a much lower rate because
these leases when they're
entered into, they're held by
production. So as long as the
land stays in production, and I
know you know this, I'm
explaining this for the body. As
long as land sees in production,
that lease stays in effect. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, we
literally have leases there are
over 100 years old, and I think
the royalty rate in those leases
is 12.5%, which is why it's so
important to raise this rate.
Before we lease out these
parcels because we can't come
back later and raise the rate.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, your
understanding is very similar to
mine that we have a lot of
leases at 12.5% and we actually
have new leases that are being
issued at 16.67%.
But one of the things Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen that
you've talked about a lot is, is
that is is about our competition
is Texas. And Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I'd suggest to you
that actually the state's
competition is not Texas, it's,
it's, uh, the federal leases,
because they are being issued at
a much lower royalty rate.
Much lower than even the, the
base rate of, uh, or excuse me,
the maximum right now of 20%,
but what if this legislation is
passed would be the minimum
rate.
I also know that Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and I believe you did
as well, um,
That, uh,
calculation is, is that perhaps
some $50 million a year.
In additional revenue will be
generated by going from 20 to
25%. Did I hear that number
right, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Do you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
yes, I do agree with that and to
be clear, it's revenue to the
land grant permanent fund, so
this isn't, uh, general fund
money. This is specifically land
grant permanent funds.
Mr. Speaker, uh, and gentlemen,
um, are you aware that the state
land office has essentially had
a moratorium or has not leased
uh many of these tracks for at
least a year or two, is my
understanding, perhaps longer.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, the
state land commissioner, uh, in
her discretion in her business
judgment has withheld the best
tracks because she knows the
current cap rate at 20% is it
below market rate?
And so she is hoping we will
change that rate.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, you say it's a below market
rate, but we have leases being
issued immediately adjacent to
state land office leases by the
BLM that are less than,
according to our recent
discussion, less than 17%.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
again that's an artificially set
rate, the, the rate in Texas
going at 25% and the rate on
private lands which aren't
subject to these artificial caps
is also a 25% in this, this
prime area.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you said
it's an artificial way. Explain
to me how it's an artificial
rain. It's, it's something that
the state land office is, is
making a determination of what
they believe the proper rate
should be. The Bureau of Land
Management through direction
from either the interior
department and or Congress has
made a decision and fee leases
are, are negotiated and I have,
I'm certain that there's a
number of fee leases that are
being negotiated in that area at
less than 25%. So I'm sorry, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I don't
know what you mean by
Quote unquote artificial.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, when I
say artificial, I mean not the
market rate.
If the same land office was free
to negotiate the rate?
They would be higher. They're
artificial because they're being
capped in statute, both in state
statute and in federal law.
But Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
when Fel leases are being
negotiated in the same area at
less than 25%. That's not an
artificial rate. That's just
something that something that's
been negotiated between two
parties. Is that not correct?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, I, if there are a few
leases being negotiated at less
than 25%, that may be the case.
There are also ee leases being
negotiated at 25%.
So that's part of the negotiate
negotiation, but we have
prevented our state land office
for maximizing the return on
these assets because we have
artificially capped.
The royalty rate that they can
charge.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, the legislature has uh has
maintained that position for
decades, correct? through the,
uh, through the statutory lease
form. Am I correct on that, Mr.
Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, you
are correct, uh, this hasn't
these rates haven't been
changed, I believe since the
70s, uh, the extraction methods
have changed since then and the
productivity of these wells have
changed since then, so maybe
this rate was appropriate when
it was adopted the 20%.
But it's not appropriate in
today's market with today's
technology.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I, I note that, uh,
That in 2023 and 2024,
Um, there were some 6 leases
that were nominated by a
presumed industry, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that, uh, we
offered and they're and they're
within the best of the best
outline.
They were offered at 20%
royalty, but they received no
bids. So I don't understand how
we're going to take
Leases that were offered at 20%,
received no bids.
Move those up to 25% and expect
to sell them.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so, uh,
I think you're talking about 6
out of 230 leases, uh, for
those, my understanding is they
were put up in the next auction
and they were bid out. Um,
there, you know, we're we're
talking about a geologic area,
um, there, there are areas near
the geologic area which aren't
quite the same. The state land
office has different, uh, rates
in different areas and for
different purposes and they do
this, they also do this about.
Evaluation where they rank the
property to come up with the
appropriate rate. If uh property
is put for lease and there are
no.
Bitters
You know, that can be
reevaluated in the property can
be put up again. There is
actually no loss to the state
land office or to the state by
that process.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I also know that
I believe is the one the FIRs or
the analysis that that
typically, um, from lease to
production can be many years.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I
should introduce my expert. It's
Stewart, who is deputy
commissioner of operations at
State Land Office, and he tells
me typically, uh, from lease to
production, it's about 3 years.
Famous speaker and so by if this
bill passes, leases are issued.
We will have delayed leases for
some 3 to 4 years plus the
moratorium of probably 5 years
for going for going at 20%
royalty rate approximately 10%
in taxes in order to get
A 5% royalty increase in my
understanding that math
correctly, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, I, I
think in, in
In general, mostly that's
correct. Um, the, the moratorium
as you describe it, uh, has been
a year or two, in fact, I think
it's been a year, right? So, so
this bill almost passed last
year, passed out of this chamber
last year, didn't get through
the Senate, and that's when the
land commissioner announced that
she was no longer going to lease
the best of the best, uh,
parcels.
You know, so that those would be
delayed by a year.
The other time frames in your
calculation would exist anyway.
So if we had passed this bill
last year and those parcels have
been put for bid and leased,
they probably still won't be in
production if it takes 3 years
to put them in production. So
the delay.
Uh, by holding back the best
parcels has been a year and
then, you know, because they're
held by production, we're
talking about that 5%.
For the foreseeable future, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and so there
may be an upfront cost. It's
more than made up over the life
of the lease.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I'm,
uh, I would suggest that, that
for going.
30%
Um
Of a revenue stream for any
period of time in order to
receive 5% more just doesn't
really make a lot of sense to
me, but the state land office
obviously feels like it does.
Um, but I would note, um,
That, um, that additional 5%,
and Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
will also lead to the premature
early abandonment, um, because
the world that Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, that is at a 20%
royalty is going to be produced
for longer than a well that's at
25% royalty, just need a common
sense economics. Wouldn't you
agree with that, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, again
we're, we're talking about some
of the best tracks in the world,
some of the most productive
tracks in the world.
You know, these, these wells are
going to be productive.
Very productive for a long time
if 2030, 40, 50 years down the
line.
Maybe they get closed in sooner,
uh, you know, that, that's after
a lifetime of productivity.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. Um,
In the uh energy committee, we
had, I think a fairly robust
discussion about some of the
factors that go in, um, to oil
and gas projects and economic
decisions.
And I'm not going to go into all
of those details. I'll just, I
know you had the benefit of that
and I did many in this body
didn't.
And the discussion as I recall
is that we talked about the tax
rate. And one of the things, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that we,
that we discussed was that, um,
It it was sort of the trying to
compare apples to apples between
states so that we, this state
can remain competitive.
And I think one of the things
that we were discussing was
The difference in essentially
severance tax or production
taxes in New Mexico and uh
versus Texas and other states.
And um the next thing that we
talked about was sort of the
regulatory environment.
That, um, the Texas, uh,
railroad Commission in the New
Mexico regulatory environment,
um, are much different.
Um, it, it costs something to
produce the cleanest barrel and
MCF in the world.
And then the third thing we
talked about.
Or royalties and leases.
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, there we talked about sort
of 3 elements, the term, the
royalty, and the bonus.
And I'll ask you first, um, what
is the typical term on a state
lease versus a term, um, on a
federal lease, and that's the
primary term.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, my
expert tells me that the, the
initial term, the amount of time
you have to put the well into
production on a state leases 5
years and federal lease is 10
years.
Mr. Speaker, and then um we've
already talked about the
royalties, so we're gonna have,
um, in essence, a 20% minimum if
this bill goes through in a up
to a 25% for these best of the
best leases and what would the
royalty be, um, at the BLM
lease, the, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, 16.67. Is that
correct? Would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
that, that's my understanding,
although apparently that's
slated for a change in the
relatively near future.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I, I had
not heard that, um, I'll look
into that more, but and that
surprises me. I've, I've not
heard that at all, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Um, the third element is the
bonus, and that's um the amount
of money that an oil and gas
company pays to the lesser in
order to be awarded that lease.
Um, is that your understanding
as well, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen? Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, so
would you anticipate
That with the shorter term,
In the higher
Um, royalty rate.
If you had
A state land lease and right
next to it, you had a federal
land lease.
Richard received the higher,
higher bonus.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
I, uh, to answer your question,
a slightly different way, it is
certainly our, our understanding
that if we bump the royalty rate
from 20 to 25%, there will be a
reduction in the bonus payment,
um.
Again, that amount of money will
be more than made up for over
the, over the life of the lease.
Famous speaker and gentleman
that, but, um, but that assumes
that that, that, well, that,
that lease is productive. And
while it may, uh, lie in the, in
the best of the best areas, not
all leases are going to be
productive or even equally
productive, right?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
these, these are fairly known
assets. These are desirable
tracks, uh, these are where, you
know, oil companies are eager to
drill new wells. Um, so there
may be variability, uh, but
again, because of, we're, we're
familiar with the geology. These
aren't exploratory wells.
Uh, they know what they're
getting into.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um,
I think we also discussed sort
of some of the things that, that
smaller companies look at, and I
believe, would you agree, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that,
that, um, the smaller companies
generally make the discoveries
in the state. Would you agree
with that, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen?
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, my
official answer is it depends.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um,
gentlemen, I actually, I think
it's fairly well shown, um,
across the country that, um,
small independents, um, make the
initial discoveries. The shell
boom was started by a man named
George Mitchell out of Texas
that combined horizontal
technology with hydro hydraulic
fracturing. He's recognized as
clearly the first implementer of
that of that technology. My
company drilled the first
horizontal well in the state,
uh, in 1991.
Um,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
and we then began a, uh, uh, a
program, uh, in the early 2000s,
um, that, that led to this. I
think that if you look over
history, um, even recent
history, you'll find that it's
the Independent that um finds
the certainly the onshore
fields, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Um, as a matter of fact, there
hasn't been a domestic discovery
by a large company that I can
find since Prudhoe Bay was
discovered by
By ARCO in 1968.
And I will also know it was
discovered by New Mexico's very
own Robert O. Anderson. And so,
um,
I would say that, you know,
typically,
The
Smaller company is willing to
take the risk of these types of
projects and then, um, it's been
my experience at the larger
companies uh usually come in and
buy them.
One of the things that we also
discussed in energy.
Was the need for good data.
And, um, the difficulty, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, and
really comparing and getting to
an apple, an Apple's comparison
between the total.
Impact, um, tax regulatory
royalty, uh, in this state
versus other states, and I would
note that um
The last study I'm aware of was
in New Mexico Research Institute
report from 20019.
And it noted
That New Mexico has one of the
highest, uh, burdens, um, when
you consider taxes and royalties
than uh Texas and Wyoming and,
and other states. Um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen,
Do you believe
Um, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, that, that if we
continue to add to that burden,
it's going to make our tracks
especially our state land office
tracks less attractive. So Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen,
I know that she feels strongly
that the rate needs to increase,
but, um, are you also not
concerned that there may be some
unintended consequences, um,
making, and that one of those
being that these tracks would be
less desirable than a federal
track and even a state a Texas
state track because of the
cumulative burden on the
operator, Mr. Speaker, Jo.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
according to the 2023 LFC
report.
The effective tax rate in Texas
is 8.3% in the effective tax
rate in New Mexico is 8.5%.
These numbers are comparable and
that's a range uh from a of
Oklahoma at 3.2%, a high in
Wyoming at 13.4, so we're
solidly in the middle, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, we've
already talked about how Texas
is already at 25% and Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I also have
a comparison of Texas Trust
lands to Mexico Trust lands and
there are differences in the way
the leases work and by and
large, the state of New Mexico
has much more favorable terms.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, all
these things are, you know,
actually sort of tip the scale
in the favor of New Mexico and
Mr. Speaker, on top of that,
within the Permian, it's my
understanding that New Mexico
actually has a smaller area of
the Permian, but the best areas
so these are, as I've said
repeatedly and probably will say
again, the best of the past.
These are highly desirable
tracks. I do not have a concern
that they won't be leased. I
don't have a concern that they.
won't be leased at 25%.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. I, I do have a
concern and I do, I also have a
concern about the data that
we're all working from, um, in
the very energy committee, I saw
2 or 3 different analysis, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that took
the rates anywhere from 8.25% to
9.1%. 1 study noted that we were
at 9.1% but failed to also
include gro gross receipts tax
and um state uh corporate income
tax, uh, two types of
Taxes that Texas doesn't have,
uh, that total almost 10%. And
so that, that 9.1% or 8.25% or
8.5%, um, may be production
taxes, but it's not the total
tax burden, Mr. Speaker, and,
and, uh, and gentlemen, and, um,
I think it would behoove uh this
body, uh, to, to take this um
this bill through the interim
and at the time, uh, really try
to get some good information
because it's been at least 5 or
6 years since, um, according to
the 2019 study, and I think also
too that uh
It's uh
It's, it's, it's time to, to
really look at the total burden,
Mr. Speaker and, and gentlemen,
um, to make sure that we do
remain competitive because I
think, uh, all of us want that.
I know, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, you believe that
we are, but, but I don't, and I
think that we really need um
some third-party numbers.
Um
Mr. Speaker, um,
Gentlemen, there was another
discussion.
Um, in the, uh,
In the Energy committee about a
concern that I'd raised because
I'd heard, uh, from members of
industry that, that leases were
being canceled.
And, um, Mr. Speaker, in, in,
uh, and gentlemen.
Uh, this has been a real concern
of mine. I was reassured by, by
folks, uh, deputy commissioner
and others that, um,
This, there's no nefarious
purpose to that.
Uh, but it's a real concern in
the industry and I would like to
try to address that, uh, through
an amendment. And so I've got an
amendment that, uh, I'd like to
propose.
All right gentlemen
Please bring your amendment down
to the rostrum.
Or up to the rest room,
whichever one it is.
Make sure it is signed.
It is on, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and I would like a
roll call vote, uh, if I could
please.
can't see you.
Gentlemen, will you kindly read
the number on the bottom.
Yes, I've got uh 232-118.1.
Alright, give us a minute to get
this passed out or sergeants
will do their best to get this
out.
As soon as possible and Lucas
will post it online.
And on his TikTok.
Doing a funny TikTok dance.
I'm beginning to think members
on the floor have flowers in
front of them so that I can't
see your faces while you laugh
at me probably.
Oh, well played representative
block.
It only took me 57 days to
figure that one out.
A little slow. It looks like the
amendment's been passed out and
it is, well, no, never mind.
Back row, back row is still
going and I've also noticed that
any time Representative Lara is
in the chair, you immediately
ask to remove your coats.
He's a softy.
The amendments been passed out
and it is online, gentlemen, to
explain the amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
this.
Um, amendment.
Allows um for the releasing of
leases that were canceled.
Um, unless
Um, they were previously held by
production but were canceled for
reasons other than cessation of
production.
And it's therefore uh clarifies
that, um, if a release is
canceled for any reason other
than cessation of production
that it has to be held for 2
years before it can be released.
Let's go back to the sponsors is
a friendly amendment.
Mr. Speaker, may I ask a few
questions about the amendment.
Sure.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, can you
explain to me the, the benefit
of
Not releasing it right away?
Well, I think what it does is it
ensures that, that, um,
The state land office, um,
cannot use some sort of
technicality to cancel a lease
and then to immediately release
it. It puts a disincentive or,
or to, to doing that. If they
cancel a lease because of
non-production, then they can
release it right away. But if
they cancel it for some other
reason, some technical reasons,
um, or whatever, um, they would
have to hold it for 2 years. So
it's a, it's, it's an incentive,
um, not to cancel.
leases for any reason other than
cessation of production.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
I, I, as this was being passed
out, I had a conversation with
my expert and he gave me the
numbers of what the land office
has done recently. They
evaluated, uh, 6000 leases.
They found 800.
They were out of compliance and
of those 800, which is a portion
of about 6000, so out of 6000,
then 800, they ended up
canceling 24.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
we have heard time and time
again from the land office and
from operators in the area.
Is it the land office will work
with the operators to bring them
in into into um compliance.
That they're not out there
arbitrarily canceling leases,
um, and then on top of that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, you know, a
moment ago, we were talking
about
You brought up the lost revenue
as a result of delay.
And Mr. Speaker,
Gentlemen, we're talking about
revenue to the land grant
permanent fund and, and here
you're proposing a delay.
Which I don't really understand.
And so Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
because of that, this amendment
is not friendly.
Be the Speaker and gentlemen,
well, I, as I say, um,
I would say that uh it's more of
a protection mechanism for for
the people that are only
existing leases, and that's the,
uh, that's the purpose of the
amendment, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, may, may I add
one thing? Yes, sir. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I just
want to call your attention and
the body's attention to the
language on page one.
Of the bill
The commissioner shall not
cancel leases except upon
failure or default of the lessee
to comply with any of the
provisions or covenants within
the lease described in
subsection B of this section.
This language was added to this
bill to provide protection
against the very concern um that
you're talking about, even
though, you know, I'm personally
have been assured that this is a
fear that has not been realized.
Thank you Mr. Chairman or excuse
me, Mr. Speaker, and, and uh
gentlemen, um, I appreciate the
language on page one. I
appreciate it was added, but if
you, as you know, it says any of
the provisions or covenants and
um my proposed amendment is a
little, is more tightly drawn
that it has to be for cessation
of, of production.
There is a debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Chavez Otero, Representative
Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield? Are you.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, help me
understand a little bit more.
Why this, why you think this is
important?
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, uh,
The
The concern is, is that, is
that, um, an individual or
individuals within the agency
could use a technicalities
perhaps. And I'm reassured by,
um, the sponsor and by the state
land office that's not the, the,
uh, that's not what's happening
or that's what's intended.
And I'm sure that may very well
be true, um, with the current
leadership at, at the land
office, but that could change.
And so there's an existing
concern that that is being done,
And then there is the concern
that it that it might be done in
the future. And so it's a
protection, uh, for the, for
the, uh, the operators that
operate the state land leases,
um, that they, uh, will not be
just arbitrarily canceled, uh,
for any sort of technical.
that it has to be the very high
standard of ceasing production,
therefore, as um as a sponsor
noted these leases are for an
initial term.
And then therefore, as long as
production is being, um, oil and
gas production is, is, is being
maintained and so that is where
the term held by production
comes from is that they're
they're leases are currently in
effect.
And are remain in effect because
production is continuing and so
this is uh uh a safety measure.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm,
I'm a little confused, uh, why
would this delay production in
any way?
Um, the sponsor points out that,
that we would, that it would
delay if, uh, the lease could
not be released for up to 2
years. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and so, yes, that,
that would, um, theoretically,
uh, add to the, to the time
frame before the lease goes into
production, but also, um,
provides a safety net, uh, for,
uh,
Um, for the operators operating
those leases.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what do
operators have to do to get
ready to do the production. So
if a lease was, as you point
out, just canceled, um, for, for
a technicality what might the
operator have already had to do
to get prepared for that before
it was canceled on the
technicality.
They would have to go in if
they're planning to drill
immediately, they'd have to go
in and, and file the, the, the
requisite permits. You also on a
state lease, you can't, um, you
must have a, you know, a plan
to, uh, uh, to put your, to, to
immediately begin selling your
natural gas and so many times
those types of infrastructure is
built beforehand. And then, of
course, there's the very long
and, and rather expensive
process of just getting a uh uh
a permit issued and then, and
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, what
a lot of people don't understand
is it's never just one permit.
Um, you know, in most cases, uh,
any single well you might have
to have 6 or more permits, um,
some from the state, uh, in many
cases, um, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, from the federal
government because you may be
transporting, uh, oil and gas
products from the state lease
across federal lands. So, um,
it's a pretty time consuming
expensive process.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, and
that's something I wanted to, to
kind of add on to you say it's
time consuming and all, as we
all know, time is money, or at
least some of us know time is
money. um, how much money do do
most have to have out before
they even get to this point.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, you know, before you even
nominate a lease or consider a
lease, you've got to put an
awful lot of geologic and
geophysics and a lot of science
has got into it so you can
justify, um, you know, sort of
the economics of it, um.
So, you know, we're currently,
my company is currently, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, working
on a project, took us 10 years
to put together. And so there's
very, very long lead times at
times in order to be able to
assemble the acreage, but you're
spending typically hundreds of
thousands of millions of dollars
in geologist time, science,
perhaps, um, you know,
geophysics, um, and that sort of
thing. So, um, and then when you
drill the well, um, the wells
down in the basin are, are
typically.
uh running anywhere from 8 to
$12 million.10 million dollars
is pretty, pretty good average
number. Um, so there is an awful
lot of prep work that goes in.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, what
is what you're trying to do is
make sure that a producer that's
gonna put that kind of time,
that kind of investment into
drilling a well, we want to make
sure their investment they feel
comfortable with their
investment before they put that
money out because a lot of times
what I would assume and and this
is what my question would be.
Do we fear that producers might
Move away from our state or move
to different locations because
they don't have the the
certainty that we have now
invested all of this money and
time and we could be canceled on
the technicality.
But that technicality, this kind
of ensures that they are going
to work with them because they
don't want to cancel them for a
technicality, so all this is is
is just kind of a reassurance
between the producer and the
land office, is that kind of
what you're trying to do here?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Joe, that's
exactly right. And so it, it is,
um, as I say, just a, um.
Uh, protection piece that um
protects the existing uh uh less
um lessees.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I really
like this amendment because I
think it makes both sides make
sure they're working really hard
to make sure that well is
produced, which is good for New
Mexico. It's good for producers,
uh, and I appreciate this
amendment. Thank you, sir.
There's for the debate on the
amendment, the lady from Berlin
and Torres, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentlemen from Chavez
County, please yield.
I gladly yield to my friend
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So please be gentle
with me because this is out of
my bailiwick. It's out on the
bingo card? I don't think it is.
So, Mr. Speaker, Delma, can you
explain to me because we are
looking at.
Page 2
Line 3
And so before we get to that
part, so am I assuming that
we're talking about this
agreement, which is dated on a
certain date between the state
of New Mexico acting and through
its commissioner of public
lands, so the lease or the
person that is the person who's
about to go forward with this
whole plan with this oil
production. Is that correct, Ms.
Break? I'm sorry if these are
very mundane questions, but this
is all new to me.
Yes, actually, the lessor is the
mineral right owner in this case
the state land office
uh land commissioner, um, and
the lessee is the individual
taking the lease that will, will
operate it.
And, and, uh, since you've
Uh, pointed out this form, I
would note that this is a, uh,
what we call a statutory form,
lease form that the legislature
has always, um, maintained that
it wants to keep within uh our
area of legislative control.
Um, there's been arguments, uh,
gentle lady that, um, we ought
to, we ought to give that
control up. We ought to give it
to the state land office so that
she, she or he or whoever the
land commissioner may be can
negotiate these leases, uh, on
their own. Uh, the terms perhaps
and um by term I mean the length
of time, 5 years, uh, 2 years, 3
years.
Um, the royalty rate and other
factors, but this legislature
through many, many decades has
recognized that, um,
Oil and gas development and
mineral development in the state
is critical, critical to our
revenue, to our job base, and so
we have as a body.
Um
Typically reserved, um, or put
up the guard rails, uh, so to
speak about how the what these
leases do and how long they do
them. And, and the reason that,
that, that we've obviously done
that as a body is, is that we
don't want politics or ideology
to, to get to entrenched in the
state's business, especially
when it's important as this, as
a long winded answer, generally,
I hope, I hope that answers your
question.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thank
you so much for explaining that
to me because I'm not involved
in the oil and gas industry, so
I know that there's many moving
parts going into this. So now I
understand that these are public
lands, so you're dealing with
the commissioner of public
lands, and then this is someone
who's coming into this contract
and what you want to add is,
except for leases that are
issued within 2 calendar years
of the date at which were
canceled and that were
previously held by production.
But were canceled for reasons
other than, OK, so explain to me
what that means by uh when
there's no longer any more
production. What does that mean?
So there's nobody using that.
least anymore. Can you explain
that further to me? So, um yes,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the, the way it typically works
is that a well will come in, uh,
at a fairly high level. And, um,
I'm just gonna say.
Um, I'll pick a number 1000
barrels a day.
Within a year, it's going to be
down maybe 60%, so it'll be down
to 400 barrels a day.
And so, um,
These, um,
These leases, um,
Continue to be in effect.
Um, for as long as there's
production, um, being produced
and sold, so let's say that the
world that I just described in
the 2nd year is at 400 barrels a
day.
By its 10th year, it might be at
20 barrels a day.
And by 15 years, it might be at
5. At some point, that well
becomes uneconomic.
And so you've got to do one of
two things. You either have to
go in and add more zones and get
your production up.
Or you go drill a new well.
And so, um, when you, when that
production has largely exhausted
if you don't do one of those
things, then the term, the lease
expires. Now, under the terms of
the lease, you typically have,
if I recall in most cases, it's
90 days to reestablish
production.
So that then of course requires
a fairly significant investment.
There may be a zone in the
existing well that, that you
could go in and open up that
might add production and he
might be back up to 20 or 30 or
100 barrels a day. And then that
will maintain that lease that
because it's producing and
paying quantities and, and
sellable amounts. Um, so, um, or
you have to go out and drill a
new well.
And so the purpose of the
amendment is to make sure if
production ceases, then that's a
very legitimate reason to cancel
the lease.
If it's done for any reason over
a technicality, perhaps a
payment was missed or or
something, um, and I wasn't
dotted or T wasn't crossed.
That's what I'm trying to
protect against. And it's not
necessarily directed at this
land commissioner or this land
office. It's just directed at
what to prevent something that,
that, that could be very
devastating, especially to our
small producers in the future.
Thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that, that explains a
lot. Now I'm starting to get the
bigger picture and I appreciate
that. So when
If let's say there's.
It's not, it's not profitable
anymore. Does that person or
that company notify the land
commissioner, how does that
happen in that process so that
they know we're no longer
pulling oil out of whatever
we're pulling out of it, it is
not happening anymore. How does
that process work?
Well, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentle lady, um, the way that
works is, is that as an oil and
gas operator, I've been looking
at the monthly profit on, on, on
each well. And when that well
goes negative and, you know,
maybe it's one month because the
price of oil dropped, but the
next month it's back up and it's
still profitable.
But at some point, I say to
myself as an operator, this well
is no longer economic. And so,
um, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I've, I've, I've got I've
got to do one of two things. I
either have to get the
production up, um, through
working over the well, or, um,
I need to drill a new well, but
it's something, something that,
that being in the oil and gas
business, you watch all the
time.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, I now understand what
you're trying to get at to, uh,
because it's an interesting
process of that.
There has to be some you're
trying to say that this is no
longer profitable versus a
technicality of something
happened to where that would
then be taken. Would that be
correct? that would kind of, uh,
just for a short answer that
would be, would that be taken
from them at that point or how
does it work if there's a
technicality issue, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. Well, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
I think what will happen the way
it's been described to me is you
get a letter from the state land
office that says,
Due to X, Y, and Z.
It'd be anything other than
cessation of production, but due
to this technicality or that
technicality, your lease is
hereby canceled.
And one of the fears is, is that
that might
Um
Uh, a small operator, um, would
then have to fight that, um, Mr.
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
and would have to hire a lawyer,
we have to challenge the very
large and resource rich, um,
state land office, uh, and
fight, fight it out in court.
And that is sometimes a, a
tremendous financial burden on,
on small companies.
Thank you Mr. Speaker I
appreciate you taking the time
to explain your amendment to me.
Thank you.
There is the debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
Sandoval and Santa Feresentative
McQueen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this
gentleman you.
Uh, yes, I, I yield, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I had a
couple more questions about your
amendment, um.
You keep talking about
technicalities. uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you describe
What sort of technicalities we
get a lease canceled.
Um, Mr. Speaker, um,
It's been a long time since I've
read all the, the statutes, uh,
on the technicalities. So no, I
can't give you all of the
details, but, um, I know that
the language, um, that was
drafted, uh, under one.
Is um.
And talks about the provisions
or covenants within the lease.
Uh, I also know that there are,
um,
State land office statutes.
And so
I, personally, my company has
not experienced this, and so,
but this is something that,
that, uh, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, the industry's
concerned with.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
mentioned dotting I's and
crossing T's. Do you, do you
have any examples of leases
being canceled for not dotting
eyes or crossing T's.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I don't, but as
I say, this is also perspective.
This is not necessarily, um,
looking back, um, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, this is a
protection that, that will, um,
be in place no matter, uh, uh,
no matter the leadership at the
state land office.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
consider a failure to bond or
failure to pay rent or failure
to comply with rules or failure
to clean up spills. Do you
consider those technicalities?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
do not, um, especially if, um,
there's been a dialogue between
the state land office and, uh,
the operator, uh, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, as to what those
deficiencies are.
But, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, we don't know how
a future um state land office
may operate.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
have good news for you. Those
are the other reasons you would
get a lease canceled. Those are
really substantive reasons.
Those are not technicalities.
Those are the reasons that you
exclude with your amendment,
which I think would be a
mistake, and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I'd just like to
reiterate the information we
have from the land office is
that they do work with the
operators, uh, and that they
want to the operators to stay in
production that's how we make
most of our money, um, so Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I, I think
you're, you're, um, your
amendment.
Even if it's protecting against
some future feared harm. It's
just not necessary. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. There is further
debate on the amendment. The
gentleman from 100% Montoya.
Famous speaker, does the
gentleman from Travis County
yield. I yield to my friend from
San Juan.
So Mr. Speaker and and
gentlemen, um,
I, I know you, you just stated
that you weren't sure of any
specific cancellations, but Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, were we
not informed?
That recently the state land
office did.
Uh, take back some leases.
Uh, in the state land office,
did that not just happen within
the last year, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
Yes, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I think, I think from the
testimony I heard earlier some
24 were, were canceled. If I can
recall that number.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
were they, were they canceled
because of any of the things
that were just mentioned,
spills, uh, or, or mismanagement
on the site, Mr. Speaker,
gentleman, or Miss Speaker, uh,
were we not told by
industry that those seem to be
unilateral and without any real
specific reason.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, I have heard those stories.
I don't know the details, um,
but as I, uh, stated previously,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, you know, we've been assured
by Deputy commissioner and, and
others that, uh, that process
was not abused, and I take them
at their word on that. Um, my
concern is, is that I don't want
to see it, um, become a problem
in the future. And I, and I
think that uh
Amendment ensures that.
So Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, even with this
amendment, are there not
processes in place to deal with
folks who, uh, uh, have, have
spills or whatever that they
choose, did we not just, uh, uh,
uh, see a bill go through that
uh would uh increase the.
The uh penalties.
That could be, uh, on state
lands, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, yes,
and, and, and I mean,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
The, uh, you know, the state
land office takes, uh, a very,
uh, hands-on approach from my
experience, uh, in managing the
leases and that's fine, but
that's also coupled with um oil
conservation division, which um
also looks at
That also has extensive
regulatory authority, as does
the Environment department. And
so, um,
The, uh,
Um, the scrutiny is, uh, is, is,
is, is high.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
the scrutiny with this amendment
wouldn't go away. I, I, I do not
see that, that, that, that this
does anything more than to say
that a lease
so Mr. Speaker, as I'm reading
the bill and, and, and reading
the amendment for myself.
If you read uh on page
2, I believe, on page 1,
on, I'm looking at the, the bill
uh with uh.
In context with amendments that
Section A says the commission
shall not cancel leases except
upon failure or default.
Uh, of the leases to comply with
any of the provisions or
covenants within the lease
described in Section B of this
section.
So you're, you're putting this
section B is the form.
Specifically in the language and
the form, so all I see you doing
here is putting in place
Something that industry is
concerned about, which is
Uh, unilateral.
Uh
Uh, revocation of leases or.
On technicalities.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, it, it doesn't make sense to
me that we would have
That we would
Have multiple ways of punishing.
It seems to me like uh if, if,
if these finds that we have
increased, um, that can, that
can be levied, uh, would be
enough to bring somebody into
compliance, but Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it appears to me.
Uh, that.
The only reason that we should,
according to your, your, your,
your amendment to completely
revoke a lease would be for
failure to be producing.
Or to and some speaker and
gentleman, I heard you briefly
with uh the gentle lady from
Torrance.
Uh, and Bernalillo, uh, kind of
go over.
Uh, what failure to produce
looks like, uh, but Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, would you, would
that be?
As I understand, once again, not
an oil and gas guy.
Uh, but Mr. Speaker, uh,
The
When you get a, a, a, a tract.
That's not just for one well.
But that is for the right to
develop out that tract
completely.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that's
correct.
So Mr. Speaker, what, what's
The revocation of.
Of the right to continue
developing that.
That's costly, so when, when I
When a company goes out there
and
Prospects a piece of property
that the that the state land
commission holds.
That lease
It is not just
The value of that one well or
two wells, but the value of that
entire lease to develop, so it
seems to me like this, the
revocation of a lease.
is even more punitive
potentially than a fine, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, you're,
you're correct about that. I
mean, by, um, you know, there's
millions and millions of dollars
that's invested, um, that in
buying the lease, and evaluating
the lease, um, buying the lease,
and then getting the the lease
ready and you could have as many
as, you know, 10 or 20 wells,
uh, on a single lease. So you,
you're correct. It's not just
one well, one lease.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
I, I do believe
Because of that,
Putting guard rails.
Uh, makes sense, in particular,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, with,
with recent stories and the
concerns that I know, uh, led
into wanting to make sure that
the form made it very, very
clear that
For
A simple violation or something
else that we could take through
through a fine.
Or a penalty that we wouldn't
revoke that because Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, even if, even if
that company uh is starts to
struggle, are they able to sell?
That, that, that.
That leased area to another
company and make their money
back out of it. Is that a
possibility?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it's
a possibility, but it's not
certainly, it's not a certainty.
Um, you know, they, they, they
may have drilled a dry hole on
the lease and, um, but, but it
could have some other potential,
uh, it may be that they bought
the lease and one sort of price
environment and it's changed.
Um, so it is possible, but um,
certainly it's not guaranteed
and that's, you know, just part
of the risk of the business, Mr.
Chairman and gentlemen.
So Mr. Speaker, there's already
risk involved that they
Uh, in an exploratory nature,
they go in and are not.
Uh, having success or the price
as you said the the market
changes.
Um
But if their rights are revoked
completely. They're not even
given the option of being able
to sell to maybe somebody else
who sees the value there.
So, uh, Mr. Speaker, I, I just
see this as simple guardrails.
This is something that
Um, rather than just
Uh, looking to the benevolence
of
Government officials
Um, I, I, I, I'm never.
I'm never going to be that
person who says I'm gonna trust
government.
To be a benevolent dictator.
And I, I, I just, I don't
believe in, in, in giving up
that kind of authority. I do not
believe that that is what we as
legislators should do, uh.
We don't do that with other
industries.
Um, and if other departments
that manage other industries, so
Mr. Speaker, I, I, I, I think
this is just uh
Guardrails and I think that
their common sense guardrails
to, to, to make sure, who knows,
uh, there is not, uh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, and gentlemen, if
For instance, uh,
In, in the future, there were to
be.
Uh, a commissioner of public
lands that maybe is looking
For those opportunities we have
to wait.
An election cycle of 4 years
potentially.
For to to to be able to do
anything about that. In the
meantime, Mr. Speaker, uh,
Those public lands are not being
developed and our trust fund is
not growing, so I appreciate
your, your amendment and I, I do
plan to support it and I urge
the body to support it.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House floor amendment number 1,
the Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
We are on a tabling motion to
house floor amendment number one
to Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
A lot of yes and the amendment
would have been tabled I would
have no, we're back in the
amendment.
32nd be clock.
What's about to close.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 35 in the affirmative, 24 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 1 to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 23 has been tabled.
Gentlemen, back to you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Um,
Sorry, a little confusion here,
uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen,
um, one of the things that we
talked about, um, was keeping
New Mexico competitive.
And um I think we all agree that
we need to do that. Um, and so
one of the things that I would
like to see.
Is New Mexico.
leases
Um
Going to New Mexico companies.
And so I wish to offer an
amendment that um will help do
that.
Gentlemen, I believe you have
moved house floor amendment
number 2, Mr. Speaker, on
Amendment #2 for we'll get that
passed out and you recall.
All right, gentlemen, what is
the number on the bottom left?
Mr. Speaker, this number is
232116.1. Let's get that passed
out and posted online, give it a
Write the amendments posted
online and it has been passed
out, gentlemen from Chavez to
explain the amendment.
Being the Speaker and gentlemen,
um, one of the things that I
think that could perhaps
Um, alleviate some of the
economic pressure on uh
On New Mexico oil and gas
hoppers, especially smaller
operators would be a, uh,
essentially.
Uh, what's done, I believe in
sections of procurement code and
other parts of public policy
where you give a, uh,
I
Advantage to a uh local company
in the bidding process.
And so what this amendment would
do.
Would be to allow, um, and New
Mexico resident business to um.
Be able to deduct 5%, uh, from
the accepted lease bid, so, uh,
a practical way of looking at it
would be to say, let's say,
That one
New Mexico Bay is still a gas
company, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
goods on lease and bids $100 an
acre.
And the second bid is from a
Texas company and they bid $90
an acre.
And the 3rd bid.
It's from another Texas company
and they bid $85 an acre.
So the New Mexico company would
lose or would win the bid with a
bid of $100 an acre.
But would only have to pay $95
an acre.
With the idea being that, um,
the benefit to the state is more
than offset because that
business is a resident of the
state, employs people in the
state, pays taxes in the state
and focuses as most of the
smaller companies in, in, in the
state do, um,
On, uh, on, on projects located
in New Mexico.
Gentlemen, is this a friendly
amendment?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
The scene in Mexico is required
to maximize the return from
these assets, your amendment
would not only violate federal
law, it would also be
unconstitutional under our state
constitution and as such it's
not a friendly amendment.
Right, is there a debate on the
amendment, the gentle lady from
Eddie.
And Lee, no,
from Lee Lee.
Mr. Speaker, does the gentleman
from Travis County yield.
I yield my friend from Lee.
Awesome. So I am looking at this
amendment, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, can you tell me what
the precedence is here.
Um
Mm
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle lady,
um, I believe we located
several, um,
But it's well known that, um, in
certain, um, bid and procurement
contracts that the state issues
that they do this similar sort
of thing.
And um
If it is a violation of state
and federal law, I, I, I, it
must be, um, odd, it seems odd
to me that we're doing it in so
many other areas.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
there's a film production, 5%
tax credit. Could you elaborate
a little bit more on that?
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, I know that, uh, the film
industry is able to not only
deduct a large percentage of
their expenses, something like
25% if I recall, um, but there's
also a tax credits, uh, on
things that are purchased, uh,
and on the, uh, price and the
amounts that are paid to the
Mexico res if you hired a Mexico
residents and I believe that's
what that 5%, um, is
about
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, are
you aware of the procurement
code and the 8% good advantage.
Um, uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, I'm generally aware of it,
um, but as I know, we have, um,
seen many times when contracts,
um, offer a benefit to New
Mexico-based, uh, business, and
I think that if we probably
search long and hard enough, we,
we find quite a few more
examples.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I did
some research on the procurement
code. Would you mind if I read a
little bit of it?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, General Lee,
I'd appreciate that. So, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen on the
procurement code 13-4-2
application of preference, going
down to section B1, it says for
the purpose of awarding a public
works contract using a formal
bid process, a public body shall
deem a bid submitted by a
resident contractor of Native
American resident contractor to
be 8% lower than the bid
actually submitted. Were you
aware of that?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
only generally.
And I'd like to add a different
part to that, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the next part says a
resident veteran contractor or
Native American resident veteran
contractor with Annual gross
revenues of up to $6 million in
the preceding tax year to be 10%
lower than the bid actually
submitted. Were you aware of
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
lady, only generally and, but I
think it it all of your
examples, um,
Demonstrate very clearly one
thing.
And that is, it's been in the
public policy of the state to,
uh, wherever appropriate to
offer uh advantages to
Mexico-based businesses and, um,
I haven't been long enough here
to, to know all of the reasons
behind that public policy, but I
suspect it's because
And the Mexicans want to take
care of New Mexicans and we also
want to make sure that our small
businesses thrive and um so I
think uh my amendment is a when
compared to other industries and
other types of treatments is,
um, is, is pretty, pretty
modest.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
let's talk about unintended
consequences. With this reduce
or discourage new drilling and
production.
No, I think on the contrary,
it's certainly, it would
certainly Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady would certainly
Um, encouraged New Mexico
businesses to drill more and
perhaps even to be more active,
uh, on state leases, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, as, as,
uh, I discussed earlier today,
and we're seeing a trend on
state leases where they're
becoming less and less of our
production base.
And so, um, I think, uh, this is
actually encourage the
development of state leases,
which is something that we
really need to do, um, because,
um, you know, we're, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, we're spending
almost 11.
$11 billion this year and most
of that, um, or much of that is
recurring and much of that
presumes that we're going to
continue to maintain our
production levels.
And, you know, on top of that,
it presumes, you know, prices
that are much higher than we are
now.
And also, uh, Mr. Speaker and
general lady, uh, much higher
than they're projected to be,
uh, a year from now and so uh
it's pretty simple.
In the oil and gas industry, if
you're going to maintain the
same sort of revenue profile.
And your prices drop, then your
production better go up.
And conversely, if your
reduction drops and you better,
you better pray for higher
prices.
And what I'm saying is, is that
we are trending and nobody
knows. I mean it could turn
around, we could have a
worldwide event tomorrow that
would change all of this with
Speaker and gentle lady.
So we don't know what the price
is, but the consensus seems to
be that it's going to be
substantially lower than it is
now.
And so I would very much like to
see New Mexico operators
drilling New Mexico State lands
in order to, um, keep our
production up.
Thank you for that elaborate
response, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen. So let's talk about
those increasing rates. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, if we
increase the rates, is it gonna
to discriminate against the
small and the local producers.
Yes, uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady, it's gonna be much harder
for a small producer to absorb
that additional 5% royalty rate,
Um, the larger companies
probably, uh, will, um, absorb
it better, um, because what we
see in this, um,
Life cycle of the oil and gas
business, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady.
Is that while the
Small producer is the one that
generally comes up and makes the
discovery. It's the large
producer that generally goes in
and develops the lease and takes
a lot of that front end
production that higher rate
production.
At some point, uh, in many cases
that
Um
That lease once it gets down to
lower production is sold to a
smaller operator.
Uh, who maintains it, develops
it, and then in many cases come
up with a new idea, a new
technology solution and then the
major comes back in and that was
my point earlier about the 5%
also.
hurting on the, the tail end of
the life cycle of the well. And,
um, so I'm concerned about that
as well.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I
keep hearing proponents say that
this is gonna make us more
competitive with other oil and
gas states. Is that true?
And this, I've heard Mr.
Speaker, General Lee, I've heard
that as well. But um I think as
you heard in the Energy
Committee as I went through, we,
we really, uh, we don't know how
far out of competitiveness we
are at this point, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, and the reason
is is because we've got a whole
bunch of different analysis
telling us different things. And
so, um, that is, I, I, I, that's
why I don't think that we ought
to become, um, any more
non-competitive, uh, by adding
additional royalty rates.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, thank
you so much for that. You know,
I think that raising taxes and
fees and royalties to our most
important industry is a really
odd definition of competitive,
but I'll move on to my next
question, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, um, I believe in this
session and please correct me if
I'm wrong, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, that there's been
about 23 bills in this session
alone, um, 16 in the house and
17 in the Senate that are
impacting New Mexico's.
Oil and gas industry. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
that, that is my understanding
as well.
And is this increased regulation
going to have a direct impact on
our economy, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh, I
don't think there's any doubt
that, um operators pay a higher
price to operate in New Mexico
because of the, um, cumulative
regulations, that coupled with
higher taxes and now higher
royalties, I believe, um, will
put us at a real disadvantage
going forward.
So Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, in my
humble opinion, it seems a bit
disingenuous to say that the oil
and gas industry is not
politically out of favor in New
Mexico. Would you agree with
that?
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I've
certainly heard that we're not,
um, but sometimes when you have
almost 2 dozen bills directed at
your industry, it's a little
hard to feel that way.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I think
that this would be a really
friendly amendment to my dear
friend and Dona Anna. I bet if
we saved money that there'd be
more money to go turkey hunting.
Just, just a thought, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, and that
concludes my remarks. I'll yield
the floor.
Thank you gentle lady, Mr.
Speaker further debate, the
gentleman from Lee,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from Chatersh Hi.
I certainly yielded my friend
from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I uh
Kind of love this amendment. Let
me explain why.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, do
you?
This is, I understand this is
your first year here, not your
first year.
So, but in this role.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, for
the last 5 years that I've been
here for the 10 years prior to
that that I pushed for
transportation projects.
We consistently as a body.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, talk
about the need for New
Mexico-based contractors. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, do you
see that in your neck of the
woods with your local
contractors when we're building
roads and infrastructure.
Uh, yes, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and not only do I see
that, I see, um, more and more
companies locating if they can
across the line to Texas.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
correct. So, but when we look,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, with
respect to heavy highway
construction work. We have 6
major companies that are based
in the state of New Mexico that
get, guess what?
Guess a percentage of what they
get, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Um, I would guess it's somewhere
between 5 and 10%, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, they
get 5%, uh, just for being from
New Mexico. They get an
additional for veteran owned and
older women owned and, and
different, different things, but
the baseline, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, this is 5%.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree.
That the state lands office job
is to maximize the return for
the residents of the state of
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we've already
negotiated this year and lost
our negotiation with respect to
whether or not it's actually
A benefit for the residents of
the state of New Mexico when we
offered an opportunity to
Provide a return.
In our house 2 subs uh um floor
substitute where just like um
Alaska, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we gave money back to
the residents because it's
there.
mineral.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, Jim, I would.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
there is no, there is nothing in
state law that says there's not
a good precedence for this for
the uh bill sponsored to say
that no, we shouldn't do that.
We do that.
Statewide
In so many different areas, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, we're
gonna hear different bills
tonight that that make life easy
for out of state contractors to
come in and do work in the film,
film industry.
But that's OK.
Because it's not only gas.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think this is a great idea. I
really
Really am frustrated, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that I
didn't come up with this idea.
To be honest with you, because
it makes perfect sense.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that,
that I watched this. I see the
beds on a monthly basis with the
DOT.
Where we're giving a precedence
for in-state contractors. In
this case, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we're given a benefit
and a precedence to in-state
producers.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, can
you give me a good philosophical
reason why this is a bad idea.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
really can't. I mean, the, the
thing is, is that, um, I, I, I
think that it was mentioned that
um the uh the state land
commissioner a fiduciary and
needs to maximize the benefit to
the beneficiaries, and I think
it'd be very easy, uh, to, to,
to justify, uh, that they're
maximizing the benefit by using
this, uh, this very um um
amendment, um, it obviously will
encourage.
Uh, the Mexico businesses to
stay in New Mexico, um, it'll
result in keeping uh families
and, and, and kids, kids in our
public schools, um, and
remember, uh, my recollection
is, is that, uh, if you pay a
local company $1 that dollar is
going to circulate through the
economy multiple times. I've had
heard as low as 4 times and as
much as 6 times. I don't know
exactly what that is, but it's,
it's certainly, uh, it seems
Reasonable to me so because of
all of those reasons, the
state's going to make more of
the beneficiaries are going to
make more, um, and, um, it's
just and, and it'll be good to
keep uh business in the in New
Mexico.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
love the way that you put that.
We have a fiduciary need.
The state land commissioner has
that.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, do
you think that any of our other,
or any of our 18 department
secretaries don't have that same
fiduciary need. Is there
anything in, in your wheelhouse
that says that no, they can just
go free Willy.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, no,
um, I know that, uh, the, uh,
the
The structure of the state land
commission, uh, the, um,
The the formation of it, it was
all all by constitution and, um,
but generally, I think all of
these sec uh all of the
secretaries and all the, uh, the
folks with decision making
authority within the government
have that very same
responsibility.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
are correct, and let's just deal
with the secretary of the DOT,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen.
Irrespective of the bid price,
there's an automatic deduct of
5% if you're contracting license
is in the state of New Mexico.
You can add some more, like I
said, with the veterans, with
the small business and uh um uh
minority.
Based businesses, but at the end
of the day, there is a deduct
that is allowed to happen.
To and take a reduced cost.
For or reduced benefit.
Um, and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, this isn't quite the
same thing, but at the end of
the day it is still.
Honoring the fact that we have a
business within the state of New
Mexico, that is looking to
continue to do business in the
state of New Mexico. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, yesterday we had
the state land office had this
cool computer system set up and
we were able to map out the, the
township and regions inside of
there, and I had several people
that stood up, that came by and
they said, what are you doing?
And I said, well, I'm mapping
out an area that the
State land commissioner wants to
say that we need to charge more
for oil and gas production.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I had
people from
Different
Uh, ethnicities. I had people
from different um salary ranges
from everything sitting there
going, why would we do that?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think this is a great idea. It's
a simple solution.
That helps our small private
businesses.
Privately held businesses
independents.
Um,
continue to, to be able to do
work and want to do work in the
state of New Mexico. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I really, truly
don't understand why there is a
consistent such a strong
consistent wall Caesarean says,
no, no way in heck. We're not
going to do this. We're gonna
get our 25% or we're not gonna
do this, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, there's a book in the
Bible.
Um
Of a man by the name of Jonah.
That told told God to go pound
sand and went the opposite way
and it didn't work out so well.
He had to spend some time in the
fish in the mouth of the fish
got spit out and was weeks
behind and still had to go do
what he was supposed to do.
At the end of the book, chapter
4, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, he
sat there and said, you know
what? I knew you were gonna do
this. I'm gonna go sit back and
watch. And he had to pay the
penance again for that, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, at some
point in time,
We need to hear the voice of New
Mexicans.
We need to
As a body, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, as a bureaucracy, we
need to sit here and say, you
know what, let's find a way to
encourage.
Our local businesses to stay in
New Mexico, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, we have
Uh, bill sponsor right now
that's sitting here
consistently. Last year, this
year, they're saying no, we're
going to do this no matter what
we're going to force this down
your throat, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and, and I, I just
don't get that, especially when
you start dealing on the
peripheral of that same zone.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I
appreciate this. And as I said,
I'm frustrated that I didn't
come up with this idea. Thank
you so much.
With the debate on the
amendment, the general lady from
Elison of Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with
the, uh, gentleman yield. I will
certainly yield to my friend
from Burnley. Thank you, thank
you, Mr. Speaker, thank you, um,
gentlemen. I must say that I am
very intrigued by your
amendment, um, couple of
questions, uh, first, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, one of the
How many, uh, New Mexico based
companies currently bid on, um,
some of these, these higher
producing, uh, tracts.
Um
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, it's
hard to know for sure, but the
companies that I'm familiar
with, um, you know, generally,
uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, um, somewhat familiar with
their activities through Mexico
and Gas Association or IPANM. I
can, I can think of at least a
dozen specifically that I know
and probably 3 or 4 times that.
Um, that probably would be
bidding on these leases.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. That, that's
great to hear, um.
Because I do like the idea, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen of the
additional revenue coming back
to the state in some of those,
um, direct and indirect.
Uh, revenue sources of GRT
salaries, um, money going into
the local economies, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen.
When, uh, the sponsor responded
to whether or not this was a
friendly amendment, um, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the sponsor
did reference, um, some of the
constitutional responsibilities
um that the state land office
has and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
I think a constitutional office
is a bit different than a
secretary or an executive agency
with procurement codes. So it's
not quite apples to apples, um,
but Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm
wondering if, um, in your
crafting of this legislation,
you have any, if there're, you
have any legal analysis or um
sort of um a counter, something
that I could consider, um, that
might.
Uh, be a different perspective.
The English speaker and gentle
lady, well, I would say this is
that from
From my perspective, um,
There's a lot of subjectivity to
these types of decisions by the
land commissioner, um, she made.
The decision
Um, not to lease certain tracks,
um, I would argue that, um, she
should have, um, because they
would have been leased a year
ago, maybe at 20%, but they'd
be, um, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, as we noted, they
would be in production a year
earlier.
Um, so, um, she, she made that
decision based upon her belief
that that was the proper
decision. I think that could be
challenged and, um, so that
suggests to me that she has some
latitude and how she goes about
that. I know that she is, um,
land commissioner, Mr. Speaker,
and General Ley is also, um,
made certain determinations
about the value of renewable
leases, um, and what those, uh,
and, and the, the
Competitive uses, but we, we
would call and, and, uh, public
land management policy as as
multiple use.
And putting one use above the
other as opposed to, um,
utilizing a piece of property
for all of its potential uses.
So, um, as you know, um, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Uh, I'm not an attorney, um, I
didn't, uh, get a legal opinion,
but I've had discussions and um
I think that
Um, that, uh, we, I, I think
we're on relatively solid
ground, um, I would also note.
That, um,
We've heard in this body and we
certainly have heard in the
committees that you and I share,
committee you and I share, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, oh, we
can't do that. That violates the
anti-donation clause. And some
people say, no, no, it doesn't.
And other people say, oh yes, it
does.
So, um, I'm not sure, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, uh, that
we'll resolve that legal
question here tonight. Um, but
the worst thing is is that we
put an amendment in that favors
New Mexicans and then it gets
strike down and it's, and it's
the best thing would be if it's,
you know, affirmed by a court
and, and if it's not, then it's
not.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
Thank you. Um, those were my
questions. I appreciate the
conversation, um, I don't know
that I'm quite ready.
Uh, to put an amendment support
it without the, the legal
clarity, um, but I really, I
think this is a, a.
Um
A novel approach, and I
appreciate you, uh, putting New
Mexico businesses first. Thank
you.
Thank you. There is further
debate on the amendment to
Representative.
From
San Juan
I think Mr. Speaker does.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from uh uh Chavis
County. I certainly yield to my
friend from San Juan.
Um, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I, I too, uh, think
this is a really
I think this is really good
amendment for the body to
consider.
Um, Ms. Speaker, um, I think.
Uh, it's not that often we've
seen it, uh, we've seen it in
the past, Mr. Speaker, where
Um
Where
An amendment has been
considered.
Uh, unfriendly.
But then was.
Um
Hold on just a second.
So Mr. Speaker, uh, we've seen
in the past where we've seen a
bill sponsor say that amendment
was unfriendly, but it has been
adopted by the body.
For compelling reason.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, I would say
this is probably the most
compelling reason uh for that,
that I've seen this session.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, we do this all
the time where we try to put a
preference for New Mexico
business because of all those
other taxes and other benefits.
That, uh, come with there being
a
It being a New Mexico-based
business and so not the least of
those which are jobs that are
created in New Mexico and that
then.
Those folks by homes.
Um, they send their kids to our
schools we tax them they get the
GRT from the employees in those,
in those communities so that is
a.
That's a very, very compelling
reason, I think for the body to
consider this amendment.
Um
Mr. Speaker,
Uh, we were also, we've been
told a couple of times in
committee.
Uh, that.
We have seen an exodus.
Of New Mexico oil and gas
companies either they've left or
they've gone out of business and
just have decided to retire. So
Mr. Speaker, could you
I'm not sure if you, you have
those numbers in your head, but
uh, could you, uh, uh,
potentially recite what, how
many New Mexico small oil
companies have either gone out
of business or have left the
state.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
yes, um, at least somewhat
anecdotally. I know that in my
hometown of Roswell, we are down
to 4, I believe, possibly 5
smaller independent-based
companies, um, just a decade ago
that was 3 times that number.
We've also, uh, I can personally
tell you that I've had, uh, very
close friends of mine that, that
run companies very much like not
mine.
And they are now based in
Dallas.
Um, there's at least 3 companies
I, I, I can think of there,
maybe 1 or 2 more in, in
Houston.
But
They have, they have chosen, um.
To, to relocate for a variety of
reasons, um, many times it's
because it's difficult to
attract highly skilled and
technical personnel to New
Mexico because of the, um, uh,
the status of our education
system, uh, and our medical lack
of good medical care.
And um that's Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that's, that's not to
disparage the individuals
working in those industries
because I think we have really
incredible teachers and nurses
and doctors, um, but we don't
have enough of them and it's,
and it's mainly because of, of
policy, as you've discussed and
I've discussed, but, um, I can
tell you that they've not only
have relocated their businesses
to out of state, but the
relocating their business focus
to Alice State. They may still
maintain some production.
Some activity in the New Mexico
because of, of uh of legacy, um,
they sent and so but in terms of
expanding their businesses,
they're not doing it here.
So Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, I do remember the numbers of
folks of, of companies that were
in business in New Mexico.
That are not in business in New
Mexico now, um, and that number
was a 20% decrease over about a
two-year period, uh, Ms.
Speaker, that, that number was
Somewhere around 520.
That were in business two years
ago in New Mexico that are now,
I believe the number was 4018.
That was the number that was
provided to us, so, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, we've
already seen an exodus.
Of what would be jobs located in
New Mexico. So Mr. Speaker, um.
And gentlemen, I don't know, I
don't know if you remember or
not the, uh, I, I'm new to being
a ranking member.
Uh, in, in, uh, the Energy
Committee, but when we sat down
and I, and I talked with the
members of the Republican
members of that committee. I
explained my philosophy and the
Speaker, uh, that philosophy is
That I will usually side with
the small producers in New
Mexico.
Because they're either in
business or they're out of
business in New Mexico.
For Mr. Speaker,
If I looked at the folks that
are on the permian Basin.
They're generally they could be.
Potentially
On the Texas side.
Or on the New Mexico side of
that invisible line.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the large companies
We make it difficult enough on
them, they're in business in New
Mexico and everywhere else.
Or they're just in business
everywhere else.
So Mr. Speaker, I, I think it's
a, it's this is really a very
reasonable, um,
A bill in particular, I'm sorry,
amendment in particular, because
we're not just talking about the
best of the best tracks in the
Permian.
Uh, this, this new designation.
Would be almost the entire
Permian.
Uh, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, the, the best of the
best is
That deepest play in the
Permian, which is on both sides
of the
New Mexico-Texas border.
So we're talking about trying to
have new Mexico businesses,
maybe give them a little bit
better opportunity to still be
able to play in that entire
Permian Basin, not just, not
just that deepest, uh,
Uh designation
So Mr. Speaker, um,
I, I, I don't have another
question for you except this,
and this is before, I don't see
any other folks debating, oh, I
guess there is, but
Um, I'm gonna ask you this one
question because I didn't hear.
Did you ask for a roll call
vote?
And Mr. uh Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I believe I did.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That
was, that was my last question.
There's sort of the the
gentleman from Montero,
Representative Block. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, with the kind
gentleman from Chavez, please
yield. I'll certainly yield to
my friend. Thank you so much,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So I
really like your amendment as
well, and I won't talk about how
amazing it is because we already
have established how amazing
this amendment is and how
innovative, intuitive it is, but
I believe there were some
questions from other members
about constitutionality about
this. So I have a friend who
apparently stays up pretty late,
a lawyer who I've been texting.
And this lawyer, Mr. Speaker, he
gave me a few cases, so I just
want to start off.
With a few pieces of
information. So,
According to him, local bidding
preferences have been upheld by
courts so long as it's both a
legitimate government interests
and minimal burden on interstate
commerce and the US Supreme
Court gave those parameters in
the case key versus
Massachusetts Council of
Construction Employees.
There's also other cases, uh, in
other cases, courts have
typically ruled any favorably
adjusts favorable adjustments
under 10%. Yours is 5%, so very
reasonable, have no significant
burden and so that would say
very reasonable, definitely
constitutional as well, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I heard
another case, Hughes v.
Alexandria scrap Corporation,
Reeves Incorporated versus
Steke, South Central timber
development.
versus Winicky, and these are
all cases that the court has
ruled giving the same general
ruling. So, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I, I will just defer
to all those, and then also,
Mister Speaker, gentlemen, I
believe in the Constitution of
our state. We talk about the
state land office to be a
fiduciary, but that's contingent
upon the laws that we set as a
legislature. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
If the legislature says we're
going to raise rates, then they
have a fiduciary responsibility
to hit whatever the rate is that
we're trying to get at.
But Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
currently it's my understanding
that the land office on
Unleased tracks, they have just
not leased at all for the past
year or so. So I would contend
that that is not very
fiduciary responsible.
And so I think if the if the
legislature adopts this
amendment, this is the
prescriptive.
Language for the land office to
follow. So would you agree with
that, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
certainly sounds reasonable to
me. I was not aware of those
cases, but, uh, it's good to
hear that there's some, uh, law
out there that supports this.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I think in this
body there, it's, it's very
easy. It's very, very easy for a
certain individuals to say, oh,
this is blanketly
unconstitutional, just scrap it
because some people may believe
that their opinion is greater
than others, but I usually don't
go on opinions. I go on facts
and the fact is that this is
constitutional, this is
something.
that we need to do, and it's
something that I believe the
sponsor and everybody should
vote no to table on or maybe
vote yes to adopt, and I sure
hope it's the latter. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I will just
leave you with that, but I
really appreciate this
amendment. I think it's very
well thought out. I think it's a
very constitutional, and I am
very pleased to support it.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House floor amendment number 2
to Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
There's a motion to table house
floor amendment number 2 to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Credit bill 23, a
vote a yes and the and the
amendment will be tabled a vote
of no and the debate will
continue.
The vote is now open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 36 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 2 to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 23 has been tabled.
gentleman used to have the
floor.
Mr. Speaker, um, I'd like to
talk about, um,
Development activity and
development pace, um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, one of
the things that concerns me is
that there, um, even after, uh,
assuming this bill passes and
even after the royalty rate goes
up.
There might be um tracks that um
are not least.
Um, perhaps even the land
commission refuses to lease, but
it impacts other lands around it
and I'll give you, uh, this
example is if you, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, I, I
know you're familiar with, um,
the story of the horizontal
drilling technology, and so I'll
make it a relatively easy
example for the body to
understand, but
Pardon me. If we start on, uh,
On a state, uh let's say we
start on a federal lease, we
drill down.
And we're drilling 1 1.5 mm.
The first lease we're on is
federal.
The next lease we have to cross.
Is state and it's unleashed.
And then the last two leases,
federal lease, leased, state
leased leased. So along this
horizontal well path.
Is a state lease that has been
the the land office has refused
to lease yet it impacts this
entire federal state project.
And I note that, um,
Under current law,
Um
The state land office is not
subject to the forced pooling.
Requirements of, uh,
of the OCD and so I would like
to offer an amendment that, um,
That makes the state land office
subject, subject to that. And so
that in in extreme
circumstances, the industry can
proceed with the project under
the same terms and conditions
that a fee lessee, uh, would be
subject to. It seems to me that
if we put these burdens on
individual private landowners
that we, we ought to have the
same requirements for, um, for
state leases.
Mr. Speaker, and I, I request a
roll call vote, please.
You you will have a roll call,
uh, the amendment is here. Thank
you.
John Mc while it's being passed
out, would you mind reading the
232 number on the bottom.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, um,
We are waiting for the
distribution and the posting
online.
The amendment has been
distributed and it's online, uh,
the gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, um,
currently there's a forced
pooling provisions where um if
an operator cannot assemble all
of the leases along a um call it
a proration unit, drilling unit,
then uh you can go to the oil
conservation and, um,
After negotiations with the with
the with the owner and so forth.
Um, go into what's called a
forced pooling hearing.
And if the OCD determines that,
um, that lease needs to be part
of, um, this drilling track, it
will be put into it and we might
all recall that, um,
To the primary missions of the
OCD is to prevent waste.
And without this, you could have
what's called stranded acreage
or stranded reserves that you
can't get to because you don't
have permission to go through a
particular track.
This would, uh, this would
provide that same authority to
the state, uh, over the state
land office lands, the OCD has,
uh, on fee lands. And so, uh,
um,
You know, sort of the 35,000 ft
view of this is, is that, um, we
are now requiring the state land
office, uh, to be subject to the
same rules that private parties
are subject to. And so many
times, you know, governments,
uh, Mr. Speaker, uh, will, um,
You know, will exempt themselves
from things, um, that quite
frankly, may have a real
detriment down the road and this
tries to correct that.
gentleman from Sandoval in Santa
Fe is this a friendly amendment?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, this
is also not a friendly amendment
and let me explain why. Uh, it,
it's really the same reason the
last amendment wasn't friendly.
This amendment violates the
Constitution, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, the, the state line,
uh, commissioner's authority is
derived from the Constitution.
This is a statute that would
purport to override the
Constitution, so there's a lot
of discussion about this in, in
connection with the Last
Amendment, and there's a lot of
misunderstanding about how that
Works because uh, for example, a
preference is quote unquote
constitutional under the US
Constitution or um under the
state constitution, that, that's
fine, you know, I'm not
questioning that. But if you
have a constitutional provision
that says you can't do this.
Then you can't do that by
statute. You would have to go
and amend the Constitution. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, the
Saint Land Office does have
voluntary pooling. I think the
key word in your amendment is
forced. You're trying to force a
constitutional officer to do
something with a statute.
And you can't do that.
This is unconstitutional.
There is debate on the
amendments, the the gentleman
from San Juan, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentlemen, uh, yield a couple of
minutes?
I'll certainly yield to my
friend from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So, um, I'm a, I'm a
power plant and, and a coal
miner. So can you put what you
just said in layman's terms, so
that a guy like me can
understand it.
Um, I'll certainly try because
it is, it is, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it is, it is somewhat
of a complex subject, um, but
let's, uh, let me use the panels
on the wall behind you.
Consider each one of those
squares, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, is a lease, and we've
got our surface location over
here on the right on the first
panel.
That's a federal lease. I I I
have the lease.
Second panel, same thing.
Third panels unleashed state
track.
Fourth panel is a lease BLM
track and the 5th track is a
state lease track. So right in
the middle on the first, on the
first um square there. I'm gonna
be drilling a well straight
down.
And then at some point I'm going
to be turning it. And so I'll be
going horizontally and I'll go
through the first block and the
2nd block, but I can't get to
the 4th or 5th block because I
can't go through the 3rd block.
That is an unleashed state
track.
And so we try to do voluntary
pooling. We've requested that
the lease be put up.
We've done everything we can and
um that lease remains unleashed.
So we go to if that if that was
a private lease we just simply
go to the oil conservation
division and say this is the
circumstances. If you don't
allow me to cross that 3rd
block, I'm not gonna be able to
get to the 4th and the 5th ones.
That means it's wasted
resources, federal wasted
resources, and state wasted
resources. And it could be
millions of barrels.
And so what happens is I go to
the OCD and the OCD says, well,
if you two parties, if this is a
private party and me.
They'd say the private party,
we're basically going to issue
a, a lease. You're gonna pay 1/8
royalty attributable to that
third track, me, the operator to
the state land office. And then
there's going to be a penalty.
And what that means is, is that
I've paid a certain amount of
money and whatever that amount
of money is getting across that
3rd block.
When I recover that plus a
profit.
Then the state uh land office
would uh then own the interest
in the in the well. They get
their interest back, so to
speak.
So that's about simply it
basically puts the state land
office, um, uh, in the same
situation that private owners
are, and they, and they
certainly may be differences to
that, but, but the point is, is
that this will um prevent um
future uh commissioners perhaps
or or leadership within the land
office of holding a project
hostage.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So let me ask you a
question about square number one
and square number 2. So let's,
and I, I know nothing about oil,
so I'm gonna, I'm gonna make
some assumptions.
Oh, Mr. Speaker, I hope that's
OK. I'm going to assume that um
that drilling is gonna cost,
let's just say $2 million.
And to run it through the 1st
and the 2nd 1 is going to cost
me another million dollars. Then
I've got to stop.
Can't go through number 3.
can't go down any further, can't
go to the east, can't go to the
west, unless you go way around
it, right? So the expense is
still the same, is that correct,
Mr. Gentleman?
Yes, the expense will be the
same.
OK, so you've got expense for 1
and 2, you can't get to number
3, so what you could have done.
And what the state could have
reaped from that will never be.
Uh, realize, is that correct?
That's correct. And also the
final two tracks will never be
developed either.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, I was
gonna get to those, so you've
got, you've got number 3 that's
holding this up and you got 45
and 6 that are still over here.
And they cannot be drilled on
until 3 is drilled. What if I
went around and came in from
that end.
You would still have the same
problem on this end and many
times as we know there are a lot
of, of uh surface restrictions.
Southeastern New Mexico, uh,
many times where we're starting
on number one is on dry land,
and when we, by the time we get
to 3, we're underneath the Playa
Lake or a potash mine.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. So how expensive does
it get when you're under a lake
or you have to drill down, how
expensive can it get when you
have to do those things just to
get to the next plot.
Well, then your, your thousands
of feet below the, that the
surface, 7 or 8000 ft, so 1 mile
or 1 mile and a half.
So you, but, um, my point is, is
that, um,
Unless you start on number one.
And you can get through number
3, you may very well have a
surface restriction where you
can't come back the other way.
But even if you don't, you're
still losing two of those
tracks.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen. That's what I wanted
to, to point out the state's not
going to reap the benefits. The
guy who puts up a few million
dollars is not going to reap the
benefits, nor the folks that are
working for you as well, um, I
would hope that the body would
look at this and say we'd like
the state land office to be able
to sit down and work with you on
these things and, and be able to
do this. So I would encourage
the body to think outside the
box for a minute. Let's do
something a little bit
different. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment, the Doman from Lee
Representative Pettigre.
Mr. Speaker, thank you to the
gentleman from Chater Hill. I
yield to the gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I was just
standing behind my chair, but I
will definitely take the
opportunity to talk about this.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, as an engineer and
surveyor you to think how to
figured out these look like
townships and ranges. Um, and
it's a great idea, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, what happens if
one of those
Entire
Sections
The entire township is all the.
And privately held.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, we would enter into, uh, oil
and gas leases, uh, with them.
Um, and I also, those could be
townships they could also be a
40 acre tracks. And so I know
however you want to think about,
that's the way I, I think about
it because typically that's how
the proration units are put
together in, in lines of 40
acres.
And so, but back to your
question, uh, we would negotiate
oil and gas leases if we, if we
had um an unleashed portion, we
would go through the force
pooling, um, um, procedure.
Speaker, and, and gentleman from
Chavis.
Would you agree that a typical
Horizontal well may have up to 4
to 16 different payouts on a
monthly or quarterly basis
because of who owns what and
where.
Yes, ma'am, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that, that, and
depending upon the types of uh
financial arrangements that were
made in order to assemble block,
there could be all, all sorts of
them.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I, I,
I like the fact that you broke
it down even to, to 40 acre
tracks because that gives a good
perspective. You have to add the
top end.
To actually look at what happens
and it would actually, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, take.
These all, all these panels.
Probably 3 or 4 times.
In a and assume, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that each one of
these are township and ranges to
deal with the consequences of
what the
Uh, land commissioner has pulled
out and so Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yesterday, like I
said, we mapped this out and I
had multiple conversations with
multiple people about why, why
would we be doing this?
And Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
Um, would you agree that if you
go from federal to state to see.
Each one of those are are paid
out at a different rate based
off of what your intake is.
Would you agree?
Uh, yes, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, and what we many
times do there is, is we can
what's called communityization
and so we, we basically put all
of those together, wait, what
the different um uh length of
the lateral is in each 40 acres
and then uh what the royalty
rate is and so there's a formula
you go through there to
determine sort of a blended rate
across the, across the area.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, in
that formula, you don't get to
decide, do you? No, no speaker,
gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
I don't get this and again,
I sit here and go, OK, why
didn't I think of this? You
know, I do this, not to the
extent that you do, but I, but I
help our our oil and gas
industry.
I do a lot of different services
for them, and I look at, and
I've gone through this bill.
Uh, in
Frustration and Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, you can, you can ask
my wife because I screamed and
yelled about this is I've gone
through this.
Um, again,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
think you've pulled together a
great amendment.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, with
the continual
Effort
From the bill sponsor and from
the state land office.
I understand that that you look
at, at this as we're trying to
come to an agreement. I look at
this as, as more of a stubborn
mule kind of thing.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, you
know, I'm just not gonna move.
I'm not gonna do anything and I
go back, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, to the book of Jonah.
And, and sit there and go, you
know.
Let's step over a dollar.
To pick up a dime.
And that's the continual?
Message that we get with each
unfriendly amendment that you
get. I appreciate your
amendment. I thank you for your
time. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen.
There is further debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Catherine Grant and Hidalgo
Representative Terrazas. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. We're a
gentleman from Chavez, please
yield.
Yield to my friend from
Katherine Grant in Hidalgo.
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was just,
I've been listening to this and
we've been listening to a lot of
things this 60 day session.
And, and Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
Um, I don't know a lot about oil
at all. I mean, I'm not gonna
lie, I put gas in my car. I take
my car to get its oil changed,
you know, I know that I use uh
natural gas at some of our
buildings and and and propane
and whatever, but you know I was
just sitting here and, and I've
heard I've been here, uh, this
is my 5th year here.
And I'm wondering, I can't
remember, uh.
Hearing a bill, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
That's pro-business, pro-oil.
Could you tell me
When the last time we this
legislature gave you a bill,
give the industry a bill that
help promote your work.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um,
I don't, I can't think of, of
one in at least a couple of
decades and there were some
bills back, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen back in the, uh, late
80s and early 90s that were
severance tax relief for low
volume wells. There were, uh, it
was also, um,
Uh, several sacks for relief if
I recall for, um,
Bringing on new production, uh,
what we call recompletions or
workovers. And that was during a
very, very low price environment
and so it was really geared to
survival more than it was to
expansion or encouragement.
Um, as you and I have talked
about, there's a number of
states, uh, joining states,
Wyoming and uh joining the uh uh
competitive states. Wyoming is
one that comes to mind. Seems
like North or South Dakota, they
actually have an incentive
program, uh, to drill horizontal
wells and so to answer your
question, I'm, I, I don't, I
don't recall one.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
paused too long and that's why I
said it I knew it was a long
time.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, let
me tell you why, uh, you know.
For me, business, I think you
know I'm, I'm just a regular.
Business guy, you know, and
anytime we get into business,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
And we're going to take a
venture and it doesn't matter
what it is.
He had to feel the environment.
You have to feel the
environment, you have to feel
the vibe, you got to feel and
you got to have assurance
because you're gonna put.
You're, you're, your investment
in something and you.
It's like the next guy you don't
wanna lose your investment.
Would that be
fair to say when you guys are
gonna drill a new well and or,
or investing in a new project.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, most
definitely, I mean, you, and,
and I think earlier, um,
Uh, with respect to my questions
about the number of companies
that have moved out.
Um, I think they're, I mean,
it's just that it's not any one
thing, right, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, it's sort of what we
all call the business
environment and you know, when
you have um uh a state uh that
charges, uh, corporate income
tax when other states don't.
When you have a state that, um,
has a, a very robust regulatory
regime in terms of the reporting
in the accounting and, and all
of those things. Um,
and when you have, um,
Taxes and royalties and all
things regarding the cost of
business. I mean, one thing that
we haven't talked about today
that I know you are very aware
of as I am, uh, and that's
workers' compensation. We have
some of the highest rates around
and so I know of a number of
companies that for that very
reason, mainly service companies
are located in Midland or
Seminole, not in Hobbs or
Carlsbad.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
it's, it's because you know I
always tell my, my, I'm always
trying to train my kids, you
know, in, in business and we're
I've got one of my son we're
brought here, um, Mr.
Speakerilman, and I brought him,
uh, he'd never been here to the
legislature and I brought him
over and I, and I, I'm teaching
him business and there's.
There are rules in business.
Rules is before you get into
something be cautious, pay
attention.
But I tell him there's you gotta
remember, son, I tell my tell
Mr. Speaker Gilman.
There's a person that's in the
front of the cash at the cash
register.
or the people that see it from
the outside.
And then you got the guy that's
trying to pay the bills in the
back.
The guy in the front just sees
the cash coming in.
The guy in the back saying, oh
my gosh, we need to make more of
this.
To keep the lights on or to pay
this bill, and he's getting the
bills, not just getting the,
the, the, the cash.
And uh I, I, I think, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, a lot of
people don't understand
business, a tremendous amount of
money comes in one hand.
But a tremendous amount of money
goes out the other hand.
And you know,
It, it's, it's just an exchange
in order to stay in business and
do good in business.
And maintain
Your equipment
And put money aside for research
and development and to make sure
that you're meeting all the
demands, whether it's and it
doesn't matter what business
you're in.
To for your customers for the
state, for environmental
reasons, in your case for um.
Just to stay in business and pay
all these things so that you can
maintain and keep your cus your
not your customers but your
employees. It's a tremendous
amount of money that goes from
one hand and exits the other
pocket right and goes out the
other hand.
And so, you know, I just, I'm,
I'm saying that because.
You know, I don't think we put
this legislature recognizes
although we take the credit for
it of that clean barrel of oil,
Mr. Speaker, we don't take, we
don't.
Recognize how much uh and I
don't know what that percentage
is and I don't know how how you
can calculate that. You probably
have the number.
Come up with a clean barrel of
oil. I'm sure you have numbers
cost me this much too to drill
it cost me this much this many
barrels to recover. It cost me
this many barrels to make my
payroll. It cost me this money
to to keep up with my taxes in
this barrel of oil you you
probably have it cost me 50
cents cost me, uh, $2. It cost
me this out of one barrel of oil
and at the end you end up with a
little bit because I it it but
over a big larger volume.
It's it, it can accumulate to a
lot.
The problem is if you falter.
You can also have down it, it,
it can just as it's going up
business always goes up and
comes back down.
And when you're in a, in a
highly.
Capitalize business.
Um, like yourself, it, it can
get you in trouble really fast.
Would you agree with that, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen?
Um, Mr. Speaker and, and
gentlemen, I certainly would,
and, and also I think you have
to also recognize that, um, the
oil and gas industry is a
commodity be-based industry.
And, um, so that's uh that that
price, this the, the, that price
that we received for our product
can change pretty, pretty
quickly. And there's so many
areas of risk, right? There's,
there's regulatory risks,
there's mechanical risk, there's
geologic risk and so, um, it's
something that we have to be
very mindful of and I think that
most people don't realize that
we operate on, on pretty tight
margins, um, and, you know,
another 5%, uh, is, it can be a
lot. And so,
you're a businessman. I'm a
businessman, and the thing is,
is that, uh, you know, you can
certainly, you know, the old
adage of where would you rather
have 20% of something or 20, 25%
of nothing, right? so.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, it was
kind of like when I was talking
to my and I'm gonna pretty much
wrap up here, but Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, when I, uh, was
talking to my buddy that owns
the the grocery store and when
he tells me that his.
Uh, net.
Margin is 2.5% that means for
every $100 of groceries, he's
netting $2.50. It gives you a
whole different perspective of
business.
And so Mr. Speaker, I'm just
gonna, I, I think what I'm
trying to do here, gentlemen, is
I want.
The Legislature to understand
our friends here that are
sitting here.
When we're, when we're, we're
giving, we're sending out a
message.
To people that want to invest in
New Mexico. We're sending out a
message where we like to hear it
or not.
That
We have an appetite to add
regulation we have an appetite
to be slow to give out permits.
We have an uh uh uh a reputation
of wanting a little bit more
whether it's royalties or taxes
or whatever it is.
It sends a message out.
To be cautious to come to New
Mexico and that's what scares
me.
And so I hope that we kind of
gather our thoughts here as as
as a body and we understand
that.
At the end of the day,
Business, I don't, doesn't
matter if it's oil and gas or
whatever it is is a symbiotic
relationship.
Both parties have to win in
order for us to work and I think
we're struggling on that part.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
The
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move to table
House for Amendment number 3 to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
There's a motion to table.
House Amendment number 3 to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23, a
vote of yes, and the bill will
the amendment will be tabled, a
vote of no and the debate will
continue. The vote is now.
Open.
The vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 25 in
the negative. House floor
amendment number 3 to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
for a Senate Bill 23 has been
tabled.
Gentlemen, you have the floor.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, one of the things
that you referred to, um, were
that this was only going to
impact the best of the best
tracks. I believe that that's
how we've been referring to.
It's referred to differently in
terms of, of, uh, how the state
land office describes it, but
it's the best of the best
subject to the uh the higher
rates, so, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, would you agree
that's what we're talking about
here?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes.
Danish speaker and gentlemen,
um, you might recall, um, during
the Energy Committee, how I put
on my geologist hat and talked
about the bowl or the basin
which is the Delaware Basin,
which is part of, uh, the larger
Permian Basin, um, Mr. Speaker,
uh, gentlemen, do you, do you
recall that discussion?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, you
know, to some extent.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um,
the way to think about this
would be to to think about the
Delaware Basin is it is just
like a basin, like a sink, um,
or a bowl and there's a deep
part of that bowl and there are
sediments that flow into it. And
where that deepest part of that
bowl is has the most sediments.
And so that's the area that
we're talking about in terms of
being the best of the best.
Now
The center of that bowl,
uh, probably slightly on the,
the bottom part of it.
Is um is the Texas New Mexico
state line.
And, uh, Mr. Speaker and the
gentleman was correct in that,
um,
The the basin actually the
Delaware actually extends into
Texas, um, but either side of
that state line is pretty much
the best of the best.
Now, when this bill was going
through um various drafting
stages and through committee.
A number of us in the industry
really looked at that and said,
OK, is that really the best of
the best?
Because what we're concerned
about is some of the fringe
areas of the basin would be
might be subject to these well
would be subject to these higher
royalty rates even at 20 or 20%
at the minimum.
And it would prevent um
especially small New
Mexico-based exploration
companies for exploring these
areas.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
um, and I'll go back to my
previous statement as we need to
explore these areas. um, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, uh, and
these areas are being mainly
looked at by small New
Mexico-based independence.
So I expect that they will make
the next shell discovery, bone
spring discovery, uh, Wolf camp
discovery, but it won't be any
of those names. It'll be
something that we don't even
know about right now, Mr.
Speaker and, and, and gentlemen.
And so my concern is, is that by
doing this and creating the area
that you have, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, you're actually
pulling in what I would consider
to be
Uh, areas of exploration that
should be done at a much, much,
much lower, uh, royalty rate.
And um so in order to do that, I
wish to offer house floor
amendment number 4 to Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 23.
And I request a roll call the.
Thank you. You'll have the roll
call.
Gentlemen, if you would be so
kind to read the 23232 number on
the bottom of the page of the
amendment, please, Mr. Speaker,
I chose 232-003.2.
Thank you gentlemen. The
amendment is being passed out
and we will also wait for it to
be posted online.
Gentlemen, the hard copies have
been distributed and it is
online. Would you please care to
explain the amendment?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, thank you very
much. Um, so as the present as
the sponsor, um, um, stated, um,
the area that is considered by
the state land office as being
the best of the best includes
all of Eddie Olive Lee, a
portion of Chavez and a portion
of Roosevelt.
This amendment, um, Mr. Speaker,
and, uh, gentlemen, um,
restricts that area down to
really the area in the basin
that can probably bear if any of
these areas can, um, the
additional, uh, 5% royalty.
It basically takes it to um the
equivalent area on the New
Mexico side as um as the Texas
side has many of the university
lands in.
So it shrinks the area down
somewhat to the heart of the
basin and to where the geologic
best in production best, the
best truly is.
General from Sandoval and Santa
Fez is a friendly amendment.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, this is
not a friendly amendment, and
I'd like to explain why.
Proceed.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so I,
I'm, I'm very fortunate to uh
have my expert with me. Um, you
know, when I
When I read, uh, you know,
Townsend, Township section range
description, um, you know, I
can't, I don't.
Have the ability to visualize
that, um, fortunately,
apparently these discussions
were initiated or in the side,
so I do have a map.
Um, which I, which I believe
corresponds to your amendment,
um, and I understand that your
description, your, you know, I,
I think the key words uh
In your description were shrinks
and restricts. And Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, what we're trying to
deal with this bill is we, we've
drawn the boundary around an
area that we think might support
a 25% royalty rate. It's not a
mandate.
It's a range and everything in
this, in this area that we've
drawn is already at 20%.
And we're not
We're not prohibiting a 20%
royalty. We're just enabling a
25% royalty. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen,
If you're amendment was adopted,
you know, and there were, you
know, discoveries in these areas
at 20% because that's currently
the going royalty rate.
We might be back here.
In 5 or 10 years saying oh, we,
we got to increase this to 25
because, because these are good
discoveries too. We're just, we,
we'd like to take care of that
now, so we don't have to come
back here and have this
discussion again.
Um, so just to be clear, we're
not mandating 25%.
We're enabling 25% and the the
actual royalty rate will still
be determined on a track by
track basis and that's why
restricting this as, as you
said, or shrinking the area, uh,
is not a friendly amendment.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
would note that in previous
versions, areas have been
designated based upon the best
geologic information at the
time. And Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that's uh all we're
trying to do here. What my worry
is, is that this area extends
into edge and exploratory areas
that struggle with a 20%.
Royalty and they will really be,
uh, they will really be
unattractive to operators at a
25% level.
And so what I'm trying to do
here is go back to a point that
I think I've made several times,
and that is, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that we've got to
keep our exploration, uh, going
in order to find the next, um,
the, the next big play. And at a
25%, you know, you, you, uh, Mr.
Speaker, uh, gentlemen, um,
sponsor, I believe in testimony,
um, talked about, um, the best
of the best.
And all I'm saying is, is that
you've included in, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, also that
you're sure that they're going
to be really good wells that you
you have a uh Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, that you have a
Keep doing that. Sorry, a good
handle on, um, the geology of
the area and all I can say, uh,
uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
uh, after working in this basin
for over 50 years and having
made discoveries over 11 of
them, uh, in, in my career, uh,
the areas that you are going
into, um, it, it'll discourage
exploration and I, I just
cautioned this body to um extend
the royalty rate from the best
of the best.
into what we hope might
eventually turn into, into some
sort of level of, of production.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, may I
respond to that?
Um, I did have a question in
there, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
but I think, I think it'd be
unfair not to let you respond,
so why don't you respond. So I
appreciate that, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh, I just,
I just want to note that, that
Your, your statement, you
acknowledge that these areas are
already 20%.
And under this bill, they can
stay at 20%.
Um, Mr. Speaker, and, uh, my, my
friend,
how likely is it that, um, a tax
is going to be reduced or
maximum royalty rate is never
going to be charged.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, that the
royalty rates that these are put
up for bid at or determined on a
case by case basis. So we're not
saying by no stretch of the
imagination are we saying that
every tract within this little
area, it's well it's not a
little area. The area on the
map, um, will be 25%.
That's the range, the range in
the bill is 20 to 25%. There's a
range, the land office evaluates
the tracks before they put them
up for a bid and they will
continue to be a range.
Mr. Speaker, um, gentlemen, I
understand that, but the state
land office itself has said we
expect a 25% royalty on the best
of the best. We've drawn this
very wide, large extensive area
that we consider the best of the
best. So what that signals to
me, Mr. Speaker, and gentlemen,
as we expect most of the leases,
if not all the leases within
that area of best of the best to
be a 25%. And Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, based upon my
experience, you're going to
discourage exploration.
in areas that we really need to
be looking at.
There is debate on the
amendment. The gentle lady.
from Donana Sierra, and Socorro
Representative down. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, Neil.
I will certainly yield to my
good friend from all of the
counties. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen. I
have been listening and learning
this entire session from you,
which has, it's been, it's nice
to have someone with um
In in expertise and content
knowledge in a specific field,
especially with your depth and
breadth. And, you know, I think
we are pretty respectful when
they.
Um
I don't know what's going on
when a when a teacher stands up
and talks, and, and we, we vote
accordingly. We stand up and we
listen, uh, generally when a
nurse or someone in the
healthcare field talks and we
Accordingly, uh, we stand up,
uh, and we respect the expertise
and experience of folks in, in
different fields and industries.
I don't understand why this is
the exception, especially when
you are
is the number one driver of our
state budget, but Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, I, I heard them
say the range is 20 to 25. Right
now, the range is 20, is that
right? It can be 20? Uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, yes.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, and
how many leases did the state
land office put out in the last
year at that 20% range for this
area.
Um, Mr. Speaker, General Lady, I
don't know the precise number,
but it sounds like they uh they
uh put out at least 6 that I
know of that are outside within
their area best of the best
outside industries area best of
the best, and those were the 6
leases that I was talking about
that did not get a bid at 20%.
Now, uh, they may have been
leased at some point down later,
but, um, that to me was sort of
a canary in the coal mine.
and really illustrated that you
need to stay in the best of the
best or you're going to
discourage, uh, exploration.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank
you gentlemen. And as I've heard
this debate, uh, in one
committee and now on the floor
and, and what I heard was this
is the best rock in the world,
and we can pretty much charge
whatever we want because people
want it, it's the cleanest, it's
the best, so they'll pay
whatever it costs, but you have
mentioned something, um, I, I, I
read it before, but I think I'm
absorbing it now.
You mentioned that the
discoveries have all been made
by the we got the miners, the
little guys, New Mexico owned
operated businesses and we've
got the majors that are doing
this work all around the world.
And you have mentioned, and I've
read that the miners are the
ones that are doing discovery.
Could you tell me a little bit
more about that? When did the
miners do the discovery, which,
uh, basins did they discover and
around the time frames.
Um, sure, General and Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so the
history of the business has
been, even if you go back to,
uh, Drake in 1859, drilling the
first well in Pennsylvania. He
drilled adjacent to a place
called Oil Creek. And the reason
he drilled next to Oil Creek was
is that there was actually oil
seeping into the creek, the, the
Native Americans in that area
have been using it to line um
their canoes for years. And so
he was an independent. He was
an entrepreneur, um, and a guy
that just defined that, you
know, saw an opportunity and
went and did it. And then
eventually over time, that whole
area was developed by
independents, but later became
owned by Standard Oil, and so
they then came in and sort of,
it, it's the, the example I've
given is it's, it's like the,
uh, the automobile manufacturing
industry back in the early
1900s.
There were a number of
individual
People making automobiles, but
it took Henry Ford to develop a
whole new type of business with
an assembly line.
And made it much more.
So what we're saying is, is that
same sort of
History
And it has always been this way
is that large corporations and
many times don't reward risk
very well. So it takes
entrepreneurs and people and
risk takers to go out. And it's,
it's not unlike the mining
industry if you think about Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, how
that started, we, we all have in
our mind the early prospector
with the, the mules and the
picks and the shovels. Well, it
wasn't the big mining companies
that found those, those ore
deposits. It was
that guy. And then the big
mining companies came in and
bought them out and brought all
the men and materials and
resources, men and women and
resources and money to take on
an operation of that scale.
So, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
so when you're saying we need to
keep exploration going. You're
saying we have to keep it
affordable for the New Mexico,
uh, independent producers, uh,
and when they make the
discovery, then the majors come
in and, and, and is that what
you were saying and I just want
to make sure that I understand
it. If it's out of reach of the
independence and because the the
class to explore is too high,
then we won't find the next
best, bigger and better. That's
correct, Mr. Speaker and gentle
lady is that
Um,
you know, what we're doing is,
is we're putting, um, a burden,
well, let me back up and say it
this way.
The best of the best is the best
of the best because we
understand it and know it, we
drilled hundreds and hundreds of
wells there.
But these fringe areas are not
nearly as explored. And so we
don't really know, uh, you know,
what, what, what may or may not
be there. So it's one thing to
say, OK, look, I can pay 20% or
I can pay 25% in the best of the
best, but if you're looking out
on the edges here, those
economics, first off, we got to
think about the time frames
because it may take 10 years to
put the project together.
And you have to run your
economics then off of, you know,
a 25% royalty versus a 20%.
And so how that would how that
area would compete versus say a
similar area with Bureau of Land
Management leases that are 10
years in either and now uh 16 I
believe or 316, uh, but at any
rate, at a much higher royalty
rate. So where are you going to
go? And I'm afraid that one of
the unintended consequences of,
of, of this piece of, of this
legislation is it's going to
essentially put off limits
economically off limits areas
that could be very perspective.
And I think it's a mistake Thank
you Mr. Speaker and thank you
gentlemen. Um, I, I appreciate
what you're saying and I, I see
that in reality in my own
backyard with the copper mines,
not just in the exploration but
also as soon as it hits a
certain point when when copper
hits a certain price, the mine
closes down, and I certainly
don't want to see that happen
with this industry. Thank you.
There is further debate on the
amendment, the gentleman from
Sandoval in Santa Fe represented
McQueen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, this
gentleman you.
German yields.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, did you,
uh, happen to notice, uh, the
language on page 20 of the bill.
It's the very last page of the
bill.
Let me find.
A 2
Uh, yes, uh, Mr. Speaker and,
and gentlemen, I'm, I'm aware of
that.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, for
the sake of the body, uh, page
20 this language was added to
the bill this year. The
individual percentages and total
percentage for each factor
pursuant to 19103 and MSA in
1978 shall be posted in
conjunction with these notes.
This is a transparency
provision, and so this is the
state land Office will, um, show
you their, their math.
About how they arrived at a
lease rate for a particular
tract, uh, whether it's 25 or 20
or something in between. So Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, the land
office, uh, has been and will be
completely transparent on
arriving at these these lease
rates and the bill doesn't
require raising every single
track in this area to 25. Many
of them will stay at their
existing 20%. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Speaker, there is further
debate on the amendment. The
gentleman from Lee represented
Peter Group.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, once
again, this is a gentleman from
Chavis Hill.
Uh, yes, uh, I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, as I
go through your amendment.
Um, I'm not willing to do the
math on this one. Can you tell
me how many townships.
are reducing uh the original
bill.
Um
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, um, I
don't know that number, uh,
quite frankly, off the top of my
head, um, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, the way, uh, we
approached it, um, is, uh, we
wanted to look, uh, from a
geologic perspective, um, as to
what is truly the best of the
best.
Mr. Speaker, I yield.
Thank you Mr.
Gentle lady from Berna Leo.
Mr. Speaker, I move the table
house floor amendment number 4
to Senate Finance Committee
substitute to Senate Bill 23.
There is a motion to table House
floor amendment number 4 to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
A, a vote of yes and the
amendment will be tabled a vote
a no and the debate will
continue.
The vote is now open.
Vote's about to close.
The vote is now closed with a
vote of 38 in the affirmative,
26 in the negative. House for
amendment number 4 to Senate
Finance Committee's substitute
for Senate Bill 23 has been
tabled.
The gentleman used to have the
floor.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I, uh,
Appreciate the debate, um.
I think there were some good
amendments in here.
Um, I will, um, conclude with
this, and that is, I think of,
of all of the things that I'm
most concerned about in this
bill is this geographic extent,
and I feel like, um, um, Mr.
Speaker and, and gentlemen, um,
deputy commissioner, um, that I
really hope, uh, that, that
evaluation, um, and I appreciate
the transparency, but I really
hope that evaluation is uh very
um, geologically, uh, robust.
Uh, and that, um, the state
won't have to, uh, do multiple
offers, um, because they've
essentially priced.
Essentially price themselves
out, Mr. Speaker. So, um, I
think, uh, Chairman, uh,
Representative McQueen for the
debate and I.
We got a notification for the
body if you have not had dinner
there's still food in the
lounge, so please help
yourselves.
There's there, oh seeing no
debate, gentlemen are close.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Speaker, and
I want to thank my, uh, my
colleague from House Energy, uh,
I do appreciate you, um.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, members of the
body, I, I just want to
reiterate a couple of things.
This money goes into the land
grant permanent fund, the
beneficiaries of the land grant
permanent fund are, our schools,
our universities, our hospitals.
This money literally goes to
school kids. The benefits of the
land grant permanent fund are
estimated to save every family
in New Mexico, $3000 a year in
taxes.
This is a really good thing for
New Mexico and the people who
will pay this and will do so
eagerly our large out of state
oil and gas companies.
It's not a tax. It's not a fee.
It's not a regulation. We're
selling something we own and
with that, Mr. Speaker, I move
that Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23 do
now pass.
OK, we're on final passage of
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 23.
The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 37 in the affirmative, 31 in
the negative, Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 23 has duly passed this
house.
The gentle lady from Bernna Leo
Representative Dixon, are you
ready on item?
43.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you
get me to that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate Bill 37 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
it's now subject to debate.
Amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Senate Bill 37 proposes
amendments to the existing, uh,
strategic water reserve program
at the Interstate Stream
Commission, uh, this program was
established 20 years ago in
2005, and it allows the
Interstate stream commission to
acquire water rights through
lease, purchase, or donation for
two specific purposes. First, to
support interstate compact
compliance and second.
Uh, to benefit threatened or
endangered species, including to
prevent new listings, um, after
20 years of operations, uh, this
bill aims to make 3 improvements
to the program to ensure its
effectiveness.
First, create a non-reverting
fund, um, currently
appropriations for the strategic
water reserve are included as a
line item in the interstate
stream commission's budget, um,
and oftentimes these uh funds
revert because water
transactions, uh, more often
than not take multiple years to
complete, so they need a non
non-reversion, uh, this bill
sets a cap on the fund of $15
million.
And any amount above that would
automatically revert to the
general fund. uh, Mr. Speaker,
um, the second change to uh this
program is adding a third
purpose to the strategic water
reserve to benefit aquifer
recharge, uh, specifically, uh,
this purpose would allow the
Interstate stream commission to
acquire groundwater to slow down
the depletion of these critical
resources, uh, there are many
places in the state where.
reducing groundwater use will
have both community and
environmental uh environmental
benefits and this purpose allows
for those, these acquisitions.
Um
Finally, the 3rd change is to
allow the Interstate stream
commission in its prioritization
to consider supplementary
benefits when prioritizing
funding, uh, this change would
allow the Interstate stream
commission to prioritize
transactions when they not only
meet one of the primary purposes
but also one of the secondary
purposes which would now include
um cultural or recreational
purposes.
And so with that, Mr. Speaker,
I'll stand for questions.
There is debate. The gentleman
from Colfax, Curry Harding Qua
San Miguel and Union
Representative Chatfield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I
will yield.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, is there any money
in House Bill 2 for this?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. No, there is not
an appropriation in this.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, is
there some money in the previous
fund for this?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentlemen. There is
uh money left in the, um,
From previous appropriations
that will be moved into this new
non-reverting fund.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, on
page 3.
Can you tell me what our story,
right?
And what are their values?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Storage rights,
that was the question, correct?
Mr. Speaker, generally lady,
yes, what our storage rights and
what are their value?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So storage
rights, for instance, um,
storing water in dams or um
reservoirs.
And Mr. Speaker, gentlemen,
their value, um, it would be
negotiated fair market value.
How would we do that? Do we have
previous experience knowing
what, how we negotiated that
value, how would, how would we
come up with a value on storage
right?
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentlemen. It would be compared
to other storage, right, uh,
rights acquisitions.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
uh, the water right, uh, would
be at its appraised value.
Now you might buy an ag water
right?
Or you might buy some other type
of right.
And it would now go into the
stream and it might become in a
recreational right, which, which
value.
Are you placing on that right
when you purchase it?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, uh, the value would
be based on the primary purpose
for which it is purchased.
So the purpose from which it is
purposed, like if it was
agricultural water, it would
now, it would have agricultural
water value.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, so
within the, um,
Within the strategic water
reserve program, uh, the rights
can be acquired for 3 reasons,
uh, and so it would be one of
those 3 reasons. Uh, is that
what you're referring to?
Uh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I,
I'm probably not asking it
correctly. You're, you're buying
it from one use and you're
converting it to a second use.
So how do you arrive at the
value? Is it the value that you,
I suppose, uh, the value that
you purchased it from, I
suppose.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Uh, we believe
so, although that's not
changing, uh, in the scope of
this bill.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, uh,
if I read the bill, you don't
necessarily have to purchase it.
Can you lease this water?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, you
can lease this water.
So, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, do
you think there's, uh, a good
chance for that possibly leasing
some water around the state.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, that is
wonderful that you bring that
up, uh, the majority of the
acquisitions um are leases, in
fact.
Oh, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, on
page 4.
It says that the state may not
condemn water rights.
But it may condemn
Real property for the
conveyance.
Or infrastructure.
Uh, is, is condemning the real
property. Is that a, is that a
new right? Is that a new part of
this bill, or do you already
have the right to condemn real
property for conveyance.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um, that is not
a new provision that's in the
existing statute, um, and to our
knowledge, it has not been done
before.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, why
can this water not be converted
to groundwater.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, um, after
consultations with stakeholders,
it was decided that that was not
best within the scope of this
program.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I
know in the bill it says that it
can be used for a for recharge.
You never get aquifer recharge
running water down a stream
that, that has any water in it
at all if the, even if the
ground is just moist in the
bottom of the stream, it will
not absorb water. That is the
water level of, on both sides of
the stream. The only way you can
get a forre to just to run it
down a dry arroyo or inject it
back into the ground.
Um
On page 6.
What would be traditional and
cultural uses. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker, uh, and gentlemen, so
traditional and cultural
practices, um.
Could include um some
agricultural purposes.
So on I think it's on page 6.
Also said it can be used for
habitat improvement or
recreational. Can you give me
some examples?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Sure. So some of
the in-stream activities like
kayaking, fishing, um.
Canoeing
Things like that.
I think that so I think on page
6.
I believe it's also on page 6.
It says that you can only
purchase this water for the
things that are now that you can
already now purchase it for plus
one of the supplementary, uh,
Consideration set forth in this
bill. Can you tell me what those
supplementary considerations
are, and give me an example.
Of how you use the two of them
together.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So as a, as a
refresher, the primary purposes,
uh, currently are interstate
compact compliance or endangered
species recovery or uh
Prevention, uh, efforts to
prevent that, um, and so the new
primary purpose that is being
added is Aquifer recharge. And
so when the interstate stream
commission is prioritizing, uh,
which rights to lease or
purchase uh if they are choosing
between A and B, perhaps adding
in, uh, if one of the options
has an additional component of
cultural or outdoor, uh,
recreation as a supplementary
benefit.
they might prioritize that
option higher.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
does this add the ability to add
any other streams that you do
not already have the right to
include in this program.
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, um, so
nothing new, uh, no new types,
but, uh, it does provide for new
ways to prioritize.
So Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, the
reason I got up to talk about
this bill is I, like many of my
friends have long been an
opponent of converting our good
little farms and acreages in New
Mexico, farms and ranches and
allowing the state to buy that
water for whatever reason.
Uh, but when this bill came up,
I realized that as I drive
around the state and I drive a
lot going to LFC meetings, going
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority meetings. I spent my
life on the road, but I see so
many of our senior water rights
that have gone fallow, not only
in our farms and ranches from
the old timers, but also in our
land grants and various, uh,
different areas along the river.
So New Mexico water law says if
that land lays fallow.
The state engineer can give you
notice that you're not using
your water and they give you one
year to start using that water
again or you lose that right.
Well, most of these small
ranches and farms, the kids grew
up it wouldn't barely support
their parents and it certainly
won't won't support 3 or 4 kids,
so they moved to town and got a
job.
And, uh
So there is the farm not being
used. I, uh, really hope that
someday they will come back and
use it.
And I view this bill as a way to
lease those rights to the state.
And that prevents them from
getting non-use on those water
rights.
And when some days when they,
when it's profitable, when the
grandchildren are able, they can
come back and have the home
place again and.
For that reason,
I support this bill.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Curry, the Baca,
Guadalupe, Roosevelt, and San
Miguel, Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentle lady yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, um,
I will yield to my good neighbor
from all of those counties.
So gentle lady.
With this bill.
What
What's gonna happen is the state
or the fund is gonna be used.
To purchase water rights. Am I
correct, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, uh, or
lease, correct? Purchase or
lease.
OK, and then.
When, when the state does that,
if the stream.
Is running low or and and we're
not.
Failing our compact.
With Texas.
Well, there
Will there be a chance.
That the state of New Mexico
will be pumping.
Groundwater into the stream to
let it flow into Texas, um,
gentle lady.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So that could be
a possibility, uh, but not only
within this program.
OK, but, but this fund.
Can be used to buy water rights
in the state of New Mexico.
To meet the compact with Texas.
Generally
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, yes, uh.
The funds can be used to
purchase or lease water rights,
uh, to meet interstate compact
compliance.
But not for
But not for injection.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
so we will be putting farmland
out of commission in the state
of New Mexico.
And
Sending the water to Texas at
the end of the day. Am I
correct, gentle lady?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. So everything
within this program is fully
voluntary. So if.
A water right owner decides to
sell or lease their rights. It
is a fully, it is up to them.
OK. With that, I have no more
questions, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
So no further debate, John to
close. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
move that Senate Bill 37 as
amended do now pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Bill 37 as amended.
The vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of 42 in the
affirmative, 20 in the negative.
Senate Bill 37 as amended, has
duly passed this house.
Gentle lady from Bernalillo
represent Borego.
Are you ready on item number 51.
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that, please?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for policing
Senate Bill 127 as amended on
final passage has been taken and
that it's now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady, to explain the
bill.
Mr. Speaker, um, Senate Bill
127.
Hang on one second. I have my
notes here.
Senate Bill 127 is an act.
Which
Relates to occupations providing
an exemption to the barbers and
cosmetologists act for makeup
artists and hairstylists
employed in the motion picture
productions. It exempts hair
stylists and makeup artists who
work on film sets or stage
productions like at Pope Joy or
at the Santa Fe Opera from the
barbers and cosmetologists Act
and with that, Mr. Speaker, I
stand for questions. There is
debate
lady from Katrin Sierra Socorro
and Valencia representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker of the
gentle lady from Burnley O
Yield. I yield to the uh Madame
Flo leader from all those
counties. Thank you, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. So what problem
are we trying to solve? Are they
getting fined? What, what
problem is there that we need
this legislation?
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the issue that we're having is
that most people who are
licensed for cosmetologies to
become a cosmetologist, do it
for public, basically
consumption, uh, in this
situation it's just for the film
industry and theatrical industry
and so they are not, they really
don't need that license and so
with that.
Uh, Madam Fleurly there, um,
that would be our answer. uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, gentle
ladies, so we want to do a carve
out for the film industry again.
And, um, and they don't have to
have a license, but anyone else
in New Mexico has to have a
license to do cosmetology. And
is that what I'm hearing? Madam
floor leader, um, and Mr.
Speaker, typically these
individuals are contractual to
the film production industry,
and so they're actually not
doing any public um haircutting
or makeup.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker, kind
lady, uh, I, I hope that we
would remove red tape for others
as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
That's all.
See no further debate, gentle
lady or close.
Mr. Speaker, I now move that we
pass Senate Bill 127.
As amended.
We're on final passage of Senate
Bill 127 as amended. The vote is
now open.
Vote is about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 46 in the affirmative, 19 in
the negative. Senate Bill 127 as
amended has duly passed this
House.
gentle lady from Taos, are you
ready on item number 38 I sure
am, Mr. Speaker. Can you get me
to that point?
that all action necessary for
placing Senate Bill 109 is twice
amended on final passage has
been taken and is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution. General lady to
explain the bill, Mr. Speaker,
this bill provides for greater
flexibility in addressing the
needs of the New Mexico Public
regulation commission's
operations, and with that I
stand for questions.
Seeing no debate generally
close.
I move
I now move uh Senate Bill 109 is
twice amended.
Do not pass those things.
Where our final passage of
Senate Bill 109 as twice
amended. The vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The, the vote is now closed by a
vote of 64 in affirmative, 0 in
the negative. Senate Bill 109 is
twice amended, has duly passed
this House.
gentle lady from San Miguel in
Torrance.
Are you ready on item number 39,
Mr. Speaker, would you get me to
that point?
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate Bill 113 as amended has
been taken
And is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution,
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Senate Bill 113 extends the life
of 5 boards pursuant to the
provisions of the Sunset Act.
Each of the boards and
commissions would be extended by
10 years.
Seeing no debate generally
close.
Mr. Speaker, I move that Senate
Bill 113 as amended do not pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
Bill 113 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is almost closed.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 50 in the affirmative, 14 in
the negative, Senate Bill 113 as
amended, has duly passed this
house.
General Lei from Donana and
Otero, are you ready on item
number 56.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, will you get
me to that point. Let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing.
Senate Bill 480 on final passage
has been taken and is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution general lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, um, and
chamber, as many of you know and
have talked about throughout the
session in your committees and
on this floor there is deep
concern about those students in
New Mexico who don't graduate in
4 years. These students are
deemed quote out of cohort,
meaning they aren't graduating
with their peers, a typical
cohort is typically about 30,000
students, which means
approximately 6000 students do
not graduate from high school
every year. One more thing, the
public
Education department collects
this data. We know who these,
these students are now and yet
that data sits there, uh, while
our public schools are
alternative diploma programs and
workforce training schools
struggle to find those out of
cohort students and invite them
back into the classroom. Senate
Bill 480 would require PED to
create an annual report of all
school age students who have not
graduated from high school
within 4 years of entering 9th
grade and
provided to and be provided to
public postsecondary educational
institutions, adult basic
education providers, workforce
development programs and schools
that serve out of cohort
students in attaining high
school diplomas or high school
equivalency credentials, and
with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand
for debate.
There is to be the gentleman
from Valencia, Representative
Rebaca.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady from Donna Oto
County, please yield. I yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. I did see this
bill in committee and I do
commend you for bringing this
forward.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, I, I
do have one amendment that I
would like to, uh, basically,
uh, with this bill, um.
I believe it's been passed out.
Will you kindly move the
amendment?
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move
the
Number 232076.1.
Right, that's what I have and it
is, has it been passed out?
It's been passed out, gentlemen,
to explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, as I said
before, I think this is very
important, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, my only amendment is that
on page 2 line 6 before Anon
insert that the legislative
education study committee and
the legislative finance
Committee.
That the information that's
going to be collected by PED be
shared with those two committees
so that those committees can
make proper recommendation and
or funding to targeted areas.
You ladies is a friendly moment.
Mr. Speaker, this is a friendly
amendment. Thank you to the
gentlemen.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment.
See none. You have an amended
bill.
Gentlemen, back to you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you gentle lady. I appreciate
you bringing this forward, and I
encourage the whole body to
support this bill.
Right? Seeing no further debate.
Oh, there is further debate,
young lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady
from Donana Yild.
Uh, I yield to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr.
Streaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. Um, uh, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, uh, I had a
Long line of questions and and
uh committee about this bill
regarding the confidentiality,
was any of that taken into
consideration in, in, uh, look
to be amended, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
um, we spoke with, um, PED and
um with um the, um, with stand
rounds from the Association of
Superintendents, and I will say
that PED would enter into data
sharing agreements with
educational institutions to
receive this information that
would include name, address,
telephone number, date of birth,
and participation in any
officially recognized activities
and sports and dates of
attendance.
Um, this information one is not
subject to IPRA and parents and
guardians can opt out of this
directory when enrolling their
student, um, gentle lady and Mr.
Speaker Speaker generally, I
believe that was the same
response that you gave me in, in
government, uh, houses
government and to which I had
other questions and concerns
about confidentiality and how
this would be an expanded, um,
Uh, information piece and, and,
uh, further developed, uh,
Contracts of shared information
on uh.
Children ages or our students
like rather ages 13 to 22. Is
that correct, madam, or Mr.
Speaker, General lady.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, gentle
lady, so one, I will add that um
out of cohort students means any
student that has not graduated
from high school within the 4
years of entering 9th grade. And
so, um, this list would be
targeting those, uh, school age
students and we did confirm with
PED that data sharing agreements
will be in place and that
information will be
confidential, uh, and then out
of cohort.
students are only aged 17 to 22,
um, and if, um, and then a
student that's left school
within the 4 years they are
reported after they should have
graduated, um, so, um, so this
will be post where when they
should have graduated, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Actually that's,
that's better information.
Thank you for getting that,
getting uh a recovering and
having a clear uh definition of
some of the questions that I
asked with that, Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate,
gentlemen, from Lee
Representative Petticguru.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentle lady yield?
I yield to the gentleman from
Lee County.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. I have one
question for you.
How does
This piece of legislation tie to
the policy spotlight that we
were given at the first part of
session in HAFC on successful
practice school practices.
Mr. Speaker, uh, gentlemen, can
you say a little bit more about
that?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I'm
just hoping that I've gone
through this bill and I don't
really see how it ties to Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, the uh
policies spotlight that was
given to us from LFC.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, so.
One, these students that are out
of cohort are often just
invisible. We cannot find them.
And as I said before, about 6000
of these students, um, go.
Invisible. We can't find them.
They're out of cohort and then
it's up to uh workforce
development programs,
post-secondary institutions and
our public schools to do broad
net just putting out billboards,
radio, um, radio ads, Facebook
ads to find these students this
program, this bill, um, would
create a list where those
institutions can target them
directly, reach out to them
directly and say, hey, we know
you're out of cohort. Come back
to school.
come back to uh career technical
education institution and so I
think this bill will help
connect students to the
workforce if they've left
school, um, and complete their
diplomas or GEDs, um, it's a
best practice to re-engage
students whenever possible, um,
and the LFC FIR also says this
bill is positive for increasing
student success, workforce
participation and diploma
completion and I'll also add,
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen that
the amendment that
Um, the, uh, gentleman added to
this bill, I think further
strengthens this bill because
then we can track that data and
we're asking, not just hoping
that uh LESC and LFC will use
this data to then track earlier
interventions, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady. I just went
through several different
Documents from LESC from LSC,
all these people that are paid.
To do the analysis, and I don't
see anything that's consistent
with, with this bill is asking
for in any of those documents,
so I was trying to.
Maybe connect the dots, uh, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, uh.
Understood. Is there a question?
Speaker and gentle lady, no, I
was just hoping you could help
me connect dots to where I can
sit there and say, you know,
this is a good thing to vote
for. I, I don't.
Discount anything that gentle
lady that, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, that you've said, I
just don't see anything in
writing from
Legislative, pardon me, uh,
education study committee and
legislative finance that
connects the dots that says we
should do this.
Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that you can give me to help me
get across that finish line
would be great.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I appreciate uh that
concern. One, I think, and I
spoke with Director Senna this
morning, um, this has never been
done before and I think we, you
know, we sit on appropriations
together. I think we did hear
from LESC, um, that there is a
gap when it comes to how do we
outreach to out of cohort
students, um, and we talked
about that metaphor of them
being on the bleachers, uh, and
they're just sitting.
up there waiting to be engaged
into workforce development or to
get um their diploma or some uh
equivalent uh degree or
certificate and so this outreach
rather than just hoping that
they'll hear a a radio ad will
directly go to their home,
they'll get a phone call, maybe
their parents might pick up and
they say, hey, have you heard
about this program? So for
example in Hobbs, there is an
expansion of a career technical
education, um, program out
there.
and they're hoping to capture
all the southeast corner of the
state and so Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I think that this
list and generating um in this
bill will help people target
those young people more
directly, more efficiently to
get them off the bleachers and
onto the field, um, and then do
work. So thank you Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady, I have no more
questions. So you know for the
debate, you need to close.
I know, uh, thank you, Mr.
Speaker, and um and chamber with
that I um ask that the Senate
Education Committee substitute
for Senate Bill 480 as amended
do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 480
as amended. The vote is now
open.
What about clothes?
The votes are closed by a vote
of.
63 in the affirmative, 1 in the
negative. Senate Education
Committee substitute for Senator
480 as amended. Haulli Pa's
house, and this is your not
first bill, but we didn't
celebrate the first one, so
we'll celebrate this one
congratulations, gentle lady on
passage of Centinel 480.
And just because we can, the
young lady to sing.
OK, so this song is a fellow New
Mexican. I am expecting all of
you to join in with me. So, uh,
for all, if you all know John
Denver and where you hear West
Virginia, senior county instead,
OK? Almost heaven,
Don.
Organ mountains, wild healer
river.
Life is all there, older than
the trees, younger than the mo.
10s, growing like a breeze ready
country road.
Take me home.
To the place I belong.
Senior County. Don't you.
Mountain mama.
Take me home.
country roads. Let's go home.
Congratulations. Let's go home.
Saturday at noon.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business messages.
Clerk Reed.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the duly enrolled
and gross copy of Senate Bill
101 as amended has been read in
full and signed by the officers
of the Senate in open session
and request the signatures of
the officers of the House,
respectfully submitted Sherry De
Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered. Message
from the Senate, Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the House
that the duly enrolled and
engrossed copies of House Bill
352 as amended. House Bill 183
as amended, House Bill 368,
House Bill 269 as amended
without emergency clause.
House Bill 143 as amended have
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session and return same
herewith. Respectfully submitted
Sherry De Luhansson and Chiclerk
will be entered Message from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
Bill 101, House Bill 128, as
amended by the House. House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 296 and return
same herewith, respectfully
submitted Sherry de Luhan Senate
chief clerk.
Message will be entered from the
Senate, Mr. Speaker, I'm
directed to inform the House
that the Senate has passed House
Energy Environment and Natural
Resources Committee substitute
for House Bill 140 as amended by
the House and House Bill 439 and
return same herewith,
respectfully submitted Sherry
Dehanson, a chief clerk
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Judiciary
Committee's substitute for House
Bill 586 and return same
herewith, respectfully submitted
Sherry de Luhansson a chief
clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 69, House Bill
174, House Bill 251, House Bill
468, House Bill 494, House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 618 and return same
herewith, respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Mohansson a
chief clerk will be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 93 as amended by the House
and further amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhansson
and chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 178 as amended
by the House and further amended
by the Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Sherry De Luhansson a
chief clerk.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed House Bill 157 as amended
by the House and further amended
by the Senate. House Bill 167 as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate and
request the concurrence of the
House to the Senate amendments,
respectfully submitted, Sherry
De Luhansson a chief clerk will
be entered.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
refused to recede from Senate
amendments to House taxation and
Revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill 14, as amended by the
Senate.
And appoints the following
conferees to confer with the
house conferees, Senator Wirth.
Senator Hamblin
Senator Sanchez respectfully
submitted Sherry de Luhansson of
chief clerk.
Message respectfully submitted
and accepted.
And entered.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business. 3rd
reading of legislation.
Gentlemen from Bernalillo.
Are you still awake?
Mr. Speaker, I am. Could you get
me to that point that all action
is for placing the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 11 as twice amended
and final passage has been
taken, and it is now subject to
debate, amendment or
substitution, gentlemen, to
explain the bill. Mr. Speaker.
Senate Bill 11 would have school
districts and charter schools
adopt, um, a wireless
communication device policy and
also gives guidance for that
policy and with that, Mr.
Speaker, I'll stand for
questions.
Chavez Curry and Roosevelt
represented
of Rebbe. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Well, the gentleman
from Bernalilo yield.
Mr. Speaker, I'll yield to the
gentle lady. Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, um, I just have an
amendment, um, that I need to
present.
Gentle lady to move house for
Amendment number 12 Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 11 is twice amended.
Will you kindly
Bring it to the front. We
already have it.
Generally need to read the
number on the bottom 232114.1,
Mr. Speaker, has it been passed
out?
It's gonna be passed out.
Alright, looks like the
amendment is online and it has
been passed out. Generally need
to explain the amendment. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, gentlemen.
What this amendment does is, uh,
in judiciary we had made some
amendments, uh, but so it
strikes all the House Judiciary
Committee amendments and then on
page 3 line 7, we strike a
wireless communication device
and then on page 3 line 8 after
hours we insert a colon and then
add that number 1 and 2 text
text to speech, speech to text
or other assisted technologies.
aid and communication,
navigation, or learning, or
number 2, a wireless
communication device, um, and
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, this
is just one of those things I
think they need to be more clear
from the amendment that drafting
one fixed and so um I'm
proposing this amendment hoping
that it's friendly.
Mr. Speaker.
All right, let's go back to the
sponsors is a friendly
amendment.
It is a friendly amendment.
Is there opposition to adopting
the amendment.
In
say no you have an amended bill.
lady back to you, thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
I would yield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, I
move that Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 11 as twice amended do now
pass. We are on final passage of
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 11 is
3 times amended. The vote is now
open.
What about clothes?
The votes are closed by a vote.
Did I hear my name somewhere?
Oh.
Is your objection to recording
my vote.
See no.
I think I may have curse on the
mic too for the record,
my bad.
on the anti-distraction bill.
If there are children watching,
I'm sorry for the curse word
that slipped out.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 59 in the affirmative 4 in
the negative. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 11 is 3 times amended has
duly passed this house.
Gentlemen from Sandoval, Senator
Hernandez, are you ready on item
number 40.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, can you get me
to that point? all action
necessary for placing Senate
tax, business and transportation
committee substitute presented
by 169 is twice amended on final
passage has been taken and is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution. The gentleman
to explain the bill, Mr.
Speaker, Senate Bill 169
establishes the strategic
Economic Development site
readiness Act. This bill allows
for comprehensive study of
potential economic development
sites in both rural and urban
areas across the state. It
creates a committee to oversee
the site selection process.
ensures critical infrastructure
projects are funded, uh, SB 169
positions New Mexico communities
for strategic growth, attracting
business investments, creating
quality jobs and building a
stronger economy for our state,
and with that I stand for
questions.
There is a debate, gentlemen
from Otero Representative block.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentleman from the
Sandoval, please you.
Yes, sir. I yield. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen. So I
just have a couple of questions.
I'm sorry to ask questions, but
it's important to ask him. So,
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I'm just
wondering, uh,
Does this create a fund?
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, uh,
it does not create a fund.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and I know that I
believe the appropriation was
struck on the bill. Can you tell
me?
If it was,
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, I
believe that it was, but there
is money in HB2 to go towards
this, um, but the appropriation
in the in the bill was struck.
OK, thank you, Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, and you're absolutely
1000% sure that this doesn't
create any new fund in any way,
shape, or form that could
potentially be characterized as
fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, that
is.
Accurate, but
Uh,
OK, sorry, I needed to get some
further clarification, OK.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
does.
Start a site readiness fund.
Which is, here we go.
A dedicated fund to finance site
characterization studies and
pre-development projects, um, we
started out with 24 million,
it's 8 million a year for the
next 3 years.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That,
that answered my question. So
yes, it does create a fund.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, it
does. OK. Thank you. Sorry, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, my, my
our expert from EDD um is
nowhere to be found, so.
OK, sounds good. I'm so sorry. I
just uh wanted to make sure that
I understood. So thank you,
that's all the questions I had.
So you know further debate,
gentlemen to close.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I do now
move that the Senate Tax
Business Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 169 as twice amended do now
pass. We are on final passage of
Senate Tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 169
as twice amended.
The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 59 in the affirmative, 4 in
the negative. Senate tax,
Business, and Transportation
Committee substitute for Senate
bill 169 is as amended is duly
pass his house.
The lady from Santa Fe, are you
ready on item number 2 on the
supplemental calendar. I am Mr.
Speaker, will you get me to that
point? reflect that all action
necessary for place in the
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267
on final passage has been taken
and it is not subject to debate.
Amendment substitutions. You
need to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senate
Bill 267 requires fee
transparency, standardizes
application fees and regulates
late fees, and with that, I
stand for questions.
See no debate and clues.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I now
move that um Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute, no Senate,
yes. Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267,
do not pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 267.
The vote is now open.
What about clothes?
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 42 in the affirmative, 21 in
the negative. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 267 has really pass's
house.
The lady, oh, excuse me,
gentlemen from San Juan, Duncan,
are you presenting item 27?
Oh yeah.
Um
Yes, sir.
That the direct reflected all
action necessary for replacing
house health and human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 398 on final passage has
been taken and it is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This
agency bill does two things. It
extends the exam period from 3
to 5 years, um, that the
department will have to uh look
at the HMOs, and number 2, in
order to be accredited, it adds
a liquidity stress test and a
group capital calculation by
statute and this has to be done
by January 1st of 2026.
In a debate gentlemen, close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I do
now move that uh HHHC House Bill
398 do not pass. We are on final
passage of House Health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 398.
The vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 63 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. How's Health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for OA 398 has duly
passed this house.
a lady from Berlin, Sentative
Borego.
Are you ready on item number 33
on the regular calendar.
Mr. Speaker, are you talking
about uh
493, ma'am yes I am and I have a
couple of witnesses that will be
moving in that other stuff. Let
the record reflect that all
action necessary for replacing
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for housing
493 on final passage has been
taken and it is subject to
debate to amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill and introduce
our experts.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Um, so.
Mr. Speaker, Senate tax.
Business and.
I can't read my own writing,
Transportation Committee
substitute for SB.
353.
Oh, I'm sorry.
I am on the wrong one. Sorry
about that.
Um
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill 493 is a bill relating to
public finance, enacting the
public finance Accountability
Act establishing funding
criteria and grant management
and oversight requirements
enumerating duties of the
Department of Finance and
Administration, Mr. Speaker, um,
I would like to introduce my
expert witnesses, Ricky
Bejarano, the deputy assessor.
Auditor
And Dave Kenya, the policy
director.
There is a bit. The gentleman
from Colfax, Curry Que San
Miguel Harding and Union
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as a
gentle lady yield? yield to the
gentleman from those counties.
That I can't see right now.
Too many flowers, uh.
Mr. Speaker, gently, is the
effect of this legislation to
codify, uh, Governor.
Uh
2013-006.
Which was put into place by
our former governor.
Mr. Speaker and uh
Representative Chatfield, that
is indeed the purpose of this
legislation that was has been
about 12 years now, I think.
Yeah, so the, the policy's been
in place for, for ever since
Susanna Martinez was governor,
uh, as governor, um,
Whatever 2013-006 and it says
that every state agency must
have a 3 years of audits, good
audits before they can receive
state funding. Is that correct,
Mr. Speaker?
Mr. Speaker, and Representative
Chatfield, that is
correct.ecutive order is a word
I could not spit out of my
mouth, so with that, Mr.
Speaker, you.
There's further debate. The
gentle lady from Berlin,
Representative Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, will
the gentle lady from Bernnalio,
uh, please yield.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
yield to the gentle lady from
Bernayo County.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady, um.
Could you remind me what the,
the goal of this bill is?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, I
can, and let me just read it
really quick to you. Seeks to
codify guidelines for DFA and
state agencies to safeguard and
manage fund disbursements to
local entities of capital outlay
and other special appropriations
as the legislature intended.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you
gentle lady. Um, does this bill
require that an audit, um, be
from the most recently concluded
fiscal year.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
yes.
Thank you, um, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady, um.
Mm
Hm
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
does the bill require that
current year compliance, uh, be
met, uh, before an entity is
allowed to receive funding?
Mr. Speaker, and um gentle lady.
Uh, no, actually it's for the
previous year.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, so,
um, would it be possible then
for um an entity to receive
funding, uh, with unresolved
financial issues, Mr. Speaker
and gentle lady, yes, but only
if they come to uh into
compliance with the
The Grand Tour.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, um,
how, uh, would the requirement
for the latest audits be
enforced.
Um, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
the grand tour would have to
ensure that they are in
compliance or they would have to
come into um some sort of an
agreement with the Grand Tour.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh,
thank you, gentle lady, um,
thank you for, uh, providing
this additional information.
There's further debate, the
gentle lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. The
gentle lady from Bernelio Yield.
Mr. Speaker, I will yield to the
gentle lady from Santa Fe. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady, um.
We took up this um this uh bill
in um House Appropriations and
finance, and we had kind of a
robust conversation around it,
um, some of the
You, you know, the unintentional
consequences and, and, and
things like that, um, does your
bill, does this bill, this
version of this bill because I
knew it came to us last year as
well.
Um, but does this bill, um.
fulfill all the loopholes, if
you would, uh, that, that have,
that have come about in
discussions and even during the
interim with DFA, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Uh, Mr. Speaker, and gentle
lady, yes, because they can come
into some sort of agreement, um,
with, uh, the Grand Tour.
Mr. Speaker, generally, but does
the bill mandate that?
In in writing in the bill.
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, yes.
OK, Mr. Speaker, generally, um.
Thank you. Um,
Does it, uh, does it, um, work
on the the loophole or DFA will
be able to work proactively with
the local entities to fix.
Their finances, Mr. Speaker,
General.
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
it requires that.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Generally
it, OK.
Um,
Thank you for answering those
questions. I think that um some
of the, some of the other um
issues that I've been
Uh, exposed to to um interim in
discussions with DFA.
Um, I feel I have not really
been
Completely addressed through
your legislation and I think we
all, we talked about that as
well, and I think that the, you
know, as this bill is to move
forward if as if it should, then
maybe we can have, you know,
some of those issues and some of
those other gaps can be
identified, um, as we we uh
identified and
be amended, I don't have an
amendment for you here today,
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, but I
feel like there are still some
unresolved, um, issues within
the legislation that.
I, I think the easily uh
remedied, but it's just with
time going on, I think that
that's that's where I would just
land with my line of questioning
and, and, um.
Involvement with some of the
concerns that I have with this
piece of legislation, um, myself
and others, I think, um, so I, I
just hope like moving forward
that we can, we can address
those concerns, um, but like I
said, I don't have an amendment
or will be asking for those
amendments here today, but I
feel like there are some
unresolved issues, so ma'am, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, if you
think that that's something we
can work on, I'd be happy to
hear.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
um, in discussions with the
deputy auditor, um, they are
open to that, Mr. Speaker
Jalani, thank you.
I yield
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Vincent. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, as a gentle
lady you.
Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentlemen from Lincoln and
Arteto County.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
So we heard this, uh,
inappropriations and I had, I
guess the reason I voted against
this bill is, I feel like.
There was good intentions on the
bill, but I remember asking the
question about
How many, how many extra FTEs
was needed and I wanna, I wanna
say that the deputy auditor said
13, but there was only an
appropriation for like 3. And
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
I want to say that.
The the answer was, we'll get 3
and we'll figure it out. Is that
still stand, Mr. Speaker and
gentle lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and general, uh,
gentlemen, um, the request uh
for 13 was from DFA. The auditor
tells me that they would require
5.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
do you have the, the
appropriation 4 or 5 FTE.
Yes, uh,
Excuse me, Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, yes.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
you can get this amount of work
done with the 5TE that you're
asking for.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, they
are telling me uh the deputy
auditor is telling me that they
believe so.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
There is further debate,
gentlemen from Kari Grant, is
that gopresentative Terrazas.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's
quick because it's 10:15 and I
just wanna ask if the gentle
lady from Bernard Leo please
yield.
Mr. Speaker, I will yield to the
gentleman from Katherine Grant
and Hidalio.
County.
That that right, Mr. Speaker
lady, if I understand this
right, it's just allows codifies
the.
An entity who's not in
compliance to allow someone else
to be the fiscal agent so
they're uh capital Oley and
other funds aren't just sitting
idle.
Mr. Speaker and gentlemen,
that's exactly what it does.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Seeing, oh, there is for the
debate. The gentle lady from Rio
Riba Sandoval Center Finals
Representative Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the kind lady yo.
Mr. Speaker, I will yield to the
gentle lady from Ria Riba
Sandoval, Santa Fe, and Taos
Counties. Thank you. Um, I too
sit on appropriations and had
some problems with this bill. I,
uh, gentle lady, do you
understand that we have many um
governmental agencies that are
small in nature such as mutual
domestic water associations and
a seia associations all of
these, all of these small
organizations are usually run
by.
volunteers and um and um.
They're not always they don't
always have the capacity nor the
money, frankly, to do an audit.
Are you aware of that, uh,
gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, um,
the deputy auditor is telling me
that they are fully aware of
that those issues, um, I myself
am aware of those issues, and I
will tell you that they do have
a program to address and assist
those smaller um
Uh, governmental agencies.
And Mr. Speaker, kind lady, I, I
appreciate that but representing
a district with about 40
different mutual domestic water
associations and probably.
40ase Associations I do know
that people generally uh have
problems with this and um and
frankly, one of, one of the
problems is the capacity or the,
the, the existence of auditors
that will come out and do a very
small audit in a in an we we are
short of auditors in the state.
Do you understand that, um, kind
lady?
Uh, Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
um, I do understand that and
what I am being told by the
deputy auditor is that they are
currently working with those
groups and those uh.
Uh, governmental agencies and
that they have a small program
that is targeted toward
resolving those issues.
Um, Mr. Speaker and kind lady,
I, I know they, they have a
program, but I can just I can
just tell you from personal
experience in serving my
communities that is very
difficult and very costly to get
an auditor and auditor is not
gonna go north to to Saboya in
the middle of nowhere to to do
it on it and maybe get paid
$10,000 when auditors are in
short supply and would rather
work with an organizations and
gonna give them 20,000 and.
And that's part of the problem
and our state auditor admits
that and are you aware that he
is very concerned about the
shortage of auditors in our
state.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady, the
state auditor has discussed that
issue with me and we have
discussed the opportunity and um
he does see it as an opportunity
to work with our universities to
try to encourage those
particular professions to um be
recruited.
And uh Mr. Speaker, gentle lady,
what is the start date of this
uh of this bill?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
July the first of this year.
Of 2025.
And Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
if we don't have the auditors
now, I don't think we're gonna
have them by July of 2025 when
this goes into effect. I
understand the intentions are
good here, but I just want to
state that DFA has not been um.
Uh, they don't always process
capital outlay funds very fast.
It takes some organizations up
to 2 years to get the money, uh,
whether or not they have an
audit whether or not they can
get an auditor. I, I just think
there's a shortage of people in
DFA and shortage of auditors and
that's why I really have
problems with this bill. I will
not be supporting this bill as I
told you I will work if you take
it on we to toward us a better
solution, but I really.
they don't see one because I
don't think we have the
personnel that can carry this
forward and um and with that I
would urge other members to
consider this and uh uh vote
against this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
There is further debate. The
general lady from Santa Fe,
Representative Serrato. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the
gentle lady from Bertolino
yield, Mr. Speaker, I will yield
to the gentle lady from Santa
Fe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. If this
doesn't pass today, what will
change about what the auditor
does in his office, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, if this doesn't
change, then, I mean, the
alternative is to do nothing,
but I will tell you, uh, Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady that
they're already doing this, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, so what
I'm understanding is that they
are already enforcing this
because it's an executive order
as it stands right now and
counties and local
municipalities, etc. have been
upholding this otherwise, uh,
but this would just put this
into statute what has been
agreed to by a Republican and
Democratic governor. Is that
correct, Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady?
Speaker, gentle lady, exactly,
Mr. Speaker, gentlelady, how
much money was appointed to the
um uh auditor before um to take
care of and assist smaller
municipalities, political
subdivisions to take care of
these pieces before Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
OK
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady from
Santa Fe, $1 million. Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, and does
he ever use that million dollars
to utilize one auditor to uh
assist multiple counties and
multiple places at the same time
to uh fix their, uh, uh, uh,
their audits, Mr. Speaker,
gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, and gentle lady,
yes, and it is used in more than
one county. Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, so it sounds like what the
auditor is right now, right now
is utilizing the funds we're
giving him to maximize the
impact to our local communities
and to ensure they're able to
get their audits up to date
because Mr. Speaker, gentle
lady, eventually they're going
to be held accountable for
their, those pieces. So it
sounds like what he's doing is
assisting those very volunteer
communities, um, and, and, and I
fully understand that, that
these are
Volunteers handing it to
volunteers to volunteers, but
he's assisting them to get up to
date. Is that your understanding
what he's doing right now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady?
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
that is absolutely correct. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady. Uh, you know,
I, I come from a county and, and
a city where my sewer lines are
not being fixed right now, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. It's
because my cities's audits are
not at the level of clearance
that I need them to be at, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. It's
something that the state has
asked asked for for many years.
It's something that I have asked
for for many years, and my
community has suffered because
we do not have the
It's up to date so that the
money that I have appropriated
for them to get the sewer lines
up to date has not happened, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. It is not
the fault of this executive
order. It is not the fault of
what the auditor has put in
place. It is the fault of those
who are not ensuring that our
cities plans are in place, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady. Now I have
full faith that my city can
catch up because I have one of
the most urban places, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady, but I also
anticipate that through the work
of the auditor that they've been
able to help.
Smaller communities catch up,
Mr. Speaker, General lady. Are
there any numbers that your
speaker might have to how, how
many counties have been assisted
through their programs, Mr.
Speaker, gentle lady.
Mr. Speaker, gentle lady, at
least 10, but the auditor has
also released about $5.2 million
that has been held back. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentle lady. I will be
supporting this legislation
because it is already in effect.
Nothing will actually change for
any existing county at this time
and what this does is put into
statute what has been considered
good policy for both Democrats
and Republicans. So thank you
for bringing this forward.
no further debate to close.
Um, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I
now urge the body to support.
To vote in favor of.
How appropriations and finance
committee substitute for a House
bill 493.
We are on final passage of House
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 493.
The vote is now open.
was about to close.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of 51 in the affirmative, 13 in
the negative House
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for house
493.
Hauli pass this house.
That lady from Ber Leo presented
by the horn. Are you ready on
item number one. Speaker, can
you get me to that point?
supplemental calendar.
That the direct reflected all
action deserved for place in
Senate tax, business,
transportation.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 168 on final passage has
been taken, and it is subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Uh, SB 168, the travel Insurance
Act, has been endorsed by the
OSI to give New Mexico consumers
and regulators an efficient
fare, and uniform and effective
regulatory framework for travel
insurance
or actually any debate at all
generally or close.
Mr. Speaker, I ask that, uh, um,
I asked for a do pass on Senate
bill.
Uh, 168.
Senate Transportation do pass on
Senate transportation.
Business tax committee and
substitute for 168.
We are on final passage. There
should be debate just for that.
For our final passage of Senate
tax, business, transportation
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 168, the vote is not open.
Mm
Vote
is now closed by a vote of 60 in
the affirmative, 2 in the
negative.
Senate tax, business, and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 168
has passed his house.
Let's go back to the gentle lady
from Vernon Leo Representative
Borego on item number 41 on the
regular calendar.
Let's see.
That the record reflect that all
action deserved replacing Senate
tax Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 353
as amended our final passage has
been taken, and it is subject to
debate amendment or substitution
generally to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for
getting me to that place, um,
Senate tax business and
transportation Committee
substitute for Senate bill 353
relating to search and rescue
emergency response, and then in
search and rescue Act providing
response protocols for federal,
state, local, or tribal agencies
with New Mexico's search and
rescue is required in search and
rescue emergencies.
Mr. Speaker, I urge the body to
vote for Senate tax, business
and Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate bill 353
are on final passage of Senate
Business Transportation
Committee substitute presented
Bill 353 as amended. The vote is
now open.
The vote is not closed by a vote
of 64 in the affirmative 0 in
the negative. Senate tax,
business transportation
committee substitute for Senator
353. That is a long committee
name has amended.
Hauli pass this house.
Did you start calling it send a
text and call it a day.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to
that order of business messages
objection to clerk to read.
Message from the Senate, Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 64. I'm not
Senate seats for, excuse me.
The Senate has passed House Bill
64, House Bill 295 and return
same herewith respectfully
submitted. Sherry De Luhans,
Senate chief clerk. Message will
be entered.
General lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, it now being 11:59
a.m., I move that the house
adjourn until 12:01 p.m. will
come to order.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning present in this morning
session or present in this
afternoon session.
Mr. Speaker, I ask you unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved,
subject to revision and approval
of the rules and order of the
Business Committee.
It is so ordered.
lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I mean we go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Announcements, gentle lady from
Careerrasco Valencia
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. The
Republicans will be having a
caucus in room 318, 30 minutes
before the floor session that
you announced here shortly.
Tomorrow members take note,
gentlemen from Catherine Grant
Hidalgo represented Terazas.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. I hope
everyone got
The little thing that looks like
a gold bar but it's not.
It's a little chocolate casket.
Speaker.
I give these out usually in the
last week of session.
I hope you enjoy it.
Members take note.
Gentlemen from Donana, thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your house
appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 1040,
1050 in room 307.
Tonight I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker.
We do have more dinner upstairs
though.
Well, I'm not a member of that
committee, so.
I'm all good.
Any other announcements before
we break for the evening, I
believe there is a tax and
revenue committee meeting
tomorrow morning and I believe.
That it is at 8 a.m.
members take note, uh.
And Chairman Linte left. He's in
Grandpa Lente left. He's in bed
already.
And the other announcements.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Mr. Speaker, knock knock.
Who's there spell.
Spell
Who, WHO.
I didn't think he was that
funny, but apparently the whole
body disagreed with my
Judgment
I
a lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until 9:30
tomorrow morning.
thank you for a great, why are
you guys booing me? It's the
last day.
Thank you for a great day, I was
going to say.
The houses sitting in recess
until 9:30 tomorrow morning.
