Well if.
What are your.
Representative Matthews here.
Representative Zamora Sarah.
Representative Nelson here.
The yes.
Okay
of important.
I will come here and I am
Representative **** welcome and
please put your bills on the
table madam chair thank you
members of the committee thank
you so much out my apologies for
being here the usually takes me
twelve minutes to get here to
fifty five zero all the all the
agents is a little I live up I
twenty five.
The the exit to sink France's as
it often going to save us waited
waited waited I want to
The next exit which is called
the Senate will fail another two
miles of a back up if you miss a
lot of politics we are the this
is Jeff Representative Ezzell we
know thank.
So madam chair today and bring
you in the committee on house
bill two of four twenty three
it's related to livestock
Committee related to livestock
amending requirements and
procedures related to the stress
authorizing Katelin additional
stress that person other than
for in certain circumstances
making appropriation Madam chair
of this is an attempt on my part
others in in.
It presents some of the issues
that we have in southwestern
Mexico when I'm sure and and and
committee
we've had these cattle to hear
the.
As you heard madam chair on for
the other day with the
announcement I Representative
Ezzell and myself on hand over
this issue
this is probably not the perfect
solution I think we're all just
trying to find a solution madam
chair and members and so
this is an attempt on my part to
try to bring some relief to that
situation in in lieu of them of
the aerial shootings with that I
stand for questions.
We
one yes I'm sorry Madam despite
these.
And given I'm sorry Tom Shelley
and I know talk really good with
the vote on the state and so.
Percentage of.
Who those are two X. what was
thank you madam chair and what
they liked it would you have
liked to have conceded provided.
You start sure so wanted madam
chair members committee my
name's typeface and
I'm here Representative grant
sold water conservation district
or rancher down southwest New
Mexico.
Tomorrow in the reason we
brought this bill for this tier
of the the Four service is going
to start going out in the.
At the end of this week or
second go around.
We started this process about
two and a half years ago
in my board the Grant County
county growers to Tom shall each
with met with the in supervisory
human National Forest adamant
okay.
Indicated that his back was
against the wall we did have.
Of the budget to deal a big
budget to deal with the staff.
Told us that he had met with
the.
Of dealt with the New Mexico
last awkward was spoke was
getting nowhere was hoping to
get some at least part of the
revenue from those livestock
which had occurred back in the
nineteen we've got to retire of
Force ranger that that can
attest to the US ruffled we've
talked to the long time former
chairman of the New Mexico
livestock for bill Szabo who
granted this provision whereby.
The Four service it changed to
where the contractors were
getting the livestock and it
helped with some revenue helped
stretch the federal dollars
together.
Those those folks were very
successful in gathering this
calendar nineteen ninety.
General and ask if there's not
anybody salty enough together
those countdown there there's
plenty of people soft enough
together the cap but it becomes
a great experience great risk
and the way the current New
Mexico last October rules are
you know we have to they have to
turn those animals over to the
state livestock.
So anyway we told Mr mnogo no
problem The New Mexico livestock
work serves our industry will go
talk to them.
I don't how much time do I have
your own.
Okay I
so my board the county
categories for women New Mexico
livestock for plaques to no
avail we got absolutely no
relief no help at all.
Mr midowga I told him that we
would introduce leading
legislation he said you get that
passed I think I think we can
stave off shoots cal we didn't
get it
as you well know they went shot
sixty five echo last year.
They're they're proposing to go
and shoot some more law this
will be the second time they've
done it.
They've got some precedents and
so are big fear is you know.
Next time they want to get a
permit T. off even those count
granted I think they have the
latitude to maybe going to do
that they say no but but they
have some precedents I want to
explain that that down in
southwest New Mexico it's very
rugged very tough there's a lot
of federal land.
You know people I've seen people
comment to us that you know if
you don't want straight
California ranch fiction fans
will the black fire burned up
hundreds of thousands of acres
last year including some private
land for service land along with
office it's gonna be thousands
probably hundreds of miles of
finance that can be repaired
over life in a lot of that to
the wilderness you can't just go
build she can't have any
mechanized equipment in some
cases of federal agencies are
forcing us to do so for some
type of meat even do and
maintenance offense.
Again that country very tough
it's very rugged.
We we have livestock operators I
expect all across the state of
New Mexico that for whatever
reason can't take or don't take
care of the keep their account
for and I'm experience this
person.
Pretty soon in a short time two
to three years of them operating
those council.
I mean I heard that rose to the
ranch I don't care what kind of
things you have those skills
start with the coming of the
neighbors and then we're out of
the field we'll just tell our
brand is.
I can take action additional but
if there are branded nobody
claims or accept the New Mexico
livestock for.
Percent not liable for the
counties in on and the only
legal thing we can do is go
Gallo and handed over to the
next to last issue I can't
Brandon that's against the law I
can't protect mobile ranch.
And we just work we need
something we're asking for
something this this chart
account in the heat of it
they're gonna start shooting
tomorrow I I know pharmacy that
went up there and help develop
their stranded Calvin her.
The Four service has no
provision to compensate
whoever's County.
I'm gonna get it we're told
detail where they belong but
again when you have hundreds
thousands of acres of fire if
it's is route.
You can't you can't put those
comments back up we were begging
for some relief some protection
from this and we ask that you.
Consider this bill I know there
I know there's opposition to.
We get it we understand it but
we we believe for a unique
scenario down there and we need
some type of the and and I'll
stand for any questions to me
thank you thank you so much.
What for testimony to.
I'll keep it brief the thank you
madam chairman and
representatives for hearing us
today
I'm Tom Shelley I'm a fifth
generation
Cattle ranchers Grant County on
a combination of private and
wilderness for racing.
In fact my allotment is
immediately adjacent to the area
that is now closed to the public
so that they can fly in a
helicopter.
Have.
I have the respectful and good
relations working relationship
with the for service.
I that is tied mention their
backs are against the wall in in
this matter that's what they've
told.
The but what they're doing is
illegal under New Mexico
livestock lost.
It's also shameful and
unnecessary.
And it will solve the problem in
the long run anyway.
So.
Please support this bill.
New Mexicans can come together
and
resolve this problem.
What this bill does in my
opinion these gives makes clear
that New Mexico does have stayed
in the game and is willing to.
To pass legislation and funding
to help solve the problem we all
agree that we need to
participate San propped.
This gives an incentive for
those who at great risk go and
gather these Katelin it takes a
certain breed cowboy to do that.
But it is possible and it has
been successful in the past.
So.
I've read the the the at the.
Criticisms of this particular
particular bills that it does.
Given the New Mexico Law
livestock board.
A flexibility to fill that with
this in the right way and
properly at least give
compensation and motivation to
do this the right way.
That's what we're hoping to
achieve here.
And the.
Work together and we can solve
this problem.
Like to see madam chair is.
I just wanted everyone to know
madam chair committee that this
isn't just a I get this pulled
out of my hat I've got a letter
here resolution great counties
popped calibers the question
into this the resolution from
the apple so Grant County
stormwater people to do this and
the heat off of school water
conservation so there we
constituents madam chair so I'm
just trying to address their
issues thank you thank you all
for your presentation
I will go to the audience now on
a can you just raise your hands
how many are in support of this
bill.
All how many Americans still.
Okay I guess we're hearing the
people against this film first
could you raise your hands okay.
Madam chairman of the committee
members monitors rules for
Representative The New Mexico.
We would like to stand in
opposition of this bill is it's
got it's got a lot of issues
first Boston start circumventing
a lot of what the New Mexico
lost four is already put in
place there's a direct case
right now Representative was
already started working right
now in this part of the issue so
with the New Mexico our
starboard working with for
service but this recommend place
to show real steps the
advancement of getting he's got
a lot of the issue out of the
Human actual wilderness.
This director does not need to
be put in statute whatever it is
put into statute is gonna open
up an entirely new those.
That needs to stay shut.
Open up that.
If you read into this bill staff
is going to be very very calm
right comes additional.
District of the New Mexico lost
our board has put in place like
I said is already started
working.
The standard The New Mexico
watched Authority is the
standard last four in the United
States and if we start going and
and we start undermining them
putting all through
legislature's we're gonna start
degrading their act.
The event in the event that the.
Calar capture to be so they have
to go through the same health
protocols that everybody else
has to deal with because you're
gonna be crossing county lines
you guys are awesome State.
We can't have been that what one
is crossing state lines.
With these possibly disease
that.
One is that law the National
Security.
Trending a struggle without
first going through the New
Mexico last October that's
that's called stealing floors.
The New Mexico are starboard.
Doesn't gather livestock that's
not in there for and with that I
want to say that thank you.
Yes not.
The money's Taylor returns on
behalf of Mexico will growers
the staff has to this bill for
all the reasons previously
stated and like to reiterate
that New Mexico grandmas are
some of the best in the United
States.
Want to see these laws
alternative for any species
thank you thank you.
Chair representative committee
holiday are going on the
executive director of the New
Mexico licensed for we stand in
strong opposition to this bill
for various reasons
Representative or teen dresses
all of the history matters in
the state.
Using those laws for over a
hundred years and they have
effectively
Representative and retired to
the producers of the state so.
I would like to correct to
record their the the New Mexico
I thought for extensively
researched to see if there was
any funds that was turned over
to the Forest Service.
Those records do not exist for
service not producing records
well so if those funds were
turned over to the for service
we have no record of that.
So.
The board have the authority to
enter into joint powers
agreement with Indian nations
tribes or pueblos to promote the
operation carried out for more
is why order code.
so
six proceeds from the sale of
was very lax ought to be
very terms before I think more
directly an asset.
A private individual possibly
violating anti.
Rosie's very large opportunity
here is is Representative
conflict of seventy seven
thirty.
Chapter seventy seven yes
specific power support
tribulation livestock industry
having a law that takes some of
the work will be further
weakening the law producers.
Allowing wearers together is L.
and Randy cattle we need to
reschedule misinterpretation Law
lead to neighbor stealing for
unranked Carolyn presenting them
for sale under the pretense of
them being fair.
Section seventy seven sixteen
states all private when you get
to the Russians I thought our
press property with kids dance
there is no reason for Senator
pero help your property.
Sure it is properly.
Thank you.
Chairman.
Sunday's deputy director New
Mexico lost our borders.
Involved in the inspection
process for twenty three years
hello this quite a bit New
Mexico last awkward returns five
hundred to eight hundred
thousand dollars.
Right livestock to the rightful
owners every year.
Of this bill would hindered
process I tried to apply
solution to the eagle area
statewide we would of regionals
loss and we would
of we had our own brand loss
good neighbors keep their fences
up that's that's the standard
good neighbors and also returned
Katelin don't belong to them
this is a no.
That's how we create this good
neighbor
working relationship that we
have in New Mexico and just
because of for service is not a
good neighbor it's not reason
for us to implement a law that
affects the whole state and be
speaker this this would affect
the communal areas we have
communal grazing up north this
would affect the checker board
areas where we have
of close ties and tribal
entities and this would affect
the tribal neighbors that have
cattle on on the Mexico
producers and all the travel
fishers so current statutes are
adequate to allow the New Mexico
last are board district to
protect industry service by
returning straits and forcing
Health mandates we we will
continue to serve producers New
Mexico thank you thank you.
The chair.
On and ran away.
From.
All county offices closed down.
Mr there's also a rancher who
ranches in rough country and so
can do straight away and get
away and so presently how we
handle that situation we always
gather our cattle feeder during
ship Committee branding and we
will offer you branded cattle we
see and we do call our stop for
for a permit number at that time
and then we can all cap to a
local state more to be to go
through the a straight process
and then we are compensated our
fuel and so we get the lawn
Grant capsule my membership
those scattered where they
belong to their return to the
rightful owner and at least have
a W. secretary the rifle so I'm
personally this bill this bill
with courage livestock staffed
and and I just think that we
don't want to be a jerk because
of the killing he law killings
and I just want to reiterate
what everyone else says thank
you for the opportunity thank
you Sir.
Anymore appropriations
southeastward state not for all
the reasons stated.
Thank you for.
Anybody else against okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee on health centers.
State veterinarian I'm against
any bills that's going.
Going to replace of health rules
those rules are in place to
protect dollars in the state not
just specific herds being picked
up as they go along if we miss
opportunities for surveillance
to see what diseases are in the
Calumet area into they're going
straight slaughter without any
process without any examination.
What we're here for and we're
entering the health are you Sir
thank you thank you secretary.
Yes yes morning madam chair
members of the committee we
start with the serve of the
chapter representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
of the respectfully stand in
opposition to the four forty
three this bill comes in the
context of current tens through
feral cattle from here is for
school the Forest Service is
within their authority to handle
this issue in a way that is best
for the cattle the landscape and
those who safety could be at
risk.
Says this bill creates
requirements
required procedures processes
that have already been well I
admitted with so we C. will.
This is bill thank you.
Anybody else wish to speak
against this bill yes Sir did
you produce for your committee
Colfax County Mexico of.
State in opposition for reasons
stated appropriations within of.
Well if you for the film the
stated if we want the person to
see.
Hey look with this blanket
legislation overall.
The research they use religious
levels.
We're talking about the letters
in ended up in Colfax County
this whole but stated that we
posted overseas thank you thank
you Sir anybody else opposition
families are generation
southeastern New Mexico
in addition past president New
Mexico brewers Association I'm
currently a vice chairman of the
finance committee for the
national cattlemen's beef
association.
I'm not representing either out
formalization of representing
myself in this thank you stand
in opposition of this bill.
Process we.
Right here in the process of
trying to do something to
prevent the.
So these animals.
This the shooting is supposed to
start on Thursday January twenty
I mean very worried twenty third
and so we're in an attempt to
try and stop it and to have a
healthy way of gathering in
which the directive that lost
are forecast to address this
situation does not mean that we
need to have the action is a sad
to have the whole state of that
is off to be able to go out and
gather
Well there's well tenders okay
that.
The.
service on board and we will
start with.
Tranice.
To.
Hi this is Quentin Griffin in
Silver City New Mexico hi
inspection of the process our
representative H. B. four two
three is not a perfect bills
there's no accounting for the
proposed budget of half a
million dollars different yours
one H. B. four two three let
them pay for through it checked
off not the general fund
background on this bill it is a
grant soil and water
conservation district bill
coming from Grant County since
two thousand nineteen so along
water has been fighting keep
those feral cattle out there in
the wilderness to continue a
decades long battle of public
land ranchers.
Free to do whatever they want
versus proper management to our
public lands by the heel and
national force five thousand of
us wrote the public comment to
the poor service to say we
support their legal rights to
manage our public lands in
regards to the removal of feral
cattle H. B. four to three is
just another attempt by grant
sorrel Water to stop the removal
of these non native feral cattle
thank you and please vote no on
H. B. four to three I appreciate
the time.
Thank you we'll go to the lower
frost.
Our state you.
We'll go on to the next person
maybe get back to Laura let's go
to
She and.
What.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Janet Wilder teeth I am also
constituent representative at
that office and I am completely
opposed to H. bill for twenty
three for all the reasons
mentioned before and under
current law fail cattle are on
owned and managed unbranded and
do not meet the legal definition
of a stray therefore feral
cattle remain outside the
management authority of the New
Mexico livestock board thank you
very much for your time please
vote this bill down.
Thank you.
Sure it's.
Office.
These has.
Hi madam chair this John frost I
propose House Bill.
But for twenty three for the
fact that I am in fear of this
this could cause range wars
because a it's it's taken away a
lot of the rules from the likes
on board thank you ma'am thank
you John and now lower for.
Mr frost.
Where I Allison and see what.
Yes good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Alice and civic and I'm
director of the Hilo
conservation coalition based in
Silver City and we also oppose
house bill four twenty three and
we view this bill as an attempt
to take jurisdiction away from
the Forest Service in regards to
the un branded on authorized
cattle issue on federal lands
especially.
In regard to the recent decision
to use with all methods to
remove feral cattle from the
healer wilderness and we agree
with the concerns that have been
raised this morning and also in
the fiscal impact report.
It HB for twenty three will
weaken the ability of the
livestock board to do its job
and will also set up a situation
that will cause conflict between
ranchers over stray cattle
rather than mitigate potential
problems and moreover H. before
twenty three allows the
petitioner to take up to two
hours of the unbranded cattle
perpetuating serious ecological
damage caused by the feral cows
which is the issue that we're
trying to address right now in
the heel a I urge you to vote no
on H. before twenty three thank
you thank.
I think our next speaker is Todd
Freeman.
Good morning my name is Mike
green and red turn Grant County
New Mexico.
Page one page two programs that
receive the language here could
enable regulatory agency
overseeing or grazing lease our
lot with to apply pressure on
the current we see tender
Committee and predatory manner.
Wrestler plied for purpose of
rural the laci from the from the
property in order to install a
new one in its place or not have
one at all H. two paragraphs
State my opinion in this poor
judgment to allow really percent
of the cat about a lot of stock
board chair.
We will are not met as is the is
stated in paragraph but being in
the state lacks prudent
implementation of regulation of
our stands question statement
seems to truck protection agency
is yes give livestock owners
gonna feel comfortable
systematic Larson that would be
deemed lawful if this would
become law.
Thanks for section three it
should never be impractical for
the directors not publish notice
of industry focusing notice
regardless of practicality
promotes transparency.
Closing remarks the cattle
situation here those result
failed policy in the moving
target regulations for years
almost grazing allotments is
bills being touted as a solution
to the issue that was being shut
down the throats very livestock
producer in state my opinion it
would be much more productive to
handle the trust passes straight
issue Callum he'll of one off
manner thereby managing the
issue with agencies responsible
for stripper corrective action
plan a plan with indicators
status and progress of
completion realistic goals step
and all stakeholders input money
livestock producers in New
Mexico as a whole it not being a
self installation after very
well impacting the perpetual
manner due to the fact that it
can be difficult to recall for
change legislation once it
becomes law I oppose this bill
please vote no and thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Next we will go to.
My.
I pronounce that right.
Yes you sure did.
Thank you madam chairman for the
opportunity speaking and
commission R. legislatures
I guess what I wanted to point
out in this issue first of all
I'm so disappointed to see my
soil and water representatives
there
Actually sitting there just you
know members of the cattle
industry I don't see any talk
about soil and water so the one
of the first things that I want
to say is that the main stem no
wilderness reach of the healer
river is an ecological jul it's
a reservoir for soil carbon
water biodiversity in the course
wildness you're in the middle of
the heart of the healer the the
the first wilderness area in the
world so to me the you know this
isn't so much discussion about
Owls in the cruelty of aerial
shooting you know the ranching
industry specializes in killing
cattle.
And.
In that I would like to
suggest that perhaps this is a
you know a battle over of power
in land use we've had three
decades now of failed round ups
they have failed because they
have not a radically did the
heard it's a revolving door you
go in every five or ten years
get out another two hundred
somebody makes a profit on it
certainly not the you know the
users of the Hugo wilderness
this is an opportunity to get
rid of these cattle completely
this is the decision of whether
or not we're going to allow
Kyle boys in cattle on the land
state and what we have just
designated wilderness are we
going to I I saw on categories
websites people talking about
you know what would be really be
helpful what would really help
us manage those counties if we
had some some pens in some some
corrals maybe some roads into
the area you know if we just had
access to just let us on to the
land we could solve this issue
for you well that's not
happening it has not happened in
the problem has just gotten
worse and it's time to get rid
of these populations completely
so please vote no on this
legislation thank you thank you
New Mexico to Katelin strapped
Spratly.
The morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kate once probably would New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we appreciate the spirit of this
budget legislation as we do you
believe that these ranchers need
assistance the entire fiasco
that has taken place in the
queue is outraging we do have
concerns of portions of this
legislation but appreciate the
work the sponsor has done to try
and address his constituents
needs we strongly encourage the
for service livestock board and
local stakeholders continue to
work together to find a solution
that works to meet the needs of
all those involved as we face
the strenuous issues it is that
we stick together to try and
develop collective solutions
thank you for your time thank
you Kate sorry for
mispronouncing your name and I
think our last no Donna Stevens
next.
Chair and members of the
committee my name is Donna
Stevens and I am the executive
director of the upper people
watershed alliance watershed
protection nonprofit based in
Hilo and Silver City.
On behalf of our more than three
hundred and fifty members could
cherish a healthy he'll
wilderness area we stand opposed
to HB for twenty three because
frankly it's unnecessary the
Four service already has legal
authority to remove the feral
cattle from the heel wilderness
these invasive animals do not
meet.
New Mexico's legal definition of
just straight because they have
never been owned or domesticated
H. B. for twenty three attempts
to assert state and private
control over feral cattle on
federal land this is potentially
illegal and could embroil the
state and costly legislation
mid of litigation excuse me.
They are very compelling
ecological reasons to facilitate
removal of these wild on managed
animals that have been degrading
land and water in the field of
wilderness for decades Lee full
removal is the most humane way
to accomplish that because more
than half of the cattle die in
roundups in this rugged.
Thank you for this opportunity
to provide input and again I
urge you to oppose H. B. four
twenty three.
Thank you I think our last.
It is time sure.
Thank you madam chair.
Choking with center for
biological.
Spent a lot of time up in well
there's there's been a lot of
different misinformation about
this this the the feral cat
removal and I could spend a lot
of time trying to correct some
of that but lot of it's been
said.
The irony about H. B. for twenty
three is it actually won't help
with the people of federal
capital situation because the
the authority would be limited
to private lands leased lands
for permitted allotments on
federal lands none of which.
Of those things apply to the
wilderness where the feral
cattle are so you know if that's
the reason to do this it's not a
very good one thank you.
Thank you okay and I would turn
to members of the committee and
Representative similar madam
chair move to table.
For the motion to table of
their.
The manager was our second half
does it is second and on the
second but thank you the clerk
to call real.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative gates yes.
Representative Ezzell yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Is yes.
Read more yes.
Representative Allison yes.
I'd like to explain.
Yes to table and are displayed
and we have some people
explaining that that's
representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair completely
understand what you're going
through.
Completely understand by
Representative colossal spot
this legislation for people that
he represents did the same thing
with the water on St Augustine
plains issue.
Helped my community.
But it hindered other parts of
the state.
And that's why I voted yes to
table but I appreciate the
you're trying to do something
about it thank you madam chair
Representative Representative
mark madam chair members of the
committee and and presenters
there's no need for us to figure
hammer on you guys for an hour
and a half
thank you need to go back to the
people and and work with the
people that this concerns you
heard the testimony.
There's there's no need for the
breast center.
You guys need to go back work on
a little bit see if we can come
up with a different solution
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you and
madam chair thank you very much
Representative to rass in your
expert witnesses thank you for
being here today and I
understand what you're trying to
do don't get us wrong.
One of the US Forest Service
goes in their tears at all means
being able to get the SCAVELLO
both Pentagon over there of.
What is it thank you they're
they're wanting to replicate the
forest of these feral cattle
madam chair one of the things
that is stuck in my mind is the
threat of trichomoniasis is some
of these cattle are sold and
they're going to different
counties in two different states
I don't want to quarter to to be
put on every cattle herd in the
state of New Mexico madam chair
what the Forest Service is doing
it so I decided to come comments
that were made later on in
testimony from those of the
line.
Is sickening.
It's nothing more than animal
cruelty because they are not
actually killing all yes there
will be the analyst in agonizing
scrutinizing rate.
To die of the floor of the force
so I do.
Appreciate your concerns but at
this point we we have to stand
by what's in place thank you
very much madam chair and I too
would like to
Thank you for coming for setting
I too have Representative bills
that we're we're table very
quickly and and I understand how
painful that that and I know
you're trying to sell something
back you should know that the
whole house is very is very
supportive
you know telling the poor
service.
Would you like to close I just
want to make.
Now so I just want to tell
everyone Madam chair of the
committee I appreciate everyone
not just on this committee all
those people for constituents at
and the last four all those
ranchers that have differences
of opinion I totally understand
that
was never to create I think
present Representative Armstrong
thank you we don't want her
services state I don't want to
undermine the last four I want
to
heard the process at all
madam chair as I you came into
office during the COVID.
and so I was only able to really
address system memorial last
year and all of us trying to do
madam chairs bring everyone to
the table to have this
discussion
it's it started to move that way
but it's been unsuccessful.
And so
And I'm just responding to those
who have come to the which of
only been to this point other
than the last few days the only
people that came to me after I
did the more the manager was a
livestock or excuse me the cal
growers will slow water people
and so I always all the courage
all those individuals from like
my constituents back home to
have a good conversation we can
all come together and find a
solution it's obvious that we
all want them to be out of the
the force and so we're just
trying to find a solution but
madam chair thank you very much
for.
The or allows you to sit here I
think the only thing that this
did do is when attention to the
situation that is happening down
there this you up and although
this is not the perfect solution
absolutely not for solution it
at least I could conversation to
the table thank you for giving.
Okay I did not recognize
explained to I'm fine thank you
very much madam chair I want to
also thank you for bringing this
the.
And not only do we need to
continually bring this issue to
our attention and have this
conversation but I heard your
frustration.
And and your willingness to go
and resolve it and I appreciate
that but I I think that you're
in good hands with
Representative trying to bring
everyone to the table so that
we.
Find more contact with all of
our process I thank you.
Thank you.
We have a tape appreciate.
Thank you for Senate bill two
hundred.
Madam chair I'd like to point
out that.
Presentation by the
representatives yesterday
morning on the news.
Just
take place over there in the.
And one of the comments that was
made by one of the television
reporters was these cattle are
grazing.
Health bills would need to be
aggressive to the helicopters
chase.
This is Judy and.
Chris.
So you know folks if you're
gonna be report news get all
your facts straight.
Thank you.
They were clearing the room in a
quiet down now and
Thank you senator of.
Wait so long.
It was very controversial if you
have been early.
Please put your bill's clear out
the room yes.
No no for that.
For a minute here.
We were out of the they were
success that was.
Okay thank you madam chair
members the committee this bill
is extremely.
Question two projects in the
state of New Mexico the used
water project the Navajo
McKinley County project.
Both over five hundred million
dollars.
we've been working on the U. one
for over thirty years suspected
number home with families on to
we are getting some federal help
all nation that for the end of
the money's going to have to
come from what this particular
bill does is it just lets the
projects please.
Egypt from Bernalillo four year
contract from common.
Mexico because these are
projects are going to take a lot
of years and chances are the way
most of these are that there's
never more than one person.
Because I so.
The amount of work it takes
it's always particularly build
those and the contracts
administrator thing after the
other part of the financial
situation.
The list.
Thank you for all the.
For the committee to be done by
the.
Companies are involved in this.
Thank you senator and do we have
you wishing to speak in favor of
this bill.
It runner body.
Schools in favorite thank better
or this is.
And so.
Recognizes.
uses the word.
In order or or.
Eastern New Mexico.
Some.
Is fighting thank you.
Madam chair of her head up and
members of the committee my name
is Orlando Ortega I am the
administrator for the eastern
New Mexico water utility
authority and I'm speaking on
behalf of in favor of this
Senate bill two hundred Senate
bill two hundred would give us
to the the the the authority to
to work towards
Going beyond the four year
professed professional services.
Of the procurement with our
power projects of our project is
is large and our engineering
contract to at at present is a
four year contract for
procurement and our projects are
are longer than that so we we
see a conflict there we are
working in a pro active wait to
try to find a solution to this
as we move forward with this
project we we are in favor of
Senate bill two two hundred.
Thank you so.
members of.
Representative similar acts
madam chairman with do pass
second we have a deep passed by
Representative Zamora and a
second Representative K. is
there any opposition to the.
And Sir can I just ask a
question I'm I'm sorry Sir you
said there were too many
projects.
Eastern is one of a decision
here with disabilities Gallup
McKinley county.
New
York gov years ago the Sanchez
please.
The I don't know all the details
about your project expected to
over five hundred.
That's all this particular
project use of drugs more stuff
like this over five hundred.
In that sense one of the
questions S. or these these
focus on farm for these farming
no water project water for
cities or okay.
Thank you
I know a lot about that I'll
tell you that after it's okay we
have a motion on the floor yes
is and is there any opposition
to this motion.
I see none Senator Ingle you
pass.
We should give.
A lot.
