Representative Lord.
Here
Romero here.
Representative Thompson here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Here
And Madam Chair.
present.
Have
We have a quorum, Madam Chair.
Um, first up, we will have HB 12
Extreme Risk Firearm protection
order changes, and what, how
we're going to um handle this
is.
Present the bill, then we'll go
to opposition 10 people from the
audience and the um uh sergeant
at arms will hold the microphone
if you line up, you know, right
down the middle but not too
close to the um sponsor's table,
and we'll go to, um, if we can,
um, well,
They've been having problems
with the um webcast or the.
People making public comment
through web.
We can get that, we'll take 10
minutes, I mean, uh.
10 minutes for that and
Seeing how many people we have,
but 2 minute limit on people in
the audience here, um, and we'll
do 10 on each side, and then
we'll go to clothes, OK, all
right.
Um, yes, we have allowed uh the
press to take photos.
meeting
OK.
Um
OK, uh, uh, Representative
Garrett and Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh we're here today, um, let me
introduce our witnesses as well.
We have a detective Matthew
Tinney from the Crisis
Intervention Unit with
Albuquerque Police Department.
We also have lieutenant uh
Janice Madrid, who's with the
Criminal Investigations Bureau
in New Mexico state police as
questions come up.
So the extreme risk firearm
Protection Order Act called URO
and popularly known as the Red
Flag Law, became New Mexican law
in May 2020. The law creates a
court process to temporarily
prevent a person in crisis from
assessing firearms in order to
harm themselves or others from
the first year that the law was
enacted, there was a handful in
2020, um, in this past year.
2024, there were actually 90
petitions filed with 86 granted,
and it's informative because
now, um, the Department of
Public Safety, the Department of
Justice and different nonprofits
have expanded training so that
law enforcement can understand
when it's appropriate to use
this tool and to also know when
they can tell families that it's
available to them, uh, for those
online or in the
room. Information about this
bill can be found on the New
Mexico courts website. It has
all the forms that you file when
you're in this situation,
including a firearm relinquish
that receipt form.
And I think as law enforcement
officers have implemented the
act in in real time. They have
identified a few areas that
require changes in order to be
more effective and particularly
to prevent tragedies. So
Representative Christine
Chandler will share some of
those changes.
Oh thank you, um, Madam Chair,
thank you, Representative. This
bill actually is a pretty narrow
bill.
It addresses two issues that
have been identified by law
enforcement and others as
needing some adjustment.
Um, the first issue is who can
report um.
be a reporting party at which
that which starts the petition
process, so.
The the districts district
courts in the state are split
right now and how they interpret
the law.
Some of the districts believe
that um police officers can be
the petitioning party, but.
There are other districts in the
state that have ruled otherwise
and they there's an ambiguity in
the law that we're attempting to
address by explicit explicitly
saying that a police officer.
may file a petition.
So that is on page 2,
and it starts at line 23.
So
Provided that a police officer
might also file a petition based
on credible information that
Um, the officer collected while
carrying out their official
duties, so we know that um
police officers see a lot of
things interact with family
members have often have
knowledge about the person that
would give rise to sufficient
information for them to, to file
such a petition.
Um, I would also, um, point out
that the second change is also
considered, um.
Uh, a fix that law enforcement
and others have identified as an
issue, and that has to do with
the fact that currently a person
who receives an order to
relinquish a firearm pursuant to
the due process proceedings that
they, they received May um.
May have 48 hours to relinquish
those firearms.
There was controversy around
this provision when the bill was
originally enacted and.
What we're trying to to assure
it doesn't happen is.
Injury to someone who um may be
the object of that person's
aggression.
safety of the police officers
who are arriving to retrieve the
um firearms after 48 hours, so
this is a safety measure, um, if
someone is in a place where
there are not at a mental place
where they might be acting out.
We think that's 48 hours rule is
something that could be
counterproductive and put people
at risk. So those are the,
that's the sum total of the of
the changes, Madam Char be like.
Detective Kinney, would you like
to add anything?
Sure, in Albuquerque, we've been
using this uh law since it's
passed. We've been able to to
use it to successfully help.
Quite a number of individuals
that have been in crisis.
And I really appreciate the
legislator taking this bill on
with some of the updated
language that would help myself
and my other colleagues in.
And I, um, inspired by the
crisis unit in Albuquerque, uh
Sandoval County, uh Berlio
Sheriff's County. Other people
across the state are seeing the
value of these crisis
intervention units. Lieutenant,
would you like to add anything?
Thank you. And with that we
stand for questions.
OK, thank you. Again, we'll take
10 people from uh the opposition
side.
Um, if you'd like to line up and
our sergeant of arms will.
If there are 10 people.
Good afternoon. My name is
Anthony Sagra. I'm with the New
Mexico Shooting Sports
Association.
We've been a firearms advocate
association for 90 years.
Um, I am speaking against this
bill.
This bill seeks to expand the
New Mexico's red flag
confiscation law by burdening
the list of individuals who can
actually apply for a
confiscation order.
Additionally, it, it mandates
that you must surrender
immediately rather than waiting
the 48 hour window.
Such drastic measures not only
infringe upon the rights of
abiding citizens, but it also
raises serious concerns about
due process.
And the potential for misuse of
law.
And I've seen that in the past.
I actually worked for the
Berlingo County Sheriff's
Department.
And we know that all officers.
Hopefully
Abide by the law, but we know
that some don't.
And we're afraid that with this
law that they have the
opportunity to abuse it.
So we're against the law. We're
hoping that it does not get
passed.
So that we can, you know, if, if
they have to.
Uh, find out that they need to
get the firearms from somebody.
There is a clause where they can
put an emergency order in and
and remove the firearms.
Without having to wait the 48
hours, so there's already a
provision in the law that allows
to do that, so I
Hope that you decide to vote no
on this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair representatives, my
name's William Fire Eisen and
I'm a retired computer scientist
here in Santa Fe.
I urge you to reject HB 12 as
its currently written. URO laws
move in the right direction by
addressing the subset of people
who have been identified as
potential offenders rather than
targeting everyone.
However, our original law lacks
due process and sufficient
standards of evidence when
dealing with constitutional
rights. HB 12 makes this worse.
New Mexico's standard of
evidence is less than that of
other states where as many as
1/3 of orders have turned out to
have been incorrectly issued
against innocent parties.
HB 12 does not correct this.
Ex parte orders do not involve
the affected party, so there is
no recourse until the 2nd
hearing.
Elimination of the current 48
hour period makes this even
worse.
Please fix this law HB 12 takes
our current EPA law in the wrong
direction.
Madam Chair, representatives,
thank you.
Is there anyone else in
opposition would like to speak.
We're going to go to the web. Is
there anyone? How many people?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Nate Eske here
on behalf of over 1700 members
of Z rifle and Pistol Club in
the Albuquerque area. We
opposed.
Oh, he did. We just, OK.
We oppose this bill.
For the reasons already stated,
I'd like to put a finer point on
the potential for abuse, uh, by
this. Obviously, we'd all like
to think that law enforcement
officers are above board, but
they're people just like the
rest of us. There's a spectrum
of
Law-abidingness and
Desire to abuse law amongst law
enforcement officers.
to tell you about Ronald Davis,
um, former Pennsylvania state
trooper. He used that state's
involuntary mental health
commitment law to abuse his
ex-girlfriend and harass her,
leading to him strangling her in
her driveway for over 12
minutes.
Uh, Mr. Davis was eventually
charged with a number of crimes,
but he had access to his victim
because of the power given to
him by a law.
This law could
Permit the same kind of abuses.
And targeted harassment against
members of the public by a rogue
law enforcement agent. Thank
you.
Next person online.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
This is Larry Sontag speaking
for Better Together New Mexico,
which represents hundreds of
advocacy groups and thousands of
New Mexican statewide.
We respectfully oppose House
Bill 12, Extreme risk, firearm
protection orders. This bill
enables
Individuals to be deprived of
their rights and personal
property and to be subjected to
invasive searches based solely
on one party's assessment that
they might have committed, they
might commit a crime in the
future.
This is a deeply troubling
concept, and we cannot justify
imprisoning or punishing someone
based on speculation on what
they might do.
As outlined in the bill's search
warrant provisions, a single
round of ammunition could be
concealed anywhere within a
home.
Allowing invasive search
warrants based solely on the
judgment of an uninvolved third
party, fundamentally undermines
Fourth Amendment rights and
others. For this and other
reasons that you have already
heard.
We urge you to vote no on.
House Bill 12. Thank you.
Thank you. Next person.
Madam Chair, can you hear me?
Uh, for the record, Dan Reed, on
behalf of the National Rifle
Association. We're here in
opposition to House Bill 12. Uh,
this is an expansion of the red
flag orders which we oppose the
underlying bill. It allows for a
deprivation of your
constitutional rights not based
on a criminal conviction or
mental adjudication, but based
on third party allegations, this
bill compounds that problem by
allowing law on law enforcement
officers to have the process
streamlined where they're both
acting as the sole source and
the mechanism for deprivation
of.
um,
at unreasonably low evidentiary
standards. We also have serious
concerns with the immediate
surrender provisions and how
that actually gets executed
without uh causing people grave
issues um by eliminating that 48
hour requirement. With that, we
stand in opposition. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Cynthia Canner from Sequoia
County. The red flag law is
unconstitutional. It violates
obviously the 2nd Amendment, the
4th Amendment to protect us from
arbitrary government intrusion,
5th Amendment to ensure due
process and legal justice of
safeguards from unjust burden.
First Amendment, of course, um,
the freedom of speech without
fear of someone retaliating for
different views.
Credible report should be taken
seriously, but there must be
objective standards, ensuring it
is not a subjective malicious
report which can come from an
unknown person, but qualifies as
a credible report from the
reporting party is ambiguous in
this bill. Everyone must have a
due process to defend themselves
from an improper invasive search
is conducted. It should not be
passed as it is.
With such low standards
approved. We pray that you will
make this decision that promotes
integrity, humility with a
genuine desire to honor the
constitutional rights of all New
Mexicans. We pay that you see
that got ing
and wisdom in Jesus' name we
pray. Thank you and God bless.
My name is John Bolton. I'm the
district director for domestic
Shooting Sports Association down
in Roswell.
Uh, as you already know, this is
a violation of the Constitution
2 and 4th Amendment rights.
This is low, the Mac, it's only
been used about 115 times, which
The meat is disparages the
urgency that they, you guys said
it needed in 2020.
One person has already been shot
and killed by law enforcement,
and it turned out that the
person was innocent and the
information used to follow the
red flag law was enacted.
A child was discussing a parent
owning guns with the teacher and
the school administrator feat in
a red flag ball against the
parents without any factual
knowledge or wrongdoing.
This is a
This is again, just an absolute
unnecessary
Violation of rights.
Let's look at some of the real
crime laws that have been
introduced year after year that
the leadership will not pass.
They would do something to
really fight crime rather than
violating law abiding citizens'
rights.
Anyone can issue an anti-gun
bill that is usually useless.
It would take some real courage
to pass effective gun laws in
this state. I urge you to do so.
Thank you.
We have one more person.
Go ahead.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Go ahead, John. OK,
great.
What did uh Patrick Henry say?
Did he say, give me safety,
health, taxation, or did he say,
give me liberty or give me
death.
During the ratification of the
constitution in Massachusetts,
everyone agreed that any
usurpation of any liberty was an
act of tyranny. All natural
lights rights were given by the
Creator, not government. Above
all, the right to bear arms, to
bend oneself and property.
Clarence Thomas in the most
recent Bruin case was clear.
When it applies to the 2nd
Amendment, you have to look at
the history and that there were
no restrictions in 1791.
I don't care if you pass this
bill or any other bill.
I'm here to tell you that I
won't comply. And then I urge my
fellow New Mexicans to follow my
lead. Every gun control bill
that is made is
unconstitutional. Norton and
Shelby County agrees.
Any constitutional act is not
law, confers no rights, imposes
no duties, affords no
protections, creates no office
and legal contemplation as an
operative and can be ignored
with impunity.
I oppose this bill, of course.
OK, thank you. That's it for
the, and he went online.
Thank you. OK, now we'll go to
those in support of the bill and
if you looks like there'll be.
Close to 10
Right, let's not get more than
10 in line because we're going
to stick to that and 2 minutes
or less, and if you'll please
state your name.
Uh, at the beginning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Carolyn Wynn, on behalf of state
police, we do stand in support
of this bill, and I do want to
preface that to ensure that you
receive the latest copy of our
fur because I know there's some
difficulties earlier, so I just
want to ensure that you have
that. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Miranda
Vascoli, executive director of
New Mexicans to Prevent Gun
Violence, we stand in strong
support of this piece of
legislation. It simply gives law
enforcement one more tool to
keep our community safer as well
as keeping law enforcement safer
and addition to that, we've been
deeply concerned about the 48
hour waiting period, and we saw
what happened in Farmington when
the man was given 48 hours and
he used that 48 hours to shoot
up his ex-girlfriend's house.
It's such a very dangerous
environment. Thank you very
much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The legal voters has a
position that um supports
legislation that promotes gun
safety, and we believed that HB
12 was consistent with that
position. So we urge you strong
support for HB 12, and I want to
thank Representative Garrett,
Representative Chandler for
bringing the legislation
forward. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main
speaking on behalf of the
American Association of
University Women in strong
support for HB 12, and we would
like to thank the sponsors. We
also like to thank the Attorney
General who weighed in on this
bill and gave lots of uh
suggestions to make sure it was
implemented because we had it on
the books and only 4 cases came
up, I think after 2020 and uh
Even after clarification that
police officers could be
reporting part parties, um, they
were unclear, so uh I think it's
absolutely critical that we put
these uh protections into law
and that we also have immediate
relinquishment and I just want a
very briefly uh tell you a story
about when I was um a dean at
Santa Fe Community College and a
student of mine stayed um with
her son under
underneath my desk overnight
because her husband was drunk
and she had, had been a victim
of domestic violence before, and
she was sure he would kill her
and her son, and she was one of
the lucky ones. Um, they
separated, but they actually
were able to get back together
after he stopped drinking and he
got um some mental health uh
counseling. We've got to get the
guns.
way
From when people are in crisis,
they cannot have them for 48
hours. We've seen too many
tragedies, so I urge you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Uh, chairwoman and members of
the committee. I'm Janet
Williams with the National
Organization for Women. We
support the expansion that
includes law enforcement,
according to recent studies
conducted across 4 states,
researchers determined that ERPO
can save one life for every 13
Ebo issued.
This bill will help reduce gun
violence in New Mexico, please
support HB 12. Thank you.
Madam Chair, representatives,
and all those in attendance. My
name is Jerry Hogruff. I'm a 37
year police officer in New
Mexico, probably longer than
anyone else wearing a badge in
this room.
I think we can all agree.
Certain people should not have
firearms or have access to
firearms. That's why I'm here to
support this initiative.
Currently, the extreme risk
firearm protection order or red
flag limits uh the ability to
apply it in many situations,
those situations I've had
personal experience with is when
somebody is having a mental
health crisis, and there is not
a petitioner and a law
enforcement cannot be the
petitioner, uh, in many
jurisdictions in this state.
At least where I practiced my
two terms as Taos County
sheriff.
It makes little sense to me that
under state statute 43,110, a
police officer can take a person
in protective custody for their
own well-being when they are
having suicidal or homicidal
ideas, but we cannot seize the
weapons of choice, i.e.,
firearms, in those situations
unless the law enforcement
officer has credible information
from a third party petitioner,
which in instances I could speak
of, we have not or I have.
Not
I've had personal experience
with that and knowledge of the
instances in in Taos County
where that person was taken for
mental health evaluation by the
initiative and investigation of
a police officer and we
developed what we believed was
credible information, enough to
put in a in a an affidavit.
For a district court, an
attorney judge to review.
But because we cannot be the
petitioner, we could not proceed
forward with that.
And that was very disappointing.
That was one of my first
experiences with the red flag
law.
That was for 2 minutes.
Oh boy, I had lots more to say.
Some of the others were short.
Can I have another 30 seconds? I
promised to push through.
Next meeting.
Hi, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. Uh, my name's
Wesley. I'm here representing
Students Demand Action. As a
student and a human being, my
top priority is safety, whether
at school, at home, or anywhere
in my community. Strengthening
our extreme risk protection
order is a vital step towards
preventing gun violence in our
state.
This bill provides a critical
opportunity to light, to reduce
the likelihood of dangerous
situations and mental health
crises escalating into violence
and in many cases, death.
For students, this means greater
protection against our peer
struggles, turning into tragic
acts of violence. We must
empower law enforcement to act
on credible evidence, allowing
high-risk individuals to retain
that access to deadly firearms
for 48 hours, opens the door to
sudden and impulsive acts of
violence. I urge you as a
student and a constituent to
vote for this bill and support
it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Ivanne Torres and I'm a
lead with students to demand
action as well. I come here
today from your Rancho.
The place where a red flag law
was recently used. The Judge
George P. Eschenwald said, and I
quote, after he granted an Urbo
order, this was a fear I never
knew existed. And this is all
the more common in the United
States, gun violence being the
number one killer of children
and teens in the United States.
It's time we do something and we
allow police to use their
training and expertise and
probable cause and judicial
supervision to ensure that
extreme risk protection orders
are used effectively, safely,
and across the state broadly,
because as my own community,
a rancho, we don't want more
judges to say, this is a fear I
never knew I had.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, I urge your support.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Jennifer Vickery.
I am an assistant attorney
General with the New Mexico
Department of Justice. I
specifically trained law
enforcement um on Earthpo across
the state. Last year I trained
over 475 law enforcement
officers on how to specifically
use this uh petition. Um, one of
the things that constantly comes
up is why can't we file when we
don't have a reporting party,
when we don't have somebody that
can say this person's
poses a risk of immediate risk
of harm to self or others. Um,
law enforcement, I think, have
across the board said, you know,
we want this help, we want this
support, um, if they feel that
it's appropriate. Remember, I
think it's important to remember
that they are making these
decisions based on their
training, their experience, and
in the line of their duty, um,
and they're not just going in
and taking firearms away.
They're filing a petition for a
judge to make the decision. So,
I think it's important to
remember
that this isn't just giving
permission for law enforcement
to enter a home and seize
firearms.
It's still willful
relinquishment. It is immediate
relinquishment, which, as we are
all aware, um, 48 hours can lead
to potentially very serious
situations. Um, when an
individual is told that they
have to relinquish their
firearms, but you have 48 hours
to do it, potentially, that's
putting the person that was the
reporting party at risk. And
that's a very real concern for
law enforcement and the, you
know, and our office, um, this
will also help provide clarity
and consistency as was as was
discussed by the
the sponsor representatives,
there is a circuit split going
on right now where some courts
are allowing law enforcement to
do these petitions and others
are not. Um, so I think the
clarity that this, um,
corrections the bill and, and,
and this bill has 12 will
provide to the statute will be
beneficial to the community,
also making it clear and fair
across the state, no matter
where you are, we have the same
standard of whether or not law
enforcement can file these
petitions. Um, I do stand in
personal strong support of this
bill. Thank you.
Hello, my name is Kathy Mosley.
I'm a retired, um,
School nurse and um chair
Ferrari, members of the
committee, um, my professor, uh,
in my graduate program and
Cleary was killed in 1991 from a
a mass shooting, one of the
earliest in our country, and uh
now there are books written
about school mass shooting. He
shooter died by suicide.
And he had many warning signs.
Uh, his roommates has asked to
move out, his office mates had
asked to move out.
And I believe URPO would have
saved him and my professor if
we'd had it at that time.
As one person mentioned one, for
every 17 UOs issued one life is
saved by suicide.
And I believe it would have
saved that student and the
professor.
Um, I have had the opportunity
to work with the crisis
intervention unit.
And um I think it also would
have been the updates would have
been important in this situation
because the um
Shooters, the people around him
knew very well that he was a
risk.
And um the immediate
relinquishment in 48 hours would
have been important. He had a
plan and a list.
And I think it would have been
critical to have both of those.
So thank you for supporting HB
12.
Thank you. Now we'll go, are
there some people.
There's no one.
OK, for public comment. All
right, then we'll go to the
committee we have Representative
Lord first.
Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Representatives, uh,
I have some questions on this
bill.
you can help me with.
Um
What we're talking about
credible information.
Can you have somebody define to
me exactly what they mean by
critical uh credible
information. What does that mean
to law enforcement? How does
that play out in courts?
Madam Chair, representative,
I'll ask Detective Tinnita.
Give some examples of that.
Sure, and thank you for the
opportunity. When we think about
incredible information, it's
anything that we obtain that we
feel comfortable as law
enforcement.
Bringing in front of a judge and
testifying.
So that can be firsthand
accounts from interviews that.
can be firsthand knowledge like
you're there investigating a
crime or you're doing a mental
health evaluation, let's say
and.
Depends on what the person says
or the environment.
So it, it's kind of a broad
thing. I don't think it's
defined anywhere.
So it sounds like different
jurisdictions might.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Um, can that be from direct
observation or could that be
from hearsay?
Madam Chair Representative
could, it could be.
E.
So direct information hearsay.
Um, how many hours of training
do law enforcement get to study.
Incredible
Information. Like I'm sure it's
got to be an important topic
when you're in the academy. So
how much training do state
police or sheriffs or uh any
police department get that.
Can, can I just, um, first take
a stab at this.
Law enforcement and correct me
if I'm wrong, get training on
how to collect evidence, what is
evidence and how to proceed in
terms of compiling evidence, um,
I don't know if that term
credible information is the
exact term that is used in the
training and perhaps we can ask.
Um
The lieutenant here to expound
on that, but I just want to make
clear it may not be in that
exact terminology, Madam Chair
Representative.
That's a great question.
Credible information is, is very
broad, right? So law
enforcement, what we do is we
independently verify.
We get the information that is
reported to us and we verify
that, meaning we do interviews,
we gather evidence before we
make a determination. We obtain
the probable cause in order to
file these.
OK, so Madam Chair, so when
you're in the academy,
How many hours of training do
you get?
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, you have over 1400 hours
of training, continuous training
to include, as you continue on,
you have biannual training. All
of those are refresher courses.
So you're continuously getting
educated.
In several aspects of law
enforcement.
Not limited to just
incredible information.
But it's also independent
verification.
OK, so Madam Chair does credible
information required cooperation
on any port, any additional
sources to be because there is,
is there anything else that goes
along?
Well, it has to be credible. We
have to independently verify
what people are seeing. We can't
just take people's word for it.
OK, so when you go, let me go
this way.
Madam Chair
I'm trying to figure out exactly
how much I mean you guys study a
lot with what you're doing on
the job. I understand that.
What I'm trying to figure out is
specific hours and specific
training because this changes
everything, right? Cause you're
going in and making a decision.
And what you're gonna do on this
UO. So let me jump to UO real
quick and then I'll come back.
And I'm sure how many hours of
training do you have right now?
Uh, in the academy.
Or URA.
In in the academy specifically.
In the, in the New Mexico State
Police, we have a 40 hour block
of mental health. It's
continuous education. During
that mental health portion, we
talk about independent
verification. We talk about
signs, symptoms, and behaviors.
We teach interviewing
techniques. We teach trauma
interviewing techniques that way
we can independently verify the
information in order to proceed.
So we have a 40 hour block after
the 40-hour block, our officers
who graduate recruit school, go
to crisis intervention.
training.
That is another 40 hour block.
We have a certain set of
individuals who are in the
advanced crisis intervention
team who go through another
80-hour block of advanced crisis
intervention training.
So it's continuous.
And Madame Chair and
representative, I just want to
point out.
The petition has to be based on
credible information. It's a
judge who determines whether the
information that is provided
meets the standard that is
contained in the statue.
And after the guns, if an order
does issue based on what the
judge determines to be credible
information, um, then there is
an opportunity for a hearing
after the the guns have been
relinquished to to law
enforcement, and at that
hearing, there is an uh where
the the respondent is present,
there is evidentiary hearing
that will re-verify whether or
not that information that was
provided was adequate to support
their their relinquishing of the
guns.
OK, so Madam Chair and
representatives and experts. So
you say 48 hours of mental
health training, but what
specifically addresses this
purpo and specifically the new
changes in our books. There's
not going to be any training
now, but you're gonna have to do
that in future. So right now,
when you take that 48 hours, how
many of that is specifically
addressingERPO.
At the 48 hours of your mental
health, how many, because you're
looking at a lot of things. Am I
gonna harm myself or others and
that.
But specifically how many hours
are spent on just UO on how to
address that because it's very
specific. It's very different in
a way, because you're not just
going about.
Because the, the bigger picture
on it is not just am I gonna
harm myself or others, it's
making that decision that I'm
going to take somebody's
property from them.
So is that is that discussed
when you do the training? Is
there something in there that
says, by the way, you're gonna
be taking people's property
without due process, and here's
how you do it. Yes, so.
I can only speak for New
Mexico's Madam Chair, just to
correct it, it is not without
due process, so we, we embedded
in that question was an
inaccurate statement. I just
want to correct that for Madam
Chair Representative are arguing
that because you have the right
to be heard and you're not being
heard. You don't have a chance
to go to trial. You're not being
adjudicated to know there is no
due process in that as far as
I'm concerned, and that's my
biggest problem with all this,
and that there is no due process
because they someone is coming
in and taking your property.
You haven't gone to a trial.
Actually
Post retrieval of the guns,
there is a, there is a hearing
evidentiary hearing, Madam
Chair, whether a judge present
and will verify whether or not
the the gun, the firearms are
taken appropriately and Madam
Chair and representative, I
would argue it need to happen
beforehand.
So my, my point is how many of
the 48 hours of training that
you have.
How many of those hours are
specifically to deal with.
We got a call for an ERPO.
4 hours.
I've met him sure. I'd like our
trainer from the Department of
Justice to just uh talk briefly
about the training that's been
given to the 475 uh officers and
Madam Chair, are we talking
about training that's outside of
the police academy and is that
for all agents including
sheriffs, police, everybody.
Madam chair and Representative
uh she'll identify who got, who
received this training.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Lord. Like I
said, my name is Jennifer
Vickery. I am a, I train. I have
a New Mexico Department of
Public Safety certified course.
So it is a continuing education
credit, um, that I have trained
law enforcement across the state
of New Mexico like I indicated
last year alone, I trained 475
law enforcement officers and law
enforcement personnel on how to
uh file these petitions, what
information to look for, um,
what steps, you know, if, if.
You know, reporting parties are
coming to them requesting these
petitions. What steps need to be
taken to ensure that our
community is safe. That is a big
part of my, uh, training, um,
and, and we go through
hypotheticals, what, what it
would look like, what
information to look for. And I
think it's been brought up by um
the representative sponsors, um,
once that petition is filed, uh.
The court, a judge is going to
review that petition to
determine whether or not uh
order should be granted.
Within 10 days or less of that
order, there has to be an
evidentiary hearing that the
rules of evidence do apply. This
is not hearsay. This is specific
rules of evidence that is being
presented by usually the officer
that has been the petitioner.
What this amendment seeks to do
is to help officers.
File that petition when they are
in the course of their law
enforcement duties, file that
petition when maybe there isn't
a reporting party thinking of
potentially homeless individuals
or reporting parties that are
fearful of retaliation and don't
want to act as the reporting
party signing those affidavits.
This helps kind of fill that gap
of a law that's already in
place. The Earth laws already in
place. This is just allowing law
enforcement to file those
petitions. So I hope that's
helpful. I do, like I said, I,
I, I have trained.
Specifically on this across the
state of New Mexico.
So Madam Chairman representative
and expert, how many hours do
you do training and with which
branches? It's with um any law
enforcement that wants to do it.
I've done it um uh sheriff's
office, um, we do, I do in
person. I did one with San Dio
Pablo Police Department. I've
done APD trainings. I've done,
uh, Rancho PD trainings, uh, I,
I, I'm not directly with the
academy because it is a one hour
separate course for continuing
education for law enforcement.
Um, so it's not
Part of the standard training is
a continuing education course,
but it is New Mexico Department
of Public Safety certified,
meaning it has been reviewed by
their instructors as being
appropriate for law enforcement.
OK, so Madam Chair and
representatives and experts, so
then it would be up to that
specific law enforcement to say
we would like that training and
the training is one hour.
Our training and it, it, yes,
it's I I host these trainings,
um, and I schedule it with them,
um, based on their availability.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, can you give me
an example.
Of a law enforcement going to a
house and what's going to
trigger a URPA.
What would be the specific
things.
That are going to trigger an
EPO.
Madam Chair Representative, are
you wondering if it was like if
law enforcement was to do it
completely or just how we've
done them.
Explain to me how you've done
them and how this will change
with this new, uh, if this gets
passed,
traditionally how we've been
doing them is a third party
normally it's a family member
will come forward concerned
about a loved one, my loved one
is killing themselves. They
wrote it out in their journal,
which I saw, and then I saw a
receipt that they went to buy a
gun.
Um, we go out, we talk to that
person, they, you know, say yes
something about killing myself
or I have a plan for it.
We take a hospital. There's
other circumstances the family
says the family wants it, we go
over the paperwork.
They fill it out and we submit
it.
Another one that we get is from
community members like
psychiatrists.
They'll reach out about a
patient they're concerned with
that had plans to harm
themselves or others, they filed
an affidavit, um, if it has what
we believe credible information
we present to the court.
Ones that we don't, that we have
not is, let's say, uh,
We had it uh
A woman come forward about her
ex-boyfriend, had some blanket
information. There was no other
police reports. We had no other
information. We determined we
didn't have enough to go forward
on that one and what we didn't
proceed for that.
Um, those are my specialty is
the behavioral side, that's one,
we recently did one on a
domestic violence, an individual
was arrested after he used his
uh pistol to hit his wife with.
They arrested him. That pistol
was collected with evidence.
The wife was concerned because
he has ongoing history of use of
firearms and threatening, and
she requested it for the.
Further firearms and so that was
one which was brought up that
was strictly around, I guess you
would say criminal justice.
I don't know if that helped
explain it. I could go into
tons of stories, but my question
would be, so.
I don't want to say it's
subjective, but it kind of is
because if you show up there and
It is
Examples, but
A husband says my wife is gonna
shoot me and kill me. Not that's
really not true.
What do you use as your
discretion for this credible
information, how you
determining, oh my God, yes, she
is. I mean, because it's gonna
be obvious, right? If you go, if
you say to somebody, are you
going to harm yourself of
others. They're gonna say yes.
Hope that you're taking them and
to get a psych eval.
But what about where it's not so
clear cut? How does the officer
then make a decision who's
telling the truth, who is not,
if they're both screaming
yelling, they're both saying the
other person's guilty, then,
then what are you relying on?
Madam Chair Representative, I
actually personally love this
bill because it puts more steps
in. I mean, currently there's a
temporary restraining orders and
that's completely third party.
We don't have to verify
anything. They turn it in a
sheet of paper. We're like, uh,
we don't require it, we call a
judge, we take with our kids.
answer
There, there's no, nothing on
that one, on this one at least
when we get it, if there is
nothing that's pending like a
previous police report, and
there's nothing else to go on,
we really wouldn't have that
extra information to bring
forward to a judge.
So we would have to as law
enforcement conduct more follow
ups so we'd have to find the
wife and talk to her, look at
past police reports. We couldn't
just go off it on the front hand
like we do on temporary
restraining orders.
Right, and
And, uh, Madam Chair and
representative.
I understand that, but the
problem is is that I've known
people who've been harmed by
those things too. It wasn't
necessarily the truth and I
don't think it's fair to take
anybody's kids or property
without and this is where I have
the problem with all this
because you're not going before
the judge and getting your
chance to say what it is that
you need to say.
So, Madam Chair and
representatives, um.
What about what behavioral
things like?
If you're going into an
officer's gonna say I'm gonna
take somebody's property.
I'm looking at
Like
Some limited hours of training,
but what would be something if
they didn't say to you, I'm
gonna kill myself. I'm gonna
kill my wife and then kill
myself. I'm sorry I'm picking on
men, but they're likely to be
the aggressors stats.
I did use a female before in the
last one, so I'll try to be
even. So.
What do you use for your
discretion.
If let's say the um.
The man says I'm, I don't wanna
talk, says nothing.
The female saying, well, he did
this and he did that, and he's
like I that isn't what happened.
What do you use as your
discretion then, or is there any
behavior assessment to be made
to say what I'm doing of taking
somebody's property is gonna be
justified for.
Sorry, Madam Chapresentative,
you know, I think law
enforcement were always given
these what ifs and we can't
predict the future one, and
nothing is ever clear cut.
I think we'd look at each thing
with compassion and so if one
was brought forward on that, we
would have to investigate the
overall thing. So is it
something that looks related to,
let's say suicide and man, the
hell, I'm the one that's
probably more likely my category
to to complete suicide, well, I
mean, you mentioned it,
but we would have to ask them
that. So suicide is a lot of
times linked with someone
suffering or living with
depression and so what are some
characteristics of that
withdrawal, um, not admitting.
slow processing, so if we would
use that and if that then deemed
that that person was showing
those signs and symptoms that
that could be enough that that
officer would find to bring
forward and also would maybe be
fond enough to take the person
for an evaluation.
OK, Madam Chair representative,
so um.
When the Epo happens, there does
not have to be any arrest,
right? It just be like I'm gonna
take them in. It doesn't have to
be an arrest, right?
The rest of the, yeah, yeah, the
person, the person is arrested.
This is a problem, right, right,
but it doesn't.
I know it's a civil process,
but.
It seems like when somebody's
making a threat, then there
would be an arrest, so maybe I'm
going too far and my assumption
on that because I'm also
thinking with the red flag,
there's nothing that mandates
that they have to be taken in. I
mean, if they're saying you're
gonna kill yourself or others.
Then shouldn't it be in the red
flag that they also mandated
they have to go in.
Or are we just doing the
assumption that we have another
law.
I would say that there are other
statutes that would address
behavior that is art.
Potentially criminal.
As I look at Madam Chair, sorry.
Uh, I look at, to me, it seems
like it's so important.
That if we're, if somebody's
saying they're going to harm
themselves or other that that
would be definitely spelled out
in the bill, but it's not.
Um, so if somebody comes in the
other circumstances and somebody
says something that I think this
person's a harm to themselves or
others.
How much investigation has gone
on to that with the officer on
the scene.
How many hours or how much time
did they spend interviewing this
person to make sure that they
are a credible witness.
Etiquette by saying, and they'll
let the the detective answer.
Obviously every case is going to
vary depending on the
circumstances, so to expect one.
Specific hourly answer, I think
is um not realistic, but I'll
I'll ask the detective to
respond.
Sure, uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives.
It really honestly would vary on
on each case, um, the case in
the situation with the domestic
abuse that was.
The, the officer figured out
through the course of theirs and
that call is probably 3 hours.
Um, there was one, you know, a
case where someone might be
chronically dealing with
suicidality, so they often think
about killing themselves,
possibly had previous attempts.
That person may not qualify for
hospitalization, so the forcing
them in may not be possible and
they might suit better with
treatment in the community at
their home, but the family might
still be concerned that they get
a firearm, that's going to need
a higher level investigation and
that's kind of what my unit
would do and that could be
anywhere from.
11 to 2 weeks.
OK, so Madam Chair,
representative expert. So if
somebody says,
Uh, my partner, I think he's
going to harm himself, and they
say no.
But you see a firearm.
Are you automatically gonna
assume we need to take the
firearms even if that person
says no, Madam represented no,
we, we don't currently do that.
So Madam Chair Representative
and experts, um, if somebody
says, and the heat of the
moment, I'm gonna kill her.
Or drunk and
And they don't specifically say
with a firearm.
How does that play out with the,
with URA. We're still gonna take
the firearms even though they
meant they're gonna kill them
with their with a knife or a
fist.
How does that play? Do they have
to say specifically gun?
Madam Chair Representatives, it,
it.
mean's case by case the earth
boat is for firearms, so someone
has to say why they're concerned
that person has access to
firearms.
OK, so do, OK, Madam Chair
Representative.
So we have the right to say
nothing, if, if, if somebody
says in the heat of the moment.
stupidly.
I'm gonna kill her.
I take that seriously, it's a
threat, but.
If you went to talk to him,
well, do you have any firearms?
You don't see firearms. You
can't get a warrant.
So they say nothing, they clam
up. Now what's the next step?
Uh, Madam Chair,
representatives, if that was the
case that was presented to me, I
would talk with the requesting
party to make sure that they had
appropriate resources. We, we
have to have some more
information. We had one very
similar to that come up where
someone made a post online
making a vague threat, right?
Um, we're like, OK, there's a
call for service, they ask us
for help, we go out there, but
sure enough, he's like, oh, I
was posted and then he went to
show he was on the 7 day wait
because he went to go buy a gun
because he had a plan to do it.
But we've also had it where
people
Have makes the same reports and
like I'm venting online there's
we wouldn't go forward with her.
And thank you ma'am. Um, can we
keep
The discussion to the changes on
the bill, not just URPA in
general, yeah, I'm sure it does
I'm still talking about it I'm
under the credibility because
that goes to mentors, what it,
what if what you just brought
up, OK, so we're looking at
credibility somebody goes online
and says something.
How was then that investigated.
How, how does that UO, how does
the credible information play
out if it's just something
somebody says on on social
media.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, perhaps I could
give an answer that will answer
all of these hypotheticals.
Um, prospectively.
Every case is case fact
specific.
An individual specific and
circumstances specific.
And um I think that would
probably be the most appropriate
answer for these kinds of
questions, madam Chair and.
Right, and I can understand
that, Madam Chair and
represented, but, but.
thing with
Um, the reason that we have
rules and masons is to ask
questions so that I can make a
credible decision on that, which
is what I'm trying to do
because.
To be honest,
There's some things lacking in
there that makes me scared.
Um, and part of it has to do
with the credible information.
Um
So he said representative, keep
it to the changes, 38 hours and
then the officers.
Yeah, madam is gonna be uh being
able to petition and OK, this is
gonna be on credible
information. What happens if two
officers go to the scene and
they both disagree.
One says, yes, we should take
the farms, the other one
doesn't, then what happens?
depends on the circumstances and
facts that are on the scene,
Madam Chair Representative.
OK, so what I'm understanding
is, no matter what, it goes down
to, and I love law enforcement,
I'm the biggest part of law
enforcement. I give money in law
enforcement, health, law
enforcement, law enforcement are
some of my best friends. My
issue is with the credible
information is that human beings
can.
Make mistakes and sometimes
human beings can be.
I'm guilty of it too, making
mistakes. I'm guilty of.
judging things that I think are
one way, but they're another
way.
And my concern is we got 4
hours.
A training that one hour of
training.
And I don't expect you guys to
be behavioral experts. I mean, I
understand that if you say.
This person said, I'm gonna harm
myself or others, so they have a
long history. I get that, but to
be a new person on the scene.
To then take somebody's
possessions.
Um
Makes me nervous overall with
the credible information.
So let me go on with some more
questions, madam Chair. We'll
skip on from the because I have
tons of questions about the
critical.
Sorry about our um
Incredible information.
So
I asked the question about.
Madam Chan representative the
person doesn't want to
incriminate themselves and they
don't have to. They can say they
don't have firearms.
So isn't, so you're saying I
think what you said earlier was
the step is that you would tell.
Who, who are you telling
information or giving
information because you don't
have to incriminate yourself,
right?
So then what is the next step if
you feel that that person may
have firearms, but you don't
have a warrant. You can't go in
and look for fires. What do you
do then?
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
could you, um, tell me where in
the amendment your um your what
you're referencing.
Madam Chair, I'm going back to
the credible information we now
have a law enforcement officer
that is allowed to have this.
Ability, uh, to follow the
petition. What I want to know
goes back to the credible
information, just asked about to
law enforcement officers. Now
what happens when the law
enforcement goes because we're
giving this law enforcement
disability, if the person says,
I don't want to criinate myself.
Um
Is there training on what to do,
like what do they do next? I
mean, cause if we have a a woman
who's being beaten and the
person says they're going to
kill him and the person says,
I'm not gonna incriminate
myself.
And what?
How, how the firearms taken from
that person if they have fire.
I think you're referring to um
page to lines 23 through 25.
Madam Chair, again, it would
depend on the circumstances and
the facts that are presented at
the time that the officer
appears on the scene.
Men of chair and
representatives, what I'm trying
to do is make sure my
constituents don't stand for
this, and I've talked to a ton
of law enforcements don't stand
for this. I had a, a police
officer call me today who
doesn't stand for this. So
before I can make a decision on
this, I have to ask as many
questions as possible because we
are saying.
I love you law enforcement.
I
Don't want anybody. I don't care
who it is. I don't want a school
teacher or anybody else to make
this determination of I'm gonna
go in and take somebody's
property. So I'm taking this
very seriously because I believe
in due process and I want to
make sure.
That there aren't things that
could fall through the cracks on
this bill to where somebody
could have their stuff taken.
And that
And Madame Chair represent him
so when their firearms are taken
from them. Let's go to this,
because now we're changing it to
immediately.
So let's say a law enforcement
officer goes on a Saturday,
determines this and the judge
orders it whatever.
How did they immediately?
Release
Their firearms if they chose to
do an FFL and they're not open.
That would force them to then
surrender them to law
enforcement.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I'll ask, uh.
that
Sure, Madam Chan represented as
we go off of what the judge's
order says, so most people
surrender them. We've had cases
before people said they don't
have them anymore, and we have
to wait till the hearing on it,
um.
If we had seen the firearms
before, we have to look at it in
a different route, like getting
a warrant.
Um, the other things you
mentioned before, if there's a
crime related, it's different.
We have to look at it criminally
and understand that I know it's
totally different. It's
criminal.
So Madam Chair representatives,
so they're told.
They have to surrender their
firearms immediately. Is it
going to be the same.
Officer, going back to get those
firearms.
Or how does that, who, who's
going to go take the firearms or
collective.
Madam Chair representatives, I'm
sorry, I don't know if you
wanted to add anything to these,
um, it's whoever is serving the
the paperwork from the judge. So
if it's the original
investigating officer, that'd be
it if that jurisdiction hands it
over to the sheriff's
department. It's whichever law
enforcement aency serves the
paperwork from the judges who
would would collect it
immediately.
OK, Madam Chair representative
experts, is that, could that
technically be one officer.
Who's going to a house who said
I'm gonna harm myself or others,
and they're going by themselves
to serve that.
Are they going into the house.
To get them. Excuse me,
representative, this is going
into the Upo law itself, not
into the changes. I'd like to
remind you to keep your Madam
Chair, it has to do with the
media. It changes everything. 48
hours is very different, and I
have the right for Mason's rules
to ask as many questions to get
the answers I need without being
interrupted if it's according to
what the bill is, please. It is.
This is about immediate. When
you, OK, look, 48 hours
immediate. Immediate means
you're going to get that
judgment immediately go back.
There's no time, there's no
cool.
No.
You're going back, the wording
has now changed to immediate.
When it's immediate, how were
you taking those firearms out of
a person's house immediately.
That's in the bill. Sure, madam
chairs representatives, the way
we do it now, you know, it's,
it's the person that receives
the URA, so it's their surrender
of it to us per the court order.
So if they want us to go into
their house to retrieve them,
that's kind of up to them. They
normally bring them out to us or
they walk us to the safe.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you. Uh,
that's what I was trying to get
at how
Do you get them in your
possession when it's immediate?
And how long Maam chair and
Reson would it take for a judge?
From the time that law
enforcement officer says we need
to do the ERPO to the time it
would take the judge now with
immediate how long would that be
like an 1 hour, 2 hours, 3 hours
a day.
How long does that take?
Madam Chair, Representative, I
don't understand the question.
OK, Madam Chair, we're going
from, they had 48 hours to turn
them in. Now we're going
immediate.
By what a judge says. So how
long is it gonna take for the
judge to say, yes, I agree with
this, and they surrender him
immediately.
I think the detective can
describe the process after the
petition's been filed
So Madam Chair Representative,
of course I'm speaking from
Albuquerque where we have all of
our courts are right there for
us. So from the matter of time
that we go in as long as the
judges aren't in a uh trial. It
would be about an hour before
the paperwork gets back to us.
If it's in trial could be
longer. I would imagine smaller
jurisdictions it might take
longer than.
an hour, but
I'm not sure if lieutenant can
speak aloud.
Yeah, I mean, sure, and rips
that's a good point because I
have Torrance County and then I
have on Leo camp.
So those are two different ways
of operating. So if you want to
answer.
All committee members,
Representative Lord, yes, it
could take between an hour, uh,
depending on what.
Judge is on call up to 2 days
because it's gonna take them
time to look at it, so it's all
depending on the judge at that
point.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Represents the expert. I
appreciate that's what I was
looking for because in Torrent
County.
We don't have a big operation
like they do, so you're still
looking at the 48 hours.
So is anything changing, Madam
Chair Representatives and
experts on.
The 48 hour surrender.
Versus the immediate surrender.
So is it the judge?
That is going to say.
bring them to the door.
Take him to the law enforcement
officer or wait what does it say
on the immediate one.
Of how they're supposed to
attain the firearms.
With the new bill, does the
judge say amount of chair?
I, you have the right to go in
the house. I'm giving you a
warrant.
Or are they allowed to go in
without a warrant and or how is
this or they bring him to the
door.
I, I had, I'm seriously curious,
it's not a, I'm trying to ask a
question, Madam Chair
representatives, it's up to the
person that they're extreme risk
firearm protection is is on so
if you place one on me and she
came to serve me, she'd be like,
hey, you've been served with
this, you must immediate it. And
then I'd be like, OK, I'm gonna
go in and get them or we work it
out together. If for some reason
there was concerns, I'm assuming
law enforcement or whoever's
requesting could put the
concerns on how there would be
surrendered and
As a judge to make a decision,
but it just says that the
receiving party must surrender
them, so it, it's up to them on
how they surrender it.
OK, so Madam Chair
representative.
It just seems like such a scary
thing to me to go to this
person's house, and I know that
they're volatile. I gotta go
serve this. But how does that
work if they want to take it to
an FFL.
If that's her decision and they
say I wanna take all of my
firearms immediately to an FFL.
Do, do they have to go to the
FFL and drop them off, you go
with them. How does that work
when it's now immediate?
Ma'am.
Madam Chap representatives.
I can only speak on for
Albuquerque police.
And we have encountered that,
um, we've had other people who
have requested the judge that
they get them sent to FFL and
our, our evidence of transferred
it to an FFL. I'm assuming that
would be based on every law
enforcement jurisdiction their
policies if they write a policy
that says we could take them to.
You know, ex- gunshot, but it
would be up to their policies.
OK, so Madam Chair
representative experts. So are
they allowed to take them
themselves to the FFL.
Or you have to take them to the
FFL immediately.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, so once we go to serve.
The ex parte order. If somebody
tells us simply, no, I'm not
turning over my guns to you. I
want to turn them over to an SFL
and they closed the door on us.
That still does not give law
enforcement the ability to enter
into the home at that point, law
enforcement would.
Have to uh either apply for a
search warrant or apply for a
civil wit.
That takes time as well.
Madam Chair Ripip, can you
explain a civil way because I
understand getting the warrant,
which I also.
It is just a court order that a
judge can give in a civil um in
a civil fashion for law
enforcement to enter into the
home.
So we'd still have to apply for
it. It's not like we could just
enter in the home and take it
based because we've got this
order in hand.
People still have rights that we
have to abide by. We still have
policies and procedures that we
have to abide by.
OK. So ma'am sure, I guess I was
trying to get to.
If the option is there, it says
it can take it to an FFL, but
the FFLs are closed. I guess it
means that they're forced then
to give it to law enforcement
because it's immediate. Yes,
that is the answer. Is that
correct?
I think that's correct, and then
they can request that the guns
be transferred to an FFL, which
I understood our our detective
to say occasionally happens.
And is honored.
OK, Madam Chair and
Representative, I know before
there was, I believe in the
previous bills, it's staying the
same were.
The law enforcement officers
going to sit there and do they
write out the um.
Its name escaping me, a serial
number. Are they doing the
inventory and all that, so they
have a piece of paper to hand it
them.
OK, so mentor and
representatives, what happens if
when you go in this immediate
thing.
And you don't feel that they've
turned in all the firearms. Is
that when you would get that
civil wit or the.
OK.
You have to say yes, so they,
the answer is yes. OK, thank
you, because nobody can see you
nodding your head.
OK, um, let me process all the
information that I have right
now.
So I, I do have a question that
I've wondered since the
beginning of all of this, and
especially with the amendment
being made, Madam Chair
represents.
Oh, never mind, you answered
that question because I was
trying to figure out why it
isn't mandating also, but you
answered that question. I'm
trying to go through everything
they just asked.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative.
What ha, OK, so I'm gonna give
you an example in one of my
counties, we have this little
wedge of Sandoval County, Santa
Fe County, Bernaleo County, and
often the three officers will
show up. I did a motorcycle
accident, all 3 showed up.
Does somebody take precedence
over that if it was in a split
and how does collaboration work
if there's two agencies that
shows up, how does that change
with with what is happening now
with it, especially with it
being immediate.
Who, who would, who would be the
one?
If let's say 3 agencies show up.
Which is also makes me concerned
because we're talking about the,
the evident, um.
We're talking about credibility
here. But if 3 officers show up
and to say,
Two counties say I don't think
this is a red flag, but the 3rd
1 does, so that get entered
into.
When the paperwork is done, when
it goes to the judge, these two
said no because I'm trying to
figure out how.
These people work together.
Sheriff says no. At what point
in time, Madam Chair, after the
order is issued before to make
the decision about the order in
general.
Let's just say two different
officers show up from two
different departments on a call.
It's a county, but there's a
line where they're city and
county they both show up.
One says, yes, I think this is a
red flag. The other one says no,
I do not, which one takes
precedence in that scenario.
The judge
OK, with the judge after seeing
the petition takes precedence,
OK, but they would write in
there that the sheriff or
whatever other officer said, I
don't agree with this.
And Madame Chair Representative
on C on page 2.
The law enforcement officer
declines to file a requested
petition. The law enforcement
officer shall file with the
sheriff of the county of why he
declined.
Yeah, I remember that Madam
Chair last time they have to
fill out the paperwork of why
they declined.
Uh, miniature representative,
um.
on.
Just it's a lot of information
to take in with a lot of steps.
Um
A me chair and representative.
Let me look at the bill. I wanna
make sure this pertains exactly
to the bill. Hold on one second.
I do have another question on
the bill, uh, with the red flag.
I guess you're probably going to
answer the same way before Madam
Chair and Representative.
We don't have anything in there
that says, and we will do due
diligence to protect the person.
Like, let's say it's, it's a
domestic violence, because it's
just about taking the firearms,
correct? There's nothing,
there's nothing in here about
taking them or helping.
The survivor of domestic
violence, is that correct?
Because I don't see anything in
there, cause I was wondering why
that didn't get added as an
amendment. Make sure we make
sure we take care of the people
that are being threatened.
Madame Chair and representative
because there are other laws
that address.
those sorts of situations.
I been a chair representative
when they turned in that.
When the officers there and they
have all of the paperwork.
Who is putting it in the NI
system, so it is effective.
Immediately.
Madam Chair and Representative
administrative offices of the
courts.
A man a chair and
representatives, how long does
it take?
I'm trying to look and see if
there's a loophole there.
How long does it take?
When that form is filled out,
the judges, yes.
to get served
When does it happen that the
Person who's entering into the
kicks that prevents him from
buying a firearm.
When does that go into the
system, OK, so, um.
Madam Chair, if you could show
me where the amendment talks
about the next system.
Madam Chair and representative,
the whole point of the bill and
even the amendments is to make
sure that person can't have a
firearm.
Isn't that correct that they
can't have a firearm, they
cannot be in possession of
firearms. Is that correct?
The, the purpose of the bill is
to clarify some sections that we
felt needed clarity and would
add some efficacy to the to the
current law.
Man of chair represented before
there was 48 hours to get that
done. Now it's immediate. So if
we're gonna change it to the
word immediately.
How are we getting that
immediately into the NIC system
if it's a Saturday at 6 o'clock.
Because otherwise they can go
and buy a firearm the next day
on Sunday.
Uh, Madam Chair, if you deem
this to be um relevant to the
amendments at issue, I'm happy
to answer the question.
Uh, yes, um, representative.
That's not in this bill. Well, I
would argue, Madam Chair and
representatives that it is
because we went from 48 hours,
which gives somebody a clerk or
whoever time to enter it to
immediate, which it's gonna take
some time to get that entered,
especially if it happens on
Saturday. So my point is.
Without that being addressed,
without you having a special
task force immediate is not
applicable anymore.
Because immediate means you're
taking the firearms, but if you
don't have it in there that that
goes into the NIC system, they
can just go buy a firearm as it
is.
Madam chair, just for clarity. I
have been informed that AOC
enters into the system.
Madam Chair and Representative
expert is that even on a
Saturday and a Sunday, yes.
Yes.
am I down I'm not doubting you.
I just have my doubts that it
would go in
um, we
And going almost an hour.
questions, um.
And we go on.
Yes, and not repeat the same
things. Yeah, I'm gonna I'm sure
what I'm what I'm trying to get
at is.
Back to the fiscal impact.
So Madam Chair represent, I'm
looking at the fiscal impact.
Uh, talks about
Fiscal implications of this
making this amendment.
Or a house. Um, it says here on
the 2nd page.
The Elimination requirement for
third party affidavits filing
EROs will le lead to an increase
in the number of petitions
filed.
They estimate it may cost the
court staff, etc. and estimated
cost of $2,050,000.
To $500,000 annually.
Um
And where is that money coming
out out of the general fund?
Where's that money coming?
Um, well, first of all, Madam
Chair, I believe it says the
courts may require more
administrative staff and then
provides that um estimate.
I think a a reasonable having
not this
would be it would come from the
court's budget, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair represented is in
currently in the budget to cover
these costs?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I do not know.
I do not know whether they put
it. OK, Madam Chair
representative, that would be a
good thing to know because if
there's no money for this, then
that that makes all of this mute
and Madam chair and
representative.
As we do with all bills,
something like this would be
evaluated by the legislative.
Finance Committee to see if
there was any significant.
Need for additional funds in the
courts are very vigilant about
letting us know their needs.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative would be referred
to appropriations then?
Madam Charon and Representative.
When Las go into effect if they
proved to have a significant
fiscal impact, not an estimated
or guessed at.
The
courts if they should ask for a
significant change in their
budget.
Uh, it would be evaluated by the
legislative Finance Committee
analysts.
OK. And Madam Chair, I'm also
looking at, and here they have
I'm sure representatives that
the law enforcement academy and
other training providers.
I need to develop.
Updated curriculum, so that's
another estimated cost of
$100,000 to $200,000.
I didn't see anything in the
budget, so that was an issue for
me.
But I think that I've answered
have some of the questions that
I wanted answered and I have
like 600 more or more could have
asked you.
About the specific bill, um,
Um
Or for time constraints because
I'm sure this is gonna make its
way out of here.
And get its way to the floor.
I'll just ask more questions on
that.
But my problem is always going
to be that, uh, when you have an
Epo and you take.
Lawful possession of something
from a person that doesn't have
a mental health evaluation or a
psych eval or determined that
they should be adjudicated that
they shouldn't have a firearm.
It's always going to be an issue
for me because I don't think we
should ever take a person's life
liberty or property without
having their say, and I don't
want the 2nd Amendment ever
infringed on because I believe
that if somebody's doing
something, then you should be
taking them in for a psych eval,
the judge should look at them
and say, wow, this person has an
issue. They see a therapist,
they see the judge, they should
not have a firearm, at least
there's some sort of something
where they get to be heard or
evaluated, so to take somebody's
To take somebody's property to
me is a really big deal and I
don't care if it's a firearm or
not, especially if somebody
says.
You're taking on, I'm gonna kill
this person said in the heat of
the moment they didn't mean it
or they're gonna kill them with
a knife. It doesn't help that
person who's survivor of
domestic violence if they got
stabbed to death.
So the problem is the mental
health of that person and always
will be for me, and there's
nothing you can do. More women
are killed by a man strangling
him, beating him. Yes, they use
farms, but they also find other
ways to kill that person. So
unless you're taking that person
in, you will never convince me
that this is ever a good idea to
take anybody's property ever. Oh
that, it's definitely gonna be a
no vote for me.
Thank you. Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you both and thank you to
your experts for being here and
thanks again to all the folks
who are listening, because these
are very important questions and
I, I appreciate it. So, uh,
Madam Chair, representatives, I
will begin, I guess.
You know what, we
I sit on a lot of interim
committees, but one interim
committee that likes
I have a lot of bills vetted
through them and just.
Different communities of
interest is the Indian Affairs
Committee, and I was wondering,
Madam Chair and Representatives,
have you spoken to the nation's
tribes and pueblos about this
change and would this immediate
effect change.
In, in any way, uh,
hamper their ability to
Carry these out with the
counties or or what, let's just
say they're off the, they're off
their tribal land, and it's in
the county, for example, this
would go into effect. How does
that work with the
collaboration?
Um
Well, I guess my question is.
With regard to making a law
enforcement officer or reporting
party is that have we
collaborated trying to
understand what specifically in
the bill you're referring to. Of
course. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives. So,
I guess.
In the bill, it talks
specifically about takes out
agency and talks about officers,
right? So that's what I'm
talking about here. I'm, I'm
just wondering, in, in your
Experience with the current URO
law.
I know that we have, we have
lists of cases from across the
state and people who've used Epo
and people who haven't. So in
the changes that you're making,
As this significantly or maybe
minorly affected any tribal
communities that they may not
have had the proper resources,
etc.
Madam Chair Madam, we'll ask our
assistant attorney general who
um I think testified early that
she has trained.
A blow, police officers are.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chairman,
um, I like, like I indicated, I
have previously uh trained Sania
Pablo, uh, law enforcement, um,
so I wanna, I wanna be clear
this law does not, um, if
they're tribal members acting on
tribal land, this would not have
jurisdiction over them, but, uh,
Sandia and I think a couple of
other tribes have parallel. They
basically copied and pasted our
legislation in their own, uh,
charters. So
They have their own version of
Earth pose, um, that they're
allowed, you know, that that.
Would work for Trial uh tribal
law as far as, um, if it's a
tribal member acting, you know,
if off of tribal land, they
would and, you know, was uh.
A petition is requested. I don't
think these changes would have
any changes to what's already
enacted.
Thank you.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer, and I
appreciate it. I just want to
make sure and I just, are there,
I guess this is for your expert
as well, Madam Chair. Are there
other tribes, nations, and
pueblos that have done your
training other than I believe it
was Zania.
Madam Chair.
Specifically, I have done a
directed one with Sania, we have
had other tribal law enforcement
members present, um, I, I don't
have that list specifically on
hand, but I do know that we
have, we have presented that
training, um, I, I believe we've
had is let uh members present,
um, I, I don't have that list
specific offhand.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, I would just add
there's been other trainings,
um,
Chi heavy from Farmington just
sponsored a training for police
chiefs from the whole state, and
there may have been tribal or
pueblo uh chiefs who
participated, but we don't have
that list.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much, uh.
Representatives and expert. I
appreciate that. So I guess I'll
just jump back into the bill
here. Uh, I guess.
My question, maybe I'm reading
this.
Wrong, so please let me know. So
it's, I'm on the underlying
text, and I hope that
Means I'm on the bill, which I
am. So, Madam Chair, I, I guess
it says it takes out agency on
page 2, agency or, and then on
the bottom page page 2 lines 23
to 24 to 25, says that a law
enforcement officer may also
file a petition. So,
My question is, does this allow
a single
Law enforcement officer to act
as both the petitioner.
And the reporting party, Madam
Chair.
Yes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative for
that. I appreciate it. Next
question.
Uh, I think there was some kind
of testimony that said,
There was a situation in in one
part of the state, I forget what
part, but they said that it was
a husband and wife situation.
And I'm wondering, Madam Chair,
is there any kind of
safeguarding the legislation to
Like an anti
I guess the word would be
conflict of interest.
For a law enforcer to do an ERPO
on a close family member,
something like that, and I'm
sure.
Sure, Madam Chan
representatives, it's in the
reporting party form, so you
have to put if there's any kind
of conflicts that the judge
looks at it or that law
enforcement looks at it.
But there's not, I don't think
it's specifically written in
the.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And so what I'm sure
the form would be needed to be
updated because it's 24 hours
and now instead of 48 hours. So
that
Is on the report and then
Is this an affidavit?
Is it signed under penalty of
perjury, Madam Chair, with this
new form that we're creating.
The current form is a sworn
statement.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh Representative and
expert. So, I guess
Representative Lord kind of
touched on it and I, I wanted to
go back to it. The
relinquishment of the firearm.
So I know some
Some people have really, really
old guns that have been passed
on from Grandpa back in 1910 or
something, and it's not
registered, and you know about
the registered firearms already.
So let's just say they have 2
handguns and a rifle.
Madam Chair representatives.
How, how do you, how are you
ensuring that you take
Every precaution to take every
single firearm and not just ones
that are indeed registered with
the state, and that could be for
anybody. What I'm, I'm just a
little confused by the question.
What registration of gun process
are you referring to
representative because.
I'm not aware of one, so.
What, what law are you referring
to when guns are registered?
Sure. Uh, let me, well, the NYX
is someone you buy a firearm.
And representative, I don't
think this
bill involves any of, I will.
I will withdraw the question as
the lawyers like to say, right?
OK.
But we wouldn't have been able
to answer that.
OK, sounds good. You can't
answer my very important
question. It's OK. So Madam
Chair, Representative, uh, my
next question Madam Chair,
this is a little bit um
disarming. Madam Chair, would
you point of order, would you
please refer to the rule that I
was breaking by responding to
the representative. I would, I
would love to see that.
Um, I think the comment was
about.
Uh, disrespect to the sponsor
because you were insinuating
they didn't know what they were
talking about, but when they are
only supposed to be talking
about the bill at hand, that's
what we need to um
Stay um
I understand. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I believe the word I used
was can. Maybe I should have
said wood, and I apologize if
that created any stir in this.
So, Madam Chair Representatives.
Experts
I'm going to go back to the FIR
here.
I did have some specific
questions on the agency analysis
and the actual FIR. So, Madam
Chair, Representatives.
The fiscal impact report says or
the AOC says
There may be ambiguities in the
bill that could lead to
implementation challenges.
That's on the AOC one. I have it
in front of me. Madam Chair,
could you please address that
concern?
Of course, Madam Chair, I have
it right here.
What papers going on on this
table.
looks like a science experiment.
I, I had it in my notes, so I
was reading it, but let me see,
page.
Page 2
Of the AOC analysis, page 2,
Madam Chair.
What paragraph?
And I'm still finding my actual
Agency, here it is.
But it is on there. They say
that there is some concerns
about ambiguities that could
lead to implementation
challenges.
Madam Chair,
Without specifying what the
ambiguities are, I would say
there's an ambiguity in the AOC.
All right. That's, thank you.
For that.
I need to find my, my report,
Madam Chair.
it out anyway.
Regardless, let's continue the
DOJ analysis, and I don't have
the actual analysis in front of
me, but I have the same.
Question or a similar question,
Madam Chair.
Uh, concerns regarding officers
acting as both petitioners and
reporting parties, apparently
there was a problem in that
report. Madam Chair, could you
um
If you have that in front of
you, which I believed I did
until I got to this committee
and everything blew up.
Uh, what are you referring to?
OK, Madam Chair. Well, I will,
I, I, I want to pause real quick
because I suggest the absence of
a quorum.
No, we establish quorum when we
started, so it's continues
throughout the meeting.
OK, manager. So there, there's
not 4 individuals in a
committee.
That needs 4 for a quorum.
We continue the meeting
when we started before you all
came and we continue to have
quorum, they just stepped out.
reasons.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, continuing on my questions.
OK, we got another member. Got a
quorum to do.
Madame Chair Representative.
I'm gonna not be on the agency
analysis until I find mine, but
I will ask questions on the
actual bill, which I have been
doing. So,
Um,
Madam Chair Representative.
So is there any current, the
current or the, the new language
regarding whistleblower
protections for reporting
parties or any kind of
retaliation. Let's just say your
boss.
Or somebody who could retaliate
against you, is that still in
effect, Madam Chair, with these
changes, Madam Chair and
Representative, we have a
law in New Mexico. These changes
don't occur.
That
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
So
In this
Legislation here.
And I am back on the FIR which
and looks at the AOC report.
They're talking about case load
increases.
Madam Chair Representative, I
know you said it was in the
budget for those case load
increases or maybe, maybe it's
somewhere else in the budget.
250 to 500,000 in personnel
expenses, Madam Chair
Representatives.
Do you, do you know what other
states
That have made these changes for
reporting parties and
The other portion of your, your
bill.
For individual officers. Do you
know what kind of costs they,
they may have incurred.
If they've changed their
language.
From an agency to a specific
officer, Madam Chair.
No.
to represent
Can you repeat that? I'm sorry,
I didn't get it. The answer was
no.
No, OK, so no other states have
increased costs by changing it
from agency to single officer.
Adam
was, do we have information
about other states and increased
costs
that information with us. OK,
sounds good. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So then, Madam Chair
Representative, regarding the
actual
Legislation then.
Have you looked at other states
if they have a similar framework
in which states manager.
Madame Che Representative, I
believe.
Over 20 states.
21 states have law, and they
vary from state to state. Most
of them contain very similar
provisions to ours, and I would
add an AOC that says any
additional fiscal impact.
On the judiciary would be
proportional to the enforcement
of this law and prosecutions, so
we don't know what it would be
without seeing if there's an
increase or not.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative. I
really appreciate that answer.
helped a lot. Madam Chair
Representative, though going
down in the FIR here.
Retrofitting storage facilities
could cost agencies between
50,000 and $100,000 per
location, Madam Chair
representatives, have we, have
we considered that and what are,
what are the
The specific police department
saying regarding the storage
necessities.
And is it in the budget?
Um
Representative Bloch, I don't
think this is changing.
Except that they might have
more.
And that's just, um, you know,
prediction for the future.
And thank you, Madam Chair, for
that clarification, and I, I
completely agree with you.
It, the bill, which makes
changes, increases costs.
And I would just love to know
where in the budget, those costs
are reflected or in the specific
agencies that will be applying
this legislation.
With your changes, I'm to
clarify,
Madam,
this bill will be enacted. It
will begin to be enforced in a
slightly different way.
If agencies see increased costs
if the courts see increased
costs for the next budget cycle,
they will be filing budget
requests and those requests will
be evaluated through our usual
process through LFC and and the
like, so.
That is my understanding as to
what will happen if indeed if
indeed costs are increased.
These are all hypotheticals and
speculations within various
agency summaries, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative.
And I appreciate that.
I know that
We give these bills to agencies.
Maybe days before the committee
hearings, and they don't
necessarily have enough time to,
to look at every single paper
and every single agency sell on
their spreadsheet. But I guess
their best estimate is 500 to
100,000 per location. So, I, I
guess my next question, which is
in the similar vein of my
previous question. So, other
states, how do they, how do they
approach this with the storage
capacity of the immediate.
Relinquishment, which is in your
bill.
Um, to the extent it's relevant,
I don't know.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
I would just like to see what
other states are doing because
usually our neighboring states
are pretty good about
Giving their laws good look
over. So Madam Chair
Representative.
Continuing down here.
On the significant issues.
It says it would, it would
indeed.
Create
National trend, it would make
New Mexico be within the
national trend of 20 states, I
think it said, and I believe
Representative Garrett said
that. So Madam Chair
Representative, was our previous
law?
Was it, how many states was it
in compliance with before,
because now it's 20, what was
the previous one that
I would just like to know, is
this gonna, is this a very
popular piece of legislation and
this new change, will this also
Be in line with somebody who,
let's just say I moved from
California will California's law
be similar to ours when I, when
that person moves to our state.
Madame Chen representative.
There's details that differ
according to the state law of
other states, the most familiar
with Florida, where I think at
this point almost 9000 herbals
have been filed.
Um, when we first did the spill,
I believe there were 15.
But because it is dealing with
people in crisis and because it
has saved lives.
states are pursuing this law on
the national level, it's been
pursued also.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and that's good.
I'll, I'll look at Florida's.
law.
So continuing on here, I
I know that
We're trying to get in line with
other states we want. We, we
want to help people in crisis.
And so I know we've made a lot
of changes in the legislative
process when it comes to
behavioral health, we've made a
lot of significant
changes is the intent of this
law not necessarily to have more
increased.
Aces since it's not been used
much. Like, the way I see it, if
a if a law is not being used
much, it means that something is
Working, so I'm wondering, Madam
Chair and representatives, do
you foresee
A successful implementation of
this law, having more
individuals file UROs because of
this 24 hour rule in your
legislation.
Um, well,
First all, there's not a 24 hour
rule, so I'm not sure what's,
pardon me, immediate rule, rule,
right, right,
um.
So you're asked the question,
madam chairs, will there be more
Upo petitions filed because of
these.
changes
Um, and the immediate
relinquishment piece. I don't
think they'll.
I, I do not think there'll be
more petitions filed because a
person will be required to
immediately file.
immediately relinquish their
guns.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, because that's,
that's kind of the argument I've
heard. We're not using it. We
don't have the ability to use
this. So I guess I, I want to
know cause I can talk to my
sheriff and know what's working
in Alamogordo at the Almogordo
PD but is if this tool is
passed, will it be at least a
little easier for the
department, so APD Alagorta
Police Department to utilize
this if they need to, Madam.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
and that, that, and so that they
can um as my colleague pointed
out, save more lives, save
people from suicide, protect the
public, Madam Chair
Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So,
I know we have reporting parties
in the in the new legislation
that we, that is underlined, I
swear to goodness, it's
underlined in your bill.
And
So state police and local
police, how would you go, go
through a case, let's just say
it's reported by state police,
and it's in Almogordo. So how
did who takes over the case,
Madam Chair, just wanting to
know. So if let's just say this
happened in Alamogordo, but a
state police officer who was
helping the APD did filed it or
saw, saw whatever the infraction
was.
And decided to go forward with
an EO.
How would that, how would that
work? Would you work with the
local agency, Alagorda Police
Department to do that, or would
it just be a state issue since
you're, you're the one, the
officer on the scene, and, and I
guess this would be the officer.
Well, Madam Chair,
Representative Locke, thank you
for that question.
We work hand in hand with all
law enforcement. However, if APD
Almogordo PD was the one that
initially responded, initially
independently verified, they
would file the ear low.
If state police responded
independently verified, they
would file the earthbo if they
were working hand in hand in
conjunction with one another,
then either agency could file
the.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, thank you,
Representative and uh it's good
to hear. I'm glad that they're
working together. We want more
of that, right? So, Madameier
and Representative, and I
I guess this is just curiosity.
I'll probably ask you after
this, cause I know you're
In in Los Alamos, for example,
it's a county.
It's a city
They have one police department.
Is that correct, Madam Chair?
And this, if this is not on the
bill, I, I can ask you
afterward, but just curious.
We have one police department,
Madam Chair, and a.
For state police support. Yeah,
so Madam Chair Representative, I
just wanted to make sure that
there is that coordination
between agencies and it sounds
like it's working properly,
which is very good. So, Madam
Chair, representative.
I have
Kind of Lord's paper here.
My goodness. So, uh, continuing
here, so I, I finally found my
agency analysis, whoopty do. So,
I'm gonna go back to my, my
questions about their concerns
on their agency analyses.
My other questions were here on
this page.
So
AOC
So Madam Chair.
OK, I'm sorry. I guess uh
It's been a crazy day at the
Capitol today at the at the
annex, our printers went out and
half of our pages are missing.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I will continue on my other
questions that I have for you.
One of them actually, I thought
I was curious about.
was
And I forget, I forget, uh.
How do I address you, officer?
What is your, your last name so
I can
Lieutenant Mad Lieutenant, I'm
so sorry. I apologize,
Lieutenant Madrid.
And I believe you're talking
about advanced crises is what
you, you study when you were in
those 40 hour blocks or the 80
hour blocks, what is an advanced
cris crisis that would pertain
to the legislation that we're
that we're looking forward right
now.
Well, it's just further
education, right, training
officers to do threat
assessments, risk assessments,
look at signs symptoms and
behaviors associated.
dealing with
It's just a more advanced
training.
And thank you Madam Chair and
thank you, Lieutenant, and I,
again, apologize for calling
officer, but Madam Chair,
Lieutenant Representatives.
So
Are these all verbal? Can they
be nonverbal? So, for example,
if
If I
Was acting kind of strange, but
I was telling you, everything's
fine. This is fine. Don't worry
about it. Would you be able to
implement this, this immediate
Process
As outlined in the bill, if I
was acting kind of strange,
would you have to ask more
questions? How does that work
with the training that you
received pertaining to the
legislation, madam.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block.
Again, it's all case by case
basis. It's all based on what we
are seeing, what we are hearing,
signs symptoms and behaviors
associated with whatever
situation that we are dealing
with or whatever incident we are
being called to.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
and lieutenant, so signs,
symptoms, behaviors. I mean,
could you
Quickly, really quickly. Just
give me an example of a, a
symptom or a sign that would be,
that could be
lead to
Let's keep it to the bill. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I, and I
really want to keep it to the
bill, and I, I think it does
pertain to responding to
Relinquished firearms
immediately and that the officer
who we're talking about, which
is on page 23.
In the middle of the sentence, I
just want to know what the
officer.
Has to do because it's not the
agency anymore, it's the
officer.
Would you just help me with
that?
Pertaining to the bill.
Getting
Representative Block, you're
getting to be um asking about
subjective things, and to the
officer's own.
Personal, um, description, let's
keep it to the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative and and
lieutenant. I, I guess I, I'm
just coming from this as I want
to see.
How this is implemented in
practice, and I guess it's just
a little difficult for me to see
as a lawmaker because we have to
make laws on high from Santa Fe,
and we have to put them into
effect into our local
communities, I guess my
What I want to see is how does
this work?
How do we know that it's working
properly. And when someone is
going to file this ERPA, which I
think is a very
It's a last resort kind of
thing, in my opinion.
I want to know how that
Works. So I know that there,
there are a lot of hypotheticals
when it comes to
How this goes and, and I know
that the best lawyer response
is, it depends.
But I also think that
If we're lawmakers who may not
be attorneys.
We do want to know how this goes
into effect, because we're
making large changes.
If we make a one word change.
strict strike out agency and
then in the next.
lines we put officer.
And they are able to do both
roles in this EO.
I want to know.
Do we have enough resources?
Do we know which specific
Training manuals are being
followed, and do we need to
tweak them?
To make changes to the current
training.
To indeed have the most
effective approach to the
implementation. So I guess my
question, Madam Chair,
I will we need to update
training manuals or currently?
is what we're doing now.
Effective with these new
changes.
In your opinion, if, if you'd
allow the lieutenant to answer
that.
Well, the question is,
With the change of making a
police officer.
with the change requiring
immediate relinquishment.
Um, upon that require an update
of the training, those two
changes which are essentially
the extent of the changes to
this bill law would that require
an update of your training
manual.
No, because we already trained
independently verify, Madam
Chair, I apologize, and
Representative block.
It wouldn't require a specific
update because we already
trained on independent
verification. We already trained
on the process, the procedure,
the breakdown of what officers
can do and what they can't do.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Lieutenant, so that, that is
helpful because I know that now
they're, they could be
potentially in two roles, right?
They could be writing the report
and they could also be filing,
right? So I know that.
It could change things, but I
know that you guys have very
good training. And I know our
local officers all, all train at
the state academy. So, everyone
is indeed and compliant. So,
I guess, Madam Chair
Representative and experts, I
would just
You know, I do have some
concerns, right? I, I think that
the bill that we passed before,
I don't.
I didn't really think it was the
best approach.
And I know that we're currently
on the legislation. I think this
just makes it a little bit worse
in my opinion.
And I find that to just be.
Difficult for me to to sit
through, cause I know that I've
gotten constituent email from
all across my district 793
emails.
In opposition to this, and then
I got 3 emails which my
assistant had to
Comb through to find, but
I mean, in my
District, there are people who
think that this is significantly
a problem, and I'm inclined to
agree with them.
So
I guess
I really hope that this, this
accomplishes what it does, what,
what it's set out to accomplish.
I really do, because as a
lawmaker,
Like you too
I think it's super important
that we put the best laws
forward.
I can't support this in its
current version.
But I do pray and hope that this
is used.
as least as possible, maybe not
because it may be ineffective,
but just because
We don't have those scenarios.
So I appreciate everyone for
being here today, and I just
I guess that's all the questions
I had, and I apologize. I didn't
have my agency analysis, but if
I do get it, I will ensure that
I ask you those questions on the
floor if it gets there.
Hopefully it doesn't, but if it
does, I will ask you those
questions, manager.
Thank you, um, representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, just a
couple of clarifying points that
um once the budget is done, it's
not like closed forever. There
are specials and supplementals
if it comes out that there are
thousands of these that pop up,
you know, on the first day,
there is a way to handle that
and there's been a lot of
discussion of immediate,
immediate, immediate. It's
immediately relinquish your
firearms after a judge gives the
order. So no one is knocking on
your door.
saying,
Give me your guns because I
think you're crazy.
Um, so I just want to make clear
that it all of this depends on
the judge. Yes, there could
maybe be some conflict of
interest in small towns, etc.
etc. But the judge.
Whose job it is to do this is
the intermediary, so this whole
immediate immediate immediate
is, is, um, a red herring. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Representative
Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just want to thank the sponsors
and the supporters for this
bill, bringing it forward and
clarifying. I know that from law
enforcement that has wanted to
be the eyes and ears that have
not been able to file these
orders. They were asking them to
do that job, and they're doing
it credibly and seeing some
issues that have persisted, um,
in certain families in certain
communities with folks that are
certainly um in, in, in a crisis
and it's really
Um, obvious for many of these
orders that we're seeing that
have not been filed. So I
appreciate the clarity. Um, I'm
interested in trying to figure
out some of the guidance on um
how the uh
I guess the process works, AOC
had flagged, um, but I'll talk
to the sponsors about that cause
it's more so, I think outside of
the confines of the bill itself,
but that said, um, I, I just
want to thank the sponsors for,
for clarifying the process.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam sure I move it do pass.
Madam Chair, I moved the table.
Hey, there's a motion to table.
We'll take a vote.
Yes.
Representative Block.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord, yes to
table.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson, no.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair.
Uh, not a table.
Madam Chair, no.
And I'd just like to clarify
that that was a substitute
motion. So we'll go back, um.
Motion did not pass and um we
will go back to the motion.
Uh, by Representative Thompson.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass on
House Bill 12.
OK,
so now we'll take your call on
that boat.
Representative Locke
No.
Representative Lord, no.
Representative Romero, yes.
Representative Thompson, yes.
Madam Vice Chair, yes, and Madam
Chair.
Yes.
On a boat of um 4 in favor and
to opposed, you have a due pass.
Or house bill, um.
12. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for your
questions.
Thank you all. Um, if you could
take your conversations out in
the hallway so we can go on to.
Please, uh, clear the room if
Represented Kates, he liked to
present your bill, bill 26
ticket scalping at state and
non-profit events. Yes, so thank
you very much, uh, Madam Chair,
and thank you committee members,
um, today I'm gonna present
House Bill 26, um, uh, let me
talk a little bit about the bill
and then I'll introduce my
expert witness here. I'll let
him introduce himself, um, this
bill was brought to, as you
know, um, uh, uh, the state of
New Mexico.
is a large community for the
arts, um, as so much so that,
uh, we created a new department
under economic development, um,
and so our local arts programs
are very important, not just for
our uh culture and our history,
but also as a revenue generator,
uh, it was brought to my
attention that our local arts
programs are uh struggling
through some issues that I'll
let my
Expert witness, um, review with
you and we found that there was
already an existing law
protecting our local state
sports programs from these
predatory, uh, ticket sales, and
so we would like to add the same
protections in our local arts
programs, um, Tony, why don't
you introduce yourself and you
can um present your part of the
bill.
Thanks.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Cates, members of
the committee.
Um, my name is Tony Zanina. I am
the executive director of Opera
Southwest and of uh chapter
chamber music ensemble that
performs in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe. Opera Southwest is the
other opera company in the state
down in Albuquerque, we present
uh.
a year at the Albuquerque
Museum, the Kemo Theater, the
National Hispanic Cultural
Center.
Um, I'm speaking on behalf of
our organization, uh, but also
on behalf of a larger coalition
uh that does include the Santa
Fe Symphony, the Santa Fe
Playhouse, uh, National
Institute of Flamenco Festival
Ballet, AMP concerts, Nelezic,
uh, Popejoy and the National
Hispanic Cultural Center as arms
of government are also
supportive of this, although,
um, you know, constrained in
their ability, I think to, to
testify or whatever. Um, but
I'll, I'll describe the problem
because I, I think that um
There's, it's we're, we're all
facing together is uh
An old problem with the digital
twist um and so if you'll bear
with me, I'll sort of explain
what has changed and why now in
terms of addressing the issue of
uh third party ticket reselling
or ticket scalping.
Um, so to understand the
problem, I'd like to sort of set
the stage for a typical arts uh
purchase some arts enthusiasts,
whether it's um
Yourself or a friend or whatever
we'll hear about some kind of
production, whether it's an
opera or perhaps the Flamenco
festival, uh, in a radio ad, a
newspaper article or social
media post.
Uh, the typical sales uh flow
for this arts producer is to go
ahead and Google something like
flamenco tickets, Albuquerque or
flamenco tickets and HCC um we
know that Google is the front
page of the internet and where
people sort of go to find things
and until very recently, the top
organic search result that
somebody would run into is
usually.
You know, the flamenco website
or the National Hispanic
Cultural Center website they
click through, get their ticket.
Uh, but over the last year or
two,
and it seems to be basically
enabled by um machine learning
algorithmic AI. So that's what
that's the big change here is um
instead of finding the official
box office, um,
The consumer is met with
resellers who have purchased
essentially all those keywords
uh using AI or algorithmically,
and they offered these tickets
at extraordinarily inflated
prices. Um, and so,
The tickets, you know, the
prices advertised, for example,
are, are just absolutely insane,
you know, your average uh arts
organization in Albuquerque is
selling tickets for less than
$40 and most people find that
even fine arts are are
surprisingly affordable. Um,
But you, when you click on these
sort of wrong websites, you are
greeted with tickets for sale
for 85 to $400 which is
Uh
You know, obviously out of reach
for most people. Um, and what's
different again here from the
way that uh traditional ticket
scalping operates is that these
ticket resellers do not actually
purchase the inventory in
question. So under the
traditional model of ticket
scalping you would purchase a
block of tickets, um, and then,
you know, have to take on the
risk that you can't unload those
tickets. Now in this case,
because this is enabled by
advances in um
Technology,
they, they don't take on any
inventory risk. They're not
buying these tickets, right? So
what they do is they sell you
what it appears to be a ticket
and then they turn around and it
sort of instantaneously buy the
ticket.
Um, that they're selling you.
Uh, so this is a really
significant um problem not only
because you have consumers who
are deceived and are overpaying,
uh, but even more significantly,
you have uh a large number of
consumers who
Run into these websites which
appear very official looking and
believe that
This is just out of my reach. I
can't afford this, and they're
lost, you know, they turn around
and say I can't afford to go to
the Flamenco festival. I can't
afford to go to the opera. I
can't afford to go to the
playhouse, they turn around and
uh don't purchase at all. They
walk away and I think even more
um,
Uh, problematically in some ways
is that they may then draw
conclusions that arts activities
are just out of their reach
financially completely and they
never return as potential um
patrons, uh,
Yeah, I mean, you could cut me
off representative cases. I'm
new to the whole legislature I
think, I think they understand
the committee. Thank you so
much, Tony, and thank you, uh,
committee. I just want to let
you know that we already um have
a bill in, we already have a law
in place that protects our
university sports programs from
this and so that's what we're
doing is we wanna make sure that
we're protecting our local arts,
um, this will not provide, this
will not, uh, apply to any of
our tribal venues or any.
privately owned, um, venues,
these are all state, um, uh,
correct state, uh, a funded
municipality funded uh venues so
it will for some venues, some,
some, uh, acts, uh, events that
like chemo or or the Linze uh
lensic, um, it could apply for,
but not Isleta.
unless it's like a a state-owned
like the flamingo, right, the
state dances, so, uh.
We will, um, rest for questions.
Yeah
We go to the audience and um is
there anyone in opposition?
To the spill.
Anyone wanting to speak in
support. Oh, I'm sorry.
I forgot, just a minute, um, do
we have anyone in opposition on
Zoom?
OK, one person, can you wait
just a moment? You can just.
OK, person on Zoom.
In opposition, if you could
speak.
You have one minute.
Go ahead.
Go ahead, Doris.
Um, I raised my hand to um speak
in support of the bill.
OK, it was there anyone else in
opposition? OK, yours, go ahead,
since we have you online, then
we'll go to the audience.
Thank you, ma'am I'm just gonna
be the committee. My name is
Doris Seals, and I'm in New
Mexico.
Thank you for hearing 27, the
librarian Protection Act. Um, I
am sorry,
you're on the wrong bill. We're
on House Bill 26. OK. OK.
I'm back. Thank you.
Um, all right, no one else.
OK, we'll go to the young lady
in the audience.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Anne Conway, and today I'm just
here as a board member of Opera
Southwest. Um, we've been, um,
very, uh, active in monitoring
this is something that was new
to me. It was explained very
well by the sponsor, um, and it,
uh, and Tony, sorry. I just want
to stay in, uh, strongly in
favor of it. We have a great
organization that's doing so
much for
Uh, our communities around the
state and this would help them
continue to thrive.
Anyone else in support.
OK. Do you have anything else
to?
Add or close before we go to the
madam.
Wow.
Uh, I rest.
Madam Chair, I move it to pass.
But I, I
Madam Che I move a do pass. OK,
we have that does not stifle
debate. OK, we have a motion for
due pass in a second, um.
Representative Laura, did I, I
don't know that we have sign in.
Did we do
Who, who
Representing. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that.
So
I appreciate the the bill,
Representative very, very, very
intricate and very thoughtful
bills, and I know intricate is
maybe a weird word for very
short bill, but
I had a lot of questions if you
could probably see my bill here,
it's like written up with a lot
of questions. So,
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess I
The word scalping.
Term scalping, I guess, is this,
is this consistent with other,
other states.
Other states call it scalping or
do they call it underhanded.
Theft of
Theater tickets like Madam Chair
Representative, I just want to
know, is this consistent or do
we need to update the word in
statute.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you, Representative,
the terminology can be scalping
or ticket broker or third party
ticket broker.
And I'd like to add that um
representative that it's already
in state law, that's not what's
been changed.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative, and I appreciate
it. And the, in, in the actual
title of the bill.
It refers to scalping. So does
Madam Chair Representative, does
your bill change anything
regarding scalping?
Whatsoever.
Does it change
The practices of scalping in any
way.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm not clear on how to answer
that question. I think we were
clear on what it does change. It
adds to our local arts programs
to an already existing bill, the
titles are not selected by
representatives there by our
drafters and um and it is based
on an existing law that protects
our university sports programs.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
we're talking about scalping
tickets, right? Or, or whatever
the third party.
Adam, what was the 3rd of Madam
Chair, we're talking about um
what the existing law is already
states and statute with the
verbiage that they've used for
that law. Got it. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
representative. I just was
wondering if that was what other
states were calling it. And
that's just my question. But I
guess, since even though it's on
the bill, I can't ask a question
about the actual bill. So I will
continue on the actual
underlying part of the bill, and
I will really intently try to
stay exactly on the underlying.
just
to stay in compliance with the
way that this committee is run.
So
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
you strike out the word any.
College athletic event.
On the first page of your bill.
So
Madam Chair Representative, you
change it to a college athletic
event.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess college athletic event,
how do we define that since we
are changing it with any
to
A
So Madam Chair, representative.
Does this apply to both private
colleges and public colleges
that may have athletics.
Some, um, Madam Chair
representative, um, this is a
law already in statute, and so
it is, uh, they've turned it
into a preposition instead of a
verb since they were adding the
other three lines underneath it
to be grammarically correct.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative and good, I, I
agree. That's how we changed it,
right? I'm wondering, does this
apply to both private and public
institutions since it is
changing the way that scalping
can happen at those
institutions.
Madam Chair, since it's college,
I don't know how that's defined
in statute.
Uh, thank you, um, Madam Chair
and Representative, I believe
this refers to a state
universities and colleges.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives. So
taking away any college.
I don't see the word public
college in the current statute.
This says any
college athletic events. So with
that change of the A.
We're making it just to state.
Athletic events.
No, Madam Chair and
Representative, no, we are not
changing it to any to just
state. It is already been for 27
years, I think.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. OK, so then
does or an event.
Presented by the state.
Or
And that's important, or a
political subdivision of the
state.
Or a nonprofit.
Corporation. So, Madam Chair
Representative, so
I've been thinking through this.
I, I'm a member of many
nonprofits. Let's just say I'm,
I'm a member of the
Tularosa Basin Historical
Society. And let's just say the
historical Society has tickets
for an event.
And they're giving away the
event tickets for, let's just
say board members for $1.
But you're gonna sell that
ticket.
For $10
Two people in the public.
The Madam Chair Representative,
would I be an infringement.
Of this law
Bye
As the ticket says
A dollar, but I'm selling it for
10 as as the board told me, and
this is not real, this isn't
actually what they told me. So
don't, don't take that any
offense, um, to LaRosa Basin.
But so
If that did happen, would I be?
Not in compliance with the law,
if what's on the ticket as I
believe it's prescribed in the
legislation.
is different than what I sold
the ticket for.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, um,
you know, as always,
hypotheticals are very difficult
to answer cause I wanna be
accurate and correct with you,
but, um, understand that if
you're bored by laws allow you
to have private sales for board
members before tickets are put
on public. I
With hypothetically believe that
it would be uh approved.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. Cause
I'm just wondering where we're
talking about the board in this
cause it just says any
nonprofit.
Corporation under the 501c3. So
as long as it's a 501c3.
Is that, is that like a federal
law that you need to have
non-scalping legislation or
wording in your bylaws, or let's
just say it's a brand new group,
we don't necessarily have very
clear bylaws.
Would it be OK if I started a
group, people who like
Like Acatillo cactus cacti,
right? If I started that group,
And I, we didn't have any bylaws
and we sold tickets that said $1
or $10.
It's not really a hypothetical.
I'm asking, is a ticket that
says $1.
And I sold it for $10. Would
that defy this change in statute
I'm so
sorry, Madam Chair and
representative is very difficult
to follow your hypothetical. I
will say I only mentioned bored
because you mentioned bored in
your hypothetical in the earlier
scenario, you're right, it is
not part of the bill, um, the
501c3, um, so sorry, but the
501c3 is that we are um this
bill it will pertain to
state-funded nonprofit local
arts, not for profit private
entity venues or events do you
may I take a moment to um uh
talk with my expert witness.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, um, my
expert witness says it has been
covered in the statute and has
been part of the statute.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I appreciate
that that makes, that makes
sense. So I guess my next
question would be, Madam Chair.
So,
A lot of questions, but OK,
let's let's stay on the
nonprofits.
Let's, so let's say there's a
cancer research.
Nonprofit in the state of New
Mexico that has tickets to go
see.
Pit bull at the pit.
Next week.
And the tickets are sold online
through
Or whatever
The official website is for
$100.
But there is somebody who buys a
ticket. I have an extra ticket
and my buddy here.
Really wants to go see Pitbull,
and he said, oh, I'll pay you
150 bucks for that ticket.
He didn't know what I paid for
the original ticket.
So
Since we're adding nonprofits.
Would I be violating this if I
had an extra ticket? I give it
to my buddy for extra what I
bought. I get a nice, I profited
nicely $50 and he gets to see
Pitbull. I think it's a win-win.
But would I be not in compliance
with this.
New change in the statute, Madam
Chair.
Man and chair represent him, I,
I am I'm gonna talk uh as well,
it's very difficult to follow
this path of hypothetical. I
will say that, um, I don't know,
I hope Pitbull is playing at his
letter not at a so I, uh, so if,
if they're playing in a private
venue, then no, this bill does
not, but I guess if you're
nonprofit has.
I, I, I can't go down that path.
I just, there's too many
variables in your, in your
hypothetical. Thank you.
OK, so Madam Chair
representative, OK, I'm taking
away all the, all the, all the
extras. I try to make my
questions interesting so you're
not bored to tears, but
I really try, really hard and
yeah, is let in next time. Good
job. It'll be in, I believe it's
in your district, but Madam
Chair, representative, so
OK, an individual.
Charity, any charity at all.
As an event
I have an extra ticket I bought
for $100 from the event.
I upcharged the cost of that
ticket.
When I sell it to somebody who
may be a friend, maybe be
anybody.
That violates this change in the
law.
Is that correct?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. The
only if the event is by a local
arts program nonprofit state
funded.
So if it had his store, if it
was our flamingo. Let's, let's
talk to my expert witness.
He'll, he'll be glad to go down
that path with you. So, um, if
I'm following the question
correctly, the question is if a
private party was attempting to
sell a
To resell a
Ticket to a fundraiser conducted
by a charity at a price higher
than that originally paid and
take a profit that would be uh
prohibited by the statute here
because it would be selling a
ticket for more than either the
face value or the excuse me, or
the um
the face value of the ticket and
that is in fact the goal of this
statute because in your
hypothetical scenario, the um
Private individual is
uh, the charity is in fact not
there.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and
expert. And so I guess
That's a good clarification. So
as long as it's any nonprofit, I
just want to be clear, it's not
just regarding local arts, but
it's, I believe in this in the
new change.
It says
Or a nonprofit corporation
formally recognizes tax exempt.
It doesn't specify what kind.
Is that, is that what I'm
understanding? I just want to
make sure that let's just say I,
I have my own nonprofit, which I
don't, but if I did, would I be
under this if it's not regarding
local arts?
as it's currently drafted, yes,
uh, it specifies uh.
Nonprofit corporations formally
recognized as tax-exempt under
Section 501c3 uh as you may know
there are I think 29 different
subchapters of 501c and this
only specifically applies to the
ones we commonly think of as tax
exempt entities where your um
Carrying out charitable purposes
and donors, for example, can
receive a deduction for gifts
and so forth. What what's uh I
think the general public's
concept of a nonprofit, for
example, not a hospital.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
expert. So yes, so like a C4,
which is not tax deductible, C6,
not tax deductible, it would
have to be specifically a C3,
and it would not be specified to
be arts, right? And I'm just
trying to figure out.
Thank you.
OK, got it. All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So,
It says, I know the bill
actually currently had already
includes online sales. So I'm
wondering what, what kind of
Have we done any studies or have
we, we canvassed certain groups.
I know that we have the opera of
the Southwest, I believe it is,
or I'm sorry, what?
guys are called uh Upper
Southwest, which it's, I'm
guessing it's affected you guys.
Has it affected other
individuals.
to a large scale to need
legislation. I'm wondering,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative. Yes, yes, as the
beginning of our presentation,
my expert witness named off
quite a few of our, um, beloved
arts programs across the state
and variety areas.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative. So,
I, I guess my other, I had a
hypothetical, but I'll kind of
take it away from all the
interesting fun facts that I
tied to it. No more pit bull,
but Madam Chair representative,
so I know a lot of events, for
example, if, if a nonprofit C3.
At an event that they put on and
tickets sell out immediately.
And some of the event sponsors,
they, they may have gotten an
extra ticket for a spouse or
something.
And it, and it was $100 they
want to sell it for $5000
because let's just say Adele
came to town or something big
like that. Sorry, I don't want
to get too hypothetical, but I
mean, that would be cool, right?
We all like Adele, but if that
did happen, and if they sell it
for $5000 that's what people are
willing to pay. I guess my, my,
my concern is, is this
infringing on a free market,
because people would be willing
to pay a 5000 bucks, go see
Adele, not just 100 bucks, would
that person be a scalper because
they, they see the market
demand. They
see this person's popularity.
They see comparable ticket sales
in other sectors, let's just say
she's going to Arizona next and
she's charging 5000 bucks there.
If it's comparable in another
place, would it still be
scalping if it was not what was
on the ticket or what was
charged at the door for
admission as your bill includes.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. Our
current laws state that you are
not allowed to do that for
football, so if you have a $20
football to ticket to see UNM
and um and you want to be able
to buy up the words for AI that
says New Mexico football so that
you can look like you own all
the tickets, even though you've
taken none of the financial
risk, so
I, uh, strongly disagree that
this hinders free market as in
nobody's paying for these
tickets, they are just taking
control over it because of AI,
so they have not taken the
business risk to make it a a
free market, um, in,
sorry, this microphone is
really, um, and, and it also is
only for the, so we're taking
the exact instead of just
protecting our football games
from our state universities.
We are going to expand it to our
501C3 local arts programs as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. And I
guess, I guess my question
probably wasn't as clear as
possible. I'm talking about a
board member on the board of the
nonprofit,
Madam Chair that for you and it
wasn't something that was
included as a board.
OK, Madam Chair, it's, it's a
person who's associated with the
the C3. Any individual who may
or may not be associated with
the C3 which you're changing in
the bill. I'm wondering if those
proceeds go back to the charity.
Right? I'm, I'm fundraising for
a charity for a concert, $100
tickets are selling for $5000.
It's going back to the the
entity that it's trying to help.
Would that go against the
spirit, or at least the words of
your legislation, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
let me just clarify, and then
I'll bring to, I'll ask my
expert witness, so you're saying
as an individual, you're gonna
take a ticket that is to that
you purchase to help uh your
local nonprofit, you're gonna
sell it to your buddy for $5000
but yet you're not taking
possession at $5000 you're gonna
pass it through back.
To the 501c3 because it's part
of that. All right, thank you.
Um, so nothing in this bill, for
example, prevents um a nonprofit
that finds out that for example,
demand for the Nutcracker is
much higher this year than last
year from altering, you know,
their prices in response to
market demand because the
You know, if you adjust your
ticketing program or the price
charged at the door, the new
tickets are issued at a higher
price. And so in the case, for
example, um,
of the hypothetical where
suddenly this nonprofit has
discovered there's the
possibility if the board member
is is not pocketing that $5000
you know, there.
The the the
The way to resolve that would
simply be to return the ticket.
To the charity and allowed the
charity to resell it for $5000
thus achieving the, the aim that
you're looking for in terms of
allowing a charity to capitalize
on unexpected demand for its
fundraising event. So I don't
think that the existing statute
would be um you know, pose any
difficulties to that uh happy
outcome for the Tularosa Basin,
uh, cactus, um, charity.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. I will
further state that this scenario
you should uh consult a tax
expert because you've taken
possession of the 5000 and now
you're donating it to 501c3, and
that is beyond my scope of
expertise.
OK, thank you, ma'am. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
same here. I don't sit on the
tax committee and I don't
pretend to, so I appreciate
that, Madam Chair
Representative. So, OK, clear,
clearing it up. I heard if you
return the ticket to the
To the entity, they sell it for
$5000 it's OK.
So that's my understanding of
what I heard. So, OK, thank you,
Madam Chair,
Representatives representative,
I don't think they agreed with
that, but they didn't.
I, OK, then I would love
clarification. I'm so sorry
hypothetical is not something
that they can answer and then
they've said that already.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
totally understand. We, we all
agreed we're not tax experts.
That's just what I understood
the, the response was from the
expert, but I will just pretend
like I didn't hear the response,
manager.
So, continuing on.
Here, Madam Chair.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, so I
know we talked about certain
nonprofit schools, for example,
political subdivisions.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Does this bill kind of aim to
increase access to events for
lower income individuals. Is
that something that was
considered or the purpose?
Madam Chair Representative only,
uh, no, it is this bill does not
consider that as in
but most certainly isn't a
wonderful consequence in the
fact that it keeps our local
arts programs affordable and
accessible.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
OK, so, and then all third party
resale platforms would pretty
much just be not.
Loud
On the and it is in the bill,
madam chair, because we're
changing it in the statute to
increase the people who it
affects. So, Madam Chair, I was
saying,
Um, I'm wondering,
So third party resale platforms
would pretty much just be
banned.
Regarding these specific events.
If like a third party, I guess
you buy a ticket, can you repeat
that question? Sure, yeah, so
like a third party resale, like,
for example, I, my first concert
was, I think it was in
Albuquerque. It was like
Florence and the Machine or
something. So my first
Answer
It was a nonprofit included in
the bill, right? Let's, let's
just say it was.
If I bought a third party
ticket, which actually I did for
that first concert concert, by
the way, that would not be
allowed.
Pursuant to the legislation
since we're adding nonprofits,
and if it was a nonprofit, I
bought it for an extra amount.
That person who sold it to me.
Would indeed be violating.
This legislation.
Is that correct?
And and I'm, I keep missing the
addressing the chair, so I
apologize, Madam Chair. Um.
Uh, yes, so if it was sold for
greater than uh face value or
the price charged at the place
of admission, that would be a
violation of the statute. This
does not.
The resale of tickets at or
below face value.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
that, that makes sense. So if I
bought a ticket for $100 and I
can't go and I'm really
desperate to get, get rid of it.
I could sell it for $50 if it
was $100. I bought it for, that
wouldn't break any laws because
it was a loss, Madam Chair,
correct, you could say and
representative block you could
uh sell the ticket on it exactly
the price you paid for it. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representative. So then,
will this legislation, since I
know it's a problem that we're
looking to address with these
online bot
Arm things or I don't know how
the AI works with.
Whatever, whatever is selling
the tickets for more money
online fake.
Websites or whatever, are we
going to be investing in some
kind of
Technology to monitor.
Any kind of scalping that occurs
in the state of New Mexico is
that
Cause I'm, I'm sure with this
legislation there will be more
cases. Is there any kind of
concern or consideration for
The technology needed to.
Root these guys out of here,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, madam you
representative. Uh, there is
nothing in this bill that states
for an adding of uh.
Technology.
Um
I'd also like to add
representative the um it's.
You might be talking more about
the free market.
And this is talking about um
private sector, not government
and nonprofit events.
Yes, Madam Chair, thank you so
much for that clarification and
yes, that's what I'm referring
to. I'm not talking about going
to Live Nation for Miley Cyrus's
new tour or whatever. I'm
talking about a specific thing
that you're changing in the
bill. So I'm just wondering is
if there's even technology that
exists to assist nonprofits in
rooting out this kind of
Of, uh, I guess you would call
it, um,
Is it larceny? I mean, what do
you call this? Like when you're
stealing from nonprofit, and I'm
sure.
Thank you, madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, um, today
we are here to look at this
piece of legislature. I'm, I'm
not equipped to talk to you
about all different technical
advances for auditing this
process.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I appreciate
that. I don't know if your
expert had anything to add to
it.
Uh, so in there, I think at
least 17 states that have
anti-scalping provisions very
similar to this, um, and in
terms of like actually
On the ground, execution by
having a statute in place in
places like, for example,
Florida, um.
Nonprofits that are affected by
this have simply been able to
draw Google's attention to the
problem, Google is able to clamp
down on that issue, um, and, uh.
So that, that having the law on
the books enables it to be
something of a of a self um
Yeah, self-monitoring system,
once you have the law on the
books, Google has something to
deal with and then uh
That's how it becomes sort of
self enforcing and why it is
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. That, that
clears it up for me. I, I think
that's really good that there's
other states that have this kind
of requirement, and I'm sure
Google would be more than
inclined to help.
With that. So, Madam Chair
Representative, my, I guess my
last
Line, maybe of questioning
potentially would be um
The
This is happening to my
nonprofit, and we're sick and
darn tired of it. We want it to
stop. We tried to use Google,
they didn't help us. Can what is
the next step in helping to stop
the scalping because if we are,
if we talked to Google, they
didn't do anything. It can.
What provision in the bill helps
us to file a suit or or
something like that, Madam
Chair.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative, the um
the bill does have a penalty for
violation, um, I don't believe
that there I I I don't carry a
bill that talks about a scenario
for the future. I, I can't
comment on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
yeah, I, I wouldn't ask you to
opine on.
On the ether of whatever the
legislation is that's flying
through this place, so I
appreciate that, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
I, I guess I'm just continuing
to read the the FIR and I'm I'm
just gonna let others ask about
that, but I appreciate the input
today. I'm, I've, I have some
concerns and I'm still, I'm just
gonna sit here and listen, cause
that's what
Most important thing is, so
thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Representative and expert.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative and
expert. I'm sorry, what was your
name?
Uh, Madam Chair, my name is Tony
Zanina.
I think, um, so in reading this
bill, Madam Chair and
Representative.
An expert Tony um.
On this
One of the things that trips me
up and I'm sorry if John
Blackout says his questions, but
this also.
to fraudulent tickets.
Or just if you're selling a
legit ticket.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. There's nothing
in the bill that refers to fraud
tickets.
to my chair. So it's just if
somebody is taking the ticket
and reselling it.
So
If they get picked up on the
charges, let's say somebody gets
charged on this.
Is it gonna be one misdemeanor
per ticket or one misdemeanor
because it doesn't explain this
or per event.
Like if they get picked up for
scalping a bunch of tickets at
the one time, that's just a
mystery is it per ticket that's
sold.
Um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's, it talks about, um, is a
guilty misdemeanor upon
conviction and shall be punished
on a a fine, uh, up to $500 or
imprisonment for a defined term
less than one year or both, and
that would be for the courts to
decide.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, um.
What I'm not seeing because if
we're trying to protect people,
right, because
From all the concerts I've been
to my life and there's been a
lot.
Uh, the tickets are sellout
usually right away. It's
something really important to
get sold out really like right
at that moment.
So
There's nothing in here for
limitations, correct? Like you
can't buy it, it's just going
after the person who scalping
the tickets.
Not on a person who buys 500
tickets with the intent of
selling. It's just if they're
actually selling.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's not
going after.
Anything that you stated, it is
um ensuring that our local non
for profit and arts programs
have the same protections as our
state university sports programs
have
and man I thought I heard you
say I was trying to listen to
this.
The nonprofit.
Political subdivision.
They can adjust the price. Is
that correct? They could say,
I'm going to charge $15 for this
ticket. Holy heck, everybody
wants them. We're now selling
for 500, they can do that
themselves, is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
yous representative, the person
that sells the tickets gets to
determine the price of the
tickets.
And Madam Chairman
Representative.
So if I'm understanding
correctly, because I know John
had a lot of hypotheticals, and
it was one that I missed, which
was an important question I had
about the bill. So if you buy a
ticket and you have it for a
friend, but you sell that ticket
because they can't go and the
market demand went from $20 a
ticket to $2000 a ticket.
You would still be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
correct.
OK. Um,
So it's
My problem is
When I, when I think about
scalping, it was kind of a weird
offensive all this, but when I
think of scalping, I think of
somebody who's buying.
A large number of tickets.
Would you
Contemplate an amendment.
That would exclude those people,
so we're not picking up
somebody's mom or grandma or
auntie that sold a ticket and
they're not.
Part of a misdemeanor. Would you
consider that? Um, Madam Chair
Representative, no, I would
consider that to be an
unfriendly amendment.
Um
I gotta take a minute to take
that in. I have issue just when
there's sometimes there's
Something I think you could take
into a good bill and make it
great by just saying we're gonna
exempt somebody who sells 5 or
less tickets, 2 or less or 1 or
less. I mean, however you wanna
do it, I.
To me, it seems like people have
the right if they buy the ticket
and they want to sell it, make a
profit on it.
But we're saying no to that.
Um
Is the goal of this is what
you're trying to do. I'm gonna
take it. You're trying to make
sure cause I tried to go back
here.
And it looks like you point of
the bill.
Was that there was a news
article talking about
unauthorized sales of tickets.
Was that an I, I get worried
about this, it's gonna end up
putting grandmas in jail. I
don't like this. And you're
taking me to a place where I
look at the bill and I go, OK,
this is a good idea, but I think
if somebody wants to sell a
ticket or more.
So what it, I don't understand
what, what is your answer for
that ticket? You just
You want them to sell it for
exactly what it's worth, yet
some online selling it for
$2000. You want them to sell it
for that what I'm trying to.
Madam Chair Representative, so
the person that's selling it for
2000 is committing a crime and
so you want somebody else to
commit a crime so that it
matches that crime. No, what I'm
saying, Madam Chair and
Representative, is that somebody
has a right if they bought a
ticket or if it's gifted to them
or given to them, or one in a
raffle that if they have a
ticket, their intent is not to.
Harm other people. Their intent
is saying the market value is X
and I want to sell it for X, but
you're saying that the grandmas,
aunties, uncles, nobody can do
that. Children can do it. Nobody
can do that.
And I have a really hard time
with the bill because I think
somebody should be able to sell
it for whatever amount they want
to, but you're saying, so then
would you be OK, Madam Chair
representative, if they sold
over 2000 and they gave the
money back to whatever
organizations, is that what
you're saying? Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you
Representative. Once again,
that's a tax implication you'll
be donating, um, after you've
accepted the what what this bill
does is it protects nonprofits,
nonprofits have an IRS status
because they are nonprofits.
That means the profit from their
organization
goes back into their
organization. They are not
market driven. They are there to
historically preserve our arts
and our cultures and provide
artistic events for our public
in a nonprofit way just like we
don't allow our football players
at UNM to sell autographed
merchandise for above market at
our university lands, so
What is the difference between
this bill and a for-profit
market-based event.
OK, madam chair and I'm just
trying to not increase
incarcerations for somebody who
is negligent, doesn't know this
bill exists or wants to just
make a profit, I mean I look at
the intention. I don't want to
incarcerate more people that
their intention was they just
wanted to sell a ticket because
the way you have it written,
it's even if it's $1.
Let's see if it's one penny.
So I, I don't think we should be
incarcerating people for selling
ticket for one penny more than
what you're saying. There it has
to have some common sense for me
to be on board with the bill to
allow people that if they want
to make a profit cause in
otherwise, Madam Chair and
Representative, you have to say
to that nonprofit who I want to
make money, right? That's what
the point is, if they sold out
all their tickets in one day and
sold them for $20.
Then they have released it out
to the community, allow those
people to do it, then maybe they
should put restrictions on how
many tickets and who can buy
tickets and you can only buy 5
tickets per day.
So I don't want.
To, there's a difference which I
see Grandma buys a ticket, wins
a ticket, raffle ticket, sells
it off for $1 more versus
somebody when I look at
scalping, that's a person's
going in with the intent, I'm
gonna buy all this about 100
tickets and I'm gonna go out and
scalp them because that's how it
worked when I grew up in Los
Angeles. They sell tickets on
the street. That to me scalping.
Somebody who has a ticket.
Without the intention.
Um
Wanting to go to jail or knowing
that they're doing some criminal
activity to me seems like
that's.
Uh, kind of
Taking somebody who doesn't mean
to do that or selling it for $5
more as now
Now it's a misdemeanor and a
$500 fine, and I'm also looking
at what if this is somebody low
income and they can't afford it
or disabled person.
Who needed to buy bread or
whatever. I mean, I'm looking at
all scenarios and I and I don't
like that part and the way that
it's worded right now, I can't
agree with that because I look
at the intent.
I look at the intent of somebody
saying, man, I really need to
buy eggs cause I don't know who
can afford eggs anymore, and
they sell the ticket for $5 by
eggs over the price and now
they're it's a mystery
representative,
I think you're mixing again the
free market and then what is
government and um.
Uh
Private, I mean, nonprofit
corporations,
I am very concerned about this
line of questioning as it is
completely inaccurate of how the
word the bell reads in for our
public interest. I want to make
sure that they understand that
whomever commits ticket scalping
is guilty of misdemeanor and
upon conviction, so upon
conviction shall be punished by
a fine up to.
$500 or by imprisonment.
For the define definite term of
less than one year or both.
There are a lot of oars in
there. There's an up to in there
and how this bill is being
described is extraordinarily
inaccurate.
Madam Charon representative, if
you have the word knowingly.
I wouldn't have a problem with
the bill. My problem is that
it's so cut and dry.
If somebody sells that ticket
for $1 more than what they got
it for, it's going to be if they
get convicted.
Uh, $500 fine or imprisonment up
to a year or both, and that's a
long time for us to put
somebody's grandma in prison, or
sorry, in jail for selling
something $5 over, so the way
that the bill is.
routed right now, I cannot
support it. I do have one more
question, um, Madam Chair
Representative.
How are we going to address
people cause there's plenty of
people, like right now on
Telegram, you can buy cocaine,
you can buy a gun, you can buy
anything on telegram.
Um, how are we going to stop
people using fake names and
Bitcoin.
Uh, from selling representative
that has nothing to do with this
spill. Keep it to what the bill
says.
Oh yeah, Madam Chair, I thought
uh there was something
addressing online early that
represented Block had brought
up.
Because what you were talking
about hypotheticals with Bitcoin
and things like that, Madam
Chair and representative, how do
we address online? I guess how
are we addressing online with
some of the fake madam chair,
the, the underlying, there's
nothing about online. OK, so
online, so you can sell online
then you can sell, you can scalp
online then, Madam turn.
Representative, this does not
address anything along that
line. Please keep it to the
bill.
So Madam Chair representative,
that's another problem too,
because it doesn't say anything
about online. I can go online,
make fakela and sell the tickets
because that's not in here.
So this is only if that person
sells them, gets caught, gets
turned in, but they could do it
online because you're not
addressing anything.
So there's too many holes in the
bill because I don't like the
word knowingly. I don't like
giving somebody that much time
and if there's nothing about
online, then it kind of negates
it because everybody's selling
everything online. Everybody's
selling everything in the whole
world on.
Uh
On the apps, so then that means.
They're just gonna go straight
online and sell them. So that
kind of makes the whole building
null and void. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. We have a motion.
We already did.
So 5
So
move to table.
Hey, there's a
Yeah, substitute motion to
table, um, will you please take
roll.
Representative Block yesterday.
Representative Lord, yes, the
table.
Representative Romero.
No.
Representative Thompson? No,
Madam Vice Chair.
Note a table.
Madam Chair, note to table.
Oh
On a boat of um.
For 2 to 4, um.
We will be not be tabled and we
will go back to the emotion, um
at the emotion, the motion.
Um,
to, for a due pass.
Take all.
Representative Block? No, ma'am.
Representative Lord, no.
Representative Romero.
Representative Thompson. Yes,
Madam by his chair. Yes.
Madam chair, yes.
OK. You have a vote of 4 in
favor 2 against or do pass um on
House Bill 26.
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
um, I am 27.
Which is um librarian Protection
Act.
Thank you.
And thank you very much, Madam
Chair and thank you committee.
Uh, today we are presenting
House Bill 27 is our librarian
Protection Act, as you know, um,
uh,
libraries, oh, I don't know why
it doesn't. I'm just gonna stand
right here.
OK, thank you,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Oh,
you're good. Thank you. OK, so,
um, thank you very much. So, uh,
our librarian Protection Act you
bring this book this uh bill to
you today because I have
concerned about our public
librarians throughout our state,
and I believe that this is a
bill that will help protect
them, as you know, librarians
have spent their careers in
education and um being able to
serve.
their community and they're all
about process, not about
politics, and we want to be able
to let them stay in that process
oriented, um, manner of decision
making, so public libraries all
have written policies of
reviewing books and determine
whether or not, um, uh, they
serve the community. There is a,
a process written for every
public library on on how to
review books and how the public
can bring it to their.
attention as well, those written
processes vary between the
public libraries, but they are
all based on the national
library Bill of Rights. This
bill states that as a public
library, you must follow your
written process, or you will
lose your state funding. So you
cannot decide to usurp your own
written process and um
determine.
What is offered to the public,
uh, by any, uh, uh, a pressure
outside this process.
Uh, as you know, our public
libraries that we know today are
distinctly American as libraries
have a history of thousands of
years, but were only offered to
the wealthy landowners,
educated, and that the public
library you know today is
offered to the public, um, and I
would like to make that, uh, can
stay consistent. Um, I bring
this bill to you. I would like
to introduce to you my subject
expert who is our state
librarian.
Madam Sharon, uh, committee
members, uh, my name is Eliane.
I am the state librarian of New
Mexico. I'm here as a uh
technical expert on this bill.
Um, should this bill pass?
Uh, and become statutes in the
state library is prepared to um
align our administrative code to
um to match the statute, the
wording of the statutes, um, as
Representative Kate said,
librarians follow process to
purchase.
Um, well reviewed books and
other library materials from
reputable publishers.
That represent a wide variety of
viewpoints, so we do not
consider this to be a partisan
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you committee. We stand
for questions.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in
opposition? No? OK. Are there
people here in support.
OK. How about um.
Or did you want to speak or just
show that you're in support?
OK.
Um
Oh, OK. Go ahead.
I think he's the only 10, there
is someone else. Yes, you'll
just line up and.
Is my name is Dick Mason. I'm a
member of the board and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico, and we stand in strong
support of HB 27 library
Protection Act.
Um, in 2024, the League of
League of Women Voters US
convention passed the following
resolution.
Therefore, be it resolved that
public libraries are essential
institutions for strong, viable,
and sustainable democracies.
And that access to materials,
resources and programming
provided by public libraries is
a civil right.
Which should be enjoyed by all
and distributed equitably to our
communities.
That, that resolution passed 798
to 14. If you know the League of
Women voters, that's an
overwhelming vote.
um, further, um, I attended the
League of Women voters. I mean,
I intended to reo Rancho City
Council meeting, where there was
a proposal to eliminate some
books from the Rio Rancho
library.
The
Public response was
overwhelmingly in opposition to
proposal and the city council
ended up voting against the
proposal to eliminate some of
the books from um the uh from
the library. So I wanna thank
Representative Cates for
introducing HB 27, and I urge
you to give it a due pass. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Nathan
Sara. I am the program manager
at Equality New Mexico, and I'm
here to speak in support of the
librarian Protection Act, HB 27.
I was raised in Blen, New
Mexico, a semi-rural town where
I didn't understand that the
word gay wasn't a slur until 8th
grade, and didn't start feeling
as if it wasn't a slur until
12th.
It was in 7th grade, my first
year of middle school, when I
first discovered the benefits of
a public library, and also
discovered the first book that
had characters like me. I
remember that book to this day,
mostly because of how good a
book it was, but also because it
was my first look into a world
that at that point in my life
was entirely taboo and also
entirely resonated with my own
life experiences. Everyone,
regardless of their identity and
life experiences deserve to have
access to information and
stories that resonate with them.
For our youth, especially those
in primarily rural communities.
looks out the door to learning
about information outside of
their own community bubbles.
Information about themselves
that might not be accessible
otherwise.
Public libraries are the
institutions that provide this
access to everyone for free, and
all New Mexicans deserve
unimpeded access to this
information, regardless of their
socioeconomic class and
identities. We have to trust
individuals to make their own
decisions on what they choose to
read and believe. And this bill
puts us in a place where no
district's public libraries
across the state will be able to
remove books based on their
content or authors. For these
reasons, on behalf of LGBTQ
folks across New Mexico, we are
urging the committee to vote yes
on HB 27 and protect New
Mexico's.
freedom of information.
Sharon members of the committee.
My name is Rachel Ray. I use
they them pronouns, and I'm with
bold futures and advocacy
organization by and for women
and people of color in New
Mexico.
As a former healthcare chaplain,
I have experienced the
transformative power of stories
firsthand. Whether hearing
families share memories of their
loved ones at the end of life,
or seeing youth bond over their
favorite novel in a behavioral
health spirituality group.
I have seen these stories
support healing, growth, and
belonging.
We know that books subject to
ban attempts were nearly 5 times
more likely to be written by
authors of color.
These restrictions ultimately
limit freedom, intellectual
curiosity and representation in
our communities.
All New Mexicans deserve the
right to craft our own stories
and learn from the stories of
others, and to find solace in
our public libraries.
A vote for HB 27 is a vote in
support of free speech,
belonging and respect in New
Mexico.
We ask that you vote yes.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Tatiana Prieto, and I'm
with the ACLU of New Mexico,
along with the many advocates in
this room, we stand in strong
support of this bill over the
past few years, over 3000 books
have been banned in schools and
communities across America.
Banned books disproportionately
feature stories about LGBTQ plus
communities, people of color,
and others who have been
historically marginalized. Book
bands are not only
discriminatory.
But they are also a violation of
people's First Amendment right
to access information. Public
libraries and librarians enable
communities to exercise this
right, and we must ensure that
New Mexico remains a state where
this is true. Every New Mexican
deserves to see themselves and
their experiences reflected in
the books they read. Book bands
not only threaten our civil
liberties, but they are also
harmful to the pillars of
education, independence, and
democracy, we strongly encourage
you to vote yes on this bill.
Thank you.
Go ahead. Yes. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, on my,
my name is George Fis and I am
in in Mexico, and I wanted to
thank you for hearing how 27,
the libraritection Act.
I'd like to thank
case for carrying this bill.
I am a lifelong reader. I'm long
term library volunteer, a long
time donor, um, also a library
patron, um, in my view, has 27
serves a, a number of
Purposes and a number of
protections,
um, tests, um, briefly protected
continuation of library funding,
um, 27 supports librarians as
they adhere to the American
Library Association's Bill of
Rights and one's right to read.
Um,
the bill in essence
upholds patron's right to read
what they want to read. Patrons
right to learn patients right to
grow via literature, their right
to become more armed with
knowledge and it broadens
people's perspectives, um, they
allowed patients, patrons to be
more contributing members of our
community and our society. So
Men shares of the committee with
deep respect. I, I ask that you,
um,
Recommend
and do have to.
27. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Madam Chair of the committee. My
name is Kimberly Farley. I'm a
volunteer with indigenous women
sing. The organization and I are
in full support of this bill,
protecting librarians and their
stewards are librarians or
library is under attack
nationwide. Not only our
libraries underfunded, but now
library harassment and death
threats for holding.
The kind of librarians to see is
a symptom of a much larger.
of wanting to control what our
children and communities have
access to. What we should be
encouraging access to knowledge
which help break down barriers
and foster understanding in our
communities,
especially on indigenous land.
We have an obligation to protect
those who help spread knowledge.
To not just children,
families and others.
Thank you.
That everyone
Go ahead next.
Hi, this is
I'm on the train cut out and
urge you to support this bill,
um, to me, libraries are like.
of human experience and believe
they're sacred embodiment of our
treasure US Constitution.
Um, I really
like this, but thank you.
OK, thank you.
All right.
We covered everyone, uh, is
there anything else to thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
uh, committee, I know, I, I
stand for questions.
OK, we go first to
representative block, I mean,
uh, Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And please keep in mind it's
already 4:30 and we still have
another bill.
So, Madame Chair representative,
I just want to say right off the
bat, my parents were lesbians,
so this is not a LGBTQ issue at
all. This is a fact that I
looked at some books that are in
the children's section that have
actual graphic pornographic
images in there that are
troublesome for me.
My mom was born in 1919. There
was absolutely no LGBTQ
anything, and there was a lot of
oppression and I would be sure
that she would have enjoyed
being able to read a book about
lesbian romance or a lesbian
coming of age.
But the books that I saw are
graphic.
Pornography, and that lay lies
with my issue. Besides, this is
my very best friend John Block
and he's gay, absolutely love
this mountain art,
so this isn't about LGBT for me
and I just want to nip that in
the bud for anybody who's gonna
go down that route saying that's
why I have issues with the bill.
So back to the bill itself, I
also want to say I agree with
you on one part of the bill.
On page 2, we should never ban a
book.
On an author's race,
nationality, gender identity,
and they should not, we should
never have a ban based on who
the person is that wrote the
book. I want to say that's one
part of the bill I agree with.
But going back to the bill
manager chair representative.
So, OK, so the first part on
page one, we have this librarian
protection Act, which is then
discussed briefly.
On page 2.
And that's the American Library
Associates Library Bill of
Rights, adopted in 2019,
including the requirement that
library materials not be
prescribed or removed because of
partisan or doctrinal approval
or Mateo's contact or based on
Arthur's race, nationality.
Now in part two of that, I do
agree with that. This is where I
have the problem.
I try to take into common sense
when we're looking at stuff.
And some of the stuff that John
and I looked at because we spent
a lot of time reading this
bills.
Was a book that is so
horrifying.
To me
That it shows
A young boy
Being pleasured by another young
boy made for kids.
I don't think that's acceptable.
That's my personal belief, and
I, I hate for people to lose the
right to say we don't want
pornography because we don't
allow porn in schools. We don't
let our kids get in Pornhub.
Shoot, they can't even get on
TikTok anymore.
Some
So my, my issue is
Taking away common sense
parental rights like nope,
nobody should come in and say
you should remove a book because
the author is LGBTQ, that's just
a horrible thing or horrible
thing for a person's sake,
period in his story, or their
color, anything else that I
agree with you on 100%.
But where I have to draw the
line is.
What you're saying here.
I'm understanding this correctly
on page 2.
Online name, including the
requirement library materials.
So now when you get into library
materials versus the author
themselves.
is where we get into this, so
with this bill, the way that
it's written.
In libraries, and now these just
for state libraries or it's also
for school libraries.
Make that Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative.
This is only for public
libraries.
So Madam Chair, a school is
public, so you're just saying
for a public library but not the
library in the school
representative,
it does not pertain to school
libraries.
So Madam Chair, and the last
time that I went into a library,
there's usually like a kids'
section.
Where little kids hang out, and
then there's the rest is just
all open. Is that correct? Like
a child could mill over to any
section and start looking at
books. There's no age
discretion.
Or certain things that are for
over 18 X-rated those things,
but in a different area that
let me finish my question. Yeah,
sorry, it's OK.
I want to take a drink so I'm
thirsty, um.
If I understand correctly, there
are no age restriction areas
like this is for only this
people and this is for young
children, is that correct or is
there age discrimination.
Age discretion in the library.
Madam Chair Representative, I am
not prepared to discuss the
architectural design of every
individual public library in the
state of New Mexico.
I will say that um there will be
a process and design that um
that.
Is provided by your local
community, and they can uh let
you give you that information.
OK, so Madam Chair and
representative expert.
Is there anything that would
stop a librarian from getting
this book that I looked at last
night that shows a caricature of
a young boy being pleasured by
another boy. Is that a book that
would be accessible because it's
very, very, very graphic, and
that's just one of the books we
looked at.
Is there any way to take those
away from younger children or
can anybody look at that book?
So Madam Chair Representative,
um, first I'm not prepared to do
a book by book review at this uh
committee meeting, I will tell
you that the purpose of this
bill is that we stay with the
process. There should be a
process in place at your local
public library to review the
appropriateness of each of the
books, and if you disagree with
that process, there should be an
appeals process in where you can
that to be able to um review
whether or not it needs to be
removed.
Ah, I'm sure representative,
then there should be an appeal
process or if 50% + 1 of the
people in that community say,
hey, I don't want my children
looking at this one very graphic
book, not because it's an
LGBTQQ.
Author, because that book is
graphic and pornographic.
Do the parents lose the right to
be able to say or petition or
appeal that we don't want this
specific pornographic book.
Accessible
Or do they lose their rights, if
this is passed?
Madam Chair Representative I'll
repeat exactly what I said.
There is a process in place at
every public library for you to
review the appropriateness of
that book and if you want to
talk about a specific book or a
specific process in the specific
library, it will be available to
you that you can follow it. I
will say that you and I do very
much agree that we believe that
parents are the decision makers
for what books are appropriate
and not appropriate for their
children.
Thank you. Man Chaps an expert,
maybe you can answer the
question on that when books are
brought up, is that before
they're put on the shelves or
after? Is there a process to
appeal right now if you, if
parents don't like a book.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Representative my
expert witness is not to talk
about the individual processes
of your individual public
library use here to talk about
general how state library system
works. Thank you.
OK, well, Madam Chair and
representatives, that makes you
the expert on all of this, is
that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I don't know what all that
means, but I am the expert of
this specific bill which does
not indicate a process, OK.
Meter and represented what I'm
getting to is we're talking
about a ban.
That a librarian, if they ban
any books.
Will not get funding. Is that
what this bill says?
Mountain chairs representative.
No, it doesn't.
So Madam Chair then explained to
me what this bill does if a
librarian went ahead and decided
to ban a uh a certain book.
Madam Chair Representative, I
believe that's a very
disparaging, uh, sentence as
that I do not know any librarian
in public service that would ban
a book. There is a written
documented process that has been
approved by your local library
board in which this bill is
requiring them to follow.
OK, so Madam Chair and
representative then if nobody's
banning books and why do we need
the bill?
Madam Chair Representative, I
did not say nobody is banning
books. I said librarians are
not. OK, so Madam Chair and
Representative and librarians
are not banning books, and why
do we need? Madam Chair
Representative, this is not a
bill to prevent librarians from
banning books.
Madam Chair Representative, it
says right here is used in the
librarian protection as ban
means active removing and
prohibiting the addition of
materials from the public
library, not according to the
established. So you're basically
says right there it defines ban.
It defines public library and
then it goes on to say that the
American Library Association,
there, you cannot.
prescribe or remove any of the
following books based on any of
the following materials, so that
says that a librarian cannot.
Take any book out that they have
to leave it on the shelf and
that the parents don't have any
right to appeal that, but you're
saying they do have the right to
appeal that. What is that
process happen?
How to say thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative. That is not what
I said. Um, I will say that it
states.
And if you read further on in
the section in which you agree
with that they are not allowed
to usurp their own written
process and remove both.
That have been requested to be
removed outside the written
process, especially but not
limited to when they are based
on the author's gender,
nationality, race, sexual
orientation, political or
religious views.
Madam Chair Representative,
let's say that happened in a
community and I would be
horrified. I talked to some
people and showed him some of
the pictures from that book.
So if we have a group of parents
who say I don't like that book
in the library, that librarian
cannot remove it. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative,
there will be a process in which
those parents can most certainly
be able to um bring to the
attention to the librarian and
to the board and to the public,
their concern about any book
that is open to the public
library.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
what does that appeal look like
and where can I find the process
for that, what a parent would go
through to appeal the book and
how many people have to appeal
the book. Could it be just 5
people just to be 500. Can you
explain that to me? So, uh,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. No, I
cannot explain that to you, as
there is a different process for
every public library, so you can
imagine a public library serving
a million people in the
municipal area with let's say
250 employees might be different
than a
library with 3 people and a
5-person board, but every, every
public library has a written
documented, public, accessible,
transparent process to review
books in which it is based on
the national library's Bill of
Rights.
OK, Madam Chair and
representative, your expert does
not know how that works, the
appeal process.
Uh, manager, I
the the appeal process is
different in every library.
OK, Madam Chairman
Representative, how does it work
in the library in your district?
Is there a board who would make
that decision? How does the
appeal happen? Because you're
asking me to vote on something
that I don't understand you're
saying this appeal process
because there's been time where
Bill's come forward and been
told something that's not
necessarily the case. So can you
explain to me how this appeal
process works in one of your
libraries.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
thank you for your interest in
the rearrange the public
library, um, we have many roles
uh at the at the the you um as a
child cannot get obtained in a
library card without a parent or
guardian, uh, permission and
signage, and as you check out
book that uh what you check out
is emailed to a child in the
city of Rio Rancho, that's how
our public libraries work if a
parent is concerned.
about access to a certain book
in the library, there's a form
they can fill out is reviewed
not only by the director
librarian, but then it is taken
to the board of directors, which
is a public meeting. It's
providing the uh invite public
comment and they make decisions
on what needs to be removed and
what needs to be placed on the
shelves.
OK, so Madam Chair and
representative, it's then up to
that board.
They're the ones who make the
decision.
For the city of Rio Ranchos,
library system in specific that
is part of the process, yes, OK,
it doesn't, Madam Chair
represent doesn't guarantee that
that book could be banned, it'd
be up to the board.
But the other problem is that
even if you get parental
permission.
And
Those books go to the parent, it
doesn't stop them from going to
look at those books.
There lies the issue. If I walk
into a grocery store, I don't
know if they still have our.
you call them, magazines,
Playboy, whatever. I don't even
know if those are such a still
thing.
They're out of children's reach.
Here now I have books.
That are very pornographic that
should not be in a children's
reach.
So my problem lies in not in a
gay or lesbian romance story or
somebody overcoming or anything
that goes against my political
beliefs. I don't care.
What I care about is the
accessibility that that book is
there and there might be a
process that may or may not
remove it, and to me that
removes sensibility, because I
don't want children to have
access to pornographic material.
And again, I'm not talking about
romance. I'm not talking about
anybody's opposing view. I'm not
talking about anybody's gender
identity or political or
religion or anything else.
I'm talking about just common
sense.
And not having the
accessibility.
So I think if you came to me
with this that said, OK.
We're gonna have this super easy
appeal process of 10 people come
in and they say we don't want my
child to see this or.
John and I looked at some books
that are really bad, rape. I
mean, why, why little kids don't
need to know about another
person raping another person.
There's just some books that I
think are age appropriate and
some are not.
And I don't think giving
children access to pornographic
stuff, I mean, that's where we
have the ban on Pornhub.
To me it just seems common sense
that something that is deemed a
pornographic book should at
least be put in somewhere that a
kid can't even get access to it.
Or allowed the librarian to have
more discretion and that there
lies in my problem, so.
Oh, hold on.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
um, does HB 27 allocate any
specific funding to assist
libraries and implementing all
of these required policies and
the changes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
don't know what she referred to
by all these changes in policy,
there is no change in policy.
OK, if this bill passes,
There's going to be some sort of
change where you have to now
educate librarians, print out
paper, have it on a wall like we
always do everywhere you work.
Is there funding to assist with
that, with the training of the
librarians or to make it aware
or whatever we normally do in
public offices where we put
papers out so that people can
read them.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative.
It is my understanding just as
an employer that when you post
changes it's because they're
changes there is no changes to
this bill every public library
currently has a written process
in which they must follow based
on the national librarian Bill
of Rights.
Hold on, one second, I'm just
looking at the and I'm sure I'm
looking at the
FAR
It says there will be, but it'll
be minimal.
So it is minimal, is there
something to cover that from the
general fund that they'll be
able to access, I'm sure.
For anything, I mean printing
out for teaching people about
the new rules for having it
accessible.
Well, how would that be covered?
Is that gonna come out of the
general fund? Is that already
been allocated?
Of Madam Chair Representative, I
think I answered the
appropriations question.
OK, so is after this man of
share and this gonna have to go
to probes for any minimal what
says your minimal for the cost
to implement this new bill.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
thank you for asking. We do not
have an appropriation committee
assignment as I stated before,
there is not an appropriations
for this bill. OK, so Madam
Chair, so if I understand that
there's gonna be a cost if, if
we sit down and they do this,
and they say every single
library has got to put all these
out so that everybody has
access. We have to put in the
training manual, we have to
change our office procedure
manual and training staff, then
there's no.
I don't see any appropriations
then to cover that.
Madam Chair Representative as I
stated before, know what you are
saying once again is very
inaccurate. That is not what I
said and that's not what this
bill says. There is no change in
the current policy or our public
libraries.
This bill just gives the
librarian and the library.
Clear delineation that if they
succumb and break their own
already written and trained
processes and policies that they
will lose their state funding.
Right, Madam Chair and
representative, so.
If let's say there.
If
It was a small community, the
board only meets once in a
while. That book is still
accessible, right? Is that
correct? Until the board meets
and they decide, and if they
don't, it still stays in there,
the library librarian cannot say
this book is horrific, it does
have porn. Kids are looking at
it, so the librarian loses total
discretion, and what I'm
understanding, they can't ban
anything ever, um, Madam Chair
Representative, I can't, I, I'm
so sorry, but I can't even
follow that story. I'm not sure
what you're talking about. We're
now talking about a specific
book. I, I thought we were
talking about.
training on this bill. Now we're
talking about reviewing a
specific I'm not sure, can you
please clarify?
So Madam Chair and
representative.
What I'm saying is I just jumped
from that to this other question
that came up.
If let's say the board only
meets once a month.
There have been a bunch of
people upset that there's a
child.
A book showing a child.
pleasuring another child.
And the parents want out, they
have to wait until the board
says something, the librarian
cannot say there is a huge
uproar. Parents don't want it. I
can't even hide it anywhere. Is
that correct?
So Madam Chair Representative
that has nothing to do with this
bill, what that has to do is
your individual process and
policy within that individual
library, then you'll need to ask
them those questions, thank you.
But if this bill passes, Madam
Chair Representative, that's
what it states now, correct?
They cannot pull that, that is
not correct. So they can ban the
book is that I mentioned? No,
that is not correct.
Mhm
Oh, OK, so they can't ban the
bill and they can, I mean the
book and they.
can and they can't. So they do
whatever they want and that's
not gonna affect their state
funding, Madam Chair Madam Chair
Representative, that is not what
I stated.
OK, so please clarify because
my, what I'm trying to figure
out.
Parents are upset
There's this book that we looked
at. Parents want to have the
right to get rid the book, you
tell me about the eel and all
this stuff, but if there's a
huge public outcry, and that
librarian says, I can't take any
more. This book is disgusting.
It is showing some things that
little kids should not be
looking at and takes a book off
the shelf and bans it from
anybody looking at it.
They're not gonna lose state
funding or they will lose state
funding.
To Madam Chair and
Representative, I believe I
already answered this question.
This is an individual library
process question.
Madam Chad it's even after and
even after this bill passes.
If they ban the book, then.
Then they're gonna lose the
state fund. My chair
representative.
If your scenario is saying that
the librarian is not following
their own written process of
review, then yes, they will lose
their state funding. OK, thank
you. That's what I was trying, I
was I was trying to get at.
The amount of representatives,
so if it goes to the board and
the people are still not happy
and there's a huge majority in
the community who still do not
want this one particular book
there.
And that librarian, so I'm what
I understand, they pulled the
book librarian's in trouble.
And then they go through the
appeal process which could take
forever.
So
Again, this goes back to my
issue of I have absolutely no
problem with.
I mean of age.
Or finding your way or
discovering that you're gay or
issues that you have of being a
color other than myself.
Although being a tall redheaded
kid came with its own issues, I
could write a book on that.
Um
I'm just asking for something
simple with an exclusion. I
don't, I, I just don't
understand why there's not an
exclusion that if a book is
extremely graphic and the one
that I looked at is is extremely
graphic.
That I like Brian can't just
say, you know what, I know they
wanted these rules this way, but
this is absolutely above and
beyond and so egregious that I
want to pull the book.
So there lies my problem with
it, the whole thing, that
there's no discretion and
there's nothing in there and I
don't even understand why in the
2019 version there isn't
something about children to get
a hold of pornography.
So that's forever going to be my
issue. I wish though when my mom
when she was a teen could have
had some lesbian romance novels
to read, that's great, but.
Looking at pornography, I got to
draw the line. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Representative
and, and librarian, I guess
state librarian, I guess that's
how we address you. Thank you
both.
I appreciate the time today. So,
I guess I'm kind of, I'm gonna
start getting kind of granular
into what your actual bill says
and I'm really appreciative that
your entire bill is new
language, so I will not be.
gavel down or something for not
being on the bill because your
bill is the whole bill. So,
thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Mm, I guess the first thing I'm
gonna ask is,
There's a line 13.
On page one
There's an or there.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
the way I read the bill is they
either adopt a policy.
I'm sorry, there, there, the
line 13 is blank, so um.
On the first page.
Oh, pardon me, madam. I
apologize. Yeah, the second
page, I apologize. Everyone is,
has been here for a very long
time, so I apologize. So, second
page, you're right.
Uh, 9:13.
Thanks again. Uh, this or?
So I'm wondering about the
written policy. It says you
either adopt a written policy
that complies with the
The American Library
Association's.
Bill of Rights
Or
Adopts a written policy
prohibiting the practice of
banning books.
Based on certain things. So,
Madam Chair Representative, the
way I read that and please
correct me if I'm wrong. You can
choose to have your own policy
that aligns with this section of
the law, so it would be line 14
through 20.
Or you could just copy paste.
The American Library
Association's.
Uh, policy from 2019, either way
you'd be compliant. Is that?
The way I read this and I'm.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. So,
um, uh, that I cannot comment on
copying and pasting, uh, comment
about the library in uh the
library Bill of Rights. I will
tell you that this is uh the
change to the document from the
bill that was presented to you
last year, as this is what, uh,
like the librarians have said
that they would like to make
sure that we have that in place.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
guess, OK, so I just wanna, I
just want to be super clear. If
I'm, if I'm a librarian, or I
guess
Person in power over a library,
local library that's publicly
funded.
I can either choose to just use
whatever the ALA has.
is provided as their
Bill of Rights.
Or
We could do our own that's very
bespoke, very, very tailored.
to the library.
As long as it
It is within the guidelines of
this section or this, this part.
I just want to be clear, if my
library in Alamogordo.
Doesn't just use the ALA and
they use their own as long as it
is in compliance, that would be
OK. Is that what I'm
understanding, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. There's a
3rd choice where your own
library can create their own
written policies based on the
library Bill of Rights. It
doesn't have to copy and paste
the library bill of rights.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
good. So there's, there's an
option there. If we don't, if we
want to be special and write our
own and, and work harder, not
smarter or whatever that phrase
is, then we can't do that. OK,
so Madam Chair Representative,
In the
The section, I guess I'll start
with
Lines 7 through 13.
Online
12
It talks about the authors,
race.
Nationality, gender identity.
Sexual orientation or political
or religious views. I'm still on
page 2.
And so I'm wondering, Madam
Chair Representative.
Uh
Let's just say, um,
I'm trying to find a way to say
this very easily for people to
understand.
So
I know in in my library, there's
a lot of books that go through
circulation.
There's some old books. There
are some that we, we sell or we
give away for free.
And so these books,
If they are written by somebody
who may someone may think that
they're being targeted because
these books that are going out
of circulation are written by,
let's just say somebody who
It was a different
Political or religious view.
Let's just say it's, it's
Hillary Clinton's book who one
or two people read in my
library. Maybe everyone read it
in Albuquerque, right? No one
reads it. We're just taking it
out of circulation. The Madam
Chair representative, if someone
took that out, put it on the the
free book.
place for people to take for
free.
Could that be construed as
Against this library Bill of
Rights because we didn't take
away the Donald Trump book as
well, cause, you know, it's both
sides, right? So,
You understand kind of my
question there, Madam turn.
I, I will give you a brief
answer and then I will um defer
to my expert witness, so every
library and librarian will have
its own written process of
review, and I believe that they
can they do remove books based
on lack of interest, and if that
is occurring in your Alamogordo
library that might be uh what is
makes it eligible for removal,
but I would love for our state
librarian to chime in on a on a
more technical answer. Thank
you.
Adam Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
so in library parlance, we call
this weeding, and books might be
weeded, uh, because they are
moldy because there's no room on
the shelf left and you need to
add more books because there's
outdated information, etc. etc.
and we have whole processes
around that. Um, I'll just point
to the definition on um page
one.
Line 19 that a band is the act
of removing materials from a
public library, not in
accordance with the approved
collection development policy.
Um, that collection development
policy will set out the reasons
um by which a uh librarian might
remove a book. Um, again, as I
said, because it's moldy because
there's no room, etc.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and uh
Mr. Librarian, I'm, I'm learning
things in this committee. That's
cool, weeding.
Right, put that in your
Daily word of the day, I guess.
So, Madam Chair Representative.
Mr. State librarian. So, OK,
during that process, I, I guess
another question is the
oversight mechanism, I believe I
heard the word bored referenced
by the sponsor here. And so,
Madam Chair Representative, I
My first question is, OK, I know
our board, at least over the
library, the Almo Gordo Public
Library has a library board, but
they're just an advisory board.
So, and uh, and I know that my
partner, he used to be on the
board and uh
He, he went off to do better and
bigger things, but
Used to be advisory. They gave
stuff to the city commission.
And so if someone did want to
petition,
To the commission or to, to stop
a bill or I'm sorry, a book, to
be in the library. Would they
have to go first to the board,
since they don't really have
oversight, since they are,
they're just advisory, or could
they go straight to the
Mission, and I'm sure,
representative.
So thank you, madam.
Chair and thank you
Representative. So the use of
board was from representative
Lord asking for a specific
process within my community, so
we do have a board that you do,
so Almo Gordo may be different,
um, I would ask your partner
whether or not he is aware of
what that process is, um, that's
why we don't want to put it in
legislation because every
community is unique and has
their own.
written process, and we want to
be able to make sure that our
educated professional librarians
have the ability to serve their
communities as an individual.
And I guess my, my question
regarding that was just because
I know that funding, cause talk
about funding in the bill, and
each library, I would assume
would need some kind of physical
agent, like the
City of
Of Farmington or the city of
Santa Fe or the city of
Almogordo, they're usually the
fiscal agent for the public
library. So, I just wanted to be
clear, if I did have a problem,
let's just say there was a book
that I really thought was, was
graphic and I, I didn't want my
kid to see it because
He likes to go to that.
That library section and read
about dinosaurs right next to
the dinosaurs is something
really horrific.
Could I go to the, do I go to
the library?
I mean, I, I'm just wondering
who has the power in this
scenario, because the fiscal
agent, I would assume would have
the power because they're the
ones who would take the hit from
the state if they did something
incorrectly. So,
I'm just wondering on a, on a
high level.
Please don't. I'm not trying to
generalize this. I'm just
wondering,
Madam, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you Representative. I,
I'll go back and and and and
defer what I've been saying the
whole time. Each community has a
specific process to their public
library, so you're absolutely
right that many public
libraries, fiscal agent, is the
municipality, and they still may
have a process and where their
board makes these decisions,
they may have.
a process where their city
council makes these decisions.
This is why we do not talk about
the process. What we do is we
are protecting our librarians to
make it clear to the public that
they are about process and that
there is already a written
reviewed, accepted, transparent
process in place and that they
should not be targeted um for
decisions that regarding what
the books are being offered to
the public in.
allowing parents make their
decision.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, and
I, I completely agree. I don't
want to be
Hamstringing librarians and
making them have to be a
boogeyman or something if they
don't take a book off a shelf or
something. I don't want to
target specific people. But I
did want to make sure that that
librarian was protected if they
were taking out, let's just say
the Hillary Clinton book versus
the Trump book, right? People
are reading the Trump book in my
community, maybe not in
Albuquerque or somewhere, and
people are not reading the
Clinton book.
What protections are to the
librarian if they are reading
the books, as we mentioned, and
they take out a book because not
many people have read it.
What protects that person from
having some kind of liability or
being, being in the crosshairs.
If they did have to take the
book out just because of
whatever the algorithm may have
been or, or the process that the
library has, are there
protections in this bill for the
librarian, if that does indeed
happen, Madam Chairman, thank
you, Madam Chair and thank yous
representatives. So as we stated
before, there is such a an
accepted process and specific to
each community, there is a term
for it that we've all learned
today, weeding.
So that means that they have the
data on the usage and who's
checking this out. They can also
uh document the condition that
the book is in, and these are
all ways that probably fall
within their written processes
into determining whether or not
to remove that book.
That they could use so that when
if accused for political
purposes, they have met the
criteria in these other ways.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And so I, I
appreciate that. So,
I think that's important that
they have local authority, I
think local authority is good.
I'm wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, when it comes to
the
Policy
I know it's, I'm sure it's a
public policy. It's
Has to be approved by whatever
the governing body may be, it's
probably IPAable, but are would
this
Librarian Association, American
Library Association, do they
require record keeping of that
kind of weeding, just to ensure
public.
public equality when it comes to
the
Removal of any text that may be
in the library. Is, does the ALA
Is that in their 2019 policy.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. I cannot
comment about what is in the ALA
policy, but as a a government
representative, and I, and I
believe you're on the
appropriations committee. No,
you're not right, so um I do
know that any kind of public
asset and those books are public
asset. There is a written policy
on how to
Distribute
Or remove that asset. It is
purchased by public dollars.
There is a written policy for
all that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And so then
I guess I'm, I appreciate that.
I'm not gonna to belabor that
point any longer, even though
the horse is dead and
it, I'll find another horse. So
here madam chair representative,
uh, let's go into the actual
Words in the bill. I'm I'm
thinking about partisan and
doctrinal disapproval.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
that's on page 2.
Starting.
16.
Basis of partisan or doctrinal
disapproval. So I'm wondering,
Madam Chair Representative, by
the word partisan, does it, does
it specifically mean a political
party.
Or does it encompass like a
broader ideological stance. So
Madam Chair Representative.
I'll I'll just let you answer
that first and then.
It's my next question.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, um,
Thank you for the question. Yes,
I, I, I, my reading of that is
that it's meant to um uh
politically partisan um or based
on a certain religion, etc. um,
so just speaking from the
librarian's point of view, we
don't purchase books, uh, just
for Democrats or just for
Republicans, we, you know, we
purchase uh a broad variety that
represents the community's
interests. So I think that's
what that's intending.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and uh
librarian. So I guess, I guess
that makes sense.
Generally, because partisan
disapproval, but let's just say
there's a, there's a book about.
I don't know, like a like a like
a political person that we don't
like, like Hitler, right? Nazi
Party.
a political party.
And people who are against that
party.
There may be one or two people
who, who support that party in,
in an area of the state or
whatever.
Would that fall into the
political partisan disapproval
or would that more be like
ideological and would that not
be included because it's not
technically party in the state.
It's not, it's defunct for 70
years, right? Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering,
does, does it keep that intact
or
Am I allowed to just keep that
on the shelves, and I'm sure.
Madam Chair represented, I am so
sorry representative Block, this
hypothetical is also difficult
for me to, uh, follow.
Um, OK, Madam Chair, I, I'll be
really, I will try to dumb it
down or not dumb it down, I
apologize, or, or I apologize
that was not what I meant. I
meant to simplify, right?
simplify it.
For myself.
Madam Chair Representative
And I apologize for the, for the
careless word. I, I do. So,
Madam Chair Representative.
What I mean is, uh,
Just an ideological stance.
Like, let's just say uh
Policy
That someone may disagree with,
let's just say climate change or
evolution.
Right. There's, there's someone
who thinks that climate change
Totally exists, and then there's
somebody who thinks that climate
change totally doesn't exist.
Could that fall into
Partisan or doctrinal approval
or disapproval.
sure.
So for me, Madam Chair
Representative, that is the
beauty of our public library as
they are here to serve the
public, um, not an individual's
interests only one individual or
a group of individuals interests
but for the public.
Um, they served the community
now in such a wide uh range of
uh topics and uh community
supports, um, there is a process
in place, librarians are
professionals. They are
educated. They are, they have
processes of community input
they have processes of community
feedback, and they are there to
serve the community, so if the
community.
is interested in 70 year old,
uh, indoctrination, and they
believe that they are
appropriate to ask in their
historical session that that is
that that has nothing to do with
the bill. Now, now we're talking
just in general and what is the
process and in this specific
libraries.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So,
OK, so would cultural or
traditional beliefs also fall
under that.
Madam Chair Representative, I
know like, like in
New Mexico, for example, we have
historical.
Uh, frictions between different
Different, uh, interest groups.
Or individuals in in history,
right? Let's just say
back in 1600s, it was.
There was the Spaniards versus
Pueblo Indians or Native
Americans, right? Those are two
different specific groups.
Where are, are they protected?
In this legislation when it
comes to that kind of
historical.
Interest group
One versus the other, because
there may be a Native American
child. There may be a uh
Hispanic child. There may be
some kind of friction. What
protections are in there for
that, Madam Chair, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um, this bill
will prevent.
Decisions being made that
because of doctor or cultural as
you were saying, uh, cultural,
um, I'm not sure what you were
saying, uh, that the, um, that
if, if they were only presenting
one side of that conflict
because of uh cultural biasness
that that may uh put their if if
that was founded, it could put
their state funding in jeopardy.
Um, so that is how that bill is
addressed.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So I
guess they only put one
perspective. Is that what we're
trying to say? If there's only
one perspective that says this
person's 100% right. This
person's 100% wrong.
And you stand on either side,
I think that if it was proven
that only one perspective was
presented because of a cultural
biases.
Um, then that, yes, that could
put their funding in jeopardy.
Mm
OK, Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative.
Uh
That's very, that actually kind
of scares me because I was a
librarian and I, I was
overseeing a wide selection of
books. And I got, I got in a
book, let's just say it was uh.
About anything. Let's just say a
political party or a historical
event, and I didn't have both
sides technically, and it seemed
like there were 5 books about
something that someone really
liked. And then one book about
something people didn't really
like.
But there weren't many books
that have been published on the
topic, for example.
Someone
Could use that as a vehicle to
say, well, this isn't being fair
to me.
And I, I would be hesitant for
the public just to have funding
wise, OK, I literally cannot get
any more books about.
Something very vague
That's the other side of the
topic.
How, how would we approach that?
Because I don't want any library
to lose funding. Oh, thank you
very much, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative and thank
you for your concern and making
sure that we have access to
books, so just like the um
concern of wanting to remove our
books. It goes to the same
process of the concerning you
want to offer a variety of books
to our public, so if you feel
like there's not enough books on
another subject, there is a
process to follow to be able to
bring that.
To attention to your library and
then they will be able to review
and accommodate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, that, that
did clarify it a little bit for
me on that. I, I'm still kinda
really hesitant though, because
I, I don't want libraries to
lose funding. I do not want
that. That is something I do not
want. So, I guess it taught uh
one question that kind of just
popped into my head. Is there a,
uh, I know there's an effective
date on the bill.
But is there a specific date
when a library must be in
compliance.
With this legislation, Madam
Chair.
Representative
Because like, like if it's, I
don't know what the, the
effective date says July 1st,
2025. That's really not a long
time. This session ends in May,
let's just say it passes last
day in May. It's what, a couple
months after that.
I'm sorry, March, pardon me.
See.
Praise God, we don't, we're not
here till May. I, I was gonna
have to say I need a new, a new
casita to, to rent or whatever.
But Madam Chair Representative,
it's OK, so March.
I was thinking April, May is
probably when it gets into,
maybe June 1st or something. So,
By July 1st, then.
This library in one month or
around there would need to
promulgate the rules, ensure
that they're in compliance with
the legislation and then have
them available to the public. Is
that kind of what I'm
understanding? Or is there kind
of a grace period? Is this not
as stringent or rigid as I'm
reading it, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair Representative, as you
know, as a sophomore legislator,
you know that um most bills, um,
they'll have different start
dates on them and it is not
uncommon to have one to starting
a beginning our fiscal.
July 1st, um, 2025. I'm not sure
what you are referring to as
propagate the
Rules or policy, there is no
policy change.
As we indicated with uh
Representative Lord's question.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I just, I guess
my question was, if my library
doesn't have a policy right now.
Madam Chair Representative, all
public libraries have a policy
and all of them are based on the
national library.
s
OK, Madam Chair representative,
then I guess.
Yeah, I'm just wondering why,
then what's the impetus of the
bill? I mean, why do we need the
bill if it's already there? I'm,
I'm wondering librarians,
stating that if they do not
follow the already existing
written policy.
That is based on the library
bill of rights and they usurp
their own written policy to to
succumb to groups who want books
removed or placed in the library
purely based on the following
categories of biasness.
They will lose their state
funding.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, that.
I understand. I currently have
policies. This is just kind of
codifying it or or something. So
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
next, when we talk about the
author, the author's race, and
it starts on line 12 to 13 on
page 2.
Author's race, nationality, etc.
Madam Chair Representative.
Are we
Are we requiring librarians to
research.
The authors before they hit the
shelves because
The way I hear it or the way I
read it or listen to you today.
I may not understanding
correctly, by the way. But if
the way I read it,
If I don't research.
A certain author's race,
nationality, gender identity,
sexual orientation, or political
view.
And I may have a
disproportionate amount of any
of those categories of author.
Could that lead us into some
kind of
Actionable
Road, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative No.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So then I guess
I'm just wondering what's the
purpose of putting this part in
there?
Because it
It talks specifically about the
author's Madam Chair
Representative, nowhere in this
bill does it, does it require
equal representation of the
following categories. What the
bill states is that you cannot
usurp your own written policy
and remove books on the
following categories. It does
not require equal
representation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So, OK,
let's just say they, they just
don't like a book.
And they don't do the weeding.
Let's just say they just don't
like a book, cause it's like,
it's a really hideous cover or
something. It's not a protected
group in here. I'm sure there's,
I've seen books that are really
ugly covers, right? So if the
person just takes out the book.
wasn't necessarily weeded, but
it is within policy.
With that
Would that be OK? Since it's not
based on someone's sexual
orientation, gender identity,
race, religion, or any kind of
other.
instance, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives.
The, the, any, any individual in
authority who can take away the
book, such as a librarian who
oversees the the the selection
of books. If they have a process
to remove ugly books, they may
remove the book.
wrap this up.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I, I, I have so
many more questions and I find
it in to talk to you in my
office.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
So I, um, we have another bill.
It's already 20 of 6.
And you have asked some of the
same questions as representative
Lord and
I don't
Here anything that's um
Advancing this bills, um,
information.
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, is that
I, I don't understand the
question or I don't understand
the point.
I don't understand.
Wrap it up with any other
questions that you have that are
pertinent to this bill.
That have not been asked
already. OK, I didn't think I
asked that question before. I
didn't hear that question be
answered before, but I, I do
have many more questions and I
will continue here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative.
OK, so, Madam Chair
Representative, does this
include, when we talk about the
public library in the book.
Does this include both the
online selection of books as
well as the actual
Physical copies of books and
magazines, etc. Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and
I would assume, I don't, I, I
wouldn't want to speak for
libraries, but I know at least
my library, they have a big
selection of audiobooks and
stuff that people can read and
it's just based on this, this
application through the the
library. So, Madam Chair,
Representative, I'm wondering if
that means
That, um
Did they have to follow the
American Library Association's
requirements and then the, the
ones promulgated by the
The local library, because I
know that probably would indeed
create a lot more.
Workload for the librarians and
people because they're there are
tens of thousands of audiobooks
out there, right? The Madam
Chair representative, I'm
wondering how, how would that go
forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Madam Chair,
if we're gonna go through the
entire catalog of every
wonderful type of uh process and
uh.
Item in which our libraries
provide for us, then I would,
uh, need to be, I can provide
that in a list, but the answer
is yes. Everything the library
provides for its community
applies to this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. OK.
I appreciate that. And I know I
just, I just wonder about third
party places, third party
applications that an application
may be.
Uh, from the Almogordo Public
Library or somewhere else, they
may have a specific application
they have a subscription to. And
I just want to make sure if that
subscription isn't in
compliance, and they still are
offering it and it may go
against the ALA or current
policy locally.
Would they, would somebody be on
the hook for the consequences of
not having
The equitability of the current
ALA standard or the local
standard that was
That was tailored to the
community.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative.
That is very difficult for me to
follow. So you're saying there's
a third party librarian that has
a subscription that the library
wants. I'm not sure what you're
saying. I'm sorry, ma'am I'm
Chair representative. Uh, no,
I'm talking about a library
offers a subscription.
As a member of the library who
was a library card, offers a
subscription to an audiobook
service or a service that gives
Kindle books, for example.
Are those standards from the ALA
included.
In those as well, Madam Chair
Representative, something they
don't directly oversee is what
I'm asking.
Madam Chair Representative.
If the library is removing the
audio book subscription.
Based
On what?
Special interest groups have
demanded and not followed their
own written policy of review,
then it will be applied.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So it would be
applied, but it would only be if
it's removed, like we
established earlier, from my
understanding of what you just
said.
Is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. If they do
not follow their own written
policy, it will be in violation
of this bill.
Whether they remove it.
Or they place it without
following their unwritten
policy.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So next
question, I know the, the
governor had an initiative over
the summertime.
It was the reading initiative,
and I know that they provided
books and things to different
children.
Yes, ma'am the governor does
doesn't have anything to do with
this bill, Madam Chair. I'm
just, I'm wondering if it's a
public, is it included as a
library?
What's, what's the definition of
library?
And I'm Chair representative,
that the state library the
the the public library has a
distinct definition to it, and
it has nothing to do with the
governor's book program.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Got it. So they're, they're not.
Within the crosshairs of this
bill, and because it's not
A library, right?
I'm just wondering, is it a
library. This bill is only
covers a public library which
has a legal definition.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So then,
before we talked about
libraries, not in schools like
elementary schools, does that
also applied to higher ed?
Colleges, universities,
and I'm I can keep answering the
same question only public
libraries.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
but
College libraries are open to
the public.
So
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
I can Google what public library
is, it is not an education. It
is not a school library thank
you thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you Representative. I appreciate
that. Next question here. So,
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
does, like, what about federal
agencies located in New Mexico
who have libraries, they're
public libraries, although
they're federal.
Which is a law library.
So Madam Chair Representative,
would it, would that be included
in this or even our library, we
have a public, well, it's not
public library because it's our
library at the legislature. But
Madam Chair Representative,
would that apply a federal
library that's public,
technically public, not in an
institution of higher ed or or K
through 12, would that apply in
this legislation manager.
Madam Chair Representative, once
again we'll go down this
hypothetical, so in your
hypothetical, this law library,
anybody can come into this
library. It has library hours.
It has a written policy and it's
receiving state funding.
It's not just for college
students or for lawyers or for
the bar association.
Yes ma'am. Then it would fall
under public library.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. OK, next,
uh, regarding the like the
number of staffers or volunteers
needed, needed to meet the
requirements in this.
Or, I know some lover libraries
are very small.
They're very rural. There may be
two people.
Madam Chair Representative, how
does this take those folks into
account, especially in rural New
Mexico, where like there's a in
Let's just say
Las Vegas, they have a Carnegie
library. It's a public library.
And they only have a couple of
staffers.
If they did, right?
What if they are not able to
weed through all the books
because they have low staff, and
there's some, there's something
that's thrown out.
By mistake or something that may
be a book that is protected by
this.
These sections in this bill.
What happens in that instance?
Are we taking rural folks into
account with this bill.
We are Madam Chair
Representative, that is why we
are not indicating what the
process is because that rural
library can has their own
written process that they are
following.
And I'm not sure what.
Additional labor requirements
are needed as we've already
established in previous
questions regarding this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So then,
That makes, that makes sense, I
suppose, and I appreciate that.
So,
Continuing on here, um,
compliance checks or audits,
does the state librarian do any
kind of compliance check or
audit, like a random audit just
to make sure that folks are
indeed following state laws
since they're getting state
funding, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I will let um
Eli answer, but I want to
clarify.
What is, what is the audit? What
is the auditing and what is he
checking?
For you, for you representative
sorry uh Madam Chair and
Representative, can you clarify
what the audit and the checking
you are asking if the state
librarian performs. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
yous representative. Compliance
with this law.
with this law.
If this becomes law,
This bill becomes law.
Are we checking, having an audit
audit to comply with this law to
make sure that local libraries
are indeed in compliance because
we can't be everywhere all the
time. Is there some kind of
mechanism to ensure compliance,
Madam Chair, Representative and
expert.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. So,
um, this bill is all in the
context of uh library funding
and we have certain eligibility
rules, um, every year, um, after
June, so starting in July,
libraries start giving an annual
report.
the State Library.
Um, and they have a certain
deadline on that. Um, it's a
federal requirement and then we
have our own state requirements.
Um, that annual report serves as
their application for um the
following fiscal years, uh, uh
state grants and aid and and
other grants that we provide.
And that's all in in Mac 4.5.
To, that's what what governs
that, um, so with each of our
minimum standards, the
libraries, um, essentially give
us assurances that they're
meeting those. Um, my staff do
review it and if there's any
particular red flag that we
might, we might check up on it,
but um that's the process
essentially.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and,
and Mr. Librarian, cause I, I, I
think that's important, right?
But red flag, this is
self-reported stuff, right? I
was a librarian in some some
place in the state. And I, I
wanted to maybe hide, maybe I, I
was throwing out books that I
just didn't like. And I wanted
to just tell everybody at the
state level, everything's fine.
What if I lied on my report? How
would you know, since it's not
not technically a red flag,
Madam Chair representatives
representative.
Uh, that's not what this bill.
Is it dressing that's.
I don't a process that's already
in place to uh checks and
balance process that's already
in place, that has nothing to do
with the spell.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I thought
it has everything to do with
this bill because we're talking
about oversight. And they would
just oversee the this new law
that is indeed overseeing.
Local libraries.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm just wondering, is there any
kind of
Other way, let's just say boots
on the ground, actual be there
in the town that you're looking
at the library. Is there any
kind of actual physical
enforcement on the ground, Madam
Chair Representative of this
legislation that would be in
place. Yes, ma'am. This bill
does not propose that and
they've already stated how the
libraries um submit a report and
they get their funding if I.
They're in compliance, is that
correct?
And thank you, Madam Chair. Yes,
I would say the same statement
I've been saying for the hour is
that there is an individual
process whether it's the fiscal
agent or the board of directors
or the oversight, um, but every
individual public library has a
checks and balance system of
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, point of order. I have
the right not to be interrupted
pursuant to the rules of the
house. Excuse me,
I have to decide what our
committee's doing and if you're
repeating the same thing over
and over, you're not.
Madam Madam Chair
Representative, I, I did not
repeat myself over and over, but
I will continue asking questions
that are new questions because
it's important to vet
legislation before we pass it
and not just ram it through the
house. Madam Chair
Representative, I will continue.
And your questions have to be
pertinent to what we have not
talked about over for the past 2
hours. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
really appreciate that.
Madam Chair Representative.
I'm wondering
Representative, uh, we talked
about earlier, I think, I think
it was about patrons and
advocacy groups, Madam Chair
Representative is our, our
advocacy groups allowed to
petition.
County commissions or or city
commissions rather proprietors
of the libraries.
Since they're, they technically
are not like a member of the
life, they may not have a card,
a library card. But since it's a
public library, would they be
able to?
Petition. Anyone who oversees a
public library to see if they
can remove books, let's just say
if they're pornographic in
nature, and they don't want to
see them there.
Or would it have to be a
specific individual, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I think
you're describing harassment, so
what you would this political
groups would have to follow what
the process is, they are not to
contact an individual to try to
get a book removed that is
harassment in this bill, I would
hope would discourage that, um,
but there should be a process in
place that does not require you
to have a library card to bring
concerns and want books added or
removed from.
the library.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I really
appreciate that.
OK, so continuing on that.
So
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
If, if let's just say I, I
didn't know what the policy was,
and I wanted to, I was
concerned, I told the librarian.
I guess, is there, is there a
way that the librarian could
relay that message on my behalf,
or would they just have to give
me contact info for or whatever.
And I guess this would be based
upon the ALA standard, because I
don't want
to be more burdensome than that.
So is that, is that considered
in the ALA standard from 2019.
That's referenced in your leg.
Madam Chair
Representative reporting.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. Let me make
sure I am following you
correctly. Um, it is not in the
ALA standard, but there will be
a process in place as there
isn't any.
Business if you as an
individual, um, are, uh,
expressing concerns to your
librarian, they will probably
direct you to the process.
Probably an online or website.
Um, if you feel that that was
not sufficient, then you could
probably make the.
Concern in a document such as an
email.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I appreciate
that. That's, that's helpful a
lot. I think that that concern
though, I, I think that they're
just
Needs to be some kind of
Protection for that librarian,
right? And I, I'm sure that's in
there somewhere. I just don't
want to create any more
administrative costs, especially
if there's a very rural library.
There's only 2 folks who work
there.
And their proprietors of that
library. So I would just
consider that. So, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Hey, I'm gonna continue here and
just talk about specific content
in the library, and I know
Representative Lord brought it
up a little bit, but like
talking about sexual
orientation, gender identity,
political, religious views, and
I know that there are many
pieces, many books that may have
this really graphic stuff,
myself and Representative Lord,
we were looking at some of these
books last night.
that were online and they,
they're in New Mexico, books
that
Books that are in libraries that
have very graphic stuff relating
to children.
Right. So, Madam Chair
Representative,
If the book was, let's just say,
written.
To to cater to a specific group
like sexual orientation or or
religious view.
I mean, how would I go about
that? Because I, like, I don't
want to go to the the city
commission and say, I hate this
book, it sucks a lot. But the
title says, Don't be gay or
something, or, or, or whatever
it's called, right? The book has
something relating to sexual
orientation.
I don't hate the gays. I'm gay,
right? I want to go in front of
the commission and say this is a
bad book that has porn in it.
How do I get around that
stumbling block of someone
trying to argue that.
Or wherever the, the actual
Public
Meeting may be, how do I get
around that? Because they could
say, oh, this guy, he just wants
to ban this book because it says
The word gay on, on the title of
the book, right? I mean, I have
nothing against anything
regarding that. I just am
wondering about.
As actual graphic content in the
book.
Is there
How do you go about that? I just
want to know for the public to
know when this goes into effect,
if it passes, how did they go
approach this without being
called bigoted or or whatever,
Madam Chair, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you for um helping the
public to be able to understand
the processes and the access of
our fabulous public libraries
across the state.
So as I stated before, every
library, every public library
has its own process and so there
is a process if you have concern
about content in the book as I
tell individuals, I have concern
about many books and their
content, um, but I get to decide
what my children and myself have
access to, it is not the
Kathleen library, it is the
public library, and we must
leave the have the public
available so
As long as they're following
that process and bringing it to
their attention, it can be
addressed.
Do you have any other questions
that don't concern the process
that has already been explained
over and over. I absolutely have
many questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I will continue to ask them.
Yes,
ma'am.
You have continued to keep
asking the same questions in
different ways, but the same
thing.
Please
Refrain from that.
OK, Madam Chair, Representative,
my last question.
It was about how do I approach?
Filing a complaint, if I'm a
concerned parent.
And I don't think that that
should be.
Negated if if a parent has a
concern and acts an actual
concern. What if the parent,
they, they have a student who
goes to the library on a field
trip.
And on the field trip, they see
a book that they don't like
and how you're saying are over
and over hypotheticals, the
process is up to each library
and what they adopt.
So. Thank you, madam. And we,
and I agree with that, Madam
Chair. I'm not disagreeing with
that. I'm trying to get clarity
on how the public can understand
what the legislation is about,
because like you, Madam Chair
Representative, I think we need
to thoroughly vet legislation so
that people have an
understanding
of what this bill does. That's
the whole point of being here,
Madam Chair Representative. And
so I appreciate.
The sentiment, but I want to
know if there's a specific
instance where someone doesn't
doesn't have clarification if
the ALA standard is vague, which
it has a lot of very vague
terminology when it comes to
definitions. I'm asking these
very important questions to
ensure that people know.
Is this in compliance or not?
Will my library lose funding and
be closed to the public because
I was scared about my kid
getting access to pornography at
the library. I think that's a
very real concern and something
that my constituents absolutely
have contacted me about hundreds
of 100s of times about this
legislation. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I respectfully
Would push back a little bit,
and I like to be as respectful
as I possibly can be, but I'm,
I'm a representative of my
district. My district is asking
me to ask these questions, Madam
Chair Representative. So,
I just want to know what what a
parent has to do.
If I want, if, if there's
pornography in the library.
That I don't want my kid to be
accessed to.
And it's not specifically
specified in the ALA standard or
this standard, which in my
opinion is vague.
How, how do I keep it from being
on the library other than myself
and my kid not going to the
library anymore because I'm
scared. My kid is going to have
access to this graphic material.
That's my big concern, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative,
um, I am a parent and I'm
concerned so as once again, then
I would please advise your, uh,
constituents to please go to the
library and be familiar with
their process.
So that they can participate in
public feedback with their
public library.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, and I, I
think that's great. And I, I
would love for a spoke of this
also to have some kind of
public.
Kind of public input, right?
Like we need to announce people
how this can
indeed be in effect, as Madam
Chair Representative, I know at
least that our local.
Uh
Library advisory Board.
No one shows up, the public does
not show up to it, even though
it's a public meeting.
So I want people to get involved
in their libraries. I want it to
be able to read and write and
and be successful in this state
without having to be subjected
to really horrific stuff that
may be in the content of the
books and stuff. So,
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and
And I, I, I've, I've very strong
reservations with some parts of
the
The debate that we've had today
regarding this, this bill, I
think that there are some really
big loopholes that may need to
be addressed, especially if
If I'm a librarian or something
and I'm the one that's going to
be liable, or my library gets
defunded, I lose my job. And
that's, that's really scary. If
I was a librarian and that was
my predicament. And and so Madam
Chair Representative, thank you.
And I, I respectfully cannot,
cannot support this in its
current version. However, I do
not support book bans.
I do not support banning books.
I don't think anyone supports
banning books. I don't like bad
books that have horrible things
written in them, I don't go
reading Mein Kampf every day,
but I don't want people to ban
books so that they can learn
from history. I think that's
something that we all agree on.
We need to learn from history,
learn from where we came from,
learn about our communities, how
we were built, what we need to
do to address those inequities
and inequalities of the past and
work for a more equal future for
all students, all parents, all,
all New Mexicans and
So, Madam Chair Representative,
I guess that's kind of, kind of
where I get to that point. And I
um
I'm not for book bans, but I
don't think that this
accomplishes necessarily what
we're looking to accomplish,
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Librarian. Appreciate your
time.
Representative Thompson, thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm gonna, uh,
uh, I request the point of
personal pri so I am going to
apologize to the people in this
room, the people on Zoom are
sponsors and our experts for.
The horrible way that you have
been treated.
To say things like, oh, your
witness doesn't know that.
It it's been very demeaning or
I'm gonna dumb it down. I know
that was.
Withdrawn, but the fact that it
was.
The public listens to this, and
they think this is what we do,
that we sit here and we.
Waste time asking the same
questions over and over again,
the fact that the Hillary
Clinton book was brought up
twice.
up against the Donald Trump.
There's no place for this, that
there's nothing in the bill
about Hillary Clinton or Donald
Trump, um, and I in the in the
the bills before, the way that
the officers were treated, you
know, oh, you just don't know or
um.
Uh, it's, um, I just, this is
not how we are supposed to work.
This is not, I am embarrassed. I
am embarrassed about what
happened today, and I want you
all to know.
That this is not how we have to
work and I, I would request that
there be decorum in in our
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, point of
personal privilege. I love these
men back here who go out and
risk their life for us. Nobody
here ever said anything
disparaging against law
enforcement. I take great
offense that you would insinuate
that I did. I never once
insulted our law enforcement. We
are asking questions because
this is what we do and that's
all I'm gonna say.
Thank you. I don't think anyone
was pointed out, just, just
statements that were made.
That's all.
My second.
We have a substitute.
Motion to table. We will take a
vote.
Representative Block, yes to
table.
Representative Lord, yes, to
table. Representative Ramiro.
No. Representative Thompson. No,
Madam Vice Chair.
Noticeable, Madam Chair, no to
table.
We'll go back to the original we
have a 2 in favor of tabling and
for against the motion, um, does
not pass and um on House Bill
27, we'll go to the original um
motion.
Do we have a second?
OK. OK, I just didn't hear you.
All right, um.
My apologies.
Representative Block.
No, ma'am.
Representative Lord? No.
Representative Romero
Representative Thompson, yes,
Madam Vice Chair, yes, Madam
chair, yes.
So you have a do pass a vote of
4 to 2 on House Bill 27.
Very much
OK.
Next
But not least.
We have house Bill 4.
Criminal competency and
treatment.
Representative Chandler and
Anaya.
Thank you for your patience.
Whenever you're ready. Oh thank
you, Madam Chair and committee.
I just spell it.
Um, I'll let you introduce the
amendment when you're ready um.
Yes, and I'm wondering about
order of we do have an
amendment, Madam Chair.
The question I would have is or
suggestion I have is perhaps I
sort of frame the bill so that
you're, you're kind of.
You know, conscious of what what
what's happening with the
amendment, if that makes sense
for for you, yeah, if that would
help. OK. So, um, thank you,
madam chair, um, good to see you
again, committee members, so
this bill is a bill that is
intended to improve upon our
current statute that addresses
uh criminal competency.
And before I get to the details,
I would like to give a brief
high level overview of what
current law is cause I think
it's important for you to know
that so you have some context
under current competency law, if
a person is charged.
With
A
Violent felony.
And, well, let's start again, a
person is charged, let's start
there.
And there is an issue of
competency, meaning the uh the
uh person's attorney raises
competency or the prosecution
raises competency of the court
raises competency.
his proceedings are stopped you
know or suspended. And there has
to be a determination made as to
whether or not that defendant is
competent or not, and there's a
process for that and that person
is referred to a psychologist or
a psychiatrist, and there is a
competency evaluation done.
Competency evaluations are not.
Full blown mental health
assessments. It really is a
determination as to whether or
not the individual has the
capacity to understand the
proceedings that are at the
charges and the ability to
consult with their attorney so
that they can defend themselves.
That's essentially it. That's
probably a layman's way of
describing it, but I think it's
essentially.
Correct. OK.
Um
So if a person is um deemed not
competent.
And they've been charged with a
violent felony. There is and
there is and the assessment
comes back and says the person
may be dangerous, there is a
hearing, uh, that the court will
hold that will will address that
dangerousness issue, and if that
person is deemed dangerous, they
will be committed in a locked
facility usually in at Las
Vegas, and there will be an
effort.
To do what we call restoration.
OK. Restoration is bringing the
person to a a a level where they
are able to participate in their
own defense, that is understand
the charges, work with their
attorney, understand the
proceedings and, and, and so on.
That's all it is. It's not
treatment. The person is not
getting counseling and, and that
kind of thing that would address
the underlying mental um
illness, so.
Um, if that, if, if that person
is um restored, then that person
will be tried, OK?
If that person after some period
of time is determined not to be
not.
amenable to restoration. There
will be another proceeding.
Wherein there will be a
determination about whether or
not they should be criminally
committed, OK, and that's
there's a due process component
to that and expert testimony and
so on and um there is a list of
crimes that are part of that
determination, so there's a
determination of dangerousness,
and if they've been charged with
this a list of crimes that are
in current law, then that person
might be criminally committed,
and then there's a process for
evaluating.
Um, that person as there as they
are in in in the lock facility,
OK? Um, if the crime is one that
is not a dangerous crime and
like a misdemeanor or a low
level felony, and there's not an
issue of dangerousness. It's
whether or not the person is
competent or not.
Again, the proceedings are
suspended and the person will be
evaluated and if the person is
deemed not competent, you know,
the report and the judge makes
that final determination, but
there will be a report then
under current law, the charges
are dismissed.
That's the that's the end of the
story, so, um, what our bill
does.
Colleague representative Anaya
is uh.
It, it changes a couple of a few
things. One, it expands upon the
evaluation process so that the
assessment goes beyond mere
competency but goes to whether
or not the person, um, might be
eligible that has a mental
illness, serious mental illness,
and might be eligible for either
assisted outpatient treatment or
civil commitment, so that's one
thing we're expanding what is
going to be considered.
in the assessment going beyond
just competency.
It also expands upon the list of
Um
Violent crimes that are listed
in the list, so there's there's
an expansion on that.
And lastly and maybe most
importantly.
Um, from my perspective is it
gives the court some options
when the person is charged with
a misdemeanor or a low level
felony, and they are deemed not
competent.
And what it does is it.
Yeah
Acknowledges the option of
restoration.
It would be outpatient
community-based restoration.
It's obviously not committed,
the person is not considered
dangerous and that um process is
more abbreviated one and it's,
it's 90, it's limited to 90
days.
Um, it also allows for um
recommending the judge can point
to the prosecutor and suggest
the prosecutor consist assisted
outpatient treatment,
um, dismissing the case and
pursuing a civil process known
as assisted outpatient
treatment.
And it uh continues um a process
that's currently on, which is
the prosecutor also could be
recommended by the judge to
consider civil commitment, but
that's current law. We adjusted
some of the language, but it's
essentially the same, the same
thing.
OK. Um,
The things that I like about
this, this particular piece is.
It allows alternative choices
that are based on the particular
individual.
I think we should always be
thinking about assessing the
defendant as we find him or her.
And it also gives an opportunity
to get the person in to um uh
treatment through assisted
outpatient treatment.
And I would also point out
because the report exists
assessing the individual beyond
just mere competency it it could
potentially give family members
a basis for a seeking assisted
outpatient treatment because,
because they could subpoena the
report.
I, I know many family members
care and are concerned about
their children or spouses or
uncles or, you know, and they're
at a loss, frankly, as to what
to do. Um, they don't have the
tools, they don't have a report,
and this will at least give them
some foundational information
for them to be able to assess
whether or not they might be
able to proceed and seek
treatment.
For these people, so, um, I
think that did I get that right?
I have my expert Megan Dorsey
with me here, um, many of you
know her, she um, is a criminal
lawyer and she's on contract
with us. She's been helping me
work this bill and did I get all
and don't feel, feel comfortable
with correcting me, um, so I,
I'll, I'm gonna ask Megan to
describe the amendment if that
is OK, Madam Chair. Oh, madam
chair and.
Um, it's the it's0230083.3. Just
wanna make sure we all have the
same one,
and is a pro I need a
recollection check. Do I need to
move the amendment? So, um, or I
move the amendment or I request
somebody move the amendment I
guess you guys the
Thompson moves for discussion.
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the.
Sorry, apologize. Is there any
opposition to discussing the
amendment?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Um, I am going to try to work
through this relatively
efficiently and will happily
answer questions afterwards.
Um, the amendment does several
things and and I guess I should
say first, uh, Cha Chandler and
Representative Anaya.
spent a significant amount of
time speaking with a variety of
stakeholders and most of these
requests are technical changes
that were requested both by the
Department of Health and by us.
Um, first, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, the first
change in our amendment, point
number 1, which is on page 2.
Lines 21 through 25.
And see that we are asking to
strike lines 21 through 25.
And on page 1 and instead we're
putting in a new section B.
And essentially what this does
is a couple of things, um, as
you can see, if you look at the
amendment where it says
subsection B.
The new language will say unless
the case is dismissed upon a
motion of a party that's current
law.
The addition is or through
diversion, and the reason that
that has been included is as you
all are well aware, the
legislature has programs during
the special session, and we want
to allow for those um to be
contemplated as a part of the
statute moving forward.
And there is also in current
statute of pre-prosecution
diversion option, which is a
separate policy that we wanted
to capture as well.
Um
And after that, you'll see that
the next section says if the
question of the defendant's
competency is raised in a
district in a court other than
the district court or a
metropolitan court, the case
shall be transferred to the
district court or.
Subsection 2, if the question of
a defendant's competency is
raised in the Metro court and
the court determines that the
defendant is not competent, the
case shall be transferred to the
district court. This is
essentially current law, um,
however, we made a conforming
change uh in the current bill,
you can see that we use the
Metropolitan court instead of a
metropolitan court. So that is
just a technical change.
Um, the next amendment is on
page 3 lines 14 and 15.
Um, and here in an effort to
make this very complicated
section of law easier to read,
uh, counsel service, initially
elected to strike the term
psychologist or psychiatrist,
believing that qualified
professional would encapsulate
those terms, um, upon
consultation with DOH we
determined that that is not the
case and so this amendment is
simply reinstating those two
words psychologists or
psychiatrist again reverting to
current law.
Again on page 3
line 25.
At line
Age 11, there we go.
We're moving to page 11.
Line 25.
Um, this section is talking
about what happens after
restoration programming is
completed, we need to have a
mechanism in law to ensure that
the defendant is returned to the
court so that the case can be
completed in whatever process is
most appropriate.
Um, and we have inserted after
the word jail within 72 hours,
and that is just for judicial
efficiency and upon request from
DOH to ensure that beds are
available as quickly.
Next on page 12 at line 6.
Um, here we are inserting the
terms in a secured locked
licensed inpatient psychiatric
hospital.
In place of a secured locked
facility in the Department of
Health, and the reason for that
again is at the request of the
Department of Health, which
found the current language to be
uh overly limiting and again
because New Mexico, as you all
are very aware, aware of
struggling with behavioral
health resources. We want to
make sure that as many
facilities as are appropriate
and be used and so this strikes
the same um.
Security measures psychiatric
hospital, but it opens it up
beyond um the singular DOH.
Continuing on page 12 at line
12.
Um, again, this is another
instance where we're striking
Department of Health and putting
instead inpatient psychiatric
hospital on page 12 line.
We're striking the word
commitment and the period.
Um, and the reason for that is
because in the next one on page
12 lines 14 through 17.
Uh, in this bill, this language
that you see online 14 through
17 was struck again in an effort
to make this section easier to
read, um, but we learned that
this language about the
necessary documents to admit a
patient into a facility is
necessary because uh what
happens on occasion is a
defendant will be ordered to
commitment, the hospital doesn't
receive the appropriate
paperwork. It causes an
unnecessary delay and makes it
difficult for the hospital.
facility to um make the process
efficient and so uh we are
reinstating that language.
However, we are just striking
the word his in there to for uh
gender neutral.
OK, the next one, number 9,
which is on page 13, line 15,
again, this is another
opportunity where we are
striking Department of Health.
And in lieu thereof inserting an
inpatient psychiatric hospital
for the same reasons I've
already age 15.
Line 8, the.
In drafting this proposal.
We initially struck the term
treatment supervisor and
replaced it with Department of
Health when we were talking
about who was required to
evaluation that the chair was
discussing earlier, um, but
again, in discussions with DOH
learned that treatment
supervisor is a very specific
term in their department and
they asked for it to be page 18.
Lines 15 and 16.
Same thing again, uh,
reinserting treatment supervisor
will change.
On page 21.
Lines 1 and 2.
Same instance where we're
reinserting treatment supervisor
instead of the department.
And on page 20.
Line 21 other instances where we
are uh expands and reinserting
in patients like you.
And then finally on page.
Line 3.
Uh, this is new language. This
is the section that deals with
developmental and intellectual
disabilities, current statute
doesn't require that necessary
paperwork to be provided in
those circumstances, and it
should be and so again at the
request of DOH that necessary
paperwork language has been
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee that.
Includes the description of the.
Hi
Yeah, um.
Do you have anything else you'd
like to explain about all these
changes, um, no, madam chair and
I guess in terms of process I'm
re-educating myself, having been
away for a while, um, will you
move?
To um
happy to answer questions
for a few
um move adoption of the
amendments as proposed. OK.
Um,
Taro.
Is there any opposition to
adopting Newman. OK, you have a.
Cannabis. Great, thank you.
I'd like to um introduce
representative Naya, I think she
has a few things she'd like to
say about the bill.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, there are a couple of things
that I really want to bring to
light with this bill. Um, I know
we have our incredible technical
experts here, but one of the
things that I really hope to do
is to bring a face, um, to, uh,
the folks that can be helped by
this bill. I'm really proud to
co-sponsor it alongside uh Che
Chandler and for the main reason
is because we have the same
goals in mind and the same goal
was to get as many people as
much treatment as possible
without
sacrificing due process rights
without sacrificing individual
liberties as well.
Um
I feel like one of my
specialties is breaking down
some of the laws, um, uh, taking
down complex uh laws and
breaking them down so that the
public understands how it will
affect them.
Um, my, I, I was telling
Representative Rubio, I was
originally uh really.
Um,
I didn't really want to address
competency because of all of the
um.
All of the um tension that has
been built around it.
Uh, so before I took on, uh,
coming into this bill, I
actually called my aunt who has
been, uh, dealing with my,
sorry, this is messing up, but
who's been dealing with my
cousin who's been through the
competency system over and over
again.
Uh, my cousin has tried on
multiple times to uh kill my
aunt.
And when I called my aunt and I
said, yeah, like.
Outside of any sort of
political um uh analysis of what
was going on. I just asked her.
If you had what you needed for
Paul, what would and there were
a couple of things that stood
out to me, um, one was that she,
you know, has very complex views
on this because she loves her
son.
And she wants her son to get
help. Um,
And she knows that.
Him going through the same
competency system over and over
to restore him is not
sufficient. She also
Doesn't know how to work the
system enough to get him to the
civil side for treatment.
It took her many years to be
able to do that. Um, I called
her again today and I asked how
my cousin was doing, and because
he was able to get away from the
criminal side that only restores
to competency, it's only an
educational program. It is not
treatment. Um, but because she
was able to move him to the
civil side finally after
figuring out how to um
Navigate the process to get him
an evaluation.
He has actually finally come
home from treatment.
And he's doing really great.
And so I know going into this,
this is the right thing to do
for families who do have complex
feelings just like I did walking
into this pill. Um, here are the
big pieces I know that I
consider, um, the big sections
of the bill, the big wins about
the spell.
One, of course, there's a path
from the criminal side to the
civil side for non-dangerous
defendants. I think that's the
biggest piece of this, uh,
competency bill that we really
hope to take with us throughout
the process.
Uh, the expanded evaluation, of
course, allows for families like
mine to be able to access an
evaluation. It was a little bit
harder to obtain before.
Um, it opens language, of
course, to make sure that more
inpatient treatment programs
aside from only Las Vegas are
available, uh, for folks.
And of course, the
community-based outpatient
competency restoration, once
again for non-dangerous
defendants.
Um, and the last piece, um, that
I'm really grateful we added to
the bill, uh, specifically in
this amendment is the nod to the
diversion programs. I know
throughout the interim
committees, we were hearing from
the diver diversion programs and
we received updates both then
and now on how they were
working, and there were judges
who said, originally, I just
wanted to go in and prosecute.
And now I am seeing that these
diversion programs are really
working.
Um, and so I, I believe that
spells hope for the spell and
hope for the people across New
Mexico, uh, who really need
treatment, um, and not just
going through the competency
system repeatedly. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
happy to entertain questions.
OK, great. Let's go to the
audience first, um, those, um,
who are in opposition. Would you
like to speak or?
OK
Hm
Madam Cha, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, uh, Jim
Jackson, I'm representing
disability rights in New Mexico
today, um, our CEO Gary Haseen
was here for most of the day,
but he, uh, he had to leave. Um,
and, uh, as we've suggested to
Chair Chandler, we'll be
suggesting some additional
technical amendments that we
think will help improve and
strengthen this bill as it moves
through this process. The, that
we still have two major
concerns.
sort of almost philosophical
concerns, I guess you'd say
about, uh, about this spill that
we want to bring to your
attention. We appreciate that
there is an amendment now um
that recognizes diversion, but
this bill doesn't really create
diversion or authorized a
diversion or a path to diversion
to get people out of the
criminal justice system and into
uh uh treatment. The Supreme
Court has had a commission on
this issue that's been working
on this for the last couple of
years.
and virtually all of their
drafts, including their final
draft, had some provisions that
would specifically authorize um
diversion out of the criminal
justice system, uh, and into
this, and we know that there are
some pilot programs that are
going on, but those are really
still just at the initiative of
some local courts and we'd
really like to see some language
in state law that says, yeah,
courts, you can authorize this,
you can divert people out of
this criminal justice system and
into.
treatment
Um, we think Senate Bill 3 that
um majority leader worth is
carrying will help provide a
framework for this, but again,
that bill also doesn't really
explicitly authorize these
diversion programs. The second
point that I'd like to bring in,
I'll wrap it up, Madam Chair. Is
it, I think the bill is still a
little bit out of balance, that
is, it adds more crimes to the
list of things that can be used
to keep people with mental.
illness,
Uh, in the forensic unit at the
behavioral health for, for
frankly, for decades in some
cases, um, and to the extent
that it encourages
community-based mental health
treatment. That treatment is
specifically for the purpose of
getting people to be competent
so that they can be prosecuted
again. So uh we know that this
bill is fast tracked but we'll
work on that. Thank you. Thank
you.
Uh, Madam Chair, Andy Vallejos
for the Mexico Criminal Defense
attorneys. Uh, we're not
standing in opposition or
support for the bill, but we
would note a couple of things.
And we appreciate the amendment.
clarifying that when when you're
sent to Vegas, it should be the
evaluation should be done by a
psychiatrist or a psychologist,
we would even suggest language
that had with experience of
forensic evaluations, because
that's really what they're
doing. They're not only making a
mental health competency, uh,
determination, but they're also
talking about uh ability to
restore the competency and also,
um, uh, in, in some form,
dangerousness as well. So it's a
very highly technical area and
it
the state hospital does a great
job, so we appreciate the
amendment.
But we really want to focus in
on those forensic evaluations
and, and not just a psychiatrist
off the street.
The second thing is a practical
matter that we just want to
raise is in both the mental
health code, the commitment
statutes, the AOT statutes, and
of course we know criminal law.
You're entitled to an attorney
in in all cases, but criminal
defense attorneys when they have
a PD contract, they can only
represent on the criminal
charges and not necessarily on
the, on the AOT or, or the uh
mental code, uh, those codes
provide for general counsel, but
they have
Uh, appointed counsel. So it's
sort of a practical matter that
I, I just wanna highlight at
this point for the sponsor as
the bill goes forward about how
those trade, those handoffs
would happen practically in
court. So because once the
criminal defense attorney, once
it's um a finding of
incompetency and not dangerous,
and it gets diverted to AOT then
they're no longer involved in
it. And so just mechanisms about
how the court might, you know,
trip, um, have a warm hand.
off in those situations and all.
Thank you.
There's one other person.
Oh
2 minutes, please.
Thank you, Chair and members of
committee. My name is Kat
Sanchez. I'm the policy director
for Bold Futures. I'm addressing
the committee today on behalf of
the Public Safety Coalition of
11 organizations who opposed the
governor's competency measures
in the special session this past
summer. We are neither speaking
in favor of this proposal nor
opposed what we want to do is
recognize that this bill makes
significant improvements upon
the proposals offered over the
summer and express our gratitude
to the sponsors, uh, for being
open to amendments and
incorporation of changes that
work to address community
concerns and continue to improve
the bill. We look forward to
continued conversation if this
bill continues to move forward
through the legislative process.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Bronwyn Neer. I'm a forensic
psychologist, and I was doing
mental health public policy for
the last 4 years here in the
state. Um, I too am not here to
oppose or support this bill as
it currently stands. I do want
to give my gratitude to the
sponsors for taking the time and
attention to this bill. I do
think it reads much better than
what we saw last session, um,
and during the special session.
I do have some concern
in terms of mechanism to speak
to what Andy did, but from the
evaluation endpoint.
Um, are currently, our current
competency evaluation process
does not include dangerousness
and it only speaks to the issue
of competency. So, you're only
looking at that issue, the end
part doesn't provide any
indication over dangerous or
not, that's a legal.
That's a legal term and it's a
court determined process. In
addition, our evaluators are all
contractors. So they're not in a
central agency. They don't have
access to all these documents
and each individual contractor
is responsible for their own
admin. Um, a lot has been
brought up over the last couple
of years in terms of whether or
not someone who is going through
a competency process can sign a
release of information, and
that's simply for the competency
process, which doesn't require a
diagnosis. Now we're gonna add
on civil.
com m it ment and AOT which
would require a mental health
diagnosis, which is a much
larger and more robust
evaluation 1. And 2 requires
significant information about
that individual going back, um,
a couple of years, actually, to
see if they were noncompliant
with treatment in terms of AOT,
um, at this point, I don't think
that the bill addresses how
those evaluators are supposed to
accomplish that massive task.
Um, I don't think it's just as
simple as like, oh yeah, those
evaluators can just do that.
Um,
I think it's a much larger
conversation to have in terms
of, um, how to complete that in
a, in the best way possible. And
then lastly, in terms of those
evaluations, and again, speaking
to what Andy did. Um, they're a
criminal evaluation, not a civil
evaluation. Thank you.
Is there anyone on Zoom now?
OK, and they're in, OK, um,
person online.
Or
Jeremy
for the police department.
I'll be brief since it's getting
very late there for a while,
um and I for taking this song.
It's not an easy task. They
probably got a lot of pressure
from both sides, but I
appreciate the work that they
put in.
The only point I will raise it,
I think it's
a huge.
Significant improvement from the
current law, and the, the
argument that there's a very
small amount of people, but they
committed a significant amount
of the crime in laws that are
found in and we haven't found a
way to, one, get them to
treatment or to do anything
other than cases.
And so
I don't think it's to that
group.
Um, it does give us some options
to the judge some options
for community or potentially to.
So I appreciate the work that's
I look forward to see how the
process. Thank you.
Thank you, Chief story. OK, um,
we'll go now to the audience in
those in support.
You man, evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Troy
Whler, chief, New Mexico State
Police, uh, DPS and and Mexico
State Police stand in support of
this bill. I wanna thank the uh
sponsors for bringing it
forward. I also too, I know we
mentioned it briefly earlier, I
wanna apologize if we didn't get
our fur. We had a little
logistical issues. I think we
got it ironed out after the day,
so we should be all squared
away. But my apologies, uh, if
you did not get that. Um, but,
you know, this bill helps
provide another tool in the
toolbox for law enforcement,
district attorneys in court.
Uh, and the courts, um, you
know, you heard that, I would
echo a lot of what Chief story
just mentioned there, but um
himself and uh I took part in a
lot of the town halls traveling
all over the state the past
year, and this is a uh issue
that affects um communities
around the state. So we think
that it's very important that we
address it here in the session.
I would argue that we not only
have a duty to protect the
public, but we also have a duty
to protect those who cannot
protect themselves, and this
bill would help do both of those
things. Um, not allowing our,
not allowing offenders to fall
through the cracks, uh, due to
the competency issues, um, as
we've already heard today, but
also uh allowing those
individuals to get the services
that they need, uh, to move
forward in life and hopefully uh
become uh viable members of
society and contributing
members, so, uh, once again,
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
committee and
I appreciate y'all going late
into the night tonight. Thank
you. Anyone else in support in
the audience.
Where we go back to Zoom.
OK. Um, I believe we have one
more person.
Yes.
City councilor from Donana.
From Las Cruces, um.
Yes, counselor Ben Calmo.
Hi, everyone. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
OK, wonderful. Good evening
everyone, my name is Joanna for
the city of Las Cruces.
Um before I am an elected
official. I'm a supporter and as
a social worker, I know that
jails don't disappear or social
problems. They disappear.
people and that are reliance on
the mural system to attempt to
address these challenges is
expensive and has never yielded
the safety we all desire for our
communities.
I elected official for the last
5 years. I have seen vulnerable
members of our community who are
living with severe mental
illness,
and sometimes with addiction
disorders, cycle in and out of
our court system with absolutely
no system willing to intervene
on their behalf leading their
families, neighbors, law
enforcement and community
frustrated and feeling unsafe. I
stand in support of this bill
because I think it's the gold
standard of care because I think
it gives us the most options
right.
Now. It is also important to
know that this will not work if
the legislature doesn't also
make serious investments in our
behavioral health system. I hope
we are able to get to a place
where we can intervene in the
lives of the most vulnerable in
our community
before they harm to themselves
or others around them. I
appreciate the diligence you
have taken on this matter as I
know it is not easy. Thank you
very much.
Thank you.
Would you like to make any other
comments, Madam Chair, I think
Representative Anaya wanted to
share something.
Yeah, um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I just wanted to
speak to the diversion piece,
uh, because this is something
that I know coming into this,
um, you know, I had seen, uh, I
had watched the interim
committees. I had seen the work
of, uh, the committee that was
addressing this. I know it was a
substantial part of their
recommendation.
Um, I was holding on to it very
tightly, um as, as Cha Chandler
will tell you, um, but I want to
tell you what I learned about it
as well. Um, what I learned from
folks who have defended folks
who are incompetent.
Um, is that
diversion programs don't work
for folks who are incompetent in
the way that they work in the
same way that they work for
people who are competent. And so
inevitably we might be setting
folks who are incompetent up.
To be in a weaker position when
they very much so might fail
that diversion program.
And so that was something that I
know I was holding on to pretty
tight, um, but I think right
now, um,
Knowing that they could come
back into the back into the
system in a weaker position,
actually uh gives me a lot of
pause.
Um, I do think that our
substantial investments in
behavioral health right now also
need to include the diversion
programs so we can figure out
into the future ways in which we
are assessing how these work or
or may not work, but it looks
like they're working right now.
Um, but how they work for folks
specifically who are
incompetent.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, I
have nothing additional to add.
OK, thank you. Um, we'll go to
the um committee and we have
representative Romero first.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thanks to the sponsors. I know
you've been in the thick of it
for many, many months, and so I
really appreciate um.
All of the thoughtful work.
I'm done here. Um, just a couple
questions that, uh, and, and
also thank you for taking the
time to help me, inform me about
the process and how it works. So
just a couple of nuances on, I
think some of the comments and
some of the um
Both the fiscal impact report
and analysis, um, and just to
make clear for the public on
this idea of evaluation.
Between dangerousness and mental
health.
And criminal versus civil.
Um, can you just clarify.
And we're and perhaps it's in
the bill or just in narrative
form, um,
How the different processes work
and how can we be sure?
That one, in one circumstance, a
judge determines the criminal
process and another circumstance
as per Reina's example where
there's a voluntary process, um,
How do those two divergent paths
exist in the legislation and how
do we know what the evaluation
is needed for either process.
I'll take a stab at that, and
then I have my trusted expert,
um.
This bill
Of course it addresses criminal
competency for dangerousness,
and I talked about that.
So when the person is not
dangerous.
They're the the the options that
I enumerated earlier are
available, so that's potential
community-based restoration if
the person is deemed.
AOT is the civil process, I, I
think that maybe we we're
talking about here, um, Madam
Chair and Representative.
That's a civil process that's
been in place, I don't know.
And I think 2016ish, um, and it
hasn't been well utilized,
frankly.
But it has criteria. So what,
what I would expect is that the
DA um.
Or a family member once they saw
the report.
Would use that process and their
criteria that the individual
would still have to meet, meet,
we're not changing the AOT
criteria.
And what we did in our bill is
reference those parts of the
criteria that the report would
address, you know, the
evaluation report would address
that seemed relevant to a
psychologist, because, of
course, there are some other
criteria in that in that process
as well.
Civil commitments is also a
civil process.
Um, and it is and currently
referenced in the competency
statute and it yet and it does
give the DA, it does acknowledge
the D as a potential petitioning
party or of course there are
other family members and we're
not changing any of that either.
We're not addressing.
Changes to the competence of
civil competency law commitment
law, sorry, and we're not really
changing AOT other than um
adding district attorneys or the
uh attorney general as a
potential petitioner and, and
Madam Chair and Representative,
I hope I answered your question.
If not,
Um, I'm happy to supplement.
I think you, about, so I'm
trying to create like a little
graphic for myself, I know which
is like.
So the first evaluation done is
dangerous versus not dangerous,
no.
First evaluation done is
competent, not competent. OK.
And OK, so competent, not
competent, and then it's
dangerous, not dang.
I'll ask.
Madam Chair Representative
Romero, thank you.
It is complicated.
Uh, so I'm gonna try to go
slowly and stop me if I lose
anybody.
Uh, I'm actually going to take a
step back from your question and
start with the whole process. So
a defendant is charged with a
crime.
Somebody involved in the case,
their attorney, the prosecutor,
the judge says.
I don't think this person is
competent to proceed with the
proceeding, so they raised the
issue of competency in the
criminal cases on pause.
Held it stays put while we
decide.
The first thing that happens is
an evaluator.
Conducts a competency evaluation
which under current law is very
narrow and it's just, is this
person able to assist in their
defense or not.
A little more complicated than
that, but that's a snapshot of
it.
And they do they understand the
court process? Are they able to
help their attorney and to
defend themselves.
If the evaluator finds that that
defendant is not competent.
Only then did they proceed with
the expanded evaluation.
And they start with, is the
person potentially.
Uh, eligible for civil
commitment.
And that eligibility, those
requirements, those standards
are in current law and we are
not changing them, we're just
referencing them here.
And then
Is that person potentially
eligible for assisted outpatient
treatment.
And again, those standards are
in current law. We are not
changing them, we're just
referencing them here.
And so at that point in time.
The report goes to the defense
attorney, the prosecutor, the
judge.
And the judge has to have a
hearing, and the judge decides,
is this person competent or not?
Uh, do they agree with the
expert, the defense attorney can
protect the person's due process
rights by calling an alternate
expert to
Engage in a battle of wits if
that's appropriate to do so.
Um, if the judge decides the
person is competent.
This process is done, the
criminal case resumes and trial
proceeds, if that's what's going
to happen in the case.
If the judge decides the person
is not competent.
Then the judge must make a
finding about whether the person
is dangerous or not.
If the person is deemed not
competent and dangerous. They
are committed to a secure locked
inpatient psychiatric hospital
for restoration education.
Where they uh there's an attempt
to educate the person about the
criminal justice system to
stabilize their mental health,
so that they can participate in
their own defense.
If they are, uh, and there are
several points in this process
where there are additional
evaluations to check in on that
competency process.
If the person that has been
deemed not competent and
dangerous, and then sent for
inpatient restoration
programming.
is never restored to competency.
There can be another hearing
with the judge where they decide
they look at the sufficiency of
the evidence as to what the
person's charged with the crime
they're alleged to have
committed at the beginning of
the case.
And if there is clear and
convincing evidence that the
person committed that act.
And at that point in time they
can be committed criminally if
they're dangerous and are
charged with certain things.
So then let's rewind, go back to
the beginning, so let's pretend
what happened instead was.
They were charged
Competency was raised. The
evaluation was conducted.
I said not competent.
And then the judge determined
that the person is not
dangerous.
Then we have all of these new
options under this proposal that
are open to the body or to the
body, excuse me, open to the
parties engaged in the case
whereby the district attorney
can decide do I want to ask the
judge to order outpatient
restoration programming so that
I can pursue prosecution.
Or are the parties able to
negotiate as defense counsel
able to negotiate an exit from
the criminal justice system into
the civil process, um, and that
is where we're looking at
assisted outpatient treatment or
potentially civil commitment.
Um, so I hope that, uh,
representative answers your
question.
I'm taking
um,
I think the.
Thank you. First of all, thank
you, Madam Chair. um, thank you.
um.
Madam Chair, and, um, our
brilliant expert, Megan. Um,
I think just the idea of how the
rounds and the feedback loops
sort of circle back.
Is, um, is important, and I
think that whole the check and
balance of of how that continues
to go back.
And what I've learned through
that process too is that.
We know that with some of these
feedback loops that we're gonna
find pockets of areas where
we're gonna have some
bottlenecking.
Whether it be an evaluator or um
just the timing of getting these
things through, um, and I guess
just on the idea of the deeming
of um non-competency by a judge.
When we're looking at that sort
of round two loop or steamed,
um.
That
The judge decides they're not
competent after that second
evaluate or that after the
first.
Hearing
Um, does that person then get
institutionalized for that
evaluation, I guess, like, is
that the time?
OK, so
Madam Chair Representative, no.
Um
Well
Clear answer. It depends. I know
we all hate that answer, so.
Usually in a criminal case.
When the defendant is charged
with a crime.
The first, not usually in every
single criminal case when a
defendant is charged with a
crime, the first hearing that's
held is an arraignment or a
first appearance. That's where
the judge says, this is what
you're charged with, this is the
maximum penalty you could uh
receive if you're convicted is
and this is where they set. They
determine whether the person
should be released or not.
So if at that stage, the judge
says we're granting you
conditions of release or
determining unrelated to
competency that you are not
dangerous.
In those circumstances, if later
in the case or even that day of
competency is raised and the
defendant is already out of
custody. That initial competency
evaluation occurs out of
custody.
Um
Most of the time
If at that initial stage,
they're held in custody because
they're dangerous. Then that
evaluation happens usually in
jail.
Um, the evaluators will go to
the jail to conduct the
evaluation.
They're not usually sent to Las
Vegas, uh, uh.
And until later on, um, so the
person is usually committed to
Vegas for restoration treatment
after they've been found to be
not competent at that initial
hearing, and found to be
dangerous.
And then there's a 2nd level, so
that's when they're civilly held
in Vegas for restoration
programming.
A criminal commitment happens if
that fails, so if you can't
restore somebody if somebody is
just not um able to participate
in their defense, then that's
when they're.
Criminally committed to Vegas
for longer periods of time, as
you heard from one of the public
comments sometimes for a very
long period of time because they
can be held on a criminal
commitment for the same amount
of time they would be if they
had been convicted of the crime.
Does that help?
Getting there, um,
thank you, Madam Chair. No, and
I, I appreciate you
understanding the process and I
think just part of again that
sort of space of
How are we couching those who
are civilly committed versus
criminally committed, and I
unfortunately know nothing about
how that operates from the
inside of when when somebody is
um.
There's zero restoration and the
need for criminal commitment.
How is that separate from the
civilly, uh, derived cases that
are basically folks that are
going through that process as
well, thank you, man. I think
now I, I get where there are,
um, there are other ways to be
introduced into the AOT system
and the civil commitment system
and those ways are described in
those specific statutes, so, um,
it doesn't require the
commission.
Well, it doesn't it a predicate
is not necessarily the
commission of a crime, OK? Um,
it's a person who uh often uh
I'm told often it's hospitals
that um are the initiating
petitioners, and I'm told that
is often the way it happens in
Donana, which has a pretty well
developed assisted outpatient
treatment program and we heard
from them over the summer, so
there that's a separate, there
there's just another avenue.
And there's a list of
petitioning parties, often it
might be a hospital, it could be
a family member and they're
they're listed and or someone
who lives with the person who
has knowledge, so that can just.
happen on its own, you know,
based on the interests and
concerns of the institution or
the family member. Same with
civil commitment.
Um, you know, a family member
can certainly seek civil
commitment because they're very
concerned about their child or.
are having issues and
they have to follow a certain
process. I would note for the
AOT process, um, the courts
provide an attorney for the
individual who's the subject of
the petition, so their rights
are being watched, you know,
and, and, and protected.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thanks for that response and I
guess just on the sense of um.
The provision of the
community-based competency
restoration.
Is that
Is that process different only
for criminal?
Um
The criminally processed versus
the similely processed.
Restoration's not an issue in
civil processes, um, those are
treatment.
Completely treatment oriented, I
hope, you know, treatment
Restoration really isn't
treatment. It's, um, bringing
the person to a place where they
can participate in their trial
to meet constitutional
requirements.
Yeah, and I think Madam Chair
and, um, rep, I think that's
part of our mountain chair
chair, um, part of the confusion
about what restoration means
just from the legal term to the
sort of mental health terms. So
that's where I think I
continually use that word and
get caught up going, which,
which which restoring are we
talking about? Um, and I don't
know if the definition requires
to be in the bill, but just for
keeping things straight, maybe
helpful, um, since we're only
talking about the criminally.
committed in this bill, um, and,
and just to keep things straight
for when we're talking about
families looking for access to
services, um, that this, that
sometimes that that we're
conflating the civil side versus
this criminal side that I think
we're we're trying to stay
focused on. So, just wanting to
um, to clarify where we are in
the, in the decision tree, um,
that I'm trying to help draw up
at some point, but um.
I think that's all my questions
for now, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, um, most of you probably
know I have a, a giant adult son
with significant autism, and
this is a concern, um, he
He's unpredictable, you know, I
wouldn't call him criminal or,
um, but he reacts very strongly
to certain things, including
someone telling him, you know,
yelling at him or cursing at
him.
And, and I, well, I do have to
say this is probably not
perfect. I don't think we've
ever had a perfect bill, um, if
we, if we did, we should have a
party.
But, but
It makes me feel better, uh, a
question that I asked to the
sponsors is.
Could we use his.
30 years of.
Of paperwork that says that he,
I mean we are total full
guardians of him, could we use
that paperwork to help to prove
that he is incompetent and that
will last for the rest of his
life.
And um and the answer was yes,
and that made me feel better,
um, and so I will support this
bill and I thank you for being
able to explain it to a mama in
a way that she can kind of say,
you know.
Take a, take a deep breath and
uh and it don't you start
crying, or I will.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Rubio, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. I'm gonna send
out pictures of my dog.
Um, from now on, here on out, so
you all have.
Something to think of when we go
on nights.
Um, because Yoko.
He's cute. She's the great
uniter, um, but no, I just
wanted to take a moment just to
thank you all, um.
As you probably will.
Um, it's very, very clear that
I've never been supportive of
this issue in the past. Um, and
I think part of the reason is
because, um, it, it just became
so politicized and I think this
has been probably.
This is the reason why it's so
hard to be in politics or to
serve in an elected office is
because we sincerely can't ever
get anything done because it's
always based on elections and
that to me is very, very
frustrating.
And I share that because this
issue specifically.
Um, it is important, like there
are people in our communities
that do need support and we're
just not providing them with the
kind of support that they, that
they, that in my opinion they
deserve. And while I don't
believe that this is going to
solve everything. I feel like.
How it's been mentioned, how
it's been discussed in in
previous comments is that it, it
does provide um options, it does
provide choices, um.
It's hard for me to vote yes on
this still. Um, but I will vote
yes, but one thing that I will
say too is is that just because
we're voting yes doesn't mean
that this is the end to making
um this legislation better and
that we have to ensure that
there is funding for behavioral
health, and we have to make
those demands this session, but
also beyond that, and I know
that it's been raised, um.
Before, even just in terms of
expanding how we're expanding
some of the like I learned the
1.3, 1. like I, I've learned so
much. I, I really appreciate you
all taking the time to hand hold
me through this whole process
because it's something that I
didn't actually have before.
Um, but just understanding that
even just that that conversation
around expanding that we can
still continue to have that
conversation around how do we
actually narrow that versus
leaving it as is. Like I think
that is a very important
conversation to have.
Um, but I, I, I definitely
appreciate that, um, and so I
just, yeah, I, I intend to vote
yes on this legislation, um.
I, I just, I wanted to just
commend you all for taking the
time to, to really just better
educate me on this issue and um
and just seeing how it can be a
tool.
Um, out of something that's much
more bigger and that it's not
something that we should be
politicizing like this is
something serious, there are
people who are hurting, um, and
we really need to do something
about that, so thank you.
Thank you, and next we have
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair, um.
I, I just wanna say that I think
Representative Romero was right,
there should have been a flow
chart cause I was trying to
write this down cause I'm on the
fence on this. I want to like
this bill and I want to vote for
it, but I just have so many
questions.
Um
So I, Madam Chair and
Representative and also
Representative Rubio made some
good points about it should
never, this should not be
anything with mental.
politicized ever, it really
shouldn't. Didn't matter whether
it's election.
But we do definitely need to
fund.
OK, so I think I'm sure if I, I
just had a question in my my
scribbly.
Flow chart.
OK, so the crime triggers as
they do a crime, they go to
court competent uncompetent
danger, not dangerous, but I had
a question on one.
It's
They're
They're not competent.
And they're dangerous. So then
they go to Las Vegas and then
they get an appeal like or do
they go before some vacation you
see if they're.
Not competent still or still
competent, then does it go to
criminal if they're found that
now you're competent enough.
That you get charged criminally.
I please help me.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
happy to help. I understand your
question, and I'll go, I'll try
to go slow, feel free to
interrupt.
So
When a defendant has been found
not competent.
And dangerous in a court hearing
with due process and a judge and
attorneys.
They are sent under current law.
This is not new under current
law, they're sent to Vegas.
This bill will say a secured
locked inpatient facility so
don't have to be Vegas, but
Vegas or similar place.
For restoration.
Programming, which can last for
folks who have been deemed to be
dangerous, a maximum of 9
months.
So once they get there within
the 1st 30 days.
There's another evaluation done?
Where the evaluator essentially
says.
Can't do we think this person
might be amenable to treatment.
Do we think that the programming
might work.
Are we making progress? How long
do we think it's gonna take? Do
we think we can get this done in
9 months, OK? So there's that,
there's one point where there's
a check-in.
And at any point in time, the
evaluator can at any point in
time within that 9 month window.
The evaluator can submit an
opinion to the court that says
this is not possible.
This is an individual, for
example, potentially who has an
intellectual disability. That's
not something that we can
change, that just is what it is.
Um, and so this is a waste of
resources, they should go back
to the court for the judge to
decide what's going to happen
with the case.
At the end of the 9 month
period, if they stay there the
whole time.
Then there's a a final report
that the evaluator completes
that says all of the same things
at this point now that they've
gone through restoration, are
they competent now? Yes or no?
If they are not competent still
at that point in time, do they
qualify for civil commitment or
AOT?
That final report that says how
do we do? was this successful
gets sent to the judge.
The prosecutor, the defense
attorney.
And the defendant is brought
back from whatever hospital
they're at to the court.
For another hearing where the
judge again decides today is
this person competent? Yes or
no.
If they are competent, then we
go forward with prosecution,
right? With a trial normal case,
they are still not competent.
Then the judge has to decide
again.
Are they dangerous, right? Are
they still dangerous, which?
Probably they are because they
were already found dangerous,
right?
And if they are still dangerous,
not competent.
Dangerous, then they can go for
criminal commitment.
Which is where they are held in
that secured locked inpatient
facility.
For a maximum period of time,
the same amount of time they
would be facing if they were
convicted of the crime they were
charged with.
So, for example, if you were
facing.
The trafficking charge within
18-year penalty, you could be
held in commitment for 18 years,
no more, no less, but while
you're there, well, it could be
less. I'm sorry, no more than 18
years.
While you're there, they check
in every 2 years.
So I think to circle back to
what I believe you are really
asking is how often are we
checking in and making sure this
is working.
Very regularly.
And at every stage, the
defendant has a defense attorney
that gets to object and uh.
Object to what's happening to
protect their defendants due
process rights? And there is a
prosecutor there who gets to
say.
This person should be
prosecuted. This person is
dangerous to protect the public
if that's what's appropriate.
And at those stages, the judge
gets to decide what's best.
OK. I got, I got that pretty
much, um.
So every 2 years, OK, so 9
months, blah blah blah opinion
and then I think.
Competent
Not competent
Dangerous versus not.
And we just address it, we
addressed it, so if somebody is,
there was one other question.
For the outpatient restoration.
Or we had this was, hold on.
Not competent, not dangerous.
There we go. I gotta look at my
scribbles. Seriously a flow
chart.
So much
So they can, they can either be.
They have to go through
outpatient restoration or.
Who decides that? Is that the
judge that decides that?
So, sorry, you have to say
something. Yeah, OK. So,
Outpatient restoration.
Or they can be put back into
there because they can't take
care of themselves.
Or where would they go because
there was something you to put
in and I would put civil and I
don't know what I wrote after
that scribbles. Well, the in
addition to outpatient
community-based restoration, the
prosecutor could.
Seek, assisted outpatient
treatment, so that.
He would file a petition through
that process, OK.
And that's also an outpatient
process.
Not, not commitment and or if
the appropriate criteria are
met.
Civil commitment, that's a civil
process also.
The underlying, one of the
underlying requirements is
danger to self.
to establish that for civil. I
got.
So, uh, tell me a little bit
more that with the outpatient
restoration is that
So that gets mandated by the
judge and they have to do that.
It's not like we suggest.
Correct. OK.
And are they living in?
Group home or how does that?
They're still being supervised,
correct? Not like they're on
this, and because they're not
out in the street and have to
just come and take meds or are
they actually in a facility, no,
OK.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, they
are not in a facility, that's
why we call it outpatient, so
they will be um residing
wherever the court has approved
for them to reside, so remember
at the beginning of any criminal
case if a defendant is released
from jail?
The judge orders conditions of
release that the person has to
follow.
That usually includes uh an
approved place to live.
Um, it can include travel
restrictions, it can include
drug testing, it can include all
kinds of different things, and
so the person who has already
been released, we'll continue to
live wherever they are, but they
still are under the supervision
of the court, and if they
violate those conditions of
releases, they violate those
rules the judge has put in
place, it could go back to jail.
Thank you Madam. That was my
next question. What happens if
they're noncompliant.
Well there's a, there's a.
starting here. What are we doing
for housing if they're unhoused
to start with.
What do we do with these, these
people, they're in the
outpatient care, but where are
we subsidizing that or we put
them someplace that they have
housing.
When, when you say outpatient
care, are you referring to
outpatient restoration
outpatient, yeah. OK. Well, uh,
Madam Chair Representative, this
bill does not provide for any
housing subsidies.
Um,
Here that the legislature is
very interested in working on
housing in general, and I hope
that that happens, um, but what
happens currently in the
judicial system.
When somebody is unhoused or
under housed is largely up to
the judge at that initial
conditions of release setting.
So there are some judges who
will say you're permanent,
you're permanent address could
be um an interfaith shelter, uh,
a homeless shelter or a variety
of different places and that's
fine.
Um, there are plenty of in
particular individuals who are
represented by the laws of the
public defender who are unhoused
and don't have a safe place to
live, that is a major problem
that we would love to see fixed
and I'm just trying to think of
all the
This isn't just a bill we're
passing, this is like.
200 other things that go along
with it.
And one of the things I did
hear.
Um, because I, I get concerned
about getting bone, which, you
know, it gets frustrating. We
have so much money and it
doesn't ever seem to kind of.
To go like something like this,
so.
Where are we if if we need
forensic psychiatrist, and
that's what we need more than
anything, where are we going to?
Yeah
I'm sure, sorry,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Oh, there is a forensic
psychologist uh training unit at
UNM. I know, happen to know that
since they're one of the groups
and organizational folks that I
spoke to when I was looking at
this bill and how we might
structure it and so on, so I had
conversations with them, I think
we all recognize I hope we
recognize and I'm sure you do as
well. We are gonna have to
invest in building.
The structure to support this
process.
AOT, um, other ways to get
support for people and
treatment, and that's part of
the larger discussion that this
legislature's going to be having
and funding. I know there seems
to be a significant commitment,
Madam Chair, from both chambers,
and I think probably on a uh
bipartisan basis to invest in um
you know, the infrastructure
necessary to provide the support
for behavioral health, um, drug
treatment, um, those kinds.
structures, including these
processes for the forensic
psychologists that are
referenced and needed to support
the competency determinations
because they may increase, I
think we all need to acknowledge
that. So I hope, Madam Chair,
um, and rep that answers your
question I wanted to supplement.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I think one of our, one of
our discussion points as we were
going through this was the fact
that this bill
We don't want it to stand alone.
We don't want it to stand alone
for several reasons, one,
because we need to fund our
behavioral health programs.
To we inserted language in here
to uh to.
In hopes that our budget that
follows this will also need to
follow the language and law, um,
should this be passed, but I
think the third thing is I, I
know we have a lot of.
It's coming down, um, coming
down the line that we've been
working on, as you know,
Representative Lord, you were on
the health committee for quite a
while and so there are a lot of
initiatives that are coming up
that I think have really great
potential. You know, we have.
Uh, compacts coming down the
line would also like to plug my
strategic healthcare recruitment
program,
but I really do, and I plug it
not just to plug it, but I plug
it because I know that we need a
lot of different bills to be
passed in order for not just
this to work, but for all the
other bills to be able to work
in sync as well.
Thank you for explaining that my
share and represented because.
There's a lot of infrastructure.
It's like we're talking about
building a city.
It's a lot of stuff that goes on
with that. Do we have to look it
up.
How much
representative. So in the FIR.
Um
So it's gonna be reoccurring on
the general fund.
If we're looking at the pie of
the whole project.
Where are we at with building
the structure because it.
Is this gonna be enough to even
get it up and going?
I guess because it because we're
looking at all these other
outpatient things that also need
to be done. So those are gonna
be separate bills with separate
money, and I'm trying to figure
out.
See if I can put this.
The money that you have here
right now, how is that gonna lay
out with the infrastructure.
And are the other bills if they
get passed, going to be able to
cover the rest of the budget
that we need for all the stuff
to tie in together, so that
makes sense.
Um
Cause I don't want to have
something that's partially
funded and it doesn't go
anywhere, Madam Chair and
Representative, of course,
that's a very valid concern, um,
however, I think Mr. Jackson
represents rep um.
Reference to SB 3.
Um, the appropriation commit re
uh Senate Finance and our
appropriation committees are in
the loop in terms of what is
going to be necessary to support
this bill as well as a whole
other slew of.
Um,
Activities that we will help and
to address the behavioral health
crisis we have in the state.
In Meter and
Representative, this is
something I think I've always
agreed on even in health
committee that we have such a.
Or behavior health. We have all
this money and I look at like we
went through it yesterday and
all the money that we have from
gas.
I just look at that. I'm like,
well, this needs to be diverted
more into behavior or health
because it's just lacking,
seriously and so that's my
concern. Only reason why I'm on
the fence is.
There's a lot of technicalities
in here.
And a lot of stuff, I mean, it's
the web, right? of
interconnected stuff in here.
And I would hate for us, which
happens, we pass something and
it isn't quite complete. It
actually needed 5 other bills to
make it complete and then it
goes off into limbo for a while.
I just have a few more questions
that I want to ask on this, um.
So
My concern is always the people
right that are going through
this process.
And
What happens in all seriousness
that we need to think about what
happens if we do get bottleneck?
We don't have enough friends of
psychologists, we don't have
evaluators because we're trying
this new program, we're trying
to get everyone take care of.
What if we're lacking?
We don't have now, how are we
gonna address that issue.
Every thought about that. If we
get bottlenecked.
Well, I, my expectation is that
the individuals who are
Implementing those programs will
be coming to the legislature in
asking for additional funding if
they need additional support.
Um
Is there, Madam Chair
Representative, I I.
I like to look at other states.
Is there other states that have
done something like this that
has been successful or I've done
this.
That we can look at and say, OK,
this worked out really great,
and we looked and it has
pitfalls and this is what we
need to be prepared for.
What I can say to that, madam
chair and representative is the
entire country is looking at
criminal competency.
And also um assisted outpatient
treatment.
And um civil commitment.
And seeing whether or not they
meet the current needs because
we are not alone in having the
mental health crisis that we are
experiencing and seeing.
Unfortunate individuals who.
are on the streets and you know,
suffering, so there are other
states looking at mechanisms and
we did look at those, um.
Whether they came to this exact
approach, I can't answer that,
but definitely there are um
activities out there that are do
a similar to ours, truthfully,
um, thank you, Madam Chair and
rep. I know that a lot of work
did go into this. I had a
question on um
So on page 6.
Uh, starting here at 10. Let me
see now, now that I get the flow
chart in my head, let's see if I
can make sense of this.
So after a competency hearing, a
court determines that a
defendant is not competent to
stand trial.
The court shall determine if the
defendant is dangerous. OK, so
are we expanding the definition
of dangerous, is that what all
this new material is.
OK, what did they, sorry, Madam
Chair, what did they have before
is dangerous,
I'd be happy to answer that
question for you. Thank you.
Give me 1 2nd.
By the way, Madam Chair, I do
appreciate human traffic.
So, um.
Madam Chair Representative.
Here it is, thank you.
Um, under current law and if in
case you 9-1.2, and you said it
again because I actually will go
31-9-1.2.
Subsection dangerous means that
if released, the defendant
presents a serious threat and
inflicting great bodily harm on
another.
Or violating section 30-9-11.
Or 30-9-13 and so you then come
back and look at the proposal.
Um, which under the proposal,
the section that you drew our
attention to on page 6 is still
39-31-9-1.2, yeah, OK.
But what we've done here.
I expand those lists of what we
call predicate crimes that can
be included to find somebody
dangerous, um, and so, uh, it's
rather extensively expanded.
OK, thank you, and I appreciate
it.
And representatives for for
expanding that dangerous.
Um
Looking at all these underlying
words like oh my God, it's like
I want to support the bill that
scares me because there's so
much stuff in here.
And I know that it's getting
late. Um, let me just ask a few
more questions.
Oh, diversion program, so I,
when we say diversion programs,
we mean instead of jail, you go
to.
Rehab, what do you mean by
diverse?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think what is meant by that
is.
Their pretrial diversions, so
there's an arrangement between
the defense and the prosecution
so that um the individual could
go to.
of treatment and that's, that's
the agreement. It's a voluntary
process, um, and often if it
doesn't.
If the, if the, the individual
doesn't comply with whatever the
terms of diversion is, the
charges can be refiled.
And uh
Thank you, man. That's what I
understood diversion to mean
that you get this option where
they say, hey, we think you
could be a good person going to
rehab or whatever, and if you
comply to all the stuff in the
drug test, um,
There's anything else.
Because I'll probably ask more
questions to, um, Madam Chair
representative, where does this,
is this bill been heard in
another committee or is it
going?
Um, it's going to House
Judiciary. OK.
Um,
All these I have on here.
Uh, let me just see if I can
find one more thing.
I think the only thing that I
wanna say is I wanna make sure
that
So we have this great flow
chart.
We get stopped here.
As all the other things.
process
And we desperately need more
diversion and more mental.
Or rehab and
Treatment centers.
You need a lot of more of that.
We're such a rich state
actually.
Have that ready, but I guess
it's better to be in the process
of it.
Then not at all.
That's
So I kind of support this bill.
Let me read through it some more
so I can make a decision on it.
I'll probably ask you.
it, um.
I always worry about sometimes,
you know, some bills get passed
and they're good, sometimes do
things that do more than I.
This doesn't seem like it, but I
just wanna make this.
So thank you, man.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives and
uh
Expert
So Madam Chair representatives.
I, I just have, I don't have as
many questions as Representative
Lord.
But I do have a few.
So, and I'm chair
representative, I guess I'm
gonna start with
We talked about the individual.
If they're, if they're found
incompetent to stand trial
repeatedly.
They could be held in Vegas for
up to the entirety of their
sentence.
So, Madam Chair, Representative,
I'm wondering after that, and
That time, let's just say it's a
5 year time.
With that individual who is
still incompetent.
Then be released if it is the
entirety of that sentence, they
would have been charged with,
Madam Chair.
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
and, uh, the reason for that.
that is
Due process that you can't be
held any longer than you would
have been, um, if you had been
convicted.
However, um.
Because of the under current
law, that's what happens. And
that is what will happen under
this bill as well if it becomes
law, however, the way this bill
seeks to
Transition, the defendant back
into society is by providing
that expanded evaluation so that
when they're exiting Vegas or
wherever they're being detained.
That, um, in a report is
available that indicates whether
the person is is eligible for
civil commitment or AOT.
You know, I could just
supplement, um, when the person
is criminally committed, they
are supposed to receive the same
type of treatment that they
would have received if they had
been civilly committed, so they
are being treated while they are
in the lock facility. It's not,
so I just wanted to make that
point as well.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative,
and that, that's good to
clarify, to just see that
they're at least getting some
kind of treatment.
Make sure that
They can
Hopefully when they are
released, they, they are more
competent or
Integrate into society. So
that's really good. Madam Chair
Representative, I guess I, I saw
in the agency, or I'm sorry, the
MI analysis. I don't know if you
all have.
That in front of you. I just
only have one copy, but.
I'll just read what it says,
Madam Chair Representative, it,
it says, um,
On section 3 and section 4.
It says the process requires one
report submitted at the
beginning of the treatment.
One at the end prior to the next
applicable hearing.
If they believe the defendant
will attain competency before
the end of the treatment. And
then the, the analysis says this
seems both difficult to predict.
not necessary if the supervisors
filing a 2nd and final report
regarding the competency. So I'm
just wondering if you guys might
address that concern, Madam
Chair Representative.
Absolutely, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, and.
I think I'm talking I'm not.
Um, we
Yes, so as I've described,
whether the person is deemed
dangerous and committed for
restoration or not dangerous in
order to outpatient restoration.
Either way, in both of those
processes, there are 3
evaluations that are done.
There is the initial evaluation
that is done before they're sent
to restoration treatment.
They're once they're in
restoration treatment, there's a
30 day update that says how are
we doing?
And then at the end of
restoration, there's a final
evaluation that says, did we
succeed or not, essentially.
And we have heard, um.
I hear from the committee
analysts and we also heard, I
believe in the agency analysis
from the Law Office of the
Public Defender, potentially
also from the ACLU, um, that,
that middle report may not be
necessary.
Um
I believe that the intention of
the proposal was to make sure
that we have all available
information at every stage in
the proceeding because it
benefits both parties, both the
prosecution and the defense to
have that information and to be
able to decide on a case by case
basis on the facts for each
individual defendant, what is
the appropriate course of
action.
Because at any point in this
process, the prosecutor could
determine.
We don't need to be seeking
restoration treatment, we want
to divert out of the criminal
justice system into another more
appropriate path.
Um
So that is the reason why it's
there 3 times.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and that
clarifies it for me. So,
I, I did see a lot of different
timelines, so I apologize if I
don't understand all of them. So
I see that there's a 30 day, so
that's
The report
And then we, we spoke about
9 months, is that that's the
entirety of the stay.
Is that correct from my
understanding? 9 months is the
maximum that a person at the
mental health um.
facility.
Um, for restoration programming.
Rest
We do need a flow chart, right?
You don't know how to do flow
charts, so I'm gonna need help
with that
and I think representative
Romero offered to help me.
OK, Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you. And yeah, I, I can't
wait to see like the little
bubble chart or whatever the
flow chart looks like. I can't
wait. So.
So Madam Chair Representative,
uh, continuing on here.
In the same section 3 and 4.
It says additionally redundant
in both reports, the supervisor
must include if the defendant
qualifies for treatment under
the mental health code or AOT
Act. This says this could be
determined once in the 2nd and
final report.
So I'm wondering if there,
there's any kind of clean up we
could do in there to make it a
little faster or why is that in
there? Adam.
Yeah misunderstood, but I
believe um um Miss Dorsey
addressed that in and that we
felt that the report occurring
at each stage being updated was
the best approach because it
would give us the most
information in trying to address
this. Thank you so much. I
apologize. Yeah, you're right.
We totally got that. So, the
next section here, I think it's
in the same section. This
section is very long, by the
way. So Madam Chair
Representative, it says, and I
think it's a pretty good point
actually in the analysis, it
says, if it
is not competent to stand trial.
What's the likelihood they will
be able to attend and complete
the training.
Program successfully on their
own.
So I'm wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, we could address
that. What, what resources are
available or or how do we
envision this going forward,
manager. Madam Chair
Representative, it is a great
question.
And uh you're gonna love the
answer. It depends.
Um, and the reason for that is.
Defendants are people, and
they're not cookie cutters and
so each individual defendant is
gonna have a different level of
ability.
Um, it is absolutely true, and I
believe Representative Anaya
alluded to this when she was
discussing competency diversion
that when you're dealing with an
individual who has significant
mental health issues, it can be
very difficult to comply with
things like showing up on time,
maintaining a calendar, having
appointments that you are able
to meet, even with the very best
of intentions. And so we uh the
chair and the representative
envision this policy.
Outpatient restoration process
to give grace to that.
And to recognize that these
people are going to need
additional support, and it is
true that some will deeply
struggle to comply.
Um, but I
The intent behind the policy is
to recognize that we want to
support those individuals and
get them the services they need
rather than locking them up
because of something they can't
control.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, and that,
that completely clarifies that
for me, and I appreciate it. So
I guess my
We talked about Vegas, right?
Like,
I is for
Commitment
Once they are found incompetent.
And they cannot stand trial, but
they're doing whatever the
maximum sentence could be. So in
the in between.
While they are in determined to
be competent, and we kind of hit
on it a little bit with
Representative Lord. I'm
wondering, is there
Where, where are they, if it's
like an inpatient, that's
required by the judge, for
example.
Would it be like a, a hospital
or where would that be? Would it
have to be Las Vegas as well
during the time of
determination or
I'm just kind of trying to
figure out.
representative,
um, let me make sure I
understand the exact section
you're talking about, are you
referencing um.
So, Madam Chair, I guess you
have like a really good
to there. So, OK, uh, they're
charged prosecutor or judge
calls them incompetent.
And they pause the evaluator,
I'm sorry, my handwriting is
horrible, so conducts
evaluation. And so during the
like this evaluate evaluation
process.
I think we, we talked a little
bit about they're getting
evaluated in jail in some
instances.
And then I believe later on.
They said, OK, it's eligible for
AOT this person is eligible.
Um
And then they work with the
attorney and the defense and the
judge.
The judge decides to
On an expert potentially, if
necessary.
to see. So I'm just wondering in
this, in this timeline where
this person is kind of in limbo.
Are they getting
Are they in jail and if they are
in jail, are they getting their
specific medications that they
might need or, or whatever that
might be. That's kind of the
crux of the question.
Madam chair representative again
it it depends,
um, the
as
I was referencing with
Representative Lord, what it
really.
Depends upon is what happens in
that very first hearing, the
arraignment, the first hearing
before competency, usually
before competency is even.
An issue before.
A lot of times, particularly
when you're dealing with
defendants who are appointed
attorneys to the law office of
the public defender. You haven't
seen an attorney before that
hears first hearing, so nobody
knows necessarily what their
status is.
Um, so at that setting, the
judge is going to decide.
Most of the time, whether the
person is released or not.
Um
And that
Determination, which again is
unrelated to whether the the
defendant is competent or not.
is what determines where they
are when the initial evaluation
is conducted.
So if the judge says.
Before confidence even comes up,
we think you're dangerous,
you're staying in jail while
this case proceeds. That's where
the evaluation takes place.
If the judge had said, we don't
believe you're dangerous, I'm
going to release you, then the
evaluation takes place out of
custody.
The person is only evaluated at
Vegas or an inpatient locked
facility.
After they've been found to be
not competent and ordered to
restoration.
That's the only time VHI comes
in.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that. That
clarifies it, Representative. So
I guess the next
Question, it's, I'm almost
there. So, next question is
during the AOT.
treatments so the AOT.
Madam Chair Representative, how,
how are they brought to
competency. I'm just wondering
how or
Maybe, maybe I'm got, I got the
one the one wrong. I apologize.
Whatever when we're trying to
get them to competency to stand
trial. What, what are the
procedures there so that we can
ensure that they are competent
or at least getting toward
competency,
and representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Another great question, which is
not necessarily outlined in this
bill.
Because restoration education.
which under current law is
called restoration treatment, we
are rebranding as restoration
education because it is more
accurate.
At programming, thank you,
restoration programming, get
gotta get on brand here
restoration programming.
Um, is.
It is a set.
Program
That evaluators and behavioral
health specialists, usually
psychologists or psychiatrists,
usually forensics like already
have in place based upon
standard operating procedures
and best practices in their
profession.
And so as lawyers, we don't want
to be dictating what mental
health professionals should do
is we're not mental health
professionals, um, they're
already in charge of what
restoration programming is, and
this won't change that.
That is true under current law
in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And those
resources, are they available in
all the judicial districts,
because I know in some rural
areas.
It's hard to
drive really far places and I'm
sure you might know, Madam Chair
Representative, as of today
there is no such thing as
outpatient restoration
programming in the state of New
Mexico, that is the piece of
this that is, if this bill
passes will be new law in
current law, all restoration
programming happens at Vegas.
That is the only facility in the
state of New Mexico that has the
um.
Legal qualifications under the
current law to proceed with
programming.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and that
does make sense.
That we would need all these
resources, behavioral health and
everything in these, in these
communities, so they don't have
to go all the way to Vegas. And
I know the cost to sheriffs, for
example, having to drive people
all the way to Vegas and back,
and it is burdensome on
everybody and taxing on on the
potential defendant I'm well,
well, and also the individuals
aren't.
seemed dangerous, and they
haven't been charged with
dangerous crimes, so we can't be
committing people who aren't
dangerous and who haven't be a
constitutional violation.
OK, well, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and, and I, I
guess I, I, I'm leaning towards
supporting this bill. I, I
really like the idea of helping
these people get to competency.
I like the idea of the AOT and
all the outpatient treatment,
inpatient treatments, and even
holding that individual if
necessary ending trial with or.
They're not competent to stand
trial, which I think is, is
important. I guess I just, I
just wanna.
I hope this helps a little bit.
I know that there's the whole
catch and release problem or the
issue that's come up. A lot of
people being released back into
society and maybe, maybe they
have behavioral health issues,
maybe they don't.
But I do want to see, maybe this
could be.
Maybe another spoke on the wheel
of things that we can use to
assist with that because a lot
of the time these are not just
tied to someone being violent.
It could be.
drug related or they could have
other underlying issues, and I
think this could be, this could
help. So, I'm still thinking
about the bill and I appreciate
all your time and hope that was
shorter than Representative
Lord, but I don't know. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'd like to move a
new path.
OK. Is there any opposition to
Du Pas.
We can do, we can do roll call.
Yeah, can you do roll call give
me 2 more minutes to think about
it.
OK.
We have a motion for
Um, I do pass, um, will you
please take a roll. Oh, I'm
sorry.
on the bill as amended. Thank
you very much
I'm
on the bill as amended. Thank
you very much
I
yeah
it was a while. I forgot
already, um, yes, on, on, um.
To
House Bill 4 as amended.
Representative Block pass.
Representative Lord, yes, with
the explanation.
Representative Romero, yes.
Representative Thompson. Yes.
Madam Chair Rubio.
Uh, yes.
Uh, Madam Chair Ferrari.
Uh, yes.
Representative blog. Yes, with
an explanation, a short one.
Um
You have, um,
A do pass with unanimous vote, 6
to 0 on house Bill or as amended
and representative Lord to
explain her her. I'll be brief.
I, I was on the fence but I
talked to a lot of people about
this and thank you to the.
He left already. It's just say
thanks to the state police
chief. He actually know this and
thank you guys for staying here
the whole time.
Um
So yeah, I want to do some more
research on it. They just big
complicated bill, so.
I do want to support it. Thank
you for being calm with your
reply, so it keeps me
explain everything in detail,
but I cannot tell you enough low
chart.
Repent block. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, and thank you all
for, for this. And, and I guess
my explanation on this is a yes,
I read every single bill and I
read every line and every word
and every bill, and I can't
agree on everything all the
time.
But I think that this is going
in the right direction. And I
think it could help with the,
the crime crisis that we have in
the state. And my constituents
are begging me desperately,
anything that we can do to help
the crime issue, and I think
this is one solution potentially
to help fix that. And so that's
why I gave it a yes and I hope I
can give, give a yes on the
floor. Usually when I'm on the
fence, it's a no. But I did read
the whole bill, so it's a yes.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
