Local schools we have a quorum.
Good morning happy Monday his
rise to the occasion presented
today by Representative Allen
McInnis.
Thank you for the privilege we
have to approach in prior.
Thank you for your grace and
your love the provides a way to
salvation.
Ask you to give my fellow
legislators guidance wisdom
grace with each other strength
clarity of purpose the remind us
for the we've been called here
is not as rulers but as
servants.
Senator bless all of the staff
give them strength and patience.
I thank you lord for everybody
on this floor because you have
called us here.
Senator bless.
This house of representatives
god bless New Mexico.
Thank.
If you pledge allegiance
Representative Duncan.
Bank of the United States of
America and to the Republic for
which it stands one nation under
god indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
And for the pledge to the flag
New Mexico Representative
Sanchez.
Today here playable.
Good morning members happy
Monday I hope we had a
fantastic weekend.
Of football and family I hope
for all of the most of you.
Generated from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business
innovation is so ordered.
Members announcements from the
floor the gentle lady from.
All those beautiful counties
including supporters have a.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to wish one of my twelve
grand children
Braden Dale Armstrong Happy
Birthday today the he's a hard
working smiling creative young
man that loves to come to the
ranch and his quote of the day
was Mimi I love to give your
child a dirt nap.
Birthday Braden's.
The gentleman from Chavis and
you know the Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker
ladies and gentleman on your
desk this morning as a satchel
full of all of those things that
you want and comes courtesy of
eighty county of Representative
may some and Representative
brown and myself and special
thanks.
to Haley client for put it all
together and make it happen
thank you very much thank you
gentlemen the gentle lady from
any in the Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker good
morning everyone I have the
privilege of introducing some
guests on the rostrum this
morning they are all from Eddy
county and they are superstars
in in our area so I'd like to
mention them by name and title
and have them wave it it you as
I mentioned their name so first
of all we have the mayor of
Carlsbad Dale G. on way.
Welcome Dale.
City councilman city of Carlsbad
Eddy rod Regus.
Councilman for the city of
Carlsbad west Carter.
We have city councilwoman karla
Niemeyer city of Carlsbad.
We have also some any county
commissioners with us this
morning we start with Ernie
Carlson.
Eddy County commission.
We're privileged to have Serra
Cordova Eddy County commission
as well.
And the newest member of that
tribe is bobo and Eddy County
commission.
We also have Haley Klein the
president of the R. teacher
chamber of commerce.
Also the chamber of commerce
president or CEO Chad Ingram
city of Carlsbad.
And then also we have a school
board member from the Carlsbad
municipal schools Tiffany
surely.
Welcome to all of you and I just
like to say Mr speaker that Eddy
County is having a legislative
reception this evening it'll be
at Rio Chama starting at five
thirty am going to about seven
thirty and everyone's invited
and finally Mr speaker we do
have some guests in the gallery
who are from Eddy county and in
particular but we have some
waste isolation pilot plant
staffers up there and I just
would like you to recognize if
you would Mr speaker.
Thank you thank you gentle lady.
If we could get a list from you
we can get a staff down there so
we can get that is for me.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
ladies.
Further announcements.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker for the
house today I just want to
invite everyone to join us at
six AM six AM Mondays and
Wednesdays at the fort Marcy Jim
for the house basketball team we
are putting together a killer
team and although I was worried
about losing some numbers for.
We have new members that our
party joined us and they are so
incredible we are putting our
team together and I just invite
everybody to join us for
practice every Monday and
Wednesday at six AM starting
today we'll see you on Wednesday
the gentle lady on her to the
grapevine that practice actually
starts at four AM with leader
lane.
Mr speaker that is correct
leader lane gets is early start
running before we even get there
he runs a marathon and then he
goes to practice is basketball
thank you gentle lady.
The gentleman from Chavis
representative Nibert.
Mr speaker.
Tell you.
They don't put any oxygen.
In the year of.
In that six AM.
Basketball.
It's gonna take me weeks to
recover.
Mr mentored gentleman.
Further further announcements.
The gentle gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett thank you Mr speaker
everybody say Hey both money put
us a little yesterday January
twenty second was the lunar new
year is the year of the rabbit
the rabbit stands for hope and
new possibilities so I thought
that's very appropriate that we
have hoping new possibilities in
our chamber and if you got off
to a bad start on the solar
January first you can begin
again today thank you.
Thank you gentle lady.
For the for the announcements.
The gentleman from.
Sandoval no nonsense.
I do have a few announcements I
want to
Let you know again that MVD
staff will be here on the twenty
fourth and twenty fifth in the
house lounge from eight to
twelve and one thirty to five PM
for simple vehicle title and
registration transactions.
Emphasis on simple note that I
don't know what that means but
nothing too complicated please
but they'll become the twenty
fourth and twenty fifth and for
the members of the house this is
when you can get your cars.
register to get that big fancy
red plate
that does not allow you to
speed.
On the free way to come to
session just wanna make that
clear
we heard from Jenny from eighty
about the Carlsbad chamber of
commerce city county legislative
reception tonight at Rio Chama
we also have heating County.
Administer administration town
of Clayton legislative luncheon
up at the end and spa at Loretto
and today is also Mexico tech
and science day at the
legislature all of a the return
the.
Harper's on the monitor.
Members also will make a few
more announcements with regard
to ranking members two house
committees
we are pointing Representative
Jennifer Jones as ranking member
of the house health and Human
Services Committee.
Representative Allen McInnis as
a ranking member of the house
labor veteran and military
affairs committee.
Representative Lewis that ISS
has a ranking member of the
house for rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee.
Representative Stephanie lord as
a ranking member of the house
consumer and public affairs
committee.
Representative month in somewhat
a has a ranking member of the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee
representative bill Rehm as a
ranking member of the house
Judiciary Committee.
And Representative Josh and on
this as a ranking member of the
house commerce and economic
development committee.
Any further announcements.
And the committee announcements.
All right.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr speaker and K. R.
A. miss the opportunity to make
this announcement the house
transportation infrastructure
capital works committee will be
having an informational meeting
tomorrow starting at nine AM the
they're being square.
Thank you John.
For instance.
When once going twice.
The gentle lady from you
Representative Gaydos thank you
Mr speaker I also wanted to
mention that house commerce will
be meeting on Wednesday for our
organizational meeting I'm not
sure the the room number yet but
we will get that so all members
and Friday we will start hearing
bills.
Thank you Julie.
Gentleman from.
So the one on one interview and
percent with the again and again
that good morning Mr speaker
good morning members here taxed
revenue committee will meet on
Wednesday there is a strong
possibility that it will be Jews
and retails at that meeting for
our members and staff and also
we will start hearing bills on
Friday but again tax revenue
beginning at eight thirty on
Wednesday thank you.
Thank you gentlemen.
Gentleman from Santa Fe Santa Fe
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment that's a
resources committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning Tuesday
at eight thirty we are rolling
house bill thirty two to
Thursday so we just have three
bills currently on the agenda
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
The gentle lady from.
Very personable said the fan
tells Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker the house
agriculture a sexiest and water
resources committee will be
meeting tomorrow morning at
eight thirty for an
organizational meeting in room
three fifteen thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you delayed.
The gentle lady from the house
Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee
will be meeting tomorrow at nine
organizational meeting I have
not yet found any burritos but
if anybody would like to help me
with that that would be very
much appreciated thank you.
Thank you ladies.
From.
Los Alamos Santa Fe Santa Fe
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker just a reminder
House Judiciary is meeting today
at one thirty we'll have a
organizational component as well
as to bills that will be hearing
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you delayed.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero
thank you Mr speaker I'd like to
just announce that house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee will be meeting
tomorrow Tuesday January twenty
fourth at one thirty in room
three fifteen.
Thank you gentle lady.
Further else this.
All right the gentle lady from
Bernalillo on.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order of business
introduction of legislation the
magician it is so ordered.
Right.
House Bill three introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil and
act making appropriations for
the operation of the department
of transportation House Bill
three introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House Bill three having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house representative
transportation public works
committee infrastructure
committee and the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill eight introduced by
representatives of Penske in
senators Steinborn and act
relating to economic development
creating the creative industry
division in the economic
development department creating
the creative industry fund
making appropriations house bill
eight introduced by
representatives a Penske and
Senator Steinborn house bill
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house commerce
and economic development
committee then so the house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one thirty three
introduced by Representative
Trujillo Lujan Garrett Cortez
and Serato making an act making
appropriation to the crime
victims reparation commission to
recruit and retain sexual
assault service providers
hospital one thirty three
introduced by representatives
Trujillo Lujan cared for tennis
and Serato.
One thirty.
House bill one thirty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee and so house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one thirty four
introduced by representatives
Trujillo Ortez Gareth lu Han and
Serato and act relating to
public schools requiring the
public education department to
provide menstrual products in
school bathrooms making
appropriation house bill one
thirty four introduced by
Representative Trujillo Cortez
geared to Lujan and Serato house
bill one thirty four having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house and aged Health Education
Committee fans house
appropriations and finance
committee.
One thirty five introduced by
Representative Trujillo Lujan
Garrett Cortez and Roybal
Caballero and act making
appropriation to the children
youth and families department to
provide additional funding for
child advocacy centers house
bill one thirty five introduced
by Representative Trujillo Lujan
Garrett Cortez and Roybal
Caballero.
House bill one thirty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer and public
affairs committee Vince house
appropriations and finance
committee.
One thirty six introduced by
Representative Trujillo Cortez
Garrett Lujan and Thompson and
act making appropriation to the
board of regents of the
university of New Mexico for
operational infrastructure for
the statewide human
papillomavirus pap registry
house bill one thirty six
introduced by Representative
Trujillo Cortez Garrett Lujan
and Thompson house bill one
thirty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee intends house
appropriations and finance
committee.
One thirty seven introduced by
Representative Cabana and act
relating to taxation creating
gross receipts tax deductions
for the sale of child care
assistance through a license and
child care assistance program
and prekindergarten services by
for profit prekindergarten
providers house bill one thirty
seven introduced by
Representative cut than a house
bill one thirty seven have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee thanks
house transportation the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House bill one thirty eight
introduced by Representative
Cabana and act relating to
courts providing flexibility and
changing requirements for
payment of fines fees and costs
associated with conviction
explained community service
options house bill one thirty
eight introduced by
representative Cadena.
House bill one thirty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house consumer public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
One thirty nine introduced by
representative Cadena and act
relating to courts eliminating
court fees repealing sections
thirty one dash twelve dash six
three three one dash four dash
eight thirty one dash twelve
dash eleven thirty one dash
twelve dash thirteen thirty five
dash fourteen dash eleven and
sixty six dash eight dash one
sixteen point three NMSA
nineteen seventy eight mmhm laws
eighteen fifty eight to eighteen
fifty nine H. thirty laws of
nineteen one chapter three sixty
seven sections one and two laws
two thousand three chapter three
eighty seven section one clause
to fifteen chapter ten section
three thousand nineteen eighty
three chapter one thirty four
section six and lost in nineteen
eighty nine chapter three
eighteen section thirty five as
amended house bill one thirty
nine introduced by
representative Cadena house bill
one thirty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Judiciary Committee sens
house appropriations and finance
committee
house bill one forty introduced
by representative Lente
Representative G. Andrés Romero
Representative how they're
Martinez Representative Roybal
Caballero and representative
Allison for the legislative
education study committee and
act relating to education
creating the tribal education
trust fund providing
distributions to the public
education department providing
accountability measures
providing reporting requirements
making appropriations house bill
one forty introduced by
representative Lente
Representative G. Andrés Romero
Representative how they're
Martinez.
Representative Roybal Caballero
and representative Allison.
House bill one forty have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee then
as the house appropriations and
finance committee.
One forty one introduced by
Representative Ezzell an act
relating to motor vehicles and
acting new section of the motor
vehicle code to establish the
concerns of police survivors C.
O. P. S. special registration
plate making appropriation house
bill one forty one introduced by
Representative Ezzell.
House bill one forty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation and
public works and infrastructure
committee.
Fans house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one forty two
introduced by representative
Allison Sapan ski and Matthews
and act relating to the
environment and acting the
generating facility in mind
remediation and restoration for
public health and the
environment act requiring the
energy minerals and natural
resources department and the
department of environment to
investigate plan oversee monitor
and enforce the remediation and
restoration of generating
facilities and mine's providing
for displaced worker
prioritization provided
reporting requirements
authorizing the energy minerals
and natural was resources
department and the department
environment to hire outside
professionals to assist in the
review remediation and
restoration of generating
facilities and mines making
appropriations hospital one
forty two introduced by
representatives Allison semansky
and Matthew's house bill one
forty two having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house energy and
natural resources committee
events house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one forty three
introduced by Representative
Sarinana for the legislative
finance committee an act
relating to public school
governance creating reporting
requirements allowing the public
education department to suspend
individual local school board
members for crying the public
education department to report
assessment data on a regular and
rolling basis allowing local
school boards to establish an
annual evaluation process for
local superintendents requiring
more mandatory training for
local school boards and
governing bodies of charter
schools requiring the public
education department to report
financial data quarterly to
local school boards requiring
public school capital outlay
council approval of lease
payments for calling council
development and implementation
of a standardized standardized
lease format requiring
chartering Authority oversight
of charter school conflict of
interest documentation providing
more public access to
participate decision making of
local school boards and
governing bodies of charter
schools through webcasting and
archiving meetings as per one
thirty three introduced by
Representative serin Jana.
House bill one forty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee then how's Education
Committee.
House bill one forty four
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
taxation increasing and indexing
the amount of the child income
tax credit for certain taxpayers
house bill one forty four
introduced by Representative
Chandler.
One forty four having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee sense how sensation
and Revenue committee.
House bill one forty five
introduced by representatives
Nyberg these L. and Pettigrew
and act relating to education
amending the program
administration and criteria of
the general Richard T. nose
legislative scholarship program
at the New Mexico military
institute house bill one forty
five introduced by
Representative sniper to these
L. and Pettigrew house bill one
forty five having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee vans house
Education Committee.
Gillette from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
It is so ordered.
Members please take note
With regard to the celebration
we had earlier Eddy County day
and and the the beautiful works
from our colleagues from that
part of the state I do have a
list of folks that I'd like to
recognize at this point
and if you are here in the
rostrum or up in the gallery
please stand and be recognized.
We have Angie yes of from the
city of Carlsbad.
John.
Thank.
The reason is.
Hello.
Stephanie.
The bobbin.
Cool Papen city Virginia.
And Jessica welcome to the state
house of representatives.
Thank you Mr speaker.
From Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order business introduction of
legislation to no objection it
is so ordered.
House bill one forty six
introduced by representatives
Nyberg ease L. and Pettigrew and
act relating to capital project
funding requiring the higher
education department to consider
Berwick's projects ties by the
New Mexico military institute
for developing the department's
recommendations for legislative
funding house bill one forty six
introduced by Representative
sniper to ease L. and Pettigrew.
Forty six minutes twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
then as a house appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one forty seven
introduced by representative
Lente for the legislative
education study committee and
act relating to education
changing the distributions from
the Indian Education frontier
house bill one forty seven
introduced by representative
Lente.
House bill one forty seven
having been read twice by title.
His order printed and referred
to the house Education Committee
of as a house appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one forty eight
introduced by representative
Lente and act relating to early
childhood authorizing the early
childhood education and care
department to enter into inter
governmental agreements with
tribal governments house bill
one forty eight introduced by
representative Lente.
House bill one forty eight have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in an offense Committee this
house Education Committee.
House bill one forty nine
introduced by representative
Lente and act relating to tribal
education requiring the public
education department to
calculate and included as part
of its annual budget a portion
of funds for New Mexico Indian
nations tribes and pueblos
making an appropriation house
bill one forty nine introduced
by representative Lente.
House bill one forty nine having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
then house appropriations and
finance committee.
One fifty introduced by
Representative Figueroa and act
relating to retiree health care
increasing employee and employer
contribution rates to the
retiree health care fund house
bill one fifty introduced by
Representative Figueroa.
I.
One fifty have been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the house labor
committee embedding Affairs
Committee fans house
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one fifty one
introduced by Representative
Trujillo an act relating to
higher education extending
eligibility for unemployment
benefits to non tenure track
faculty at colleges and
universities house bill one
fifty one introduced by
Representative Trujillo.
House bill one fifty one having
been read twice by title.
Yes.
House bill one fifty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee
this house labor veterans and
military affairs committee.
House bill one fifty two
introduced by Representative
Trujillo an act.
Operations the public education
department of finance the
development of updated versions
of the Pueblo day Espanol pada.
Certificate soon billing way
hospital one fifty two
introduced by Representative
Trujillo.
How's the two.
Been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred.
To the committee and consumed in
the committee Patel's concluded
finance us the committee Patel's
for those watching at home how's
Education Committee this house
appropriation finance committee.
House bill one fifty three
introduced by Representative
Ezzell and act relating to crime
providing that each animal
stolen by a person constitutes a
separate offence of livestock
larceny Hospital one fifty three
introduced by Representative
these L..
Stand by everybody.
House bill one fifty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house agriculture as a
gas and water resources
committee thanks House Judiciary
Committee.
House bill one fifty four
introduced by representatives
reap and Reem and act relating
to children amending the
definition of delinquent Act in
delinquency acts to include
cannabis use possession and
produce production amending
sections of the sections of the
cannabis regulation act to
include cannabis use possession
and production by a minor is a
delinquent act house bill one
fifty four introduced by
representatives read and read.
House bill one fifty four have
been here twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house health and Human
Services Committee events the
house Judiciary Committee.
House bill one fifty five
introduced by representatives
read and read and act relating
to crime increasing the penalty
for Ecker aggravated battery
upon a peace officer house bill
one fifty five introduced by
representatives of rebirth and
redeem.
One fifty five have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house consumer and public
affairs committee this House
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one fifty six
introduced by representatives a
rebate and Reem and act relating
to health an act of cannabis
school use prevention resource
act requiring the department of
health to develop maintain and
oversee a cannabis school use
prevention resource program
along the department of health
to promulgate rules house bill
one fifty six introduced by
representatives of rebirth and
renewal.
House bill one fifty six seven
minutos by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house Education Committee this
house health and Human Services
Committee.
House bill one fifty seven
introduced by representatives of
Republican Reims and act
relating to cannabis products
safety clarifying cannabis
packaging requirements
pertaining to children's safety
house bill one fifty seven
introduced by representatives
read and read.
I also wanted to seven have been
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house health and Human
Services Committee this house
consumer and public affairs
committee.
House bill one fifty eight
introduced by Representative to
read and Rehm an act relating to
driving under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs
amending requirements for
testing the blood of a person
suspected of operating motor
vehicle while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor
or drugs providing that certain
medical professionals are
authorized to withdraw blood in
the performance of the chemical
blood tests for driving a motor
vehicle operating a motor boat
under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs
clarifying that the chemical
blood tests may be for drugs or
alcohol yes the one fifty eight
introduced by representatives
read and redeem.
House bill one fifty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house transportation
public works and capital of the
province Committee this is a
house Judiciary Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I will go to that
order business announcements and
miscellaneous business seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
The Julie from earlier
representative Thompson
pronouncement thank you Mr
speaker I have some guests today
action covering for
Representative Matthews this
week is national certified
registered nurse anesthetist
anaesthetists or C. are in a
week in nineteen seventy seven
eighteen seventy seven C. R. N.
A.'s where the first health care
providers to administer
anesthesia which led to the
creation of the nurse anesthesia
profession and in nineteen
fifteen the first formal nurse
anesthesia program was
established because C. RNase
find ninety first ninety five
percent of and it's the easiest
Services in rural New Mexico and
seventy one percent across the
entire state they play a vital
role in access to health care
for New Mexico residents they
have been providing anesthesia
in New Mexico for over seventy
years during this time they have
proven to provide quality and
safe anesthesia for variety of
cases they use their anesthesia
skills in the surgical setting
up step tricks emergency room
and across all age groups we
have brought gift bags in
celebration of C. are in a week
and we hope you enjoy them and I
just have a quick story one
Senator we were at a meeting
with them he leaned over to me
he said they seduce people don't
think I said no they said date
people.
So I tease them about that to
this day and so that we have
people on the rostrum and I'm
sorry I can't pronounce there's
mia Austin and.
And bill more land.
And Angela Fritz Kaegi.
Sam could Jansky.
Amelia Hynes.
And.
The I guess that's it so please
they are great people they do a
great disservice for New Mexico
so please join me in in
welcoming them and thanking
them.
Thank you Gillian welcome to the
house.
Are there further announcements
before we go back to intro the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon thank you
Mr speaker your House
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at one
thirty in room three oh seven
thank you Julie.
The June lady from going on a
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker the
Consumer public affairs
committee will meet tomorrow
let's just say one thirty thank
you.
In a room three seventeen I
believe is what we're room is
let's just say that's probably
about right gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The lady of the gentle lady
from.
Insurance in a support role in
Valencia Representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker
you could just say the gentle
lady from all those counties the
largest house district in the
nation so anyway just to make a
little easier for you thank you
Mr speaker on your desks hi
importantly forgot to talk a
little bit about the VLA the
very large array in my district
that I can see out my window in
my living room the telescopes
they run across our ranch and
the ranch is next to us and on
some state land there as well so
please visit the B. LA we have a
great a visitor center the
wanting to do some expansion out
there the federal government's
paying for it but they also like
to introduce to New Mexico a new
stem project out there for all
New Mexico kids so please read
your booklet if you have any
questions come and see me thank
you Mr speaker.
Appreciate that big fans of the
VLA time factors and you show on
Netflix called a trip to
infinity which is totally fair a
space nerd it will blow your
mind.
Further now since.
All right delayed from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
that order business introduction
of legislation.
It objection is so ordered.
House bill one fifty nine
introduced by representatives of
read and read and act relating
to traffic offenses providing
for testimony by interactive
video providing for implied
consents to a to a laboratory
analysts appearance by video
hospital one fifty nine
introduced by representatives
read and read.
House bill one fifty nine have
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house transportation public
works in capital improvements
committee.
Vance.
House Judiciary Committee.
House bill one sixty introduced
by Representative Chandler and
act relating to state properties
amending section nineteen dash
seven dash fifty seven NMSA
nineteen seventy eight in laws
nineteen twelve chapter eighty
two section thirty three as
amended to authorize the
commissioner of public land
plans to grant rights of way and
easements across the land for
infrastructure used for
broadband internet services
amending sections sixty seven
dash three dash twelve NMSA
nineteen seventy eight by
nineteen twenty nine chapter one
ten section one as amended to
authorize the state
transportation commission to
prescribed conditions for the
installation of broadband
internet infrastructure placed
along across over or under
public highways whether property
under the jurisdiction of the
department of transportation
authorizing waiver of fees for
leasing costs for infrastructure
that is to be used primarily to
provide broadband internet
services to unserved or
underserved locations as defined
in the connecting New Mexico act
this bill one sixty introduced
by Representative Chandler.
House bill one sixty having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee Vance the house
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee.
House bill one sixty one
introduced by Representative
Johnson and act relating to
Indian Affairs moving the inter
tribal ceremony office to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration cremating the
inter tribal ceremonial office
as the inter tribal Indian
ceremonial Association amending
and recompiling sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
making appropriation house bill
one sixty one introduced by
Representative Johnson house
bill one sixty one having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government election Indian
Affairs Committee vents the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
House joint resolution one
introduced by Representative
Figueroa a joint resolution
proposing to amend the
constitution of New Mexico to
provide for the creation of an
independent redistricting
commission to develop
redistricting plans for
congressional districts state
legislative districts in the
district of other distracted
state offices house joint
resolution one introduced by
Representative Figueroa street
resolution one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee events
the house Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution two
introduced by Representative
Figueroa a joint resolution
proposing to amend article four
section five of the constitution
New Mexico for changing the
length of legislative sessions
in even numbered years to sixty
days allowing the consideration
of all subjects including veto
overrides during each regular
legislative session requiring a
recess and each legislative
session allowing pending
legislation to be continued
between regular legislative
sessions house joint resolution
two introduced by Representative
Figueroa.
House joint resolution two
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee sense the house
Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution three
introduced by representative
Nibert a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
article four of the constitution
New Mexico provided a
declaration of a state of
emergency pursuant to a power
granted to the governor by law
terminates after ninety days
unless the governor calls the
legislature into special session
to address the circumstances of
the emergency and for require a
three fifths vote of the
legislature to restrict suspend
or terminate the emergency
declaration house joint
resolution three introduced by
Representative Nyberg house
joint resolution three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government election
Indian Affairs Committee this
the house Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution for
introduced by Representative
Ferrary for the radioactive and
hazardous materials committee a
joint resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of New
Mexico by adding a new section
of article to the provides the
people of the state with
environmental rights including
the right to clean and healthy
air water soil and environments
to stable climate and self
sustaining ecosystems and
directs and directs the state
counties and municipalities to
service trustees of the natural
resources of New Mexico for the
benefit of all the people in by
repealing the current pollution
control provisions of article
twenty section twenty one house
joint resolution for introduced
by Representative Ferrary.
House joint resolution for
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the house energy and natural
resources committee events House
Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution I
introduced by Representative
Alcon.
For the military and Veterans
Affairs Committee a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article eight
section fifteen of the
constitution of New Mexico to
extend a property tax exemption
currently only allowed for one
hundred percent disabled
veterans and their widows and
widowers to veterans with less
than a one hundred percent
disability and their widows and
widowers and be some amount of
the exemption on a Veterans of
federal disability rating house
joint resolution I introduce by
Representative Alcon house joint
resolution I have been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans and
military affairs committee sends
house taxation and revenue
committee.
House joint resolution six
introduced by Representative
Alcon for the military and
Veterans Affairs Committee the
joint resolution proposing an
amendment of article eight
section five of the constitution
of New Mexico to increase the
property tax exemption for
honorably discharged members of
the armed forces and their
widows and widowers house joint
resolution six introduced by
Representative Alcon House
jurors solutions six have been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
house labor veterans military
affairs committee says the house
taxation and revenue committee.
House joint resolution seven
introduced by Representative
block a joint resolution
proposing to amend article
twelve section six of the
constitution of New Mexico to
replace the public education
department with the public
school administrative office
under the direction and control
of the Public Education
Commission within the powers of
the commission and
administrative office so as not
to infringe on the powers and
duties of local school boards
school districts and governing
bodies of charter schools
providing a transition house
joint resolution seven
introduced by Representative
block house joint resolution
seven having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the house Education
Committee there is a house
Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution eight
introduced by representatives
Rubio cared Syriana partez ended
on a joint resolution proposing
to amend article four of the
constitution of New Mexico by
allowing for provision of
legislative salaries in creating
the citizen commission on
legislative salaries to
establish adjust and limit the
salaries of members of the
legislature providing for a
voter referendum to reject or no
the findings of the citizen
commission on legislative
salaries comes from resolution
resolution eight introduced by
Representative Rubio Garrett
Syriana forterra's ended at a.
House joint resolution eight
remember twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
vents the house Judiciary
Committee.
House joint resolution nine
introduced by Representative to
read Kareem and the lord a joint
resolution proposing amendments
to article two section thirteen
of the constitution New Mexico
tomorrow conditions for denial
of bail to be set by the
legislature remove the
requirement that building I'll
decisions be made only by a
court of record the move the
limitation of bills and I'll two
defendants charged with a felony
clarify the bill may be denied
if no release conditions will
reasonably ensure the parents of
a person as required and remove
certain court procedural
directions house joint
resolution nine introduced by
representatives read redeem and
lord.
House resolution nine amendment
was by title is ordered printed
and referred to the house
government election Indian
Affairs Committee this is the
house Judiciary Committee.
The.
Anybody in the jeopardy theme
music feel free to please.
House concurrent resolution one
introduced by Representative
McQueen and Scott a concurrent
resolution amending the joint
rules of the house and Senate
regarding availability of
proposed committee proposed
committee amendments and
substitutes an executive agency
analyses house concurrent
resolution one introduced by
Representative McQueen and
Scott.
House concurrent resolution one
amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house rules committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business in
addition it is so ordered.
Other announcements.
All right members thank you for
a productive morning we've gone
through.
We've gone through a great deal
of introduction and will
continue to do that over the
next few days but before we
break to the general from
Bernalillo Representative
Garcia.
Thank you and some of speaker
Estamos speaker I'd like to
modify.
The chamber.
That
Every now and then
we get the food products.
You for
from I find the businesses and
industries throughout the state.
And
If you
do not avail yourself of these
food products
I'd be willing to kind of taken
off your hand.
And let me explain it this
summer speaker then my community
at home family Catholic Church
we have a the food pantry and we
have two distributions thank in
those days on Thursday we do
I need to distribution along
within
with canned goods and the of the
shovel food items and
in these a
the food distribution
on Tuesday and Thursdays are
similar speaker
basically into a.
zip codes.
zip code eight seven one of five
and seven one two one of the
qualifying individuals that can
take in and the.
Distribution of our food pantry.
And then naturally
as the most because
the targeted population of these
for distributions are of the
elderly and the disabled and
just for working families in
general so
One last note estimates because.
And so I think it's seven one to
run essential.
The schools are vowing areas of
Westminster areas of the public
could committee of both within
the county and the city.
but it's important to note that
small speaker that a seven one
oh five zip code in the summer
one to ones of codes for the
heaviest.
Sen goals regarding.
COVID virus and so again.
Things in general in the house
if you folks a avail yourself of
these products that we get both
those of on operational food
I do want to come off your hand
and you can just set him up
right at the on the missile
system as speaker thank you very
much god bless you.
This is just a mile and and
thank you for going above and
beyond the call of duty in doing
that I am familiar with the food
pantry at Holy Family and indeed
us serve very many families in
that community thank you John
further announcements.
Right thank you all for a very
productive day will continue
tomorrow the the plan is to go
ahead come on the floor at ten
thirty to do more introduction
of legislation that we know that
committees are starting to work
this morning today this
afternoon and this week have a
great rest of your day enjoying
your the beginning of the second
week of session and to the
Rockies take it all in we're
just getting started.
