The.
As.
The.
Representative.
The presentative rubia.
Representative.
Representative townsend.
Madame chair.
The.
Okay I wanted it to sort of go
over always expect this more in
the playout uhm just over all
the same page and see if there
are questions so we're only
hearing one bill today.
Chairwoman or terrors.
Who is not here at the moment
she is in her committee
presenting.
Until she rise I am the other.
Uh after we finish the
housekeeping.
Will there is a committee served
as me.
The commission has been
circulated to the committee and
has other hard copy now.
Will move the consider committee
seven for discussion purposes my
presentation will be on the
committee serve
we want adopted yet uhm that
will come later
the public comment we will do
the more than half hour in favor
in a half hour of post.
And we will see my practice has
been ninety seconds per person
and we'll see the last ten
minutes of the each side for
people who would like to.
This apparently is newly miked
so I don't need you to come to
the middle you can just stand
where you are in supposedly the
mak.
After we do a public comment
will do the discussion.
Questions.
Well
vice chair sorry.
The.
The.
Yeah.
It started.
Ma.
The.
Thirty secretary
secretary but has been working
on this bill and uh.
The.
Yeah.
Seven four nine.
Yeah.
Thinking about your
has
changes.
Yeah.
Department energy minerals and
natural resources department.
This is the.
I think it's fair to s.
Things in the bill um perhaps on
my college think they go to far.
I just gonna run through an
outline of the bill I don't have
cross references.
Um the bill will do.
The.
That start to.
Operator.
Without the resources to
properly operate them or play
them when the time comes.
In were concerned about that.
Yeah.
We're conservation.
The.
So.
Provide for.
That is.
Just to plug a single and well.
If you have a couple thousand.
It's also being improvement.
The.
Okay.
The civil penalties they
currently.
Two thousand five hundred per
day that the cap of t.
Two thousand.
Pretty cost and with the current
cap.
Doing business.
Division.
Instead of coming back to the
legislature.
And I think that's a good thing
and we.
Every time they have to come
back to legislature.
And it also in the uh.
Yeah.
In particular the committee said
just that the mean.
First res.
The removal of the.
The.
About them.
The the setback requirements
were sticking point.
Because.
Yeah.
Good morning chair vice chair
and.
As representative mcqueen
explain this bill with the
result of months of work by stay
colders and I want to personally
in publicly thank those forty
plus individuals that spend
every other friday afternoon.
These reforms in the discussions
around them we're not.
Was willing to engage eminer
recognizes in this
administration recognizes the
importance of oil and gas to new
mexico we also recognize the
diversity in our industry over
six hundred and seven operators
have a registered well with our
largest having more than eleven
thousand where the number two
aren't sure oil producer with
over six hundred million barrels
produced last year from seventy
thousand active wells to make
sure we can responsibly oversee
these activities and that we
have the resources in place to
address foreseeable risks it is
time for a careful update to our
statutory regime i'm not here to
suggest that every well transfer
is back that every well in the
state will be orphan for from it
operators plug hundreds of wells
a year.
And have for a long time and
most well transfers represent
normal inappropriate business
transactions however with six
hundred and seven operators
seventy thousand plus wells and
our decades of experience we
know there are problematic
transfers and that some person
and that some percentage of the
current wells in the state have
been and will be ortioned in the
future with thirty thousand
wells on state and fee lands
even if only one percent to five
percent of those wells are worth
in the liabilities to the state
will be significant three
hundred and eighty to five
hundred million dollars
conservatively right now the ocd
only ones holds a hundred and
seven million in bonding against
those future liabilities.
And this disaccounts for the
shortfall in in the known
orphans that we have today the
updates being produced proposed
will help bridge that gap give
us the tools to oversee
responsible development
implementing these changes will
require will changes and I will
commit to this committee that
those changes will be done in a
responsible way that addresses
context specific concerns we've
heard over these many months
particularly those of our
smaller local independent opera.
Thank you
for questions.
All right.
Manage your members of the
community.
Mexico's small producers
strongly oppose this bill to the
extreme regulations that this
proportion
message
simply stated the spills to pick
to whites will force our members
outstand business in this build
you're not just talking about
one regulations
right I have does different
aspects of critical operations
and in recent years it's taking
fashion just
individual aspects in this
master's build like financial
shirts twenty eight
civil east bills to twenty
nineteen sixty days session.
The state method was established
just two years ago this
regulation is too much too quick
in the case of financial
responding increases by much is
for full without study economic
and small producers or to state
revenue
doesn't small producers on the
zoom line further explain how
they are impacted
if you are given the speech we
see in the post.
And we can miss.
Yeah.
I'm multiple sides.
Specifically
reconsiling and.
Okay.
While you're closer than we were
I member still have concerns.
More time and working at the
legislature.
Yeah.
And improve oil.
All sizes.
Well
one thirty three and the bill.
Last year my name is how i'm
strong.
Right.
I.
Right.
Forty years responsibly in new
mexico.
You're
it smaller.
So I can not
will make process
small for
this bill is just indicated
that's not actually addressed or
for well problems or future
so we're going to put this
increase on smaller
risk putting some of them out of
business and not actually
dressing and that's not risk
worth my employees jobs so I
urge you to pl.
Yeah.
Yeah.
No.
Even with this process
will be addressed
by clarification and details
at the from the legislature over
all
this proposal would be much more
sixty days
before impact be investigated
december as well as if i'm
likely to result in the mexico
company
watching the little you know
positive environment thank you.
This morning
my name is dear if more than the
president new mexico june
college we respect we ask you to
post one thirty three as a hard
institution operating in a
program based recognize
need for modernization to all
the
place to consider this
to ensure the protection of the
industry in the middle work in
all the
mexican college is proud of the
buyer workforce
of the industry is a strong
partner and we and we asked if
you work to the work as we work
to diversify the economy of the
county and is sure I really work
where you can both know.
I might be falling to
the chamber
this legislation creates the
worst problems with the oil and
guess industry becomes long
macro level this bill what's the
world
certain path toward a reduction
of production and this is a key
industry that directly and
indirectly provides
our general fund revenue and
it's an industry that continues
to improve its safety and
environmental performance
operations owners are regulation
should be supported by science
and study that just apply for
increases and the implementation
of implementation of new
requirements this bill closes a
serious rate to investments in
the same one basins threats that
will likely result in a dramatic
decrease and stay revenues at a
time when we are planning
financially in the long term or
a future some day without as
much resources from this
economic base of our school
soci.
Committee to set this little
side while encouraging more
negotiation and dialogue between
the industry and environmental
officials.
Yeah.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee i'm carlos
contact president and ceo of the
new mexico business coalition we
respectfully oppose house bill
one thirty three
are over writing concern is that
they're continued to be burdened
some regulations fees and rules
imposed on the industry that is
currently providing about forty
to fifty percent of the state's
budget it would be prudent for
our state to stand in strong
support of this industry while
simultaneously insuring that the
industry operates in a clean and
regulated manner which ideas
instead were seen continued
attacks on the industry were
seeing that the state is happy
to take the money from this
industry but it frequently is
raising barriers and constraints
that cause more harm to our
operators
our oil and gas industry is
producing good paying direct and
indirect jobs funding or
educational systems while
safeguarding the environment the
actions are bad actors were
inadvertent accidents have been
adequately addressed in previous
legislation and we do not see
the need for this legislation we
urge you to say no on this bill
thank you.
Hi how are you
good morning matt and chair my
name is chatting your mind the
CEO for the carls by chamber of
commercial cars by new mexico
and we're asking you to vote no
on HB one thirty three while we
can all agree that oil and gas
act we need some waterization
however this bill is not right
not yet ready to ensure it does
not create an intended
consequences or hinder producers
of any size carls about this
proud of the oil and gas
industry and we're grateful for
the businesses and opportunity
to provides until this bill is
further veteran we respectfully
ask for you to vote no and allow
further discussions in the
interim thank you.
The.
Can you hear me.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
jessica sanders under the two
thousand and nineteen mexico
state teacher the air I stand
and strong opposition of house
bill one thirty three house bill
one thirty three pros and
significant threat to education
programs in new mexico by
proposing policy that would
significantly reduce oil and gas
production in intern decrease
the amount of revenue the state
bring them for education.
In twenty twenty three the new
mexico new mexico students
benefited as well as members of
our state from the world and gas
revenue in the amount of
thirteen point nine billion
dollars one point three billion
of those funds are classrooms if
enacted this legislation would
severely cause repercussions on
classroom resources and reduced
funding for her children.
It is also imperative to
recognize the importance of
sustaining funding especially
considering the record revenues
contributed by the oil and gas
industry
I I beg of you to think about
our children as we make
decisions that adversely affect
funding in education thank you.
The.
Okay.
Good morning mentioner my name
is jennifer grassom and I am the
president and ceo of the
economic development corporation
of lee county we respectfully
ask that you vote no on each b
one thirty three like only has a
diverse and bible and economy
and we continue to work to
support our current businesses
we agree the oil and gas act
mainly modernization but we
cannot support a bill that would
hinder business of any size we
asked that you continue to stow
the modernization needs of the
bill in the interim and ensure
operators of all sizes are best
protected in considered we
county was built on small
business and we are proud of the
industries that operate here
thank you.
Yeah.
Good morning my name is mitch
kalskis i'm interim president of
ipa and vice president of
strategic company were a small
independent oil gas company
located at and we've been
operating in new mexico for over
thirty five years.
This bill is detrimental to many
of the small producers in our
state we currently pay into the
reclamation fund through the
conservation tax collected on
our production currently the
state has over fifty million
dollars in the.
This farm has been abused and
rated over the years and
otherwise would be hundreds of
millions of dollars last year
the state plugged only thirteen
wells
and spent roughly two point two
million dollars doing so
we went through the same process
five years ago increasing the
barning
I think the state needs to look
at current rules and rags and
use those already at their
disposal to address any issues
they see about those are better
and what we stand strongly
opposed opposed to this bill and
encourage you to do the same
thank you.
Thank you madame share and
committee members in good
morning my name is read edwards
and I am here on behalf of the
mac energy corporation founded
and headquartered in in our
teacher new mexico are employees
live work and raise families and
eddie we and charges counties.
We the employees of mac energy
urge you to vote against house
bill one thirty three the bill
is over broad and grand
substantial power to the ocd to
drive smaller producers out of
business between the uncapped
and hand civil penalties and the
immense growth to mandatory
financial assurances these could
increase costs threatened
natalie impacts not only our
business but the communities and
wood in which we live and work
financial decisions are made by
small producers every day and
every increased in cost will
directly impact not only the
business but the employees and
the communities in which they
raise our families we too stand
strongly opposed house but one
thirty three and hope you will
join us thank you.
Hello guys my name is samsura
sea of the buckland production a
small independent oil gas
company based in mexico we found
it three years ago with the
intention of operating in the
mexico for the next thirty
years.
We employed forty people and we
investment local communities
will be a quieter existing
produce and on gas wells from
large companies who no longer
value these properties.
Since inquiring these properties
be a doubled production along
with state revenues without any
drawing using all the existing
wells in infrastructure.
We are brought bus environmental
monitoring and we regularly plug
our wealth
with the highest respect for new
mexico in the family to live
here.
This proposed bill is way too it
has too many regulations it will
force us to shut down our
business in new mexico and move
to other states were business
and dial to be welcomed and
respected I strongly opposed to
spell thank you.
Can you hear me now yes we can
hear me okay thank you I during
the junior president owner of
someone resources i've been
working on gas.
In a street new mexico for over
forty five years started with
two cent one independence
informed someone resources my
own company where three
employees including myself
utilized consultants lenmen in
new mexico switchers pumpers
operating engineers and
with washington area essentially
also use a lot of mom and pop
companies which service are
wells all operations leasing and
prospecting projects are in the
same one basic we operate forty
wells he has small interested in
couple hundred others either as
not approking interest owners or
or over items were exclusively
in of exco and we have no
operations elsewhere
rolling gas acts in the
situation is rewind when
decimate my company I could not
afford to stay in business with
your financial insurance
requirements it's a matter of
too little cable to meet these
strategic requirements but i'd
have to bet in our drawing
projects between the middle of
doing as independent I take in
order to risk which large major
well finished public companies
refuse to take these projects
were **** development would
languish would be a better
estate immense these on gas but
this one gas actually for over
one hundred years independence
built your gas instant metscope
and the same one base and what
it is today plus the permian
would not be what it is without
independent companies figuring
out the geology completions
first all drilling technologies
essentially the secret sauce to
make the permian in southeast
mexico what it is today send one
resources in the midst of
similar figuring out in the
sound one base and make a scaff
and oil how best.
Morning out of chair and
committee members can hear me
okay.
My name is john thompson on vice
president epic energy and along
with our service company walsh
engineering we employ over
eighty people here in the sound
one basin and I have been doing
so for over fifty years i'm a
life long and proud new mexican
for fifty six years in a
graduate of new mexico state and
have a degree in geological
engineering epic energy owns an
operates over four hundred sixty
wells and we have primarily
grown our company by acquiring
wells for majors or larger oil
and gas companies just due to
the scales of efficiency that
smaller companies like us can
do.
Nobody like bloopload nobody
argues that the rules and
regulations need to be refreshed
and updated from time to time
but house bill one thirty three
has wildly missed the mark sadly
over the years I watched
regulatory agencies in a mexico
become political agencies where
science and facts take a back
seat resulting in things like
house bill one thirty three if
the intent of this process is to
push businesses like ours out of
new mexico and drive costs up to
consumers then you will have
succeeded please be at vote now
on this to save new mexico and
save new mexico jobs thank you.
Thank you.
I have unmetered it can you hear
me now
thank you madame chair and and
the legislators my name is rural
man on the managing member of
courtroom service e and p based
in a raw we are a small
privately held oil and gas
company
we have no employees i'm an
investor along with repartners
we have one contract
we operate sixty wells all of
those while during chavis county
and and I personally have been
in the state since I was four
years old which was in nineteen
fifty two
i'm asking you to boat against
our house bill one thirty three
and it's specifically I want to
want to update that as an
independent small privately held
independent company will work
out of our back pocket by then I
mean all of the bonds that we
have that mechanists able to
operate within the mexico we
have paid cash and set up an
account said our bank in order
to provide that bonding amount
to the state.
Also I just want to point out
what would work what happened to
us to part of this was
implemented name way the five
hundred dollars per well per
month provision that's currently
within the bill
our growth operating
the revenue for the month of
december of twenty twenty three
was just slightly above ninety
thousand dollars.
Our net revenue after we paid
royalty and all of the taxes
were sixty six thousand dollars.
The.
Manchere members the committee
thank you for hearing me I am
doctor gary washburn I am super
tendered of carl's bad muscle
school district
I
am strongly opposed to
the proposed legislation
it threatens career
opportunities for our students
and oil the oil and gas industry
is in a tremendous partner for
education across the state but
hearing carls bad we have
certainly
a number of benefits that are I
would just strongly urge each of
you
to vote now on this and thank
you for your time.
My best chair members of the
committee i'm john was andrew
I am employed by doing
production corporation and
bimington new mexico
we have one hundred and ninety
six employees of whom we have
here informing to we have been
in business for sixty five
years.
And yeah I don't think many.
Companies in a basically have
that sort of employment record
which grown your post house bill
one thirty three addioca
overreach it has not been darly
researched
they economic applications that
result from this are going to be
devastating to help us
have a kid million dollar
plugging bone
even if that's lightly lowered
in and and but we appreciate
that it's not going to help as
much as going to really hard is
going to hurt the state we have
responsibility in the mexico not
only to ourselves but it's
around these states that don't
enjoy all I guess activity we
have floated to victory and in
november world wars unreceived
oil we should appreciate that
the state should appreciate that
we deserve that credit and we
strongly oppose house bill one
thirty three you should vote now
thank you.
Our last week.
Good morning that i'm checking
out.
Manager good morning can you
hear me manager.
Okay sorry about that good
morning my name is matthew once
I was signed the executive
director for the compensation
lines fibre one c four non
profit organization dedicated to
educating consumers elected
officials and really anyone
within the public about our
energy where it comes from and
the need for sensible energy
policies on the promote
environmental steward shift and
an affordable energy for working
families and small businesses
typically we don't policies that
impact industries are more more
concerned about the consumer
impact of this legislation
definitely has
a large impact and we're
concerned about the world
communities
obviously it'll impact our our
oil and gas producers the
artist but our concern is
communities like the the same
one basis
based on we can expect to see
job losses we can expect to see
downturn and production so many
of our communities I live in a
community that doesn't have oil
and gas product but I am a
former elected official and so
many communities why heavily on
the of the proceeds that come
from the only industry to pay
for projects within our
communities we can expect to see
what's not all difficult they
project you can expect to see
what will for education so under
some wide implications from this
legislation we certainly
understand the interest and
runner clean up the industry and
modernize the world gas act but
we worried that this is not the
right tool to do so and we would
ask if you oppose and bring it
back to the internet discussion
happen have a better
conversation by thank you
okay thank you for that
that ends or.
Come terry.
I would ask
that so we're just a standard
seat.
I would.
The.
There went on my left who would
l.
Well yeah more people that.
Right and then we'll go on
to everyone if someone.
Good morning man insurance
committee members I stand here
for my handsesters and our
future generations I am out to
chaving from and I made a vote
from senator mexico and from
give up I want to take the
governor and sponsors is one of
the groups working with them oil
gas environment frontline groups
and september twenty such set
september this bill updates the
nineteen thirty five oil gas
active school modernization that
is desperately needed to
protection other front line
communities that we represent
our children and families live
near all of this development
threat from the hundreds of
abandoned and wells reading in
the errand and eating from the
land this is been our home for
thousands of years we need
fiscal modernization and we need
that please do not let the cries
from oil and gas prevent you
from voting for this bill
they've had ninety years to do
better u as a representatives
have the power to protect our
people aaron water well the gas
were part of the process and
have profited it the expense of
our front line communities these
children your children are huge
of generations are the people
you are protecting by voting yes
on this bill show your strength
and vote yes to protect the
people yeah
these region.
Mr chair
was west.
Yeah.
I commend deputy secretary huge
and general
shop hard work bring this bill
for you
need for their leadership
sponsoring this
one thirty three represents
necessary and overdo and gas act
reform that will help protect
new mexico communities and
taxpayers.
There's no dispute that the
current financial insurance
requirements are holy and
adequate to protect the public
from footing the bill to close
working well no dispute the
state does not have the
authority to protect against
risky transfers not dispute and
wells can contami.
Hb one thirty three helps these
challenges it is a product of
months of negotiation it is not
a perfect bill.
I doubt a perfect bill whatever
time before you this is a bill
but at this bill positive step
towards fixing these problems.
Similarly hurt penalties in the
act
with penalties and comparable
state statutes are shown by the
chart.
Multi day violations ring
violature wise by leaders into
it clients and deter future
violations bringing healthiest
line with probable state
statutes better achieve
to support the bill thank you
very much.
Thank you
thank you.
We also participated in the
market process.
Processes.
We've seen.
Yeah.
Hello my name is k issue and i'm
a community organizer with the
grassrooms environmental
advocacy based on southeast new
mexico how citizens for the
future.
We were lucky enough to be a
part of the state color for the
work with oct
b one thirty three.
It was a request for their
process and I encourage you to
respect the work of the agency.
Of course being from the premium
we were taking both strongly
since that that's the protect
public health and encourage you
to support any and all the
minutes to reinclude that back
through the spell way with that
remaining provision of this bill
are necessary to bring you
actually go into the twenty
first century when it comes to
math managing a writing gas and
preparing for a future that is
surely coming when the industry
is no longer right.
This is common sense reform for
the future where the issue of
non producing wells
was businesses that we are
majors will absolutely sell
their calls to our beltic
warming backing into the air in
the middle.
The decision to make today we'll
have an impact on the finance
and look for techniques
let's talk about reality for a
second.
In reality what we are talking
about today is that for time it
crisis this bill is simply
responsible and it will surely
not be the street it only feels
like the words that because we
live in a state where legislator
in the administration are.
I think you represented it
worked on this building people
to vote in support on behalf of
the water conservation community
we also wanted to say why
the us supreme court and twenty
twenty three in the decision
stripped protection for ninety
six percent of the mexican
weapons in those that run into
middle federal protection in
this building opportunity.
Routine weeks from whatever
polluting industries often clear
up six second span up to half a
mile the most recent spill that
started attention and ship rock
you know from the november is
that the the spill brand five
hundred and fifty feet down to
in a federal water will we call
the real value
and then
before this bill was able to be
contained as one is the oil and
gas is operating there will be
spilled and we need protections.
Guidelines already require
locating gas facilities away
from waters and well so the
subjects that we were advocating
for in this bill would really
bring new mexico into already
existing federal requirements so
we're disappointed to see the
set back not in this building
can be amended to do so we
really encourage you all
representatives to in favor
because we know that user
protections that mean her for
our communities thank you.
Mr chair.
Well guardians
while we recognize that
improvements
so what currently exists.
Concerned
a lot of the solution and health
and
that front like communities.
You know these improvements
anything
requires enforcement.
And are regulatory agencies have
really not been fully funded and
given authority to really.
If you're if you hear any
impensance to this bill I hope
this you will
support particularly any that
protection
protective step
for enforcement we do we watch
very closely we do now
are analysis
to show that
the the number the main causes
of spills are equipment and
corruption and.
But if the cost to me.
More than the cost that you're
the risk that you'll actually
get fined action in what that
find my.
Members of the committee my name
is joseph I am from chicago
mexico.
My family has a lot in the same
one based on the nation although
this does not apply to two level
I just want to
make no house
excuse me that's making right
now.
Multiple times you know I I hear
over on on the big scattered
where five minutes are trying to
look for leaks in the oil film
you know they can't
be here on multiple you know
chapter meetings here about
incidents that occur that don't
get reported
to us
the statement meaningful
progress.
We need a continue on that
momentum to ensure that the
public safety the health of our
communities and that protections
of our schools
were families live
mister chairman in the south
base i'd have
to
from texas to my only that come
to business mister
and policies like what we have
in front of us today
on the past two uh transition to
insert that jobs like someone
county which has over two
hundred work
you know working in arts
solar project though that that's
a direction that you don't we
are moved for thank you very
much
for the side the number here and
we'll come back there's time to
just good morning chairman
committee my name's interest or
disconnecting earth works i'm
here today to urge you vote yes
on hb one thirty three on the
greatest point of the bill in
front of you know like in
september visions are necessary
to protect mexicans help and
safe in the environment it's be
one thirty three is important
mexico's current financial
insurance framework leaves
taxpayers of this state at risk
and
billions of dollars to clean up
oil in the future.
Is the recent case of rich way
operating makes clear ocd needs
more to ensure taxpayers aren't
paying between up industries in
that recent case you need to
found three hundred in active
wells from company plugging
abandoning will cost the state
as much as thirty million
dollars which way will only have
to pay that back to state three
thousand dollars per month it's
an eighty four year payment.
Which way is not an outline
they're roughly seventeen
thousand on orthomos scheduled
across the state thousands more
likely to follow the same pack
in cost up with a hundred
thousand dollars in the single
if you do the matter number
start look pretty grandfather he
want thirty three race the
capital blanket bonds from the
shockingly low two hundred fifty
thousand granting place to ten
gives ocd's and desperately
needed to discrete transfers
from including individual
producing.
Long it's removing the cap on
fines and ensuring the ninety
eight percent gas catch room
statute you want to be three as
a much stepped which modernizing
the oil I guess active.
Yeah.
What.
Yeah.
The.
Supporting.
With.
Good morning
first
speaking
leak support environmentally
sound resources rigorous
regulations and enforcement to
prevent drilling activities from
contaminating circus
water or the surrounding
landscape.
Leave support added with
founding
really hard one clear operation.
Therefore.
More
conditions registered lobby
and overnight with some of the
language in the committee
to undermine the governor strong
method
we think the financial insurance
with her are you let you need it
is a big deal it's a big step
forward to have the financial
insurance peace we stand in
strong support of this gal
energy support of it as well
thank you.
Good morning mister committee
members patrick half of the year
to resources I realize that I am
an outline
representing a big oil company
who is here speaking and support
the bill I think mister chairman
had you said it's not perfect
that's been that's been echoed
in other comments I think that's
very true we disappointed by the
some of that some of the
exclusions of you talk about
that those might make it into
their but we do still think
there are a couple things worth
saving in the bill one thing
that jumps out eight percent
gask after percentage we think
that really gives the state a
chance to recognize the enormous
driver industries made towards
those catcher calls just a
cursory luck this morning
data shows that most of the
production currently coming out
in mexico
exceeds numbers I would say
that's back
but we're already better you
she's already there in a lot of
peers already everything that's
worth clarifying and that
secondly we take a lot of we
take a lot of conference based
analysis portion of the
financial insurance it's
scalable it works for operators
large and small state on and we
think there's that would be much
better than the current one size
so.
Yeah.
We are supporting this bill we
believe the loan.
Financial insurance will be
currently which the necessary
protection for a health class
are needed.
There were speaking one schools
for the thirty six thousand
children.
This
will have drought stricten state
on the front line
we must protect our starts water
the industry is responsible for
using eleven to four million
days where it's operations we
need
an amendment
for breakfast
possible or topics
and gas.
On a daily basis.
This
and water and justice
and which are significant to
many of our numbers.
We need an amendment spills and
topic waste mandatory emergency.
From she's in build process
we hope you will vote your
favorite of this bill and use
today as an opportunity to
protect art for further
pollution and providers with the
bible chance against the kind of
crisis
so I can tell you that the
rumours might and when you make
loud noises it gets picked up so
not only that not appropriate to
clapper boot or anything.
Good morning terminal and
members of the committee my name
is wallace i'm the main direct
policy and external affairs.
I don't very much appreciate the
secretary fuse and the division
have undertaken to generate a
bill the both heard and reflects
the concerns of many
stakeholders including those
industry and those environmental
advocates in the community we do
understand and appreciate that
there are still some concerns
and language to work out we had
accidentally helped support
this.
The morning chairman woman
represented my name is
american as well as the nick
that he was public and support
history
and the financial united states
and government
trying to drink oil shower gas
you can.
Whatever
I reminded their scars
this will help protect my own
way but it needs to be amended.
I don't
actually protect my cousins from
exposure to password forever
coming
from existing gas developments
this come from cancers and other
house held issues
as
they need to be able to
worry about being
on my house
when I visit my i've always
upset my drive to go to first
family which was over two hours
away no one's got to drive for
fresh water.
They should be able to access
clean non ten drinking water
homes.
Right
what water resources.
I also work
possible
thank you.
The.
Good morning members.
I am the clean
and under america
we represent marginalized
populations all mexico.
Racial violence.
Race
and a healthy claim.
As well these factors are
which calls are populations.
Most
people
are the first hardest and the
last recover
I climb
but every day.
Your health is compromised
today is an important step
forward addressing
extracted industries this charge
an important section of the
week you maintain those as a
really written account.
I would say it's about time.
These are simply reasonable
costs
the people with exercise should
not pay the cost dollars or with
lease as written.
First up we have evans.
Hello chairman mcqueen can you
hear us
i'd like to ask if the annual
cell could go first and i'll go
after him we're together.
The.
Yeah
chair
mcqueen and this thing was
legislators my name is daniel so
i've had the fortunate
opportunity to have through
three terms in the never home
nation council and the most
recent was to chair the help
education and human services
committee but the never had
nation council right now.
Basically.
Top line I support the adoption
of
this particular bill that is
before the committee in spite of
the fact that.
Mr huge
did not implement me in the
discussions that led up to the
drafting of this legislation my
siblings and I have five a lot
more
drilled their fract they're
producing oil of which every
barrel of oil the state gets
twenty percent post the
cost
that comes out of those the
revenue so the state benefits.
And and to be locked out of the
discussions it is.
I could easily be a polite say
oppose it but in the aspect of.
Moving forward on the needed
changes I support it
and I I would since we were
locked out of the discussions I
would ask that three amendments
be included in this legislation
an amendment to
miss or so you're your time has
expired perhaps this evidence
could cover the amendment.
Thank you chairman the claim my
name is gal i'm in a turn with
the center for biological
diversity we have several
thousand members in the state
while we thank the sponsors
prepare presenting this bill
because of the improvements and
they financial assurance
sections the bill is actually a
grave disappointment because it
contains no protections for
front line communities or for
our land and our water we watch
during the negotiation process
that endeard held with industry
and some environmental groups as
any protections were weakened
and weekend and finally removed
all together under pressure from
the farcel fuel industry we need
leadership to stand up to this
industry and control oil and gas
pollution in our state this bill
as it stands will not do that
even with no public health and
environmental protections in the
bill most industry comes forward
today and opposes the bell this
bill needs multiple and members
to put in place one mile help
buffer zones around schools
prohibit the use of fresh water
for fracking and to make
penalties mandatory for the
spilling of toxic liquid waste I
want to focus on children's
health buffer zones the science
is clear the oil and gas
pollution creates massive health
risks especially for children
this pollution can spread for
miles yet thirty two thousand
children in our state go to
school within a mile of fracking
sites some go to school within a
mile of many fracking sites this
needs to end our children should
not be poisoned while they are
in school at the very least
amend this bill to include one
mile children's health buffers
outs the other components needed
would.
Next step we have glen w.
This.
The.
Good morning.
Chairman mcqueen and
representatives my name is gland
white hole i'm an
environmentalist and an engineer
specialising in energy systems
ideally in order to avoid budget
busting climate catastrophes you
would phase out oil and gas
extraction over the next ten to
twenty years given that this is
not yet happening I reluctantly
request your support for HB one
thirty three the increased
financial assurances so that the
state has sufficient funds to
clean up when failing operators
go bankrupt and walk away from
their responsibility to clean up
the environmental damage costs
by their operations when oil and
gas extraction does face out new
mexico taxpayers could face an
extremely expensive
environmental crisis caused by a
massive number of the van and
wells I also urge you to restore
the setback requirements
hundreds of active wells are
operating within a mile of
schools sadly exposing our
children to dangerous airborne
toxins please also amount the
bill to prevent the use of fresh
water for fracking and to
include mandatory penalties for
toxic chemicals still by oil and
gas operators please support the
people who deserve air clean we
deserve clean air and water
don't let a polluting industry
trunk the will of the people
thank you for listening.
Thank you next week oscar some.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee ask for simpson
resident no mexico for years
involvement with only gas and
conservation work this deal was
a compromise bill isn't needed
for financial research.
To help financial
stability with it all in gas set
backs plugging fines and what I
please support house bill one
thirty three.
Thank you mister.
Good morning chairman and
representatives my name is jose
and i'm here today for calling
in from the permian basin i'm
representing front line
community members who feel as
though their voices are not
being heard i'm calling today to
support this bill with
amendments coming from the
permean basin I can tell you
first time i'll important it is
to see setbacks and health
buffers on in a modern society
there is no reason children
should live with oil and gas
facilities this close to their
school there is no reason oil
and gas facilities should be in
people's backyards we're seeing
high as marite and other upper
respiratory illnesses that are
very common in our children and
this was very frightening
another important amendment we
need as for the use of fresh
water for fracking to be
prohibited it is so important to
take care of the water we do
have here in our state this
liquid was problem is becoming
larger and we need to get a hold
of it before we no longer can
the final thing is this
amendment needs to prohibit and
bring moundabory penalties for
spills in these communities we
also need to see communities
have a adequate time to be made
aware of these spills and the
health effects that these could
cost for the people living here
these bills contain toxic waste
and this has happening due to
equipment failure the industry
needs to fix this equipment and
hold themselves accountable
people living with oil and gas
development in our backyards
depend on you more than you
realize and I want you to think
of us today and any time in the
future when you're making
decisions when our health comes
up on your bills thank you
thank you except we have windy
at city.
The.
The.
Hello thank you
my name is windy at city I live
in farming to name a co and a
naple trouble can you remember
her for now I want to think the
committee chair and committee
members for the opportunity to
provide comments and support a
physical improvements to he went
through three but please I urge
add back to set backs I live in
a forecorner's region then my
family lived with over ten oil
and gas walls within two miles
of her home it became a habit to
smell the air to know the
direction of the wind to
determine the amount of time to
stay outside been to hall water
from a further water source says
their flavor change with
increasing production of the
structures over three decades
they set back at essential
protections for a public health
and water sadly the set back to
an apply to tribal lod lands or
tribal lanes but we all breathe
one error shed that people live
learn and work we can mitigate
the harm by the proximity of
destroy scale oil in gas
production facilities and add
critical essential set backs
thank you.
Come in.
The.
Good morning thank you for
hearing me i'm diane mccash a
mother grandmother i'm an
ancestor to future generations
as we all are I hear those in
opposition to the spell but we
need to think term for the
benefit of our children our
grandchildren in the planet we
must take difficult steps now
and be willing to pivot away
from our comfort and what we
know we must put our substantial
talents and creativity to work
to protect us now and to build a
sustainable future for all of us
thank you so much.
And
that's going to bring us to the
end of our public comment
for for what it's worth we got
through everyone who wants to
speak in opposite
we allow that equal time to ball
sides we have to everyone who
wants speaking opposition there
are many more people on my list
I know there's more.
The.
Um.
The.
Welcome representatives they can
search
would you care to add anything
bef.
Mister chair thank you so much
of the audience for giving their
comments on both in support in
an opposition it really does
help us
get cleared to what we would
like to do today which is to
modernize the oil and gas act to
meet with our current needs a
demand.
We've been on discuss.
Is there a motion to adopt the
committee serve.
As the the bill in front of us
we will continue.
A second hero
so we have a motion from
resistance on the second for
small so this is just so you
understand we're just adopting
the committee serve.
We're not pa.
Is there any quality is there
any opposition to adopting the
committee.
Okay so thing that the committee
we've adopted the committee
served and now for discussion.
The.
The.
Chair representative
we have seventeen hundred and
forty six
no in wells that were reported
to DO I we have another three
hundred and forty nine
where we know the operator still
exi.
The.
I deducted from that.
So the net.
The net is nineteen forty five
seventeen forty nine plus three
forty.
And.
Reconfuse how many have you.
Refresh a question how many
wells have been plugged by.
Representative.
And.
Prior to you receipt of the
worth and well plugging money's
under the bipartisan inf.
A year in the last fiscal year
FY twenty three we plugged
seventy six this year skewed.
Quick math there is
somewhere north of two hundred
operator plugging levels very
but as I noted in my opening
statement operators plug between
two.
A year for a variety of reasons
some o.
Work by the state land office in
their enforcement and some of
that plugging are even operat.
Any administrative information.
There have.
It.
Mister chair representatives
that.
Um.
Mister chair representative our
average cost for plugging right
now as a hundred and twenty five
thousand dollars per well we are
plugging orphans so that that
the conditions very wildly
because they haven't received
maintenance the range is fifty
two three hundred and twenty
thousand that is not inclusive
of surface remediation costs at
a minimum that's a thirty five
thousand dollars site assessment
and remediation actual.
I'm cleaning up a very large
orphan tank battery that toda.
And I have another large tank
battery east of raswell that the
state is spending two point one
million dollars on and i.
Could you tell me how much money
is.
Mrperiod chair representative
the balance is a little north of
fifty million I think it's
closer to fifty one million.
So we have.
Two years worth of.
Expendi.
The.
Yeah.
And mr chair representative
i'm not quite sure i'd put a
time period on it ocd was able
to recently enter into contracts
with local companies to lock
down five plugging cruise and a
number of mediation contractors
so I think our pace will grow
and that the money expenditures
were occurred at more rapid rate
reference was made in the
comment that we only plug
thirteen wells in the last
fiscal year with state money
that's actually because we had
to focus on spending the first
traunch of money under the
bipartisan infrastructure law
and the federal government only
give us two years so with that
first twenty five million
dollars we were able to plug a
hundred and thirty eight well
sights and really only do our
mediation on three large and
five smaller remediation
projects to just give the
committee a sense of scale that
that's what twenty five million
dollars purchase for us once we
actually l.
Used could you describe.
Taxes that are paid into the
conservation and with a portion
of.
Say here
and a mister chair
representative as you correctly
know there is a portion of the
conservation use tax which is
assessed on all production
that's paid into the oil
reclamation fund it's
progressive in structure in the
sense that larger producers pay
the vast majority of the
payments into the find I I
believe this year the receipts
to that fund are are probably
closer to twenty million dollars
because of production levels I
would say it was forecast by the
lfc coming in to be sixteen I
would say if you blended
receipts over time it's closer
to an eat at thirteen million
dollar range because again
receipts into that funder
tracking production levels.
Now is that in two.
Taxes that the entirety of the
conservation tax or only the
small portion that goes into.
Mr chair representative is a
portion of the conservation use
tax unfortunately my.
The percentage is right at the
moment but it is.
Mister chairman the miscus could
you describe the utilization.
The last
fifteen years has it been
consistently utilized.
Media these orphan projects
mister chair representative
unfortunately my.
Over time I while i've been in
leadership and embedded in while
my predecessors have been in
leadership and eminer it has
been used for.
Plugging in a northern
facilities at prior times and
leaner budget years legislative
appropriations were made out of
the fund to cover other
operating costs and to cover
basic operations and that has an
impact on where we find ourself
today I can't comment on the
wisdom or not of those decisions
but that is how the rest.
Ask you to scribe
for the committee how many
bonds.
Have been pulled since we incre.
Eighty.
Mister chair representative a
relatively small number of bonds
I would say.
That portion of the lfc
assessment I agree with I think
I would explain it as follows
one
when we conduct plugging to
minimize costs to the state we
go to fields and we try to plug
hole fields typically speaking
under the terms of the bonds we
can't forfeit the bonds until
substantial work has been
completed in our costs are well
above so for example i've been
doing a lot of work in the canoe
field south of seventy east of
roswell we forfeit those bonds
the bonds held by canoe a d.
Sixty thousand dollars so we
plug based on need
prioritization in area and we
typically can't forfeit the
bonds until we've completed
substantial work it's claiming
under an insurance policy and I
think we can.
Under way.
To collect a dis.
And if so can you.
A mister chair representative
i'd have to circle back on the
precise number but yes once we
have plug to field and fear like
we're in a position and
consistent with the requirements
of the bond to pursue
the forfeiture of those bonds we
do.
I wish it were faster but for
future
they make us run through our
pieces and takes time from
attorneys and and and other
pieces but we do pursue with
those I think based on what's on
the plugging list we're still
talking hundreds of thousands of
dollars in bonding because again
the bond the the blanket bond
taps were looking.
The.
The.
And.
The.
Of how this production.
That is.
I.
Ninety years or so.
The market.
Large
public companies.
New technology and new response.
And as this production decli.
To continue to produce those.
Various factors including their
overhead structure which.
At that point trickles.
Is there.
You are under.
Worked for.
And mister chair representative
I would not.
Circumstances or unique and
different but an operators.
Thank you for that mister mister
chairman mister fuse he knew
do you have an estimate
of the total production per day
that is being developed.
From these resources that have
trickled down.
Um.
A mister chair representative.
When we look at these questions
particularly bonding advocate
adequacy and other questions we
start looking at it through the
equivalent production so if you
divide up i'm new mexico
production into tranches i've
sort of put it into buckets we
can quibble there one million
boe plus for those not familiar
with the terminology that's
barrel of oil equivalent it
allows you to combine oil and
gas production into one number
that's about a billion barrels
in the one million boey plus
category.
If you go to a mid sized hear
that's two hundred thousand to a
million boe
that's seventeen
seventeen and a half million
barrels in fiscal year I mean in
calendar year twenty three and
then the last year which are
producers that are less than two
hundred thousand b o e that's
about six.
Per day I respect we can libel
of tari how you establish those
buckets some use well counts I
think a more accurate way to
look at it is to be a week
equivalent and I could probably
quickly do the math did you
daily but that totals up to the
production we're seeing now.
The.
And would it be to say
somewhere between five and ten
percent of this total would be
attributable to low volume
legacy.
The.
So
mister chair representative
using those same numbers
and other pieces and.
Ninety seven point eight percent
is in that one million and up
some of those producers.
Have a large number of wells so
they would have a decent melcap
of well count there so I would
say yes five or ten percent if
you were looking at the wells as
opposed to the users might fit
in that ca.
In terms of production seventy
five thousand.
Okay
mister chairman and
representing the forecast and
mister used that seventy five
thousand.
To state call for.
And.
I would have to.
I suspect you have the number.
Mr cues you would suspect
correctly
and that number is roughly to
the state.
Five hundred th.
A mister chair representative.
At the numbers you were
referring to.
Again I wouldn't quibble with
the number there I think though
over time there are declined
curves on all well facilities in
other components so
it's not the type of assets
where it's five hundred thousand
dollars per day every day
knocking forward as you will
know and so there's going to be
some new.
If you math the decline mister
chairman minister fuse I
absolutely agree with.
Yeah.
Rose da.
The.
That.
Five hundred thousand dollars.
Even in the scope of attempting
budget.
So
it's been represented by a
number of these small
that this legislation.
Puts
a substantial amount of that
production.
Now getting.
We see
in that argument the projected
fina.
Address.
A representative
I am familiar with the lsc
FIR I would not for the
committee
and respect the analysis they.
And the estimates prepared by
the dfa economists
and
there were some nuanced elements
missing a.
We talked about production a
number of wells and other pieces
and the financial hit another
components I will be the first
to say that the wells are spread
among operators of all size but
a significant proportion of
those marginal are still held by
very large operators and so part
of our approach in the bonding
component is thinking about how
to set up restructure that
allows us to develop in through
rule tears that both respond to
the fact that hill corp has
eleven thousand plus wells a
very significant b o e but they
pull it from a distributed well
base is sufficiently bonded and
that we don't overburden smaller
operators who may have smaller
well counts and other pieces are
within that seventy five
thousand.
Producers and a range of scales
not all set.
Yeah.
Listening.
Reserve a
reserve.
The.
Rep.
Yeah.
I.
The.
And I I think.
So
I think that was a
pretty good process.
Some other stakeholders may be
been involved.
So I appreciate the amount.
This act needs some help.
Issues with the the way this
modernisation is is going.
Mr ch.
I want to start with the
regulation of the.
Does this
your
organ or the division the
authority.
I
france for our conveniences of
your.
A mr chair
representative
i'll give the answers there at
one we already have authorit.
They would constitute ah real
proper.
Mexico that's not to say it's
not a property right but we do
already regulate transfers the
intent behind the provision is
well for the most part as I said
my.
Business transactions to move.
Got described right now I sold
basis to scrutinize transfers is
are there two parties willing to
pass them off to one another and
can they produce the bonds
required by our rules which are
relatively low
and I don't want to engage in a
name and chame exercise but we
see problematic transfers and so
we've tried to add some targeted
provisions where we can ask some
more questions where we feel
like approving the transfer
would present a bigger risk to
the state one a lustrative
example I would give if you told
me one more minute is a small
operator with say hypothetically
ten operating wells.
Proposes to take on two hundred
and fifty wells even in its
abstract sense I don't know how
the production off of those ten
small wells will provide
sufficient revenue to retro fit
and go to the others and right
now we're sort of precluded from
asking those questions so this
is not an entree to scrutinize
every transaction we already do
respectively but it to give us
some more tools to do it in sort
of a a rational way but thank
you for that answer.
Your correct
wells or no.
The.
And I I understand that you have
some.
This greatly expands that aboard
and so well be wells themselves.
Or.
Without the real property right.
To produce the oil and gas they.
The.
Mister chair representative I
got to think of it thoughtful
way to answer it because it's
complex you can have minerals
that are least operating subjb
agreements so the operator of
the well may not actually have
the direct may not hold the
direct minor mit mineral
interest but may in fact just be
the operator of the well and
license by the mineral less
seeded to
do it and the ocd's long
standing jurisdiction is over
the operator of the well and we
do not go into questions of
underlying mineral ownership and
whether they're joint operating
agreements and other components
because as you know the less see
other mineral estate actually be
the party exploiting it or doing
it I hope I answered your
question thank you depending
secretary yet
in a way yes and and yes I
understand that these things can
be very complete
mister chair rep.
So.
I think it's pretty clear in new
mexico that the oil.
The.
And that an oil and gas lease
under which someone operates is
an oil and gas.
My concern here is with
which let's use your
hypothetical there is an operat.
Wants to acquire with ten wells
wants to acquire two hundred.
From a large.
They do a deal and maybe it's a
farm
maybe it's.
Any kind of of some of the
examples you use but even a
farmout agreement.
Is.
So
if you have no authority over
the real property transaction.
You get into a situation where
you have denied the transfer of
the personal property but not
the real property and so you
have two parties who can do
nothing with those wells because
the large operator who is
selling them has sold the real
property right and therefore
cannot produce the wells.
You have the small lot berator
who you have denied the transfer
therefore they cannot.
And you have an issue which I
think
and interference with the right
to contract.
That potentially opens your
division up to you.
Legal li.
Vice chair and.
May not disagree on facets here
but.
And.
I think in my hypothetical
if they were wells that were
temporarily inactive to
facilitate the transaction and
they had a recent production
history I don't even know why
those would be a scrutiny under
these provisions I do see the
scenario where a similar
inbalance ten wells acquiring to
fifty that don't have a recent.
Oil wells like people age heads
that takes its tall as you move
whether scale in the cost to
bring those back online so each
individual transfer scenario
will be tricky I will also know
the ocd has a parallel duty
under its police power on to you
regulate the orderly production
and it's a long standing role
under the oil and gas act that
operators are responsible for
both producing it responsibly
and then at the end of life
closing up the well
and if we see at any point in
time it's not there we can plug
we can direct the point elephant
operators not following through
on it and traditionally speaking
the plugging of an oil well does
not
impact the underlying mineral
estate in fact
the voluntary plugging down by
industry and I it's done for a
lot of reasons is often done to
plug older vertical produce they
can put in longer fract laterals
and so I believe under our
police powers and are
responsibly under the oil and
gas act to say once ninety days
are lapsed when you're not
producing the well should be
plug that has not happened
historically for a long time so
yes there is some risk I think
there are scenarios as you
illustrate but I think there are
plenty of scenarios where it
would be a valid exercise of our
police.
There
representative and.
In the event.
Restrictions.
Changes.
Sometimes.
More petty than.
They get a burger under their
saddle for one particular
operator or something like that
and III find.
This ability that the that is
somewhat they.
The.
Seven h seven.
I I think gives a lot of
discretionary power to the
director of the division that
could be abl.
Mister chair representative
with long standing practice and
this any decision laid out
there.
Depending on who signed it could
be appealed directly to the oil
conservation division where we
have an independent hearing
examiner that is walled off and
here's cases in a sort of
you know quasi administrative
court for these types of things
and worth the decisions to sign
by the director
there is an immediate.
Conservation commission.
Nothing in the p.
Mitigator impact those.
Mr chair representative.
In the event.
And you have.
The.
The.
Stakeholder meetings they.
The.
And so.
It.
A package.
Is not satisfi.
The.
The.
And those well.
Amount of overhead things like
that.
Economical anymore.
Then shepron would most likely
plug those w.
I'm mr chair representative of a
transfer was.
That is a possibility although
it's.
And so mister cha.
If that happened
and chevron plug those.
Overable hydro.
From
is that not.
Contrary to.
The.
Mister chair representative
I do not believe so and I think
a
lot of the me explain for a
moment I think that's because
the recoverable assets and other
things like that would require
an as.
Historical vertical production
is plugged so that you can run
modern laterals i'm into access
the
into access the minerals I would
also say in a lot of these
circumstances when we work with
operators or we do have a hook
to deny a transfer we actually
try to work with the parties
involved to come up with the
plan often.
So that we've got some certainty
as to plans going forward so
that an operator can work with
us to say well here's our
schedule.
Ringing these wells back online
or plugging them by a date
certain in the future and I
would say more often than not
when there have been transfers
even under our more limited
authority that we've been able
to police.
Ninety five percent of the time
we've actually resolved them in
that way because we view that as
a way to balance our obligation
to prevent underground waste
with our obligation to exercise
our police powers to.
Mr chairman.
The.
I guess
we're both making a number of
assumptions we both know there
are myrians of
a different scenarios that could
happen so.
I think you see where my
concerns are in this language
and
that.
Yeah.
I don't think we need to
believe.
I I do want to move on.
And a few moments ago
representative scott asked.
Called in the last five years
and I think you said you have an
exact number.
And
a mister chair representative I
don't have the number of bonds
but i'm not contesting the n.
On any annual financial ba.
Any bonds we for fitted the the
report items so i.
Thank you.
The.
And again i'm scattered
everywhere the number on that.
Representative I will pull it up
but
it's it's in the low six figures
in terms of bonds we forfeit as
I recall and I know because I
personally talk to the general
council at the shirt insurer
that I forfeit a hundred and six
thousand dollars bond for canoe
operating in the last five years
and so
thank you so mr chair.
You have one thousand seven
hundred forty six orphan wells
and then some another three
hundred or so where op.
Mister chair representative in
that three hundred and forty
nine are to operators because
the name was mentioned in
comment one of those one of the
operators in that is ridge way.
They are not defunct in the
sense.
Shop but.
As outlined.
Mr chair
rep.
I heard also.
With representative scott is
that an eye understand and.
The.
And so what I heard when you
talked about sort of the
historical u.
Is that.
The conservation tax had been
paid.
The phones
may not have gone to the
reclamation pa.
Reclamation.
Rated.
And so
my prior administration
mister chair representative i'd
clarify two things the portion
of the conservation use tax that
goes into the r.
Any money spent out of the
reclamation fund for the terms
of the fund has to be
appropriated by.
Purposes and other components
and again trying not to con.
By a prior executives and prior
legislature.
Thank you and so.
So.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Um.
Think you talked about maybe
that you had contracted for five
rigs.
What is your current capacity.
Mister chair representative the
plugging process that ocd has to
go through as a little complex
we first have to go through an
administrative hearing to get a
plugging order so we give an
operator even if we know they're
that is more now we give them an
opportunity to appear we give
them thirty days to correct and
then we get a plugging order
once we have a plugging order we
can proceed we didn't contract
for a specific number of rakes
we issued a price statewide
price agreement and we had
contractors from all over the
state may be a little bit more
heavily represented from the
northwest but we partnered with
those contractors and
environmental mediation cruise
and we issued pose under that
agreement to do the work with
the funding that the legislature
is making available for this
work from the wreck fund and the
money that's coming in under the
bipartisan infrastructure law
were on tack to get the first
payment of our seventeen million
this year I believe that my team
couldn't keep five or six
plugging cruise busy those
plugging crews will plug roughly
one well per rage per.
Pending on the quality of the
world so I I think we're going
to get up into somewhere in the
two hundred wells per year rate
there are some natural brakes
christmas new years
part of the reason why we.
Twenty four seven trade off
because they don't make as much
as they do you want to primary
drill rig in so there are some I
would say between a hundred and
sixty to two hundred well.
Thank you secretary mister
chairman rep.
I find that great I find that a
significant increase is to what
has been done.
The.
So
if
we're looking at a hundred and
sixty to two hundred.
At an average cost of and I know
that's hard because but I
will let me before we get into
the average cost I think
where into what death or most of
the wells you're.
Mister chair representative
average depth to the wells were
plugging are in the forward a
six thousand foot range I would
say they're a certain vintage
historical vertical wells in the
permian
okay thank you mr chair
representative deputy secretary
so sort of old san androus wells
in north lee chavis rose about
countings yeah.
I guess yes yes but was also a
large publicly treated company.
So.
That seems to me.
Um.
Some would have been issued to
me because I think and I I don't
remember but I think we had
a during the stakeholder
meetings cannot petroleum came
up and I think.
Three hundred three hundred
thank you
mister chair and representative
and the secretary.
The way I see this bill.
In mini.
Is it it gives a distinct
competi.
Larger companies over smaller
independence and I think.
That
history has shown that event the
large publicly traded.
Companies can go out of
business.
And because it was someone who
provided testimony
e o g resources formerly no one
has.
So
the the putting a blanket bond.
Four
the large operators who can
afford to tie up that kind of
capital
and a risk assessment
on the smaller ones who cannot.
To me gives those large
operators.
A competitive advantage.
It drives small independence who
actually live officers in
and care for the communities
where they.
Out of business.
And the barge operators can then
come in who are out of state and
I think there was other comment
about out of state operators and
snack
great acridge.
And benefits it.
Others than new mexicans.
Representative hemorrhage thank
you for that and I think
that was the concern amongst
many of the smaller medium sized
operators and the large
operators as well
that there that this blanket
bomb would not would just not be
attainable
and that is why you in this
committee said you see.
That we have addressed that
situation by asking for a
monthly well plugging plugging
risk for risk wool fee on a per
well basis that's on page nine
starting with twelve years in
the
on the page before that you'll
notice on
mine seventeen starting online
seventeen that there are options
for folks for those large
operators and their small
operators you don't have to do
all of this.
Based on the operator size
relatives risk.
So you can do the blinket
bonding you can do
you can enter the well plugging
risk will figure you can.
Plugging finance one well
plugging financial assurance.
Yeah thank you thank you
representative and and yes I did
see that there were some worse
in.
But in what's I want to talk
about those wars
because.
What we have I essentially.
Three auctions.
Well plugging risk.
A ten million dollars.
Blanket bond and then
essentially a well by well well
by well.
So I want to talk first about
the well plug
risk which is five hundred
dollars per well per month
correct mr representative hander
it's it's up to
and it's based on a tiered
structure
and thank you
madam.
That
thank you thank you
so.
So.
If i'm if I may representative.
And a number of dur.
C.
Access is looking at these
questions and our current rules
actually present a menu of
options you can put up well
insurance policy on.
You can provide a bank it mind
you can provide a single well
bond you can provide a cash
surely will accept all of the
above most people pick the
blanket bonds because they are
very low
and once you hit a hundred wells
you all kn.
We've not modified the
overarching structure but.
As I said my up route marks I
think the new updates to those
rules would like that
optionality the ten million
dollars would obviously have to
be tiered I think there's a
misperception that we're
proposing everyone needs to put
up a ten million dollars
e o g absolutely needs to put
up.
Hill court energy absolutely
needs to put up a ten million
dollar bond they have a lot of
well
and and other components the
absolutely may come back to bike
later but we'll move on yeah
but a smaller operator that has
a smaller university wells would
not
the oil and gas industry the oil
and gas regula.
Required full corresponding
this existing authority has
never been implemented in that
way and as i've tried to share
with the small operators because
I hear their conturns
particularly those who are.
Growing slowly or sort of moving
deliberately in sort of other
components are just maintaining
we would not assume that they
need to bond for one hundred
percent of their wells because
that's not an obligation we
didn't pose with a ten million
dollar tap on the larger
operators in the state so I
would envision.
Implementing this authority in a
way that you still retain a
tiered structure.
But the ocd needs a tiered
structure that reflects the
range of operators i've got six
hundred asset in seven one to
eleven thousand wells
I have to assume that some
percentage of those wells are
going to be orphaned we know
that from decades
in the oil and gas industry and
um we need to adopt a structure
that sort of appropriately
reflects rifts and provides an
on ram seem thing I think i've
heard the misperception that the
five hundred dollar fee would be
assessed on every well now it
says it may be assessed it's up
to you we added language to say
it's a subset of wealth all of
those components are designed to
provide another offering so if
you have an operator that under
a new structure say needs a
small increase in bonding I
appreciate for a small operator
that may be one hundred percent
capital tie up the notion of the
fee is to provide and offering
to offset all right we don't
need you to put in a bond here's
a sort of fee component on the
subset.
The details of which will be hat
will have to be developed
through a romantic process
because even if this legislation
were to pass our current rules
only require a court of a
million dollar bond so we would
have to engage in a robust
process to sort of talk through
that but that's our vision of
how these pieces move together
and their implementation track
what's down there so that we
could address these specific
concerns as you and I discuss
the scenarios are gonna very
widely
thank you deputy secretary mr
chairman representative or test.
I i'm glad you you mentioned in
that other states have been
looking at this and I have done
some stuff and calorato actually
did change its
financial assurance program how
is this similar or different to
what happened won't what the the
changes they call a router.
Mister chair representative
hembreak I understand that
colorado has up its bonding to
forty million they have a
considerably smaller
process and ind.
Colorado process also envisions
sort of a choose around
adventure of a spoke bonding
process and other components
within that forty million dollar
cap which can in but can be
informed by.
There is
there are
similarities I suppose in that
we're proposing on outer bonding
cap in new mexico
that.
The.
He'd figure range not close to
colorado even our productions
don't even graph similarly but
again I I think an
implementation while I suppose
folks could point to some
similarities practical and
implementation given the number
of.
Implemented the current
authority.
In sort of other pieces I could
see a colliperation of schedules
and other pieces depending on
scenarios but but but but still
reverting back to our current
model we are just looking for.
And thank you and matter.
Who's moving there and mister
chair definitely secretary.
Win when colorado.
What happened there.
And mr chair
and this vice chair
representative I understand that
colorado has seen
a reduction in act inactivity
any move towards lar.
Lower cost access to capital i'd
probably had the caveat that a
lot of the colorado oil and gas
development is occurring in the
front range in the backyards of.
Million dollar homes and so
there are costs associated with
transaction frictions that have.
That aren't neared here
and other components they also
had a more
aggressive bonding provision in
in in terms of pushing as to how
you'd look at it.
Okay thank you and.
Madam chair mister chair
deputy secretary that that was
part of my point is that it
drove many small independent
opera.
My other point is and i'm
referring to an article from the
car colorado so
dated september twenty seventh
two thousand three which was in
ninety days caller abandoned or
orphaned well count rose by two
hundred wells after signific.
How how would you say this will
be.
Mister chair representative.
Like that.
Um.
I offer a commitment
to the process that led up to
this bill
we took
every suggestion from my p a n m
who made and except for a couple
of elected representatives that
was the only folks on their side
I want a robust day called their
process to do this we can
balance out those
considerations
i've already started working
with my team in preparation for
this looking at
her bonding how does it move how
might how might we present it
but it's a it's a commitment to
a transparent process obviously
any will change we'll have to go
to the state rules act in other
components to
not
have any unintended consequences
but again better position the
state so that
larger operators operators with
larger well counts are.
Thing but that folks are
appropriately bonded for the
downside risk that unfortunately
I know are coming and I don't
see that with any blame I just
know with histories you're going
to have orphans you could have
bankruptcies from large
companies or others and I would
clarify you are correct canoh
hit six hundred wells half of
them are federal in the feds
have lead on plugging though so
when I saw.
Okay thank you thank you for
clarifying that
and I know there is a big
difference and that the federal
ones that.
Um.
Thank you and i'm sorry I should
have addressed.
So.
I am
representative and and deputy
secretary that uninte.
And.
I want to ask as deputy deputy
secretary of in.
You have
authority over numerous types.
Generation correct.
A mister chair representative
certainly on the extracted side
in minimum.
Mister chair representative or
tears deputy secretary but you
also have a renewable vision is
that correct.
Yeah.
A mister chair representative
yes we entered his home to the
state's energy office but their
programs are more in the grant
policy making space run the
great mark programs and other
components we do not have a s.
Renewable energy facili.
Her renewable energy office and
and other pieces so we do not
issue affirmative permit so
would not collect.
Okay thank you mr chair
representative
deputy sector.
Um.
Who does collect bonding.
Or is there any
mister chair representative from
facet of my former life it
depends on where it's located so
if it's on federal land the f.
Facilities my understanding is
that the state land office has
similar requirements for surface
use agreements related to their
facilities as you get in the
local j.
Requirements but given the
prevalence of federal lands
there you're going to have the
surface management agencies may
control those bonding
requirements and then any direct
deals that are renewable energy
company may have with a private
land owner.
Presumably if the privat.
Those requirements speak I can't
speak to those I will also say
in context and my minding in
minerals division holds north of
a b.
For call facilities in the state
they are less new.
And we've got north of the
billion dollar and bondings on
on those facilities but again
that is a for c.
Thank you deputy.
So are you do you know the
approximate size of the blim and
there was a right of way.
Operational bars
mister chair representative
on the state land office I would
have to defr.
From the r.
As well.
Now thank you.
Those are land.
Similar addressing of the
decommissioning or abandonment
of say wind farms which.
And those.
The average windmilk contains
about eighty gallons of
lubricating oil.
When those are left.
Right as they have some have
been in california that becomes
a liability to the state which I
would encourage this state to
look at and consider
mr chair r.
On the right of way as I recall
they were.
Okay thank.
Oh.
The.
Mr chair I believ.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair.
My question is well.
To you if you could avoid what's
all i'm gonna mister the reason
as mister chair I unlike.
I
am more of your average new
mexican.
Defined where more people
listening in might be able to
understand i'm afraid a lot of
the conversation mister.
To the average person this.
The majority of the new mexicans
so i'm hoping mister chair to
have a little bit of flexibility
for that reason i'm trying to
understand i.
The.
Thank you I don't.
Um.
Mister chair.
And repres.
I think the the issue
there's two issues I believe for
the small.
One is
overall
things that are currently.
More well defined in.
They look to be
being transferred to
a less defined role making
proce.
And representative and misrefuse
that one of the biggest
arguments we hear.
Is about regulatory certainty
and that is for the smaller.
Company.
That their margin is not nearly
as big and so the greater the
uncertainty the less likely.
Would would that be a fair
statement.
Mr chair and.
Do not believe that's a fair
statement.
So the rural structure that you
see reflected.
Um
was adopted from basically
similar authority we're looking
to ring up the caps on and
provide increase basically
creator creative risk
one I think if I were trying to
explain this in layman's terms
on the oil and gas act since
nineteen.
We know from production from
nineteen thirty five
circumstances occur where that
can't happen since we understand
that that's a downside risk the
states always been required to
mean seemed some sort of
insurance policy against those
risks and and we've looked at
the issue hard and we need to
increase our ability to.
We need to increase the
insurance policies we hold
again as I said at the outset
how that gets implemented and my
commitment I think it needs to
be done in a thoughtful way
on that response to
circumstances related to
smaller operators larger
operators and other pieces the
problem is and i'll be candid if
we were to adopt a provision to
the financial assurance change
and I appreciate some operators
are certainly the position it
should say the same that was
comfortable for smaller
independence we would let larger
operators off the hook with
massive well counts if the bank
bonding caps were five hundred
thousand you'd miss an operator
like he'll core which has eleven
thousand if they lose one
percent of their wells that's
ten million dollars if they
often one percent that.
And i'm not picking on any
operators i'm just talking about
numbers we have here for
exercises that I can do that
same example through other large
operators and so we need the
head room to operate and do it
and I do believe we need some
will making flexibility to allow
us to respond to these scenarios
because they are super nuanced
and there are a lot of different
circumstances to factor in but
again much of the authority and
structure here is in existing
statute and you've seen how the
ocd.
Thank you for that answer.
Yeah.
But that's fine try and drill
down.
So more specifically.
The risk assessment process.
To determine the viability.
Real property which it appears
that that wouldn't be something.
Equipment and private property
which might not be real estate
property only say real.
The.
So from scan.
Mister chair and mister fuge
would that can't still.
Concern for a small company.
Then a big company.
So.
Let me explain a small company
and this this these transfers go
in the opposite direction as
well.
Many of the small operators
there business model
is to go and drill.
Wells in an area combined the
walls into a lot.
And then sell those after the
larger operators who want that
let's see residual income the
income from works that that
smaller operators have done.
That risk assessment wouldn't be
a concern for the larger.
Operator.
But in the opposite direction
when a larger operator.
Decides that that.
The rate of return is not as
high
once it gets to once that well
maybe gets to a steady state
level and and then starts to dr.
The.
The process being defined.
Very much is in favor of the
transfer from a small company
to a large couple
but not in the opposite
direction
so
when you stated mister chair
when mister fuse when you stated
that that you do not believe.
Certainly I think that is
exactly
I think there's would be less
than certainly for the large
company is anybody massive.
Would you not agree that that
scenario from their point of
view.
It is i.
Chair representative if we might
were you referring to the
transfer provisions on page six
and seven or the reference to
tears
and risk in the financial
assurance section on page eight
line now.
The.
I I will get to.
The.
Show the first
elements of our transfer kind of
scrutiny criteria would be
compliance history and we
conscientiously avoided we'd try
to clarify what we mean by
significant histor.
They're not likely to is they
grow bigger or small I mean it
it's a probability.
And b in our transfer provision
actually just reflects current
rules you can't transfer a well
under our rules unless you can
meet our financial assurance
requirements whatever they may
be
see we tried to clarify that
scenario where a very small
operator acquires a large
universe of wells in those
transactions can look like a
whole bunch of different things
but if it's a large universe
very old wells that haven't been
serviced in a while there are
some questions about the ability
to do it and the last category
was.
There are of range of
circumstances that can come up I
will tell you
in terms of transfers that
have given pause and even under
circum.
Both directions and they are
highly context and operators
specific and the division and
again ninety five percent of the
cases.
That allow the transactions to
proceed and the devi.
They can take on the risk a part
of the reason why we got to I
mean that they can that were not
just looking at it in these are
a lot of transfers robbing
inactive wells that the division
that part of the reason why we
have the or from while issue we
did is trans.
Questioned and just a wow to
move
so mister chairman.
I think this does though is I
think we're going from like you
said maybe your hands retired a
little as I think is what I
heard you express.
To wear.
They're potentially no
restrictions it's left up to the
department all together
I think that's the uncertainty
that I am hearing from s.
Producers.
That is one of one of the areas
where and I think why we saw.
Colorado I think that was why
the uncertainty
the risk became too high.
What they see mister.
Representative has been what
what has been talk.
You.
On the lowering
risk
or regulation
or direct c.
The.
To justify further investment
and you either have folks just
stop
and hold what they have and just
whether it out but no future
investment comes in.
And and mister chairman.
For everyone.
The real money.
The.
New production.
Flow.
In colorado when this took
place.
That new production is what
stopped the future investment
stopped because a wrist became
too high from those smaller
companies who like I said
package and themselves.
So
mister chair and and represent.
The direct cost of capital which
many these companies don't.
Regulatory
uncertainty the investment.
And and that that is my major
concern that
through this legislative
legislation I think what we're
encouraging here is a type of.
Vol.
Companies that are larger larger
more able to comply.
The.
The cost of compliance.
Show support for something like
this because in reality in a
certain point they're probably
going to be able to pick up
properties.
The.
And so it it really doesn't
surprise me mister charity.
They they're in support.
The.
Ultimately.
Moving on mister chair and
representative to my my second
line of questio.
The.
The the low end it looks like
of.
Two hundred fifty thousand
dollars
exponentially to that upper end
being the ten million dollars.
The.
And all that is stated in there
is that the.
The small producer's point of
view mister chair.
And representative is.
Producers at least new
that the upper end at that time
was two hundred fifty thousand
dollars for.
They have no idea under this if
the low end.
Is seven million dollars they
have no idea.
If it's five million dollars for
a blanket policy.
This
is so wonderful.
And that what we'd have to see
is whether or not.
There is
even never an agency to the
working on that's not going to
put them out of business.
Or forced them to sell.
In that discounted rate that is
why such opposition.
To this from the small producers
and I would say mister chair and
representative.
My major concern about this
legislation is.
That we are leaving most of this
up to.
The department to set that
whatever it is.
And what may be reasonable to
the department.
Not reasonable necessarily to
the people have to comply
so they have no idea whether or
not they have the ability to
comply I would prefer mister
chair and representative if
cheers would have been
prescripted.
In this legislation.
As to take away that level.
Of of insecurity.
By those small producers.
The big producers know they're
likely plant paying for a ten
million dollars policy.
They know that it's written
right there they have a level of
assurance.
And they have made a decision
mister chair
that they can comply.
And they can comply and not only
can they compluck and they
comply.
Likely the small producers many
of them will not be able to
comply.
And there'll be an opportunity.
To collect on a fire so
potentially.
I do not think that is how we
should be doing business in new
mexico.
Is too hard.
And scare off
the people who actually are
neighbors
business owners in our
communities.
People who pay help a little
league softball they help the
boys and girls club they help
with when the city can afford to
finish a.
Project that will benefit all
people that is who
we are.
Putting the greater burden on
from their ability to perform.
To companies who do not have
their.
Businesses and their
headquarters located in new
mexico who had a certain point.
If the burden gets too high for
compliance.
Or if.
Another permian another really
lucrative.
Uh side is developed
to just leave behind and move
on.
Yeah.
I have a hard time with and have
a real hard time with mister
chair
all his waiting scale to the big
guy we did that we did that with
the box stores during covered.
We shut down all the small book
guys and and as we all know many
of these restaurants shut back
never shut down never to return
a lot of small business shut
down never to return.
And I believe that's what we're
going to do here the differences
as we saw mister chair earlier
in our earlier testimony.
This ten percent of these
marginal wells.
It is.
Five hundred five hundred
thousand dollars a day that's
not insignificant to this budget
so mister chair so that here's
the question mister chairman
represented why.
Did we leave so much obscure
here and not.
Leave it to.
Decision by the department for
setting the tears.
So financially.
And to the level of determining
as well.
Compliance and what those
specific standards and those
metrics would be why are we not
making that decision as
legislators fire we just
transferring all of that
authority away from us who then
have to meet budgetary
requirements under our oath of
office where we are we
transferring that to a
department that doesn't have to
do that.
That's two questions there.
Same question.
Two topics one is the financial
assurance the other being
roaming.
Mr chair representative.
Even under our current rules
bonding levels are varied there
are lots of operators that are
fifty thousand dollars bonds
that are small um there are
operators that have finding
levels as low as five thousand
dollars
and it's probably a single well
bond in the formula so
part of moving it even under
this new authority we couldn't
adjust these by the dark of
night you would have to go
through a state wools act
warmating process to kind of do
you
all of the pieces
we opted here to take an
approach.
Previously the legislature had
said had just put in general
aggregate caps and had left it
so we had proposed in our
amendments to say look we'd like
to increase the cap because that
gives us more room to operate
and move forward
and go and we would implement
through a transparent and
inclusive role making process
consistent with this
administration's approach all
along with those rules involving
the right stay holders
respecting small local business
concerns
and other pieces I think so
that's the that's the approach
we took here was sort of mirror
the existing structure that the
legislature had suggested with
it and then I would reemphasize
a point that I offered when in
my exchange with representative
scott
the ten percent of the wells
that are marginal nearly half of
them are held still by very
large
companies and I think as you
acknowledged.
In your remarks.
There is some sliding scale of
sort of bonding in larger but I
but I but I take your point
about wanting some certainty on
the low end but that was why we
chose other structure that we
did it's always been sort of an
outside limit and then we threw
a public rule making process had
developed a structure that that
operators could predictably
respond you and in the interim
period all an operator would be
required to do is continue
following our existing bonding
requirements so there would be
no change following passage
until we did that update
mr chair thank you mister chair
and misrefuse.
The issue with roammaking is it
really.
Is left with
as I stated earlier the
benevolence the reasonableness
of the department I don't know.
At the very east we can be
talked to his legislators I
prefer something that is more
prescriptive for that reason
cause then we know what we're
voting on I don't believe we
know what we're voting I think
mister chair and how I cannot
ultimately support this is this
just seeds way too much
authority and takes the burden
off of legislators and then
mister chair through all making
if something is not something
that can be complied with.
Businesses go out of business.
We can't turn that switch back
on we can't come back in and
what what I guarantee will
happen mister chair and
representative or test is.
We will say.
That was nice that was the
department.
The reality is it's used today.
Tomorrow to the department if we
pass this but today it doesn't
it doesn't remove our
culpability in this as
legislators.
If there are actions
then put smart more small
businesses out of business
because of the inability to
comply.
If it if it mister chairman and
representatives does what I
suggest will happen is encourage
more vulture.
Um.
Today is really the day whether
or not we determine
who signed were on and and
unfortunately III have to decide
with with businesses that are
located in a mask new mexico
they're not going way there
either in business router
business they're not picking up
and moving they are deciding
whether or not they're going to
shut the doors and go fishing
because it's no longer
profitable and so mister chair I
don't have any further questions
I just I
think.
Makes it way too uncertain the
uncertainty rises to the level.
Of those companies just not
being able to to serv.
The.
Thank you.
Represent dixons.
Thank you mister chair.
Thank you representative and
deputy secretary.
Um.
I appreciate them and want to
acknowledge and the
conversations that we have had
um over the last week I have
very much appreciated the
responsiveness and
openness that i'm you've
exhibited in our conversation.
To take suggestions and make
changes.
The.
I'm gonna ask some questions
that I think are a little bit
different from what my
colleagues have focused on and
i'm sure the chair will
appreciate that i'm not asking
the same questions.
Secretary
could you
share with me who was involved
in the negotiations for this
poll.
Mr chair representative I can
email this to committee but I
have a list of
thirty five thirty nine mister
chairs secretary please go ahead
and read it.
I jesse tremain branded
i'm sorry what are the
affiliations i'm gonna that's
included in the with their name
when their group together I will
do one affiliation jessie to
remain branded how jerry razados
and myself were emerged
individuals and a benjamin
shouting the general council and
have never those were in the
employees semantic how with cbn
douglas michael john with c b n
m ID ramous
believe she's with the sierra
club camillified fiberman at a
travelers with neighbor camilifi
woman with the sierra club adam
pelts with the environmental
defense fund a killing shoop
with ccf i'm blanking on the
name joseph hernandez also with
nato nata andrew force goodman
sim with earth works gabriel
gear hold with chronicle philips
missy courier with the moga john
smitherman with the moga matthew
harmeo with axon tennis fox with
the investment environmental law
center kimberly mendels a cook
with oxy july more with oxy matt
yields with target resources
that is a a midstream gas
gathering company.
I think it's kyler mc williams
with locus resources that's a
local operator in the sand
brian woodward with newborn
patrick padio with yogi
resources jordan testler with e
g resources patrick killing with
chevron mathia sayer with ngl
that's a primarily a a water
midstream.
I'm blanking on her last name
she spoke from within a bulgar
vice president for public
affairs apologies
a gym winchester with ipan m d
brown with djr driving also a
local independent in the sand
one basis alex campbell within
during resources jennifer
bradfut with ex on mobile
britain he fallen with the
western resource advocates a
mike ison fell with san one
citizens a sally pays with new
mexico wild my king flattery
with the sierra club and then
we'd focus discussions on
specific issues so sat backs and
water and financial assurance so
I had additional sub groups who
were there gerry jerry elgen
with strategy mexico
alf renew
with dugan production kevin him
shop with chronicle fill ups
louis salazar tonica phillips
racher ratro over be with
franklin mountain energy lc
another subgroup participants
who may not have participated in
the mall apart thompson with
whilst engineering ron hillman
with ac eight ec n m
representative hembry but in
that capacity it was
partnered jerry him free and
with him with the hinkle offer a
hinker law firm sorry in beth
ryan with chronicle philips and
then in section three same
shiverick with backhaur and
production again a
representative himbry and
jennifer nolton with chronicle
fell ups that's a sort of master
list of everyone who was invited
to the meetings did everyone
attend every one of the meetings
now
but I had.
At least thirty ish of my
closest friends from across the
group at every meeting.
Thank you thank you mister chair
thank you
to secretary
when my colleague representative
himbury was participating was he
a legislator.
Uh mister chair representative I
know he was not I should
acknowledge a ipn did a suggest
representative scott and
representative nibert and while
I respected.
Both of their expertise in the
oil and gas business we felt
like for purposes there.
Of the low smaller stakeholder
groups it was hard to separate
and so those were the only I p a
and m recommendations that we
did not include in the group
thank you mister chairman thank
you
secretary how many legislators
were included.
A mister chair
representative early in the
process there were none from the
list I read out
thank you mister chairman thank
you deputy secretary at what
point in time more legislators
include.
The.
Mr chair
representative december eighth
formal inclusion but we began
discussions with legislators
earlier in the fall and.
I appeared at a number of
interim committees in october
where I provided you know high
level of review of the efforts
and sort of element areas that
we were that we were pursuing
those were in from committee
meetings and carls bad and mass
process
thank you mister chairman thank
you to secretary did you present
to of c.
And.
And mister chair of
representative I was not invited
to participate to before an lsc
of interim committee thank you.
The the the point of my
questions here is that um.
Until december there were no
legislators directly involved in
these discussions legislators
who are being asked to vote on
an enormous piece of legislature
and while I appreciate the
discussions that we have had
over the last week.
These discussions began in
august and september
and knowing the
scope and scale and
importance of the
legislation.
Yeah.
I think it is a failure.
Of the administration.
That legislators were not
included.
Whether they were part of the
discussions or whether they
were.
Involved separately from the
beginning
because I think that
as a legislator.
I am very uncomfortable
voting.
On a piece of legislation that
has enormous impact on the state
of new mexico without having
been.
A prize throughout provided
evidence or information to
support.
Either.
Any assertions that were being
made on any side rationale for
decisions.
Mr chair deputy secretary.
What is the percent of state
revenue that is dependent on oil
and gas revenue.
Mister chair representative it's
I think the director with barns
somewhere between.
Thank you mister chair thank you
deputy secretary how many jobs
in new mexico results of the oil
and gas indus.
Uh uh.
Mr chair.
Well into the six figures if you
start modeling in in direct.
You can go much higher if I
recall that that's my general.
Thank you mister chair thank you
deputy
unpid for
the fire
are analysts from the office you
make note of what is included in
their financial analysis and
then on page nine they also are.
Mention what was not explicitly
considered in the financial
impact of the bill um
mrperiod chair deputy secretary
could you tell me what the
anticipated fiscal impact is as
reported by the lfc for fiscal
year twenty five in totality.
Thank you mister chair thank you
deputy secretary
it's twelve million would you
please tell me what the
humilities impact is in fiscal
year twenty six.
Thank you mister chair think you
I had sixty eight
can you provide me with the
cumulative some for fiscal year
twenty seven.
Thank you mister thank you
deputy I actually have two
hundred and ninety seven
million.
Um and then for fiscal year
twenty eight it is uh four
hundred and forty seven million
and that means a total between
fiscal year twenty five twenty
six twenty seven twenty eight mr
of eight hundred and twenty five
million dollars in direct.
Revenue impacting this state.
As reported by
the lfc economist and I
understand that dfa has a
different figures I would like
to note that this is
the fiscal impact report for
house bill one thirty three and
I referenced uh mister chair
independently on page nine.
The potential effects of setback
requirements on oil and gas
production were not explicitly
considered in the fiscal impact.
So the the setbacks have been
removed from the substitute
the other components still
exist.
And so.
I would like to
circle back to the fact that.
As a legislator as vice chair
house appropriations
that is currently working to.
Um.
Pulled the budget together
fiscal year twenty five.
Not only where legislators not
included.
In the discussion.
As i've said we have not been
provided with.
The.
Information maps
or documentation evidence
that gets to the impact of this
legislation.
And.
The.
I
firmly believe.
That we all care deeply about
this state.
We care about the climate in the
future for our children.
What is unclear to me.
The.
Is the.
The goal of this legislation
what is it what does this.
How.
How do we define success.
In what we're trying to do and
what are we trying to do.
And um.
Mister chair representative.
Secretary.
For me that is a big question
what is the number one objective
and how do we know.
That we're heading in the right
direction is it sat back is that
the panel tears is it ensuring
that the state has the funds to
plug in remediate the wealth
that need to be addressed I
support that.
I think you know
we need to hold bad actors
accountable.
I don't disagree with that at
all.
The.
But it is unclear to me if the
changes being sight in this
bill.
Are going to result in what is
our collective desired outcome
thank you mister chair.
The.
Thank you
thank you.
Thank you very much sure thank
you
deputy secretary thank you reps.
Mrperiod terr dippy secretary on
the got just on the the sort of
the focus here the provisions
that are in our substitute
either few other thoughts on the
penalties portion.
Mister terror sam or tas mister
fuge w secretary does this in in
other areas of compliance other
rules and regulations within the
state are there caps on
but mister chair website and
small from what I understand
generally know but mister.
So so the answer is not great
thank you mister chair thank you
representative
and I you know having been part
of the two thousand and nineteen
produce water act which
ultimately included provisions
that restored the ability for
our health and safety regulators
to levy fines there was a cap at
that time but it sounds like
that's really sort of a very
isolated approach to this area
mister chair represent
a mister chair representative
that is that as correct is
unique feature of the civil
penalty authorities of the ocd
okay and mister chairman.
Since that authority has been
restored we've seen a few
actions some of uh.
Also mister chair representative
deputy secretary we've seen
very very significant growth in
production drilling output sort
of all metrics within the
industry have risen.
Mister chair representative that
is correct okay mister chair
representative of deputy
secretary and right now we're
sitting
sort of were we've heard
I think very substantially were
sort of plato or continuing to
rise in production although it
is I guess why is that why do
you think we continue to rise
and production
or product a recount source
continues to say strong anywhere
from ninety seven to a hundred
and six over the pa.
Forty fifty weeks maybe if you
less why are we so.
A mister chair representative at
the end of the day we have to go
back to the quality of the rock
in southeastern new mexico
you know a lot of people talk
with my office about comparisons
to colorado and other pieces one
of the missing pieces is the
quality of the rock in southeast
new mexico particularly in lee
and eddie county makes it a
particularly attractive
investment I think it's why we
see private equity shops coming
in and doing some of the
investment and
they are they are purchasing
smaller operators to consolidate
leasehold interests and other
things like that and pursue
again because of the underlying
quality of the rock
to a lesser degree I think is a
regulator of those activities
ocd has acted responsibly and
transparently in supporting the
industry as it do it does it
working with them to implement
our rules and compliance and
deal with situations and sort of
affair and responsible way the
thing was your chair thank you
secretary and think of pointing
briefly to
one of the other provisions that
the gas capture this
administration's work on
those two sets of rules I think
really does show remarkable
collaboration and it also shows
us that sort of some of those
smart rules can go alongside
growth in
in production and in an economic
activity mr chair percentage of
deputy secretary I don't want to
go too long on the point but I
think it is a vital point for us
to reckon with from multiple
perspectives that we are
fortunate to have some of the
best producing areas within the
world certainly within north
america.
Arguably the best as we've heard
in various
forums i'm sure in north.
Mister chair observed I know
it's not the subject to this
bill but I do uh
we see the ability to do sources
for water shed restoration for
the education for many many
areas areas that this
legislature by enlarged has
worked very closely together to
make record investments that are
showing improvements now and
will set us up incredibly
strongly for the future and mr
chair representative debbie
secretary few so it's on the
record.
The ability to continue to
produce over this sort of near
mid and even as we go out
because even if there is less
combustion of faster fuels with
chair representative deputy
secretary there still be a use
for all the components that are
in hydrocar is that correct even
there's less combustion there is
more perhaps growing uses in
other areas.
Mister chair represents
representatives while you guess
you're right thank you mister
chair thank you representative
that you secretary and so having
that conversation helps us think
not only through this decade in
the twenty thirties but frankly
beyond is that fair to save
mister chair.
That's mister chair represents
my yes okay they thank thank you
for that even as we are
alongside as we think that far
out into the future mister chair
representative deputy secretary
is sort of the focus on uh
financial assurance on making
sure that as we continue to have
robust new drawing redrowing of
wells how important does it make
it for us to manage.
And ensure that these new
mexico's lands water and air are
are.
Mr chair represents my think
that is exactly why we're doing
this now it's incredibly
important for us to manage the
the high costs of plugging and
remediating wells we I think.
For me it's a matter of simple
economics
we don't
the money that we need to do all
the work of bloody plugging
immediately.
And I I believe a direct refusal
would agree with that this is
where modernizing the financial
assurances and the penalties in
the fees to meet those needs to
meet new times to meet the new
challenges and and the high
costs of having to do the work
as a state of those folks who
are not doing it.
That's why we're that's why
we're here today.
Don't think you mister chair
thank you representative
and when it comes to and the the
the authority on the penalty
side mister chair representative
is that one of the ways that we
actually work well and are a
good partner with the vast
majority of producers and
operators who work with in and
do their business day and day
out by the rules
mr chair representative yes we
are thoughtful in our use of our
penalty authority and even our
implementation process has a
dialogue
with cited parties so we can
work towards a resolution and my
office routinely focuses on
improvements on the ground and
make straight offs with
collecting just pure civil
penalties if we can we can
enhance investments that are
made under on the ground whether
it's redundant take away
capacity or other pieces but as
we're asked to police things
that can occur over long periods
of time having our civil
penalties keep pace is an
important deterrent but it's
something that my office has and
will continue to exercise
judiciously great thank you
mister chair thank you
definitely secretary and I I
would ask you this legislature
is made substantial investments
again going back to two thousand
and nineteen.
Sort of picking up pays most
recently in your ability to do
that work has that helped mister
chair.
Mister chair representative it
has helped very much we've
appreciated the repeat
investment in spy the lfc
in capacity across the ocd and
helping us make progress on a
needs assessment that was
conducted at the start of the
administration and we have made
setting progress both hiring and
I think more importantly
retaining those employees within
the organization okay thank you
mister share thank you that we
secretary
is I sort of wind down here
as we looked you've talked a
little bit about sort of the
implementation I think we've
heard in many across a number of
areas sort of
the collaborative approach to
many of these uh questions if we
pass this legislation this year
does that allow you to obviously
west sufficient funding to move
pretty ah aggressively moved
efficiently and quickly in.
We.
Mister chair representative.
Yes it's my commitment to the
body in the and and the
committee that consistent with
this administration's practice.
We would move quickly into the
role making process but move
move through it carefully and
deliberately so that we thought
through
carefully the questions
presented and raised by
honestly the full sweep of
operators that are required to
have a financial insurance.
Thank thank you mister chair
thank you deputy secretary
mister chair I know there's
other questions i'll wrap up
sort of in with a very
relatively brief sort of summary
based upon
the what we've heard today the
work is preceded I do share the
concern instead of
been raised about the approach
to inclusion of legislators
but this return representative.
As the sponsor in two thousand
and nineteen of the produce
water act which is saving
billions of gallons of water
hundreds of thousands of barrels
of water which mister chair
deputy secretary representative
in a sixty day session for the
came together toward the was two
times the amount of time that we
had now
and mister terr depthy secretary
representative took each one of
those days
mister chair deputy secretary
representative of I want to
thank you for bringing th.
Mr
secretary representative.
We are focusing in on the core
financial components of what is
our most important financial
round
it is of area and industry work
force new mexicans families
communities that give a great
deal to our state that in fact I
think we can see mister chair
representative that we have been
are in.
Mister chair representative.
In a thirty day session it makes
all the sense in the world to
focus on the core budget issues
and one of the core budget
issues mister chair
representative is that if we're
unable to find the cleaner in
the really just the afterward
caller what you will it's the
second part of this important
process then mister chair
representative we're not doing
our responsibility during the
budget session there are
additional components it is my
beliefs I want to share publicly
that were they part of this I
see mr chair.
Very very
knowing how hard it was to get
something done in a sixty day
session the idea of a thirty day
session seems to me that the
inclusion of other components as
important as those conversations
are.
More participation from
legislators.
The inclusion in my view mister
chair representative deputy
secretary would make it
extremely difficult and in fact
unlikely for these important.
Thank you for bringing this
forward I think the continued
spirit of collaboration and
work.
Mister chair representative or
says now to you it doesn't
necessarily get easier but I
wanna say a sincere thank you
for seven forward in a very
important piece that brings
together challenging parts of
our state but incredibly
important parts of our state
thank you I support you.
Thank you.
Thank you mister care.
Um representative or terrorist
yeah.
Deputy secretary
who I just met through the very
first time used to set correct a
huge huge i'm sorry I thought I
heard.
Huge i'm glad I corrected that
so
mister chair representative
deputy secretary
you don't know me but I will
tell you a little bit about my
background so I was a city
planner for thirty years and
then I opened a business and did
city planning and urban land use
planning
I do consider this issue mister
chair and representative and
cabinet deputy secretary
a land use issue.
Um it is just an air water
environmental issue that
protects our citizens but I do
see protections on both sides in
a few could cut the air in this
room today
you would definitely fill mister
chair that there are
differences but there's more
similarities than there are
differences
my concern with regard to this
legislation is that it was kind
of a moving target mister care
as early as last night I was
reading amendments I was
looking at the original
legislation and as early as this
morning I received a whole
difference
set of
information which you know that
in itself concerns me because
i'm expected to make a
high level policy decision on a
set of recommendations that I
received this morning
with
without the set backs I think
they'll set back so very
important I had some questions
regarding those statbacks which
I discussed with a
representative or terrorist
mister chair
is earlier last week I think
and I asked her information from
the sierra club miller.
Just this week I asked remount
to show me um where all these
uses are located so I did a
little bit of my own research of
what I found on line mister
chair to see what I could find
which is something that really
concerns me as legislators
especially when we're asked to
make policy decisions at this
level and I don't have proper
information I asked for studies
about a grandfathering.
Representative or terrorism and
and mister chair
which I have not received any of
that information
one of the concerns that I have
and and having been a city
planner for thirty years I spent
a lot of time in the community
trying to balance issues and I
see this as something that we
need to balance because we're
balancing jobs but we're also
down seeing the health safety in
general welfare of the public
for click a clean environment
mister chair I think that
a process what I saw when at
least what i've heard I haven't
seen any any documentation that
shows me exactly what this
process was but the process is I
I understand it began in august
september I think a
representative dickson mentioned
um an continued into december
for those of you who don't know
me I had a new replacement in
july I watched many of our
meetings online
and there were some it issues by
the way mister chair which I
will talk to you about
individually but no that was so
five six month
process my question to you
deputy secretary is where their
community meetings where the
public could come and give their
input in all of these areas of
not just the permean basin but
all the different basins that
exist enough in new mexico.
Mr chair representatives
we did not have community
meetings or outreached as if we
were conducting a war making
process or other policy settings
we.
As I read out for the committee
worked with the trades and
operators who were there to
convene a representative groups
of operators and in ngo and
community stake holders from
both of our producing basins are
within that list you offer
perspectives
and have.
Discussions I know smalls
relative but in a small setting
where folks could be frank
and have a robust dialogue
around issues that are
challenging
and tricky so that was the
approach we undertook a
work with the stake holders on
these areas and we met initially
with them to even talk through
the seven topics that were sort
of up for discussion on to sort
of at least.
Get some consensus even that it
was worthwhile talking through
those
through those questions but it
definitely was a priority to
ensure we had representation
from a lot of those different
facets so you mentioned a list
earlier of people that were
invited
but there were no public
community meetings that included
information regarding four
issues which I think you know
the increase in in fact in fines
the
the land use issues including
water and set backs etc
there were so there were not
there was no documentation if I
asked you today to tell me
here's the summary of this
meeting or that meeting would
you have that available to me
mister chair representative yes
I can email you after this
meeting all of the documentation
that was shared both with stay
colders at the meeting and I
understand was shared more
broadly throughout i'd be happy
to email you that package
after this meeting mr chair and
representative were teased you
can start to see some of my
concern is that there there is a
sort of limited group of people
that were involved in this in
this.
Land use issue um in the getting
us to this point um that is a
big concern that I have in terms
of a public planning process and
not having all of the
stakeholders that are being
affected by this very far
reaching legislation so that's
number one mr chair and
representative and japanese
cabinet secretary
so the next question that I how
is with regard to the increase
of um fines and you say there is
a cap of ten million it would go
from two hundred fifty thousand
is what I understand right in a
cap of ten million mister chair
represent borego and I I want to
address it I think you asked a
question about public input and
it is I want to address that
first then then to your second
for the reasons that you are
you've enumerated you know the
concern that there weren't
enough stay colder said it
wasn't enough a public process
that though though this bill and
some form at least the sort of
the concepts around it were
presented in at least two maybe
just one
interim committee meeting of
which there is in a public
comment allowed it is it's for
those reasons that we were
having some challenges getting
to agreement out folks needed
more time to really could have
dig into the understanding
around you know how as you say
land use issues around the
setbacks that it's for those
reasons that you know more need
that we have taken that out of
the committee some so we're not
discussing that today
with regard to the civil
penalties with an and the cap.
Civil hinters are different from
bonding so financial insurance
but you just you that the ten
million is for is up to ten
million for the financial
certain financial insurances
that's the bonding part the
civil penalties are are
different and have increased but
not to anywhere near the extent
that mister I didn't get my
question about these civil
penalty is on the binding
um and here is my question where
we were discussing this mister
chair earlier and some of the
representatives were asking
questions and representative or
terrorism deputy
there was a question that came
up about how we compared to
colorado which I think the
permian basin and all of our
basins in new mexico are very
different from colorado and you
to start to look at elevations
and you start to look at a
critch and and just the whole
issue and me we don't think we
can compare it ourselves to
colorado especially when we're
producing thirteen billion
barrels a day.
Thirteen billion let me just
reiterate that number it's very
hard in fact to compare
ourselves to any place in the
united states because I don't
think any other place in the
united states has that
production so if we're truly
going to compare ourselves we're
going to have to be thinking
about comparing ourselves to
places international.
Do you agree with that.
Uh and mister chair
representative I one hundred
percent agree that our
production is unique on shore in
the united states and nationally
are closest
comparison is the state with
which week I share the permian
basin I can offer some
comparisons there if that would
be helpful and I think that is
my thinking is that texas is
probably the closest comparison
nationally that we have
but
regarding that what is texas
count do they have account
so the railroad.
Mister chair representative
as I understand that the railway
commission does not have a cap
on its penalty authority in a
typical year based on the last
penalty report I assessed texas
was ten to twenty five million
dollars in civil penalties
assessed annually that compares
to the ocd
doing two point one five which
is what we did last year
I would anticipate if the caps
went up
it wouldn't be any more worry
would put is probably in line
with texas on fees while texas
charges fees for slightly
different things we are below
texas part of our
recommendation to increase those
because those help with agency
operations is that we are no
longer comparable to texas when
the fees were set in twenty
eighteen they were set at a
level comparable or lower than
texas and so a lot of these
changes would bring us
in line with texas
texas is financial assurance
tracks are current
rules so that would be one area
of departure
but
as i've testified here our
assessment is that as a whole we
are underbonded against those
downside risks associated with a
facility or orphaning so I would
agree with you completely texas
and mister chair and
representative and and deputy
part of the reason I raise that
issue is because it seems to me
like it would be incumbent to
the state and to the environment
department and I have a hard
time said the acronym I am very
sorry but I just stumble on
that.
So it would be almost incumbent
to the state to take a look at
areas such as texas and areas
that might be producing a
similar.
Uh financial.
For lack of a better word
porturate of up.
Of comparison I mean it seems to
me like we don't have background
documentation that shows me or
at least I don't have it and I
looked in here and I don't see
it anywhere that does some
comparison comparative analysis
mister chair and representative
has and and cabinet secretary
that actually gives me danger to
make a really healthy decision
in terms of what our financial
capacity should be for fees or
financial securities or
otherwise and by the way mister
chair and a representative in
cabinet secretary I also sit on
the board of directors of a
credit union so I kind of have
an idea about those types of you
know loans though we don't
handle that but I understand
the mechanism for financing so
the other question I have mister
chair and representative and
cabinet secretary is with regard
to your enforcement capabilities
so you mentioned that there were
one thousand nine hundred and
forty five
maybe
bad players and new mexico and I
agree we need to go after those
bad players and we need to get
rid of them we need to any
business that is a bad player
that they should not be in new
mexico and we should enforce on
them so
I think he said there were maybe
three hundred that are really
really bad players is that does
that what I heard.
A mister chair representative I
believe I was referring in the
three hundred numbers to
actually wells that had been
orphaned
we only have six hundred and
eight operators in the state and
and
I don't think i've identified a
number.
That are problematic we try to
approach each situation as it.
As it occurs we try to ensure
that our field inspectors work
with operators to address
compliance issues with with non
fee penalty bearing field
compliances at the start ends we
can cut them off before they
become an issue so we can
support compliance operations
before before they get large and
mister chair and representative
in deputy I do appreciate that
from an enforcement standpoint
you all are working within your
capacity to ensure that those
bad players are identified and
that we are in foreseen
so my last question mister chair
is with regard to
and so just to make my points
regarding the proposal to
increase
ten million dollars
I think that it would be
incumbent upon the state to do a
study to to really look at that
issue because we're going from
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars to ten million dollars
that's a humungous scale in my
mind and i'm just trying to
figure out how we arrived at
that number
and I don't have any answers to
that so maybe mr chair and
representative
cabinet secretary you may want
to address how we went.
From.
From
you know the difference which is
to me seems pretty absorbing it
and mr chair representative.
At ocd we looked at
the total university of
operators the total well count
that they have
the substantive that well count
for which were responsible which
are on the financial issue
inside which are just the state
and private land wells
and we made some assumptions
about orphaning risk cause we
know some subsets there we were
estimated one percent of an
operators wells might be
orphaned
and then we looked at the
largest operator by well count
which has eleven thousand one
hundred and forty two wells and
we made that assumptions and
used some conservative some
assumptions about plugging costs
and it became clear that even
under a fairly conservative one
percent assumption ten million
dollars would be the bonding to
have partial coverage
liabilities it's how it's there
that is a unique subset of
operators there aren't many of
that scale but we have many
operators with five thousand
wells and then as you move down
by number you get you all a
whole host of operators the
smaller numbers of wells which
present lower risk because you
just have fewer fewer facilities
so that's that's that's how we
arrived at the ten million and I
believe representative or test
wanted to offer a remark and
happy to follow up
mr chair and represent brego and
and I think you're you're
concerned that increase is
is something that has been
shared by other folks which is
why we are offering the options
for you and the tiered approach
for the financial
for for a different sized
operators I think it's really
really important recognizing
that you know there are lots of
large repeaters in the state in
their lots and lots of smaller
carriers and want to make sure
that they could
sort of also participate in this
you know in in this and so
that's the language that refers
to the up to five hundred
dollars
per well or a subset of walls.
So I think that's really
important that we're sure a
dressing
you know the fact that they're
not everybody will be able to
pay or should pay the up to ten
million and that is a cap
that there are different options
for and helping us
as a state as you know the
department at at emnerd the ocd
get the financial insurance as
we need to deal with the
significant liability that
exists from the orphanton and um
and and representative and and
deputy i'm out particular point
is was there modeling that was
done is there a model that I
could look at that shows me how
you came up with these
assumptions and etc do we have
that available to us
a mysterious chair
representative i'm happy to
share the modeling that occurred
looking at what we know about
operator well count what we know
about
their current bonding and then
the assumptions we used we know
what are plugging costs are
we've got a pretty good number
there and then some of and we've
made some fairly very
conservative estimates on
reclamation costs and it would
have been to have that
information somewhere in here so
that I could have you know seen
what you're modeling was in what
assumptions you use to arrive at
those numbers I mean that would
have been extremely helpful
mister care if I had been able
to you know kind of turn to them
and say oh this is how they
arrived at that number.
So i'm i'm gonna go onto the
next point mr chair the next
point is with regard to
sort of.
Because I do see this as a land
use issue
in summary it is a land used
issue because we were we were
assuming water and set back.
Originally and it I know we've
taken those out but that does
not conclude that this is how
people utilise land.
And water.
So my my next question is with
regard to.
The cost of doing business in
new mexico and the expectation
for the cost of doing business
in new mexico.
You know and I think that's one
of the problems that mister
chair and representative and and
cabinet sector secretary is a
lot of people talk about you
know why don't people come and
locate in new mexico and why are
they going to arizona why are
they going to texas or colorado
and not locating in new mexico
and i'm not referring
specifically to oil and gas i'm
just referring to business in
new mexico is part of the
problem is that we do not have
expectations and clearer
expectations of what the cost of
doing business is and I think
that is one of the issues that I
have is that.
And I was a bureaucrat by the
way for twenty eight years and I
know what it's like to create
rules you know.
My drover on the side these are
the rules tomorrow.
I think it's it's incumbent upon
us as policy makers to be very
clear about how we set policy
for any business
be it oil and gas or any other
business water error I mean
anything
cannot be.
Whatever whatever business were
in I i'm in the art and jewelry
business I have a very small
business but I do business and I
pay taxes.
And I have expectations you know
I I have to make sure that any
any jewelry or art that I sell
is labelled and it's not you
know I mean it it southwestern
or if it's nate naval ho or
whatever I have to be very clear
about how I do my business and I
think that is one of the issues
that I have
with not having some of these
clear the clear criteria in in
the policy.
And not a side word that
somebody comes in and says mr
chair
representative.
Deputy you can appreciate that
that people have a certain set
of rules
that they're clear about in
terms of how they move forward
and I you know I just I I bring
that up because I think that
that's that's one of the things
that
should be in the policy.
And so with that you know I had
some other issues mister chair
with regard to because bothering
of users and so on but i'm gonna
refrain for now schemes
questions but I appreciate I I
know it's hard because in a
sounds mister chair
representative and deputy we're
kind of setting the rules for
their history country.
And I think that you know
when you start thinking about
the comparisons which I brought
up earlier we don't have those
comparisons were sort of the the
people out there making.
The rules for
maybe other states that will
some day maybe have a premium
so without mister charle closing
thank you for indulging me.
Thank you.
I just want to clarify once come
things I do believe you have.
Um.
You've come to our committees
there's twenty two internet
committees if you don't know and
you can be picked up committee
on i'm on water we hurt from you
we heard from you and several
people
people here about set backs and
work in walls and method that's
what makes our inter- committee
is so important and we just
learn about everything that's
happening or state that's when
you pick up the knowledge
you are also in so that was in
last.
Mrperiod director rodrick could
come to thanksgiving I hear from
so much but and then we went to
carl's bad radioactive and
hazard we heard some great stuff
and in that group it was a set
back sort of wells and it was
unum.
Um industry was there
and get his name.
But you spoke about picass and
gasoline operations and all
kinds of different areas that
mean and and that's what I need
to know abandoned candidate
areas but I I believe in the in
the legislature it's we have a
quite a few of us waters a huge
committee radio hesitant squares
does not as big but we attend so
if you want to learn about all
these things they come in front
of us all the time and they
share what they know the answer
questions you can talk to them I
had a zoom with um.
Deputy director at the time your
director and.
We talked about this stuff and I
just remember being very
passioned about kids but but the
build the opportunity is there
is legislatures to hear from the
secretaries here about their
agencies here's what's happening
and
I feel like I know all of this
these topics because of your
great presentation so thank you
so
the opportunity is there for us
to learn about just about
everything about the states it's
on to also so you know there's
there's always optimally mr.
The.
Think you reps in sorting out
any.
Since got
like you were talking about two
minutes
three thousand.
The.
Mr chairman.
Website.
Depends on.
One page seven.
Looking at lines through
fourteen.
The.
And I have.
Over significant issue with the
lack of quantitative.
Okay.
Information here since they told
me left up to the division and
i'm gonna will tell you a quick
story about.
For young engineers in nineteen
eighty five.
Who operating thirty five strip
wells.
Who were purchased on.
Thirty two dollars economics.
Nineteen eighty six
well sold for mine down.
In major.
Making a conservative to do this
of their lower.
Per per welcome.
Whose four young years.
Or able to make some
acquisitions.
That would not have.
If this legislation.
No possible way would that have
occurred in the consequences of
that would have been to air
thirty plus stripper worlds to
that list of orphan worlds
the representatives seventeen.
Is
there is a great deal
a huge amount of very ability
and work constitutes
financial comparison to.
In these written findings.
That are a consequence of the
commodity price.
I've got it
an ocd powerpoint presentation
from twenty twenty one listening
seventeen hundred wells to
source
and I presume that number unless
we've added two hundred to the
list in the last two years I
would presume that number would
have had to go down a little bit
in the average cost of
in this power point presentation
was seventy thousand dollars.
Then represent it
that there's fifty four million
dollars in the reclamation fund
being added to at about twenty
million dollars a year.
Z.
The.
The ocd has a capability of
processing.
And plugging about a hundred and
sixty of these wells per year so
one might question the need for
these financial assurances at
all.
Because the problem appears to
be.
So itself from current.
Industry
contribution.
Fine.
There is.
Let me ask one question and that
is.
In this room stay colder
process.
The developed this peace of
legislation how many of the
independent producers concerns
were addressed in a positive
matter.
Mr chair
representative um.
The.
We
made changes to reduce.
The overall proposal is the
starting cap I think it's some
it turned around we said maybe
it should be fifteen million we
sort of move those pieces down
as recently as the committee sub
we made it expressly clear even
though we believe it's implied
that be tearing financial
assurances going forward
we provide some we provided
additional clarity around the
transfer provisions and sort of
other components as to their
specific addressed I suppose to
agree that's in fairness in the
eye of the beholder
from being transparent with the
committee but we have tried to
move to here some of those
reconcerns respecting that we've
got a diverse group of operators
and I would just clarify one
point i've not testified that we
only have seventeen hundred or
we have seventeen hundred known
orphans now we have some other
wells that but for some
enforcement decisions would have
added to the total and I know
for a fact that additional
orphans will be created in the
fuel at some percentage of the
well count that's that's
guaranteed
i'm not saying it's a huge level
but it's there so that's part of
the number it's not just the
seventeen hundred now it's the
ones that are coming down the
road because macro economic
conditions are other factors can
cause upsets and components and
I think it would be hard for us
to apping about what may not
occur under the transfer
provisions because those are.
Highly contact specific of the
particular transaction
resume scott minskers by first.
Mister chairman.
This this will be my l.
I can.
I can testify to the fact that
you
have any
of the independent producers
concerned.
Were addressed in that state.
The issue with this legislation.
In my constituents
is.
That this is completely moving
forward with up
regulation by room.
In that these stakeholder
meetings going forward.
The.
Will have significantly input.
From
the environmental communi.
I believe we've already heard
testify this doesn't go foreign.
Mr chairman.
Representative mister fuse the
concern is that with the stroke
of AP.
And penalties.
Can put these small operators
completely out of business.
With.
If this last year's
is any guide.
Would be.
Very significant
thank you.
Thank you observe scott.
Any further comments from the
committee.
Feeling better I left it.
Okay so a couple closing
thoughts I will not come back to
the committee i'm sorry to be
worth that.
And they will take a month
what I heard was we had.
To shive two thousand existing.
One thousand nine.
Sounds to me like a cost about
two hundred thousand dollars.
Each the plug into immediately
the at you know
it
doing the math that existing
liability of three hundred and
eighty nine million dollars.
If you just take the plugging
average.
And forget about remediation
which probably started idea.
It's still.
Two hundred and forty four
million dollars
in this is.
Exist.
This is during times of record
production
if there's an answer
that number goes up sho.
And it doesn't go up.
With all to respect misrefuse.
It's I can be one percent.
Of each operator it's going to
be whole operators.
Go ahead.
Hot what.
And so I I think like service if
one percent.
The.
They don't think one percent
source case.
If we can't put appropriate
safeguards.
In place.
During record protection.
Then we never have this secret.
The.
The.
So we we appreciate the.
Contributions although I guess
it's.
Those.
The.
But it doesn't mean they should
have kirkland to do it everyone.
We need appropriate safeguards
in place.
We've been down this road before
we've had boom industries in the
mexico before.
We had your animal.
They weren't bust.
We're still dealing with that
legacy.
That was not cleaned up.
If we ever significant downturn
in the well yes industry.
New mexico does not.
I think this is all takes a step
in the right direction.
It doesn't do nearly everything
i'd like to do.
It doesn't have some.
And I think it's significant
that we do have large operators
in support
I think that's evidence of
the department working with.
So to me we need to protect
new mexico we need to protect
new mexicans.
In this bill advances that
interest.
Someone like to make
there's everybody
care.
The representative motion and in
the correct form I appreciate
that I was about to forget.
Um victory did you take.
Yes mister chair.
Representative but I go.
No one i'd like to explode my
boat
representative d.
Yes you don't like to explain my
vote.
Representative yeah.
Yeah.
Representative
no.
Representative montoya.
No
representative rubber yes.
Yeah.
Representative scott no
representative small.
Representative townsend.
Madam vice chair.
The.
Mister chairman
yes.
Six years
by either the sixty five year
department if everyone could
just stay in place for a moment
member statement leave
representative to explain just
thank you mister
am not comfortable with
the process and the information
that I received regarding this
particular piece of legislation
I asked for information and I
never received it and so forth
for those reasons I am voting
now I think we need to keep
you know hold or
staff accountable for getting
information to the two
legislators.
When we are making a policy
decisions at this level.
Think he reps in brigade
represent the.
Despite my serious reservations
I did vote yes and it is
something that goes against what
I have said in the past about.
Supporting those that I do not
feel.
One hundred percent ready and I
sincerely hope.
That the sponsor and agency will
conti.
Thank you the committee and the
representatives for a long bill
thank you for everyone want to
