No calls close. We have a
quorum.
Members, please rise for today's
invocation.
Offered to us today by Arch
Archbishop John Wester from the
Archdiocese of Santa Fe.
Let us take a moment and place
ourselves in God's holy
presence. We give you thanks,
our living God.
Whose power is revealed in
nature and whose providence is
revealed in history.
We see your hand here in New
Mexico, your creative hand.
That imbued the vast desert
plains with vibrant life, rich
colors and a vastness that
reminds us of your infinite
power and majesty.
Even more we see you reflected
in the faces of the people that
make up our great state.
And so we ask your blessing now
on this assembly are elected
officials who represent those
who call New Mexico home.
Conscious that in you we live
and move and have our being.
We ask that you look favorably
upon us this day.
And that you blessed this House
of Representatives as it serves
the public good and preserves
the good order in our state of
New Mexico.
Guide our legislators' minds
that they may clearly perceive
solutions to sometimes difficult
problems.
Guard their speech that they may
reflect the truth revealed in
your holy will.
And touched their hearts.
They may show compassion and
respect to each other and to
those they have been elected to
serve.
And in all things may they be
faithful witnesses to your love
and then often broken and
struggling world.
Father in heaven, conscious of
our profound need for your grace
and love.
Help these honorable women and
men to rise above any
differences they may have.
And to fashion sound legislation
that will promote the well-being
of all in our state.
Particularly the poor and the
vulnerable.
Give them the fulfillment of
their aspirations, the joy of
unselfish public service.
And the peace of knowing that
they have been true to their
beliefs.
And may they be faithful to our
state's constitution and give
witness in word and deed to the
principles upon which it is
based.
And so Lord of all, as we lift
our hearts to you now.
We ask that you extend your arms
of benediction over this
assembly, the House of
Representatives of the state of
New Mexico.
And support them all the day
long.
May they always do justice.
Love kindness.
and walk humbly with you our
God.
Amen.
Please remain standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance with the
generally from Berton Lee
representative Nicole Chavez
lead us in the pledge.
And uh gentle lady from Bernard
Leo Representative Torres
Velazquez leads in the pledge to
the New Mexico flag.
General lady from Santa.
Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
It is ordered. Good morning,
members.
Um, it's a pleasure to see all
of you today. Uh, we've got a
number of guests here on the
rostrum and so I'll, I'll go
ahead and get started with those
introductions we heard from
Archbishop Wester, uh, with
that, um, wonderful invocation.
We also have other guests here,
uh, including Bishop Peter
Baldacquino. He is with the
diocese of Las Cruces. We have
Mr. Alan Sanchez, executive
director of the New Mexico
Conference of Catholic Bishops.
We've got Rebecca Lucero,
advocate for the New Mexico
Conference of Catholic bishops.
Deacon Steve Ran Hill, the
associate director of the
conference of Bishops.
Welcome to the house.
If you didn't go to the
breakfast this morning, you
missed out. It was absolutely
amazing.
No chirons will forgive you, but
they had biscuits and gravy,
which is right up there.
Um, let's go to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe because we have a
amazing performance and for the
rookies in the room, this is
probably like one of my top 3
favorite days, and I'm sure it
will be yours as well after you
see this performance.
Mr. Speaker, I'm so excited to
welcome NDI New Mexico to the
floor of the house to celebrate
their 31st year of teaching
children excellence NDI in New
Mexico is a statewide youth
development organization that
each year serves children 3 to
18 years old. The dance-based in
school outreach program is
provided in 90 public schools in
32 communities across the state.
This school year, they will
deliver over 200 classes per
week, serving over 8000 students
over the last 30 years, they
have served over 159,000
children, Mr. Speaker.
NTI prepares a young person to
meet the challenges of
adolescence and adulthood to
achieve their full potential.
These programs are improving
confidence, health, and academic
achievement. NDI New Mexico
students have better school
attendance, higher GPA scores,
and significantly higher scores
on standardized assessments.
Um, and Mr. Speaker, this is an
example of a program that has
grown through public, private,
and corporate partnerships they
are serving rural, tribal, and
urban communities across the
state. I wanna thank.
NDI for 31 years of amazing work
across New Mexico and I want to
thank all the students we have
with us today, um, and I'll
welcome Russell Baker, executive
director, our NDI New Mexico
board members and parents and
supporters, um, that have all
gathered here today and this is
the NDI New Mexico super
wonderful advanced team, the
SWAT team.
It is
I'm gonna just take this down.
I standing ovation, dancers were
so lucky.
gather together to sing, uh,
goodbye.
We would like to thank you for
uh your attention this morning.
We believe that it takes energy
and effort to do something with
excellence. NDI New Mexico
programs are a unique blend of
Performing arts, physical
fitness, physical education and
youth development this year over
8000 children will, uh, and over
64,000 audience members around
the state of New Mexico will
experience NDI and our messages
of work hard, do your best,
never give up and be healthy. We
want to thank you, our state
leaders for your partnership and
for prioritizing youth.
their education, their wellness,
and their well-being.
With your help, we help to serve
some of the 100 elementary
schools that are on our wait
list, there's a lot that we can
do. We hope that you have a
great day and a great session
and we'd like to say goodbye to
you the NDI way it looks like
this.
Thank you dancers.
You audience. Thank you.
God
Good
by
God
Thank you NDI thank you dancers,
thank you, uh, directors and to
all the parents and supporters
in the Gallery of India, I thank
you for showing up for your
kids. This is a beautiful,
beautiful performance.
Congratulations.
Just for the, for the chamber's
information, uh, the gentleman
from Lincoln and Otero,
Representative Vincent, uh, will
be starting the dance caucus,
um, meets this evening.
Check with him for the location
and the time.
Folks, uh, we've got some guests
in the gallery as well, um, I'm
sorry, in the rostrum. I believe
there are cookies on your desk,
sponsored by Representative
Joseph Sanchez.
Um, they are on behalf of the
New Mexico Credit Union
Association of New Mexico, uh,
the association has provided us
with cookies made by
Albuquerque's Sweet Spot, ABQ
Sweet Spot, a local small
business on the west side of
Albuquerque attached to those
cookies is also an invitation
for this evening's credit union
legislative reception from 5:37
p.m. at the Pink Adobe
appetizers and drinks will be
available, so please stop by.
Welcome to our friends from the
New Mexico.
Union Association. Thank you for
being here.
Gentle lady from McKinley with a
certificate, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good
morning, everyone. It's my, uh,
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to, um,
ask the body to first recognize
three people that I have up on
the rostrum with you, and that
is Sarah Piano. She's a city
councilwoman for the city of
Gallup, Patrick Garrett, who is
a little brother and Frankie
Driscoll Miller, who is a big
brother out of our big
brother's, uh, big sisters
program and so for today Mr.
Speaker, I would like to
ask if we could have the uh
certificate red recognizing that
today as Big Brothers, big
sisters, and national mentoring
Month, that's the month of
January. Fantastic, click to
read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Big Brothers, big
sisters, and national mentoring
Month 2025.
Whereas January is recognized as
national mentoring Month.
And whereas big brothers, big
sisters has a mission to create
and support 1 to 1 mentoring
relationships that ignite the
power and promise of youth
across New Mexico.
And whereas big brothers, big
sisters utilizes mentoring to
address the critical needs of
the youth, including fostering a
sense of belonging, providing
physical and mental health
support promoting, promoting
academic achievement, enhancing
workforce readiness, teaching
financial literacy, cultivating
healthy habits, building
conflict resolution skills,
encouraging physical activity in
developing leadership abilities.
And whereas education and the
presence of caring adults in
their lives are two key
indicators of a child's success
and the mentoring programs
provided by Big Brothers Big
Sisters, aim to ensure that all
youth achieve their full
potential.
And whereas mentoring yields
significant societal benefits,
including a 3 to 1 return for
every $1 invested, a savings of
more than 2 million nationally
by reducing juvenile crime and
an increase in lifelong earnings
by an average of $200,000.
her individual.
And whereas a young person who
is mentored is twice as likely
to enroll in post-secondary
education, 41% less likely to
engage in substance abuse and
twice as likely to be involved
in and hold leadership
leadership positions.
And whereas 1 in 3 young people
still grow up without a mentor,
demonstrating the need for
additional awareness and
resources to support mentoring
programs.
And whereas national mentoring
Mon serves as an opportunity to
celebrate, elevate, and
encourage mentoring across our
state and recruit recruit more
caring adult mentors in New
Mexico.
Now therefore, be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
January 2025 be recognized as
national mentoring Month and be
it further resolved that Big
Brothers, Big Sisters be
commended for their outstanding
commitment in providing gold
standard youth mentoring
services in New Mexico signed
and sealed in at the state
capitol in the city of Santa Fe.
Generally Milly. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. I want to thank
everyone and if we could please
let's give a round of applause
to our people here today from
Big Brothers Big Sisters.
Welcome to the house.
Incredible work done by an
incredible organization. Thank
you gentle lady for recognizing,
uh, this group of dynamic
leaders, um, here in the house.
Members, um, I want to remind
you that MVD is in the house
lounge, uh, for
Simple transactions. I don't
know what that means, but.
Go check it out, uh, get your
red plates if you don't have
one,
they will be here until
12 p.m. today, then back at 1:30
until 5 today and tomorrow types
of transactions include, uh,
titling new vehicles, used
vehicles, registration, renewal,
and issuance of plates, uh, no
cash, credit card or debit card
only also financial disclosure
statements are due by the end of
business on the 31st of January.
Secretary of State will be in
the house lounge on the 31st
from 10 to 12 to assist you,
shall you need support filing.
uh, disclosures and then on the
30th and 31st school picture
day.
I've said it like 4 times, but
You know, you gotta make sure
you're dressed to to the tea
represented a block.
Uh, gentle lady from McKinley in
San Juan, you have some very
special guests sitting right
behind you.
Thank you Mr. Speaker and
members of the house and before
I make my introductions, I'd
like to call your attention to a
black notebook on your desks and
uh it's a beautiful notebook,
uh, on the title on the cover it
says Navajo Preparatory School.
Yeah this cargo.
Not Ani, which means leaders now
and into the future, so please,
when you get a chance, let's
thank Navajo Preparatory School
for these wonderful books. Now,
uh, I'd like to introduce my
guests Addison Salazar is a
junior and she is Miss Hojou.
And she is one of two cultural
ambassadors for the school and
serves as a Miss Hojou
Nasha Addison is enrolled in the
Hickoryia Apache tribe and is
from Dulcie.
Welcome to the house.
And my next guest is Addison
Salazar. Addison is rolled in
the Hickory Apache Tribe.
From Du see oh my apologies.
Uh
I'm, I totally mixed mixed up
here intros here. So now I'd
like to introduce ourcadia,
Riley, Arcadia is rolled in the
Laguna Pueblo and is from
Farmington.
And next we have Clara Clanch
who is a junior. She is enrolled
in the Palla tribe and is from
Farmington. She is a runner for
the Navajo Prep School
cross-country team which won 3rd
place in the NMAA championship
this year.
So members of the house, please
help me welcome these wonderful
students who attend Navajo Prep,
a college-bound school that
produces highly academic
successful students.
Thank you. Welcome to your House
of Representatives.
The lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, may I make an
announcement?
Before we go to that motion, uh,
my motion that you're gonna make
for me.
We'll go to an announcement.
Mr. Speaker, um, the teddy bears
on your desk today are from the
New Mexico primary care clinics,
um, they serve 330,000 New
Mexicans, uh, and they have
received support from the New
Mexico legislature for over 40
years.
And uh they have 200 sites
providing medical, dental,
behavioral health and
school-based services to New
Mexicans at the right time in
the right place, regardless of
ability to pay today is primary
care day in New Mexico and I ask
you to join me in recognizing
the clinics for over 50 years of
service to New Mexico's most
vulnerable citizens.
Thank you.
And folks, if you leave your
stuffy at your desk, then you'll
be in compliance with Spirit
Week because Friday is bring
your stuffy to work day, so just
leave it and you're done. You
don't have to remember to bring
it.
Uh, lady from Santa Fe, Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business introduction.
See no objection. It is ordered
clerk to read.
House Memorial 3 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, a
memorial declaring February
18th.
2025 New Mexico Home Builders
Association Day in the House of
Representatives in recognition
of the New Mexico Home Builders
Association long service and
dedication to fostering a
vibrant and stable housing
industry.
House Memorial 3.
As well, 3 haven't been read
twice by title is order, not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
House Memorial 4.
Introduced by representatives
Mooya.
Doo, Murphy, Henry, and
Armstrong, a memorial declaring
January 28, 2025, New Mexico oil
and gas station in the House of
Representatives, House Memorial
4. How's Memorial 4 I haven't
been there twice by title is
order not printed and placed on
the speaker's table.
Your lady from Santa Fe.
Mr. Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business
from San Juan. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Um, I request that we
remove House Memorial 4 from the
speaker's table and make it the
next order of business.
That the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
housemorial for on final passage
has been taken, and it is not
subject to debate, amendment, or
substitution. The gentleman to
explain the memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh,
Today's memorial is just an
acknowledgement to the oil and
gas industry, uh.
For what it means to our budget.
Um, this, uh,
In the memorial and I, I would
ask that we have the, that we
have the clerk read it here in
just a second, but, uh, the, the
main points that I would like to
point out today about the oil
and gas industry in New Mexico
is the $13 billion that has gone
directly from the oil and gas
industry into the New Mexico
budgets across the state, both
the state and local communities,
um, Mr. Speaker, uh, that is not
to, uh,
I would also like to include the
31.
Uh, 1000 direct jobs and the
over 100,000 direct and indirect
jobs that this represents, uh,
Mr. Speaker, the, uh, $7.4
million billion dollars that
goes into uh the New Mexico
General Fund represents 49% of
our entire state budget, so, um,
this is a very important
industry, um, all of us who, uh,
use capital.
outlay dollars in their
community to help uh with
infrastructure projects and uh
just the needs that we don't
address here collectively, um,
that is thanks to what the oil
and gas industry does in New
Mexico uh in San Juan County,
uh, for instance.
409 million just shy of $410
million goes directly into
Salland County for
infrastructure, education,
capital outlay, higher
education, and K through 12
schools plus other programs for
students, so, uh, Mr. Speaker, I
would just, uh, I would, I would
ask that the clerk read the
memorial and that we.
Have a vote.
cle r k to read.
House Memorial 4 introduced by
Representatives Motoya, Dow,
Murphy, Henry, and Armstrong.
A memorial declaring January 28,
2025, New Mexico oil and gas day
in the House of Representatives.
Whereas in 2024, the New Mexico
Oil and natural gas industry
generated $13 billion in state
and local revenue.
And whereas of that amount $7400
million went to the general fund
representing 49% of the general
funds 2024 revenue.
And whereas $5500 million went
to the general fund operating
reserve.
And whereas $2300 million went.
To total state education
funding.
That served 130,000588 students.
386 public schools in 95,880
public schools and teachers, and
whereas $600 million went to
higher education, and whereas
$279 million went to the
construction and renovation of
public school facilities. And
whereas the oil and natural gas
industry provided 90% of the
funding for early childhood care
and education fund in 2024. And
whereas 1 billion
$200 million went to matching
federal Medicaid funds, and
whereas $964 million went to new
capital outlay appropriations
for projects throughout the
state.
And whereas the oil and natural
gas industry is the largest
private sector employer in New
Mexico providing more than
100,000 direct and indirect jobs
to New Mexico residents.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that the
oil and gas, natural gas
industry, be recognized for its
vital contributions to the state
by declaring January 28, 2025,
New Mexico oil and gas day in
the House of Representatives.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the Secretary of
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources.
All right, thank you. Is there a
debate on the
Memorial, gentle lady from
Catrin Sokoro Sierra.
Valencia
And Catherine
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I
just stand in support of this
memorial, uh, in my districts
alone and, and all those
counties that the speaker just
announced, Catherine Secora,
Valencia, and Sierra over $500
million brought to my district,
uh, and, and lots of those
projects into education, um, I
just appreciate the oil and gas,
uh, community, all they do for
the state of New Mexico and uh.
Uh
Drill baby drill.
lady from Donana Sierra Socorro
Representative Dao. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker and thank you to my
co-sponsors. I just stand. I, I,
I, I looked through the little
booklet and the contribution to
District 38, which is the
northern part of Donana Sierra,
and parts of Socorro County.
$1.2 billion. Um, that's pretty
substantial, but I was also just
kind of making a mental note of
the things on our desk right
now, well, in the mic in my
hand, but there's not a thing
that was being.
treated us today that did not
include a petroleum product,
even these cute little bears
from the, um, from the primary
care providers, the
It's, it's part of our everyday
lives. If every single vehicle
in the United States became an
electric vehicle, it reduced our
dependency on oil and gas by
only 1/3. So I'm so grateful to
the hardworking people that are
out there, um, making sure that
we have affordable, reliable oil
and gas. I'm proud to be part of
this.
The gentleman from
Colfax, curry Hardy and Quay,
San Miguel and Union,
Representative Sheffield. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentlemen of all those counties.
Mr. Speaker, when I was a young
man about 19 years old.
I, I, I guess I'm not getting
much amplification or
I, I needed to
Something that a job to put some
clothes on my back and some food
in my mouth. I trailed down an
oil rig and I went to work on
that oil rig, and it fed and
clothed me for quite well for a
while. I think today those oil
rigs are doing the same thing
for New Mexico. They provide
over 40% of our budget.
Uh, they keep, keep us fed and
clothed. They educate our
children, and we are very
grateful today for that industry
in our state, and I just, uh,
echo the words drill, baby
drill.
Gentlemen from Chavez,
Representative Murphy. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. This is
gentleman. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I
yield to the gentleman from
Travis County.
Thank you. I rise today in
support of the Mexico oil and
gas industry and the 100,000
plus people that it employs. I
want to draw particular
attention to what I consider the
backbone of this industry and
it's the independent oil and gas
producer. Many of these are
multi-generational companies
that continue to explore for and
produce the very products that
we're talking about today.
In Chavis County we received
roughly $315 million by rough
math that's over $6000 per man,
woman, and child, and we are
very grateful for those funds.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen. The gentle
lady from Eddie and Lee
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the
gentlemen please yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Eddy County.
Thank you, sir. uh, Mr. Speaker
and members of the body, I'm so
proud to represent large
portions of Eddie and Lee
counties which are uh known as
the oil patch.
Uh, we
Shake hands with um colleagues
in uh San Juan County where
there's also a lot of oil and
gas production. We know Chavez
and Roosevelt, um, also.
But I appreciate every year, Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen, that this
booklet is given to us
legislators.
Uh, it just kind of brings home
the point that we do need.
Hydrocarbons, uh, they do make
modern life possible. Some
people would like to snap their
fingers and see this industry
disappear.
But we have to be reality
people.
And acknowledge
How important this is to the
state and just looking at Eddy
County alone.
In terms of excuse me, capital
outlay.
K through 12 schools.
Support for students, education,
infrastructure, and higher ed.
Eddie County
gets $538 million and then Lee
County $781 million for these
same uh sectors um of life and
economy. And so I just wanna say
thank you to the oil and gas
workers.
Who are out there every day
producing energy for us.
Mr. Speaker, uh, I've been in
the oil field for tours of uh
facilities in the heat of summer
when it's more than 105 degrees
out and I don't know how these
people withstand it, but they
have certain protective
equipment and they have uh
cooling stations and all that,
and they're there.
Uh, doing a very hard job for
the benefit of New Mexico and so
again thank you to these people.
further debate the general lady
from Lee Representative Senna
Cortez. Mr. Speaker, does the
gentleman from San Juan County
yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentle lady from Lee County. Mr.
Speaker, I have some great stats
to share today. I represent Lee
County, one of New Mexico's
largest oil producing counties
and within it sets the, the
Permian Basin. Mr. Speaker, the
men and women who live and work
in Lee County are proud that the
oil and gas industry supports
over 100,000 direct and indirect
jobs statewide and we're also
proud to contribute.
New Mexico being one of the
highest producers of oil and
gas.
Mr. Speaker, not only that, New
Mexico produces one of the
cleanest barrels of oil in the
world, a huge accomplishment,
but not only that, the oil and
gas contributed 49% of all
revenue to the state budget last
year, Mr. Speaker, I am going to
repeat that. The oil and gas
industry contributed 49% of all
revenue to the state budget last
year. In Lee County alone, we
received 781,195,000 from oil
and gas revenue that funded
infrastructure, education, and
capital outlay. Mr. Speaker, I
am so proud to represent the
beautiful people of District 62,
right in the heart of oil
country. Thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker.
Uh, let's go to the gentleman
from Valencia representative
Baca.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Does a
gentleman yield?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Valencia
County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too
rise in support of this memorial
as a K-12 and lifetime educator.
I want to thank the oil and gas
industry for the contributions
and the opportunities that are
provided to the students of the
state of New Mexico.
Whether it be through the
classroom, whether it be through
funding of the SCG or whether it
be through the STEM centers that
have been built across the
state.
I want to thank and appreciate
the contributions of the oil of
gas has done, um, not only for
my county, but for the state of
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen gentlemen
from Otero Representative Black.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with the
kind gentleman from San Juan,
please yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Otero County.
Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen, and I too rise in
support of this memorial. I, I
find this industry to be very
interesting because it's got so
many people involved. We've got
people that are
Employed
In the oil field and then we've
also got folks who support the
oil field in the enabling
communities of oil and gas, so
we, we heard a bill this morning
about just that oil and gas and
what it does and, and all the
industries that contribute to
our state. So Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I do rise in support
of your memorial and I, I just
want to mention in Otero County,
we get 189.
$0.8 million from the oil and
gas industry, and that helps our
schools that helps our hospital,
which we are so proud of that
helps all of the higher
education we have in our state.
We have a New Mexico State
campus in Almogordo and so all
of these dollars flowing down
and helping produce something.
In our county and in our state
is really important to me. So
Mr. Speaker, gentlemen, I just
wanted to make sure that that is
clear because every single,
almost all the dollars that we
get for capital outlay to build
roads, to build schools, to fund
projects to buy police vehicles
to build fire stations. This all
comes from oil and gas, which we
are just so blessed and honored
to have as a resource in our
state. And so, Mister Speaker,
I rise an extreme support for
this legislation because
This is a big thing that we need
to just show and yell to the
whole world, New Mexico is the
#2 producer in the country.
I believe we have the number one
producing county. I believe it's
Lee County, which is the number
one producing county in the in
the, in the whole country. So we
have a lot to be proud of, and I
will continue to be proud of
this industry that provides the
lights that are on right now in
the Capitol provides our our per
diem. It provides everything.
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be as
brief as I can be this morning,
but thank you so much, Mr.
Speaker. Thank you to the oil
and gas industry. Praise God for
them. Let's keep on going and
drill, baby drill.
Generalman from Chavez, Eddie,
and Lee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well,
the gentleman from San Juan
Yield.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from.
Chaters County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too
stand in support of oil and gas
industry is just stated I have
parts of Eddie Chavez, and Lee
Counties in my district.
And
It is unbelievable the amount of
Money that the state of New
Mexico receives from the oil and
gas industry.
But my one of my pet deals is
not the companies that make up
the oil industry in New Mexico.
As the most part, are very good
corporate citizens. The money
that they spend on projects
throughout the state.
That don't come through tax
revenues to our kids, to our
schools, to programs.
The the list just goes on and on
and all the employees.
Of these oil companies are
citizens of our communities,
their community leaders, their.
Churchgoers there.
Coaches there
The, the list just goes on and
on, the amount of benefit that
we get from the oil and gas
industry in New Mexico.
So I do stand extremely in
support of the oil and gas
industry in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
gentlemen. The gentleman from
Donana Representative S small.
Thank you Mr. Speaker, with the
gentleman from San Juan yield.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Donana
County. Uh, thank you,
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker. Buddy, uh, uh, folks
who are here, I want to rise in
support of our energy production
industry, our oil and gas
industry is a remarkable one for
all the uh reasons that folks
have stated. Mr. Speaker, uh,
body, I reflect on my 1st
January in this chamber, January
of 2017, our oil production was
12.9 million barrels.
That month that represented at
least a doubling if not a
tripling. Well, uh, at least a
doubling of the historical
40-year production history for
the entire state. Mr. Speaker,
Badi, since then, uh, we have
grown that, uh, almost 5 times,
a little, yeah, almost 5 times.
We're now, Mr. Speaker body is a
gentleman may well know, over 65
million barrels of oil that's
produced every single month in
the state of New Mexico. That is
a remarkable.
story, Mr. Speaker, uh,
gentlemen, that's a story that
is very closely tied to this
body's investments in education,
both K-12 also higher education,
one of the few places, Mr.
Speaker, embody that, uh,
students can go and get a
debt-free higher education right
here in New Mexico in large part
built upon that increase in
production. Mr. Speaker, uh,
body.
So many investments that this
legislature has made that focus
on education, on health care, on
economic growth and
diversification come are very
tied very closely to our
production. Mr. Speaker, body, I
also want to share uh a bit
about, uh, some of the, maybe
the last uh discussed parts, Mr.
Speaker body, uh, some of our
energy producers have taken upon
themselves either individually
in concert with the state or
with federal uh authorities.
To purchase habitat, Mr.
Speaker, and gentlemen, in order
to preserve and expand species.
Mr. Speaker, uh, body, as we
acknowledge the impacts of any
energy development, the
opportunity for habitat, uh, uh,
preservation, expansion, and
restoration, I think maybe is
something that hadn't been
shared and that I know within
the energy industry, that is a
long standing and Mr. Speaker,
gentlemen, I hope you'll join me
in saying.
We hope it's a growing practice.
The opportunity to produce far
more with far less surface
acreage gives us a unique and
far higher economic value, maybe
opens up an opportunity to
safeguard enhance, and uh really
pass on New Mexico's 4th highest
biodiversity, uh, in the, in the
country.
Mr. Speaker, body, I want to
share and I see uh the gentleman
from the northwest part of the
state, the gentleman from the
Southeast, uh, the opportunity
for us to continue to grow,
advance, and decarbonize our
energy industry is something
that oil and gas producers are
at the forefront of, and Mr.
Speaker body, the same sorts of
uh budget increases that we're
talking about, give us the
opportunity as a legislature, I
think to partner.
In that decarbonization story at
the end of the day, this is
something the oil and gas
industry knows well, you know,
they are producing, let's call
it 10 times more volume at
probably half or less the amount
of people involved in that.
That's a remarkable story. Fewer
folks having to work to generate
far more, uh, production that
helps us as a state. And so Mr.
Speaker Badi, as we face a
where we have to produce far
more energy at far lower
emissions, whether those are uh
uh directly offset, whether
those are carbon capture use and
sequestration, which is an uh
legislature has chosen to invest
in over the last few years. I
look at the oil and gas industry
as central to that. And so, Mr.
Speaker, gentlemen, I wanna
thank you for giving me the
opportunity to speak and share a
little bit. It's a remarkable
story that I've been so
privileged to be part of. I'm
I'm so excited to continue to be
in partnership with and at the
table with uh our uh remarkable
oil and gas industry. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen.
To
Just as a reminder, we are
debating a
Memorial, which is sort of like
a bill.
Um, so let's, let's hold the
applause for now we can clap at
the end, uh, gentlemen from
Chavez, Ed and Notero, and I
just go to Townsend immediately,
but it's not Townsend as
representative Henry.
Yes, Mr. Speaker, thank you that
the gentleman yield.
Uh yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from Eddie Otero
in Chavis County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, uh, as
everybody has already alluded to
oil and gas is such a crucial
piece of, of our state, um,
obviously being from Artisia we
take great pride in being from
the oil patch. We take great
pride in the work that we do in
our area, uh, the one thing that
I would bring up that has not
been brought up yet we were able
to celebrate this last year in
Artesia and in Edy County, the
first commercial well drilled
100 years ago. It was Illinois
#3, um, and we took great pride
in that celebration.
Uh, had a good night. It was a
lot of fun, um, but that's 100
years of oil and gas in in Eddy
and in the Artisia area drilled
by the Gates family. So, uh,
that's just one extra thing to
add if I may, Mr. Speaker, I'd
like to introduce the guest on
the rostrum. Please go ahead.
If I can, the first guest, uh,
Mr. Clint Walker is from the
CUDD.
Second guess
OK.
Mr. Mitch Krakowski.
Uh, from strata.
James Pinback uh from Plains All
American Pipeline.
Kyle Armstrong from Armstrong
Energy.
And Mr. Jason Sandel from Aztec
Drilling.
Thank you all for being here
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you. Welcome to the house.
Uh, the gentle lady from
Sandoval Representative Collin.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman from San Juan?
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentle lady from Sandoval
County.
Yes, um, I would just like to
also note, uh, how much that we
have received in Sandoval County
from New Mexico Oil and Gas,
which was about $424 million.
For
For somebody who served on Rio
Rancho school board for almost 9
years and also served on
committees for higher education.
I
Fully understand how important
it is for our state for from
receiving the money from New
Mexico Oil and gas. So I am
fully support of this memorial
and we are very appreciative of
how much they contribute to our
state and I believe it's about
49% of what our general budget.
So thank you.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen
from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Vincent. Thank
you Mr. Speaker. Does the
gentleman yield.
Uh, yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
the gentleman from
Otero and Lincoln. Lincoln.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. I almost think
you'd be rude to me if I didn't
think the oil and gas publicly
for everything that's going on
in Lincoln and Otero Counties
during the fires and floods,
and, you know, we were able to
swiftly get some money to help
our folks stand back up and get
our, our, um, counties cleaned
back up and we're still in the
process of that, but I do want
to make sure that I, I think the
oil and gas industry publicly
for the $54 million that they
have invested into our community
in
Lincoln
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen, seeing no
further debate, gentlemen from
San Juan, Representative.
Speaker,
uh, with the gentleman, uh,
yield.
Uh yes, Mr. Speaker, I yield to
my county mate from Salmon
County.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I
just also too want to
acknowledge um the historical
significance of this memorial,
my community that I'm from.
To
It is one of 3 communities that
created the Navajo Nation
Council, the birth of the Navajo
Nation Council was because of an
oil gas lease that was signed in
1920.
23, I believe.
And
The
The lease was negotiated.
Here in Santa Fe at a poker
room.
You would think and
And uh the gentleman who
Received the the the lease
became New Mexico's first
millionaire.
From the uh rattlesnake oil
fields, which is the community
I'm from.
And to this day, my community
lives with that legacy of the
um.
All
of the uh pipelines that are
within our, our backyard and so
I, I just too want to uh bring
up the, the
Important aspect of reclamation
for these orphan abandoned oil
wells.
And uh I believe what I
understood is uh the exact same
workforce to do the drilling, we
also need that for the
reclamation part to cap these
oil and gas wells that are
impacting our communities. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen, seeing no
further debate. There is more
debate generated from Valencia,
Representative Mirabal Moya.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sorry,
I'm a little short with those
monitors. It's hard to see me.
Um, will the gentleman yield?
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I yelled to
the gentle lady from Valencia
County.
Um, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
would love to, I, I definitely
do want to stand up and say
thank you to oil and gas. Um,
it, it shows here that uh
Valencia County is, uh, has, uh,
received 223 million um in
support from oil and gas, and
that includes um not too long
ago, a couple of years ago, um,
ExxonMobil specifically helped
me put some STEM centers as far
as me as an educator, but some
STEM centers in.
Um, uh, several of our schools
which were the first outside of
the Permian Basin, which was uh
amazing. The fact that we were
able to put these um these STEM
centers in our elementary
schools and now in our middle
school, um, we have uh equipped
our students, uh, with the help
of oil and gas to be able to, to
um expand their minds because so
many people are, are afraid of
science and now they're they're
being able to uh to explore with
science. So thank you, oil and
gas for that.
Thank you gentle ladies. Seeing
up for the debate, gentlemen
from San Juan to close.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For
those of you who are, um,
fortunate enough to live in a
county where oil and gas, uh,
businesses exist, you will find
oil and gas businesses.
Uh, all the way from the
producers to the service folks.
Uh
They're good community partners,
um, besides the dollars that are
recorded here, just these are
just two,
to the tax coffers.
But
In these communities, which I've
been fortunate to live in San
Juan County. What we've seen is
everything from our, our
athletics efforts from our
schools building programs we
have um a an expansion to San
Juan College, uh, directly
related to investments by the
oil and gas community, uh, in
San Juan County, so, uh, well
beyond just the dollars that we
take in taxes and other
revenues, uh.
The oil and gas community, they
good community partners and I'd
like to thank you for that. And
I'm remiss, Mr. Speaker, one
last thing, as I've said, uh,
I've said 13 billion a couple of
times, but I forgot that
somebody told me I look like
Doctor Evil on uh Austin Powers,
and I was supposed to say thank
the oil and gas industry for $13
billion.
To the, to our local and state
governments, uh, with that, Mr.
Speaker, I ask for a unanimous
consent that we to move house
Memorial 4 and I ask that I ask
for unanimous consent, uh, with,
uh, with the record reflecting
that all members are present and
voting in the affirmative. It's
been a motion to show all
members of the House present and
voting in the affirmative see no
objection. It is so ordered.
We are a final passage of House
Memorial for. The vote is now
open.
The borders aren't closed by a
vote of 69 in the affirmative, 0
in the negative. How's Memorial
4 has duly passed this house.
Me clap now.
Back an announcements, the
gentle lady from Donana Socorro
and Sierras representative Doo
thank you Mr. Speaker. Um, I'm
rising to, uh, recognize be well
New Mexico. This is our New
Mexico health insurance
provider, um, out of the
Affordable Care Act, um, right
now we have over 70,000 folks on
this program and over half of
them have a premium of less than
$10 a month. So this is the
program where we encourage
people to go when they do not
have insurance provided by their
employer or other sources or
private marketplace. So, um, I,
I can't, I'd be remiss if I
don't point out that this
translucent bag is made from a,
a byproduct of oil and gas, as
well as every single item inside
without exception. Thank you
very much.
Obamacare going strong. Very
good. And the healthcare
affordability Act going strong
as well. Uh, more elsements from
the floor before I go to Bill
introduction, and that's gonna
take me a while.
Speak now or forever hold your
peace.
Gentlemen from Bernalillo
representative Romero. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. Your House
Education Committee will meet at
8 o'clock tomorrow morning to
hear a budget presentations from
Secretary of Education, um, the
LFC, and LESC. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Members take note or
announcements.
Gentle lady from son Day.
Representative Sapinsky.
Mr. Speaker
Before I take the motion, you
will make on my behalf.
Gentleman from Donana, I'm
sorry, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I
just want to announce your house
preparations and Finance
Committee will meet in room 307
at 1:30 also room 309, uh, that
will be breaking into the
subcommittees today. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Thank you gentlemen, members
take note, gently from Santa Fe.
Oh, sorry, no, young lady from
Donana representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um,
housing uh consumer and public
affairs Committee will meet at
1:30 today.
Members take note.
I'll go slower just to make sure
I get everybody.
Any other announcements?
Uh, bring your cheese to my
office, uh, room 201 or 102.
Well, you know, I'm reading I'm,
I'm introducing legislation. I
can go from 2 committees to 8,
real quick, gentle lady.
lady from Santa Fe Cyansky. Mr.
Speaker, I move we go to the
next order of business,
introduction of legislation
It is so ordered.
Mr.
House Bill 15 introduced by a
representative Anaya and act
relating to health care
providers creating the
healthcare strategic recruitment
program in the workforce
solutions department, providing
services for qualified
healthcare providers in
healthcare shortage fields
making an appropriation, House
Bill 1515 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 138 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to health, enacting the
hospital patient Safety Act
requiring hospitals to establish
hospital staffing committees for
the purpose of developing
hospital staffing plans to
prioritize patient safety,
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 138 House Bill 138. I
haven't been read twice by
tilers or a printer referred to
the house, Labor, veterans,
Military Affairs Committee,
Health Human Services Committee
and the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 139 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to public records,
amending the inspection of
public Records Act amending,
repealing and enacting sections
of the NMSA 1978. House Bill 139
House Bill 139 haven't been read
to us by titles or the printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 140 introduced by
Representative Chandler, an act
relating to hazardous materials,
adding a definition of hazardous
waste constituent to the
hazardous waste Act, amending
and adding the identification
and listing of hazardous waste
constituents to the duties and
powers of the environmental
improvement board, House Bill
140. 140 haven't been twice by
title, this order printed and
referred to the House Energy
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee, thence the
House Judiciary.
Committee.
House Bill 141 introduced by
Representative Small an act
making general appropriations
and authorizing expenditures by
state agencies required by law.
House Bill 141.
Is one.
Christ is averted. House Bill
141 having been read twice by
titles or reprinted and referred
to house appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 142 introduced by
Representative Cates, an act
relating to property tax,
removing the requirement that a
board of county commissioners
conduct conduct a public hearing
before adopting an ordinance to
make available a tax rebate for
low income taxpayers. House Bill
142.
How's the 142 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House of government election and
Indian Affairs Committee.
There's the House taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 143 introduced by
Representative.
Silver
An act relating to lobbying,
requiring a lobbying activity
report on the legislation
lobbied and position taken by a
lobbyist or lobbyist's employer,
preserving lobbying activity
reports for at least 10 years.
House Bill 143.
I was 143 haven't been read
twice by titles or the printer
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 144 introduced by
Representative Silva and act
relating to magistrate court
establishing a writing circuit
to chaparral in Otero County
House Bill 144.
Yeah
Is 144. Haven't been met twice
by title, is ordered printed and
referred to the House government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 145 introduced by
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
an act relating to the financing
of highway projects, providing
additional bonding authority of
the state transportation
commission for state highway
projects, House Bill 145.
House Bill 145 haven't been read
twice. My title is ordered,
printed, and referred to the
house transportation, public
works and capital improvements
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 146 introduced by
Representative Hoffman V. Hill,
an act relating to railroads,
enacting the railway Safety Act
mandating the use of wayside
detector systems requiring the
reporting of railway safety
violations and prohibiting
retaliatory action, providing
administrative penalties for
railway safety violations. House
Bill 146.
House Bill 146 haven't been
there twice by title is ordered,
printed and referred to the
House Labor Veterans Military
Affairs Committee, the House
Transportation Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
thence the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 147 introduced by
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
and act relating to courts,
creating an additional judgeship
in the 2nd judicial district
making an appropriation. House
Bill 147 4 twice by title is
ordered, printed and to the
House Judiciary Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 148 introduced by
Representative Hoffman v. Hill,
and act relating to motor
vehicles enacting the autonomous
Vehicle Act.
Providing safety requirements
for the operation of autonomous
motor vehicles on public
highways requiring that a human
operator be physically present
behind the wheel of an operating
autonomous motor vehicle prior
to 2036, providing requirements
for a human operator of an
autonomous motor vehicle.
Requiring testing and safety
plans, providing autonomous
motor vehicle requirements,
limiting the operation.
Of autonomous commercial motor
vehicles on public roadways
providing for autonomous motor
vehicle incident reporting,
providing a commercial driver's
license endorsement for driving
an autonomous commercial motor
vehicle, adding insurance
requirements for autonomous
motor vehicles.
House Bill 148.
with 148. I haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Transportation, Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee,
then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 149 introduced by
Representatives Zabeta and
Ferrari, an act relating to
health, enacting the support
decision making Act, providing
requirements for supported
decision-making agreements,
providing duties for supporters
providing a limitation of
liability, creating reporting
requirements, creating a
supported decision making
program within the Office of
guardianship in the
developmental disabilities
council making an appropriation.
House Bill 149.
I was 149.
Haven't been my title is order
printed and referred to the
House Judiciary Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 150 introduced by
Representative Chatfield, an act
making an appropriation to the
Board of Regents of the New
Mexico State University for the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture for grants to assist
state meat processors and facing
economic and technological
challenges. House Bill 150.
Is the 150.
Have been read twice by title.
His order printed and referred
to the house.
Agriculture.
Aas and Water Resources
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 151 introduced by a
representative Anaya, an act
relating to state educational
institutions requiring state
educational institutions to
provide menstrual products in
campus bathrooms, making an
appropriation. House Bill
15151't been there twice by
title is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, thence
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 152 introduced by
Representative Eleanor Chavez,
an act relating to health,
preventing the restriction of
medication assisted treatment
for minors in inpatient,
outpatient, juvenile correction
and juvenile detention
facilities and programs that
house or treat adolescents with
substance use disorders and are
operated or funded by the state,
creating the evidence-based
substance use disorder treatment
for minors fund, making an
appropriation.
152.
House Bill 152 haven't been met
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 153 introduced by
Representative Silva an act
relating to journalism, enacting
the
Enacting the protect reporters
from exploitative state spying
Act, repealing and enacting
sections of the NMSA 1978 House
Bill 15353 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the house,
consumer and Public Affairs
Committee.
Then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 154 introduced by
representative Zamora and act
relating to Raffles, exempting
from the New Mexico bingo and
raffle act Raffles for
fundraising purposes held by
tax-exempt service, educational,
athletic, or extracurricular
organizations that primarily
serve youth who are 18 years of
age and younger. House Bill 154.
154 haven't been read twice by
title is or printed and referred
to the house consumer Public
Affairs.
then the House commerce and
Economic Development Committee.
House Bill 155 introduced by
Representative Zamora, an act
relating to gaming control,
changing employment
qualifications for the executive
director of the gaming Control
Board, removing the limit on the
annual salary of the executive
director of the Gaming Control
Board, House Bill 155155 have
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee,
thence the House then the House
of Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 156 introduced by
Representative Garrett and
Senator Stewart for the
legislative education study
committee.
An act relating to school
personnel, increasing the
minimum salaries for teachers,
school counselors, and school
administrators. House Bill 156.
Is 156. I've been there twice by
title is or printed and referred
to the House Education
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 157 introduced by
Representatives Garrett.
Baca and Lata for the
legislative education Study
Committee, an act relating to
school personnel, creating new
licenses for site
administrators, superintendents,
and other school administrators,
providing enhanced
qualifications and requirements
enacting the school
administrator Development Act
providing powers and duties,
setting criteria.
Providing for a delayed repeal
of current school administrator
licenses, amending, repealing,
and enacting sections of the
NMSA 1978. House Bill 157.
House Bill 157. Have you been
written by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Education Committee.
Thence the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill 158, introduced by
Representatives Sareana and
Martinez and Senator Pope, an
act relating to military bases
enacting the military base
planning and impact Act.
Creating the military base
impact fund providing for grants
to defense communities,
establishing purposes and
limitations requiring reports,
amending, repealing, and acting
and recompiling sections of
Chapter 9, Article 15, NMSA
1978, repealing the sunset for
the office of military base.
and support and the
military-based planning
commission making
appropriations.
House Bill 158.
House Bill 158 haven't been
there twice by titles or printed
and referred to the House Labor,
veterans, Military Affairs
Committee.
The the house appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 159 introduced by
Representative Saana and
Martinez, as well as Senator
Pope, an act relating to
construction requiring
developers or owners of
renewable energy or other
projects to notify the chair of
the military base planning
commission of a notice of
proposed construction or
alteration submitted to the
Federal Aviation Administration
to initiate the United States
Department of Defense Military
Aviation and installation
assurance, citing clearing
houses approval process
requiring notice of federal
approval or a
finding of adverse impact. House
Bill 159.
House Bill 159 have been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house, Energy
environment and natural
Resources Committee to house
labor veterans and Military
Affairs Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 160 introduced by
Representatives Lundstrom,
Johnson, Lujan, Lara, and De la
Cruz, an act relating to traffic
laws, amending a definition in
the motor vehicle code requiring
drivers to stop, look and listen
for other on-track equipment in
addition to trains. House Bill
160.
How's Bill 160 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house,
transportation, public works and
capital improvements Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 161, introduced by
Representatives Doo, Martinez,
Lujan, Sareana, and Senator
Block, an act relating to state
parks, providing to veterans
residing in the state on one day
use pass for unlimited entry
into state parks or recreation
areas and one camping pass for
unlimited use of camping areas
operated by the state parks
division of the Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department.
House Bill 161.
I'll go 161. I haven't been read
to us by idlers or reprinted and
referred to the House Labor
Veterans Military Affairs
Committee, then the House Rural
Development, land grants, and
cultural Affairs Committee.
That's what I
The
Mhm
Just to clarify, House Bill 161,
which was just written in and
referred right now, one of the
sponsors is identified as
Martinez. It is Alan T Martinez,
not Javier Martinez.
Although I support.
Um, it looks like you've taken
up all the top spots, but, uh, I
can move you down and put myself
on there.
How's 161 haven't been read
twice by tilers or printed and
referred to the House Labor
Veterans and Military Affairs
Committee, then the house rural
Development La Grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee.
He's been referred twice to two
committees, so it got 4
committees.
House Bill 162, introduced by
Representatives Mason,
Pettigrew, Chatfield, Joseph
Sanchez and Block, an act
repealing the seven-day waiting
period for the sale of a
firearm. House Bill 162.
House Bill 162 haven't been read
twice. My title is or printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 163 introduced by
Representatives Reeve, Hall, and
Chavez, and act and Nicole
Chavez, my apologies, an act
relating to children, amending
the delinquency Act to include
unlawful possession of cannabis
and alcohol in the definition of
delinquent act, House Bill 163.
House number 163 haven't been
there twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, the the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 164 introduced by
Representatives Alan T. Martinez
and Garrett, an act relating to
public employees' retirement,
increasing the cost of living
adjustment for certain retired
members making an appropriation.
House Bill 164.
House Bill 164. Haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, then
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee.
House Bill 165 introduced by
Representatives Nicole Chavez,
Reeb, and De la Cruz, an act
relating to pretrial detention
requiring a probable cause
determination before a hearing
to deny bail, providing for a
permissible inferences and a
presumption supporting denial of
bail for cases involving
dangerous, felony offenses,
declaring an emergency. House
Bill 165 165 haven't been read
twice by titles or reprinted and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, then
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 166 introduced by
Representatives Nicole Chavez,
Rieb, and De la Cruz, an act
relating to crime increasing the
penalty for a felon in
possession of a firearm or
destructive device to 5 years'
imprisonment, adding a new crime
of felon in possession of a
firearm or destructive device
for a second or subsequent
offense and a new penalty of 9
years' imprisonment, increasing
the penalty for a serious
violent felon in possession of a
firearm or destructive device to
9 years' imprisonment. House
Bill 1.
6
House 1667 been read twice by
title. This order printed and
referred to the House Consumer
Public Affairs Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 167, introduced by
Representatives Garrett and
Torres Velasquez, an act
relating to education, providing
that the higher education
department shall pay the cost of
high school equivalency
credential tests and associated
test preparation costs for New
Mexico residents, making an
appropriation House Bill 1677't
been read twice by title is
order printed and referred to
the House Education Committee,
that's the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee.
House Bill 168, introduced by
Representatives Alan T. Martinez
and Doo, an act relating to
construction costs requiring the
construction industries
commission and the construction
industry's division of the
regulation and licensing
department to consider cost
studies for proposed rules and
Trade Bureau recommendations
that are anticipated to affect
the cost of commercial or
residential construction
requiring the construction
industries commission and the
trade bureaus to produce cost
studies for proposed rules and
Trade Bureau recommendations.
are anticipated to affect the
cost of commercial or
residential construction. House
Bill 168.
Is 168. I haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, the
House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 169 introduced by
representatives Andrea Romero,
Eleanor Chavez, and Senator
Pope.
An act relating to courts
enacting the public expression
Protection Act enacting and
repealing sections of the NMSA
1978. House Bill 169.
House Bill 1609.
Haven't been read twice by title
is order printed and referred to
the house, consumer and Public
Affairs Committee, then the
House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 170 introduced by
Representatives Bloch, Lord, and
Duncan, as well as senators
Lanier and Bloch, an act
relating to elections requiring
all voters to present
identification before voting,
providing for free
identification cards to be
issued by the motor Vehicle
division of the Taxation and
Revenue Department, providing
for zero graphic copies of a
voter's identification document,
amending, repealing, and
enacting sections of the NMSA
1978, House Bill 170.
House Bill 170 haven't been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
House government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee, thence
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 171, introduced by
Representatives Jones and
Thompson, an act relating to
pharmacies, amending the
Pharmacy Act to provide for
custodial care facilities,
acquiring and possessing
controlled substances for
withdrawal management. House
Bill 171.
House Bill 171. Haven't been
read twice by title is order
printed and referred to the
House Health and Human Services
Committee.
Then the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Bill 172 introduced by
Representatives Doo, Gallegos,
Jones, and Brown, an act
relating to public holidays,
declaring August as New Mexico,
red and green chilly month.
House Bill 172.
House Bill 172 haven't been read
twice by title is or printed and
referred to the house rural
development land grants and
Cultural Affairs Committee, then
the House government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee.
House Bill 173 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to children requiring
the children, youth and families
department to conduct
assessments, provide services,
and conduct an investigation
upon a failure to comply with a
plan of care. House Bill 173173
haven't been read twice by
title. It's order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 174 introduced by
Representative Armstrong, an act
relating to insurance requiring
health insurance that is
committed that is provided as
part of the healthcare
purchasing Act to reimburse
community-based pharmacies for
the full cost of prescription
drugs plus a professional
dispensing fee. House Bill 174,
174 haven't been read twice by
title, is order printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, then
the House Commerce and Economic
Development Committee.
House Bill 175 introduced by
representatives Vincent, Ortiz,
Terrazas, and Doo, an act
relating to natural resources,
amending sections of the forest
and watershed Restoration Act,
providing definitions, projects
to create or maintain buffers in
and around wildland urban
interfaces eligible for funding
from the Forest Land Protection
revolving Fund, House Bill 175.
House 175, haven't been there
twice by title. I order printed
and referred to the house energy
environment and natural
Resources Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 176 introduced by
Representatives Vincent,
Terrazas, and Doo, an act
relating to taxation, creating
the backup power generator
income tax credit. House Bill
176.
I was 176, having been read
twice by Tidal?
His order printed and referred
to the House Energy,
environment, and Natural
Resources Committee, the the
House, uh, the, the the house
taxation and revenue Committee.
House Bill 177 introduced by
Representatives Vincent, Doo,
and Tarasas, an act relating to
taxation, creating the home
school curriculum materials
income tax credit, House Bill
177.
House Bill 177 haven't been read
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
Education Committee.
The the house taxation and
revenue Committee.
House Bill 178, introduced by
Representatives Gallegos,
Hernton, Johnson, Ona Nonu, and
Hakman Vio, an act relating to
health amending sections of the
nursing Practice Act to clarify
the scope of practice for
different categories of licensed
nurses regarding the
administration of general
anesthesia, anesthetics, and
sedatives. Making changes to the
licensing process, expanding the
powers and duties of the board
of nursing, modifying the
administration of certain
disciplinary processes.
requiring the confidentiality of
communications relating to
potential disciplinary actions.
House Bill 178.
House 178. Haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the House Health and
Human Services Committee, the
the House Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 179 introduced by
representatives Gallegos,
Cerrato Herndon, Lundstrom, and
Johnson, an act relating to
taxation, extending the sunset
date for a gross receipts tax
deduction for retail sales made
by certain businesses on the
first Saturday after
Thanksgiving. House Bill 179.
Has 179 haven't been read to us
by title.
I ordered, printed and referred
to the House commerce and
Economic Development Committee,
the the House Taxation and
Revenue Committee.
House Bill 180 introduced by
Representative Thompson, an act
relating to professional
licensure, creating a new
license for speech language
pathology assistants, repealing
the apprentice in speech and
language license, repealing
section 61-14B3.1 and 61-14B15.1
NMSA 1978, being laws 1999,
chapter 128, sections 3 and 8 as
amended. House Bill 180. House
Bill 180 haven't been.
was by title is ordered, printed
and referred to the House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee then the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 181, introduced by
Representative Small, an act
relating to the government
results and opportunity
expendable trust requiring state
agencies to submit an
accountability and evaluation
plan for programs and projects
that receive funding from the
trust to the state budget
division of the Department of
Finance and Administration and
the legislative Finance
Committee, House Bill 181.
181. Haven't been twice by title
is ordered, printed and referred
to the House government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee, the the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 182 introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to judicial
retirement.
Providing for appropriations and
income derived from investments
to be credited to the judicial
retirement fund, adjusting years
of service credit required for
certain judges, increasing
certain service credit
multipliers provided in the
judicial retirement Act, House
Bill 182.
House 182 haven't been read
twice by tilers or printed and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 183 introduced by
Representative Royval Caballero,
an act relating to magistrate
retirement, providing for
appropriations and income
derived from investments to be
credited to the magistrate
retirement fund, adjusting years
of service credit required for
certain magistrate judges,
increasing certain service
credit multipliers provided in
the magistrate retirement Act,
House Bill 183.
183 haven't been married twice
by title is order printed and
referred to the House Judiciary
Committee, then the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
House Bill 184 introduced by
Representative Royal Caballero,
an act relating to income,
providing income distributions
to individuals who are residents
and file income tax returns.
House Bill 184.
I was 184.
You sure?
Tells me 184. Haven't been there
twice by title is order printed
and referred to the House
government election in Indian
Affairs Committee, then the
House taxation and revenue
Committee.
House Bill 185, introduced by
Representatives Reeb, Jones, and
Dow an act relating to human
rights, enacting the protection
of women's Sports Act, providing
definitions requiring equal
athletic opportunities for males
and females requiring separate
athletic opportunities in
certain circumstances requiring
designation of athletic teams,
sports, athletic competitions,
and athletic events as for
either sex separately or as
co-educational, prohibiting male
partic
ip ation for, against, or with
athletic teams designed for
females, allowing male athletes
to participate as practice
players on teams designated for
females in certain
circumstances, providing private
causes of action. House Bill
185. House Bill 185 haven't been
read twice by titles or printed
and referred to the House
Consumer Public Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House Bill 186 introduced by
Representative Sapansky, an act
relating to health care,
enacting a new section of the
Public Assistance Act to allow
the Secretary of Health Care
Authority to amend the New
Mexico State Medicaid plan to
create a state administered.
Health coverage plan requiring
collaboration between the
healthcare authority and the
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance to enroll individuals
in the plan, making an
appropriation House Bill 186.
I was the 186 7 minutes was by
title is or printed and referred
to the House Health and Human
Services Committee, then the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
We're gonna introduce.
Some memorials and concurrent
resolutions.
And we will break after that.
After we do community reports.
And announcements.
House concurrent resolution 1,
introduced by Representative
McQueen, a concurrent resolution
amending the joint rules of the
House and the Senate to limit
the number of bills a member can
introduce or sponsor in a
legislative session. House
concurrent resolution 1.
As concurrent resolution one
have been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the House government elections
in the Indian Affairs Committee,
the the House Judiciary
Committee.
House Joint Resolution 6,
introduced by Representatives
Lord, Block, and Duncan. A joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 20 of the
Constitution of New Mexico to
allow the recall of public
officers elected to a
constitutionally created
elective office in the executive
or legislative branch of
government, House Joint
Resolution 6. How's your
resolution 67 been read twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution 7
introduced by Representatives
Alan T. Martinez, Reeb, de la
Cruz, and Hall, a joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 10, Section
2 of the Constitution of New
Mexico to allow county sheriffs
to serve unlimited consecutive
four-year terms. House Joint
Resolution 7.
I resolution 7 haven't been read
twice by titles or printed and
referred to the house government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee. There's a House
Judiciary Committee.
House Joint Resolution 8,
introduced by representatives.
Montoya, brown, De la
Cruzerrazas, and Black. A joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to Article 4, Section
5 of the Constitution of New
Mexico to provide that each
regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed 45
days. Remove the restrictions on
bills that may be considered in
even numbered years and provide
for consideration of Governor
veto overrides for bills of
certain special or extraordinary
legislative sessions, House
Joint Resolution 8.
How's your resolution 8? I
haven't been to it twice by
titles or printed and referred
to the House government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee, thence the House
Judiciary Committee.
lady from Bertillo.
Mr. Speaker, and now what we now
move we go to the next order of
business reports.
Community reports.
reports, no objection. It is
ordered.
clerk to read.
Mr. Speaker, your health and
Human Services Committee to, who
has been referred House Bill 11
has had it under consideration,
reports same as recommendation
that it do pass and then
referred to the commerce and
economic Development Committee
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson, chair.
Mr. Speaker, move adoption
adoption of a report on House
Bill 11. All those in favor say
aye.
Oh
All those in favor if I say I.
I was a boy's name, the ICE
habit committee report adopted.
Dude they need to be honest.
Mr. Speaker, your energy,
environment, and natural
resources Committee to him has
been referred House Bill 51 has
had it under consideration
report, same with recommendation
that do pass as amended and he
referred to the taxation and
revenue Committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
Mr. Speaker, move the din of
favorable report on House Bill
51. All those in favor of a
night.
All those in favor of seeing 5
or say aye.
I suppose.
The ice barely have it.
Committee report adopted.
gentle lady from Berlio.
Mr. Speaker, I now will we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Gentlemen from Rio Ariba,
Sandoval.
In San Juan, Representative
Lente.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Good
afternoon members, uh, an
announcement that your house
taxation and revenue Committee
will meet tomorrow morning 8:30
a.m. for an orientation meeting
that includes uh presentations
by Secretary Shaon Clark of the
Tax and Revenue, uh, division as
well as, uh, presentations from
the legislative finance, uh,
committee.
Thank you very much.s on the
floor.
Gentle lady from Bernardo. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker. I just, um,
want to take a point of personal
privilege, my son Ryan, who's
been working very hard for the
last few years to get into
medical school, just got
notified that he has been
accepted to his number one
choice, UNM med school, so he
will be returning back to New
Mexico. Congratulations.
Congratulations, Ryan, we need
more doctors. I'm glad.
They're on their way.
Announcements from the floor.
All right, uh, members, take
note, change of primary
sponsorship, House Bill 120,
change of primary sponsorship
for House Bill 120 from
Representative Keats to
Representative Lujan.
Change your primary sponsorship,
House Bill 120 from
Representative Cates to
Representative Juan.
Any other announcements.
OK, um, folks, reminder, uh, MBD
is in the building today
tomorrow, financial disclosures
due at the end of business on
the 31st, um, and then there are
a number of committees meeting
this afternoon and then there
are some events on the social
calendar if you all want to.
Um, uh, enjoying that this
evening.
Any other analysis before I shut
down for the morning.
Prime members, um.
That'll conclude for today, good
work. A lot of bill
introduction, uh, for the
rookies, this is a lot of what
we'll do the next few days, um,
and then at some point in the
next couple of weeks as bills
make their way through
committee, then uh you'll start
to see that floor calendar fill
up, um, and so at that point,
we'll let you know when we get
to that point, but that's when
we'll start doing more, um, 3rd
reading, um, both in morning
sessions and then potentially um
afternoon sessions if need be.
Uh, with that, uh, young lady
from, uh, Bernardo.
Mr. Speaker, I move that the
House stand in recess until
10:30 tomorrow morning.
The house was set in recess
until 10:30 tomorrow morning.
